Rating: 1/5

How delicately can we say self-serving crap?

First of all, as a long-standing Queen and Freddie Mercury fan, I apologize for having read this pathetic, whiny bit of drivel. It is to my bordering-on-ridiculous fault of believing that I ought to finish whatever I start that I blame for continuing to read this self-serving, mean-spirited, catty farce. Poor perfect Jim! Oh how virtuous he was for living off the generous-to-a-fault Freddie Mercury -- enjoying all the free tickets, glamorous vacations, free meals, unlimited booze &amp; drugs, and luxurious roof over head whilst still receiving a hefty gardener's salary-- but oh how dare anyone think of him as "just the gardener"! He -- and only he -- was the long-suffering love of Freddie's life! BALONEY. Of course, he also complains throughout how Freddie ran around on him all the time. Hmmm, but he was the only one Freddie truly loved. He was only doing the gardening because he loved to garden, not because Freddie expected him too. Oh and the ideas that he came up with for Freddie and Queen! It makes you wonder how Freddie carried on so magnificently before he met Jim Hutton (insert sarcastic tone here). Some highly naive romantics might enjoy reading this bit of blubbery, feel-sorry-for-me rubbish but it didn't ring true to me. I don't doubt that Freddie might have had a brief fling with this petty, greedy man (as with Joe the cook, Freddie often gave jobs to former lovers) but there's no getting around the fact that Freddie left his house and most of his fortune to the one true friend he felt that he had -- Mary, the love of his life who stood by him for over 20 years. His lover for six years in the early years of his fame, this woman did not forsake him when he told her that he was gay. Instead, she stood by him and encouraged him to be true to himself. Mary was with him before the fame, during the fame and up to his death. And unlike this bozo Hutton, she never betrayed him by spewing rubbish about his private life. Hutton brays like a spoiled, greedy brat that he and the other live-in employees are only given 3 months to remain at Garden Lodge after Freddie's death while conveniently neglecting to mention that this was because the estate was in probate and Mary and Jim Beach, the Estate Manager, had no choice in the matter. Freddie Mercury left each those three staff members £500,000 and their own homes after his death. That was pretty generous considering that he gave them very satisfactory wages, free room and board, expensive gifts, and took them along on fabulous vacations all over the world while he was alive. And this jerk is mad because he's not allowed to live free forever in Freddie's mansion Garden Lodge for the rest of his life???? What an ungrateful jerk! For goodness sake, the man bought him a home in Ireland and left him all that money! And for those who would say that Freddie would have wanted Jim, Joe and Peter (his staff) to remain there free of charge, then why wasn't that spelled out in the will? Everything else was. Freddie Mercury did not die unexpectedly. He knew he was dying years before he finally succumbed to HIV/AIDS. He left his home and fortune to the one person he could trust; the one person who had always supported him through it all and had NEVER betrayed him; the real love of his life, Mary Austin. Throughout his career, he always said that she was the only true friend he had and that he considered her his common law wife. Apparently, he meant what he said. Freddie was a very private person. This salacious and bitter book would have broken his heart. Apparently, he knew his friends well, though. Out of the four living in Garden Lodge, only Mary has kept his secrets private and honored Freddie's wishes. No tell-tale book from her. Freddie was a wise man. He knew who to entrust his fortune and legacy to. Good for him. May he rest in peace.