Rating: 4/5

While reading Imperial Eyes, my background in American Indian Studies led me to continue to question how, and when, travelers and explorers are representing Indigenous peoples. Since the narratives discussed throughout Imperial Eyes&lt;.i&gt; are situated from a mostly white (and often male) personal accounting of events, one area of discussion that is quite interesting is that of Indigenous peoples and their representations – largely in part it seems as if Indigenous peoples in the context of Pratt’s work are viewed as interesting figures that inhabit new lands being traveled to, but they are still often marginalized. 

Imperial Eyes itself is fascinating on many levels. Once more, Indigenous issues were at the forefront of my interest, but from a literary standpoint there were also instances in which the novels/stories/writings of authors and explorers alike were engaging because of their plotlines (regardless of if there are completely believable!). The passage about the “indigenous horde” that led to outsiders wanting to colonize Indigenous peoples summarizes, in a rather poignant manner, how Indigenous people are often viewed when colonizing forces invade their lands (Pratt 183). While I tend to disagree with the way in which Indigenous peoples across the globe were colonized, it is perhaps safe to say that the literature that appears from these periods of colonization are beneficial products of those campaigns. Through some of these stories, we are better able to understand the complex human relationships that formed during the colonial contact era. Particularly interesting was the story of Joanna. Part of the reason this narrative is of note is because it is one of many “transracial love affairs in the fiction of this time” and presents a “romantic transformation of a particular form of colonial exploitation, whereby European men on assignment to the colonies brought local women from their families to serve as sexual and domestic partners for the duration of their stay” (Pratt 93). 

The fact that this is a transracial love affair is almost risqué, but is complex because Stedman presents the tale in a rather romantic fashion. He loves Joanna and is willing to take her back to England with him when he is recalled, but it is Joanna that decides she cannot go to England because it would impugn Stedman’s honor and she knows she would not be happy there. This is seemingly unbelievable, but at the same time it is amazing that a woman in Joanna’s situational and economic position would reject “European culture and the invitation to assimilate” to remain in her homelands, where she eventually will meet her demise (Pratt 99). Pratt argues that this story in part symbolizes a political allegory, and alludes to the independence America sought from England (99). While I agree, I would also suggest that the tale of Joanna is a romanticized story about rejecting colonization as an Indigenous individual if you can obtain enough agency to reject your colonizer. After all, the story ends with Steadman returning to England where he finds a new love interest, and Joanna is left behind and dies at the hands of jealous others because of her love affair – thus, the colonizer is free to return home, but the colonized female figure is forever tarnished in her homeland, and now having no where else to go, or no other community to support her, she is instead doomed to die (perhaps alluding to the final form of colonization). 

Pratt’s work was helpful in establishing an overview and presenting many of the tropes that can be found in travel narratives, and how they change over time. The last section on current trends and “Thinking through mobility: 1980-2007” was a perfect way to contextualize these themes in a contemporary setting. It is important to note that peoples across the globe are still being colonized, but also that there are still populations of people that are traveling in various forms (crossing borders, etc.). 

I highly recommend this book if you're interested in learning about tourism, travel narratives, etc. But if that is not something you're interested in, you may not enjoy this read.