Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars, rounded up…but only barely.

Richard Peck is a good writer, and this young adult novel about rape is honestly pretty progressive by 1970s standards, but it doesn’t hold up so well, and not just because of the content. 

The first half or so of this book is pretty good, even if it’s mostly set-up. I liked Gail, the protagonist, and the supporting characters were more interesting than they needed to be. For example, Gail’s boyfriend Steve could have easily been a nice-guy stand-in, but making him an academic whiz from a working class Italian family gave their story a lot more nuance. (Side note, this is now the second book I’ve read about East Coast teenagers from the 1970s that discusses anti-Italian attitudes, the other being “The Little Girl Who Lives Down the Lane” by Laird Koenig. Perhaps it’s a sign that I need to study this issue more, because I’m honestly shocked that that was still happening only fifty years ago!) 

However, the last third of this book is a mess. I feel like Peck was trying too hard to cram in the after-school-special aspect of the story that he doesn’t give the characters any room to breathe. There is way, way too much repetitive dialogue, and Gail’s sudden coolheaded resolve after her assault is admirable, but comes off very unrealistic. I do like how much awareness this book brings to the issue of rape, primarily, how the system was (still is) completely stacked against the victim, especially when the perpetrator is a rich, powerful white guy. It feels a little trite nowadays, but considering this was published 50 years ago, I’m impressed. Still, a good message doesn’t save a messy book.

All that to say, I saw the TV movie adaptation of this book last year, and I honestly preferred it. It trimmed a lot of unnecessary fat from the story and kept the message much more focused, and plus, it has a ton of fantastic 1970s fashion and interior design. So, as much as I like Richard Peck, I’d say skip this book and just watch the movie.