Rating: 4/5

The 1950s. If I had a time machine, I would time travel back to the decade that was as wholesome as baseball, hotdogs, apple pie, and Chevrolet but also foreshadowed the powder keg that was the 1960s. I am enamored by the 1950s so much that last year I read The Fifties by David Halberstam just because it surveyed the decade. In his comprehensive look at the decade when my parents grew up, Halberstam focused on government and politics at a crossroads in a post war changing society. When he did insert popular culture, he carefully included authors, movie stars, rock stars, and athletes who influenced the younger teenagers in society. Few books made the cut, but one thar garnered a good five pages of print is Peyton Place. Funny story, I always mixed up Peyton Place with Brewster Place by Gloria Naylor, and that is even after reading Brewster Place. There are few if any similarities to these two books, only that both were written by women and focus on roles of people in a community. That’s about it. After reading Halberstam’s ode to the 1950s, I knew that I wanted to read Peyton Place that published in 1957 and caused a scandal at the time. What this scandalous book was, it was high time I found out what all the commotion was, and all I could say after that is whoa Nellie. 

Marie Grace DeMetigny was born in 1924 in a town like Peyton Place, New Hampshire. One could say that the book was an autobiographical novel and outed all of the doings of the quirky small town that she grew up in. All small towns have their secrets, and that is why I enjoy reading about the cast of characters who compromise small towns like Peyton Place. Grace wrote stories in her attic. Upon her graduation from high school in 1942, she attended a Seven Sisters college and then chased her dream of becoming a prominent writer in New York. Adept writers will give as advice to those up and coming in the field to write about what they know. Grace chose to write about her town using Peyton Place as a pseudonym and Alison MacKenzie as the name of her protagonist. Allison, of course, is Grace, and Peyton Place is the small mill town where Grace grew up. Ardis Cameron, who wrote the comprehensive introduction to the edition that I read, notes that Peyton Place started a trend of middlebrow literature as opposed to literary fiction. She cites Gone With the Wind as an early book in this genre, but Peyton Place was chock full of sex scandals written at a time when the birth control pill was about to make its entry to society. Wholesome 1950s housewives would obtain copies of the book and hide it under their mattresses, finding it unsuitable for discovery by their teenagers. My mom was only nine when the book first published but when I told her I was reading it the first word she uttered was shocking. At the time, I can see why; however, the shock value lead to movie and tv rights and Peyton Place became a soap opera that everyone had to watch, the precursor of shows like Dallas and Dynasty. With this information in mind, I could not wait to immerse myself in this small town. 

Peyton Place takes place from the years 1937-1944 over the course of three sections. At the beginning of each, the older men of Peyton Place gather at the town’s diner and act like a Greek chorus. There goes so and so, one of them proclaims. This insertion of what I dubbed the chorus made the book wholesome like the time period when it takes place even though this is a ruse for the intrigue and secrets of Peyton Place. When the narrative begins, Allison MacKenzie is in eighth grade and claims to have no friends besides Selena Cross, who comes from the shacks. A friendship from a shacker is supposed to be a no no but Allison does not care. After all, she lives with her widowed mother, who both owns her cottage and business named Thrifty Corners. Constance MacKenzie has a secret, but then who doesn’t. Allison is the product of her affair with a married man. It has caused Constance to live in a shell for the last thirteen years and made her act overprotective toward her daughter. In the 1950s, heaven forbid anyone have intimate relations with anyone besides their spouse. Abortion was of course illegal and I doubt it would have been a choice for Constance anyway. Grace Metalious might have wrote her book in the 1950s but remember the narrative occurs in the late 1930s, putting Allison the same age as Grace, born in 1924. Affairs have always happened. Think of all the carousing ball players of the 1920s. Written and published in book form, well this one did not happen. The existence of Allison MacKenzie gave readers a shock within the book’s first few chapters. I liked Allison’s persona well enough even though I don’t read many coming of age stories. Besides, as a reader I am promised sex later on. Coming of age would be a fair trade off. 

Through Allison and her mom supposedly devoid of feelings, we meet Selena who is her contrast. Selena is all curvy at age thirteen and all boys lust after her. Upon graduating from grammar school, she is going steady with Ted Carter, and the two note that they will wait for high school graduation for both marriage and sex. Selena must take care of her younger brother Joey because their mom is constantly abused and their dad Lucas is a deadbeat drunk. He abuses the mom and then abuses Selena. Rape, abuse, and incest were not discussed in the 1950s. Remember everything was supposed to be as hunky dory as Leave it to Beaver. Not so Peyton Place, and Metalious crafts the Selena Cross storyline from a murder and trial that took place in her town, adding yet another layer to the shock value. Selena Cross emerged from her childhood of abuse thanks to two mentors, Constance MacKenzie, her employer, and Matthew Swain, the town doctor who knows everything about everyone in town. A stately gentleman, Swain acts as the foil to some of Peyton Place’s more unsavory people and acts as the grandfather to all the town’s inhabitants. Because of Dr Swain, Selena Cross graduates and moves on with her life, the antithesis to Allison MacKenzie, who needs her own mentors. The chorus remarks, there goes Selena Cross or there goes Allison MacKenzie, urging readers to see where their lives go after grammar school. That’s when the fun begins. 

Part two sees Allison and Selena in high school. Allison, like Grace, is a budding writer. She writes for the Peyton Place Times and views its owner Seth Buswell as a friend. Meanwhile, she is urged to write stories by her favorite teacher Mr Makris, who just happens to be dating Constance. Premarital sex, that is what Tomas Makris thinks from the moment he sees Constance MacKenzie for the first time. Constance is frigid, Tomas will wait for as long as he needs to woo her. Meanwhile, Ted Carter and Selena Cross are still pledged to each other, determined to wait till marriage. Other characters in the book, not so much. Rodney Harrington, the son of mill owner Leslie, attends boarding school but woos every girl around on his break. No mother, the father and son live in a bachelor pad. Leslie bribes the town to do his bidding and encourages his son’s exploits. Just what they will be and how far, remains to be seen. While Constance begrudgingly engages in premarital sex with Tomas Makris, she fears that her daughter will do the same and ruin her life. She need hardly be worried but Makris notes that after sixteen years, Constance has not gotten over her affair and needs to learn how to live. Allison is a top student who loves to write. Her boyfriend Norman has a nutcase for a mother who has a reverse oedipal complex and also loves to write. The last thing either thinks about is sex. With a worrisome mother who has not moved past her mistake, it is little wonder to me that Grace moved out and married George Metalious as soon as she could. She had Allison attend college and then move to New York to chase her writing dreams, as close to Grace’s own life as possible. 

Some readers note that Peyton Place is not necessarily middlebrow literature but a New England version of To Kill a Mockingbird. Both books open with memories, Mockingbird describing a summer long gone and Peyton Place comparing Indian summer to a woman. As the book is told through the eyes of the chorus and then uses Tomas Makris character to help convey thoughts as time goes on, one could say that the seasons are a character in the novel. Each section takes place in a different year: 1937, 1939, 1943-44 with the chorus reminiscing about the events in the town. While sex and it’s scandals is what inevitably made Peyton Place a best seller for over a year, the book touches on deeper societal issues such as classism, gender issues during the silent generation including abortion and premarital sex, and then a trial thar threatened to divide a town. Some of the hot button issues that Metalious touches on could have been taken right out of the pages of Mockingbird; however, the great novel would not be published for nearly another ten years. As a reader I felt that I grew to know the citizens of Peyton Place and its secrets. I also knew which side of the town dividing trial that I stood on. While Peyton Place did not have a moral upstanding citizen like Atticus Finch, the town was home to men like Matthew Swain and Tomas Makris, who I have come to view as my favorite character in the novel. Men like Swain and Makris did not “sell” the novel, although Makris appeared to be as gorgeous as Gregory Peck. What sold Peyton Place in the end was not the societal issues but the town and the scandals that threatened to expose it for all its worth. 

In the end, Peyton Place caused a scandal in Metalious’ home town. Residents recognized themselves in the book and it was banned in town. In the squeaky clean era of sock hops, it was banned in many other communities as well. Mothers did not want them to read sbout overt sexual acts and get the idea that it was ok to commit them, even though affairs are as old as time. This spurned 1950s housewives to hide copies under mattresses and read the book when their husbands were at work and children were at school. When Peyton Place became a serial in the 1960s after the advent of the pill and the dawn of the women’s rights movement, people tuned in. Sex sells, but, of course. I read Peyton Place like a historical fiction book featuring a small town and its secrets on the eve of World War II. The book was so successful that it lead Metalious to write its sequel, Return to Peyton Place, that I am giddy to read. The wholesomeness of the 1950s with secrets brewing underneath made the book emblematic of the decade in the eyes of David Halberstam and why he included the book in his opus about the decade. Suffice it to say I doubt I will mistske Peyton Place for Brewster Place again. 

4.5 stars