Rating: 5/5

Through the whole book, I have felt wonderful pure joy. My heart, my soul, my mind felt like they got a reward for hard work, a comforting break from reality.

On one hand, it is astonishing that it was Heyer's first novel. On the other hand, if you know her other books, you can easily see the first versions of her most beloved types of characters she used in other stories. Let's see: a chivalry man with uncompromised values (Jack), an arrogant (yet charming) rake who was changed by love (Tracy), a man who fell in love with a spoilt spendthrift (Richard), a friend who always believes in you (Miles), a faithful servant (Jim), and opposite female personalities (Lavinia - Molly). And of course, it so obvious that Tracy was a precursor of Justin (These Old Shades).

Each of the characters was perfectly created, each sentence was like a lick of favourite icecream. I could praise it for a long time.

To me, this one by GH was definitely the book about men. We got here a few personalities (see above) and meeting them, seeing their actions and (for some of them) changes was (I must say it again) simply marvelous. Yes, there was a lovely romance, but although Diana was a trigger of the most important actions, in a way, there was little of the romance. But it didn't matter at all. Because, as I wrote, the novel was about men. Moreover, we had here three stories, that could be treated as the main plot: the story about the brothers, Tracy's transformation (he was the title Black Moth), Richard's marriage. The romance I would call the fourth thread.

*** My review after first reading: ***

This is one of the best works of Heyer, in my opinion. It isn't a typical romance, a love story or I should write stories, is one of the pieces of this book, not necessary the most important. A great comedy with many characters. Each one could be a leading figure. Great dialogues, funny situations. There isn't a boring descriptions. The whole makes complete masterpiece of the genre, although I don't now how to call this genre.

My favorite quote:
"I do not like your name, sir,” she answered.
“There was no thought of pleasing you when I was christened.” he quoted lazily.