Rating: 4/5

Wilson Mather-Glass
Ms. Romaniuk
Reading/L.A. Book Review 5
16 November 2010

The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore:
When Proving your Innocence Isn’t as Easy as it Looks 
	It’s quite hard to admit that someone you know could be a criminal. Christina Lattimore, a teenage girl living in Houston, is put in this situation when she realizes that more than one person she’s known for her whole life could’ve been involved in an act that could put them a way for a good amount of time. This act involved kidnapping Christina Lattimore and stealing from Christina’s millionaire grandmother. After a couple days, Christina is found, but is then accused of being involved in this elaborate scheme. While this sounds crazy, proving her innocence is not as easy as it seems. The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore is a mystery/thriller written in the suspenseful words of Joan Lowery Nixon. I would give this book four stars. The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore is a suspenseful book because each chapter leaves you with a question, there is always an unsolved clue, and you gradually gain knowledge from each character. 
The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore is a suspenseful book because each chapter leaves you with a question. Many of the last sentences in the chapters leave you confused. In chapter six, Christina talks to Detective York about the kidnapping, and it seems like he believes her enough to make sure she isn’t tried as a criminal. However, the chapter ends with Detective York saying, “They aren’t coming... I advised them not to.”, referring to whether or not Christina’s parents are coming to meet her at the police station. I didn’t understand why she was being treated as a criminal, if she had proved her innocence. York’s reason is later explained, though.
	The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore is a suspenseful book, because there is always an unsolved clue. Christina often has a clue in the back of her mind, and knows it’s important, but she can’t seem to figure out what it is. She says, “Something in the back of my head nags me. I’ve had this feeling before. Something isn’t quite right, but I don’t know what it is.” At this point, she is thinking about something that her maid Della had said, but it doesn’t come out for some time, while the suspense builds up.
	Another way The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore is a suspenseful book is because you gradually gain knowledge of each character. Sometimes the character themselves directly gives out information, and sometimes it is found out through Christina. When Della confronts Christina on the kidnapping, she gives away information that she did not mean to give out, but is something that would help prove Christina’s innocence a lot more easily. First of all, she asked Christina if she had gotten her typewriter back from the kidnapper’s house. Christina realizes that there is no way, she could’ve known about that unless she was somehow involved. Also, Della really tries to persuade Christina to not work on the case. This helped Christina come to the conclusion that she must’ve had to have a valid reason for trying to persuade her.
	The Kidnapping of Christina Lattimore is a suspenseful book because each chapter leaves you with a question, there is always an unsolved clue, and you gradually gain knowledge from each character. I realized after writing this review, how much I actually enjoyed reading this book. I did not think it would even be half as good as it was. The main character, Christina, reminds me very much of the main character in the book, Frozen Fire.