Rating: 5/5

This was an enlightening and fascinating read. Burger gives an overview of the field of personality psychology by looking at how the different schools (what he calls "approaches") of psychological thought understand and explain personality: 

1. Psychoanalytic approach (Freudian and Neo-Freudian): our personality is made up of our unconscious drives, urges, and neuroses
2. Trait approach: our personality is the sum of our consistent behaviors and characteristics
3. Biological approach: our personality is based in our genetic heritage
4. Humanistic approach: our personality is the result of our choices
5. Behavioral approach: our personality is determined by our environment
6. Cognitive approach: our personality is the result of how our brains process and interpret information

As Burger emphasizes, none of the approaches are considered "the one." Each one has its strengths and weaknesses, each one is useful in different circumstances, and the therapeutic methods of each can be used and helpful depending on the needs of the person and situation. At times logotherapy from the humanistic school is called for, at times the behavioral approach will best help someone work through his/her struggles. There is limited consensus in the field as to what personality even is, so we can benefit from what each school of thought brings to the table.

On a personal note, the book was surprisingly helpful in understanding humanity and how scientists understand and describe how we can advance our own wellbeing by adjusting our behaviors, beliefs, characteristics, and attitudes. I had many lightbulb moments regarding my own struggles, and I think it will be an incredible resource once I have kids and am responsible for raising healthy, happy, fully-functioning, well-adjusted human beings.

**Some of the language around sex and gender was a bit dated. I did read the 2000 edition, though, so I hope and assume that more recent editions contain updated discussions in this regard.