Rating: 4/5

Bernard Fall's classic account of the First Indochina War (1946-1954). The book was originally published in 1961 (in English) and quickly became a standard reference for American military personnel as well as anyone else wanting to gain some insight into Southeast Asia at the time. "Street Without Joy" (French translation: La Rue Sans Joie) was the name given by troops of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps to the stretch of Route 1 from Huế City (yes that Hue from "Full Metal Jacket") to Quảng Trị during the First Indochina War. Strangely enough (historical irony?), Bernard Fall was killed by a landmine ,on that same stretch of road, in 1967 when he was accompanying United States Marines on a mission.

The book is not a comprehensive chronological recounting of the war. Street Without Joy is actually a series of essays that examine specific battles/campaigns that occurred between 1950 - 1954. Between the chapters ,examining the war, Fall inserts four chapters that are his personal observations and are titled "Diary:". The main centerpiece of the book is the chapter examining the destruction of Groupement Mobile No. 100 ("Mobile Group 100" or G.M. 100). It's a long chapter and very engrossing. The entire book is very involving. Episodic and written in the style of the time (frequent reference to "Reds" and "Communists") it is evident that Fall did not access to full U.S. government documents when he wrote the book. The other thing that will stand out is most of the writing is from the perspective of the French with the Viet-Minh serving more as a faceless opponent. The book is an angry book, but there is the unmistakable feeling that Fall wrote the book as a way to educate the Western world about the formidable opponent that if faced in the East. It's an angry book because Fall is recounting where the French went wrong in their fight against the Viet-Minh, but Fall did not write an anti-war scree; it has definite political biases (anti-communist) and is intended to show how the Communists fight. I would expect nothing less from a book written at the height of the Cold War.

Despite these weak spots the book is thoughtful and stays away from simplistic jingoisms. It isn't a blast of anti-communist propaganda, but rather a book intended to educate. Fall is clear that the Communists are very competent and are very capable at taking advantage of the Western World's mistakes and shortcomings. In the end the book is most successful at giving the reader a look at the Human element of the war. He shows the people of Vietnam ,and their culture, while also conveying what the French soldiers went through with a clear and vivid writing style. Fall's book is considered to be a modern military history classic because it brings the French era of the Vietnam War to life. It isn't the facts or conclusions that Fall presents (some of which are still eerily prescient i.e. what the U.S. was looking at ), but the ability to make that war still seem accessible almost sixty-five years since it ended. It's an excellent account and I recommend it.