Rating: 5/5

A well wrtten and complex love story with a mystery to unravel. The H is Viscount David Delecourt 32,and the h Cecelia Lady Walgrafen 24, who had been previously engaged when Davic was 26 and Cecelia 18. She turned him down and ever since they had avoided each other at social events.

David found out he was a bastard and that his mother had been raped by Lord Kildermere. Viscount Delecourt was not his natural father but he was raised as his son and heir. He has a youger sister Charlotte and an older sister Jonot Kildermere married once to a Rowland bearing him two sons and three daughters to Cole Amherst a reverend and Director of a Mission to help former prostitutes to a better life. This is his secret as well as his mother's and his sister Jonot's. No one else knows his and his mother's shame.

Lady Cecelia Markham- Sands comes from a very old aristocratic familes. When she was 18 she filled in for her families jockey and raced a horse at a derby winning the race. She was undressing in a stall and David in his cups saw her undressing and thought her a trollop. He seized her kissing her and called her peaches. Her brother Harry came upon them and called him out. David not realizing who she was was mortified and offererd for her. He dragged her to his brother in laws Reverand Cole Amherst's to persaude him to talk sense into Cecelia who said no she would not marry him. Cole suggested an engagement and after six weeks she could reject him calling off the wedding. Her uncle wrote to David with her refusal of marriage. Cecelia had her come out that year and married an older man Lord Walgrafen. He died 4 years later. Cecelia thought of how kind Reverend Amherst had been and volunteered to work at his mission 3 days a week and helped procure funds for his mission from the ton.

Jonot was expecting their 4th child in 6 years and David was concerned for his sister's health. Cole told David that he was taking her to their country estate for the rest of her confinement. David's mother and sister Charlotte also went with them to help out with the three younger children. Cole asked David to keep his eye on the two older boys, the Rowland brothers. The brothers both called Cole papa and were fond of him. Cole and Jonot were worried about David as he seemed so sad and was drifting. They knew he needed something to awaken his soul again. Cole and his two boys played a game of whist with him. The stakes were if David lost he would do Cold a favour. David lost and the favour was to step in for him for three months as the Director of the Mission for former Prostitutes. Cole knew that David and Cecelia maybe had some unfinished business and hoped that by bringing them together they could work it out.

Well once the two former engaged couple saw one another sparks flew. They circled each other like sparring partners in the boxing ring without gloves. Things were tense for awhile with lots of barbs and insults. She tried to avoid him but they ended up being involved in a murder mystery when two girls from the mission were murdered and thrown into the Thames. They started to work with Inspector Max de Rohan (Italian mother) with the Thames River Police.

David and Cecelia end up making love after onc of their rows. As he was a Rakehell and not one to want marriage she offered to be his mistress. He knew he loved her and would not allow her name to be muddied. She loved him and hoped she would marry her even though she turned him down 6 years before. But before any ot that could occur they had a murder mystery to solve.

There are many clever arguments with quick wit and repartee between Cecelia and David. There are many hot and heavy love scenes. Lots of drama with violence and action involving the mystery.
I gave this a five star rating. I purchased this book at a used book sale and I am keeping it.