Rating: 2/5

Some books you read for pleasure, some for enlightenment, and some from a vague sense of obligation. So it is with Pilgrim’s Progress, a classic work of English literature that was such a part of every educated person’s upbringing for two hundred fifty years that I felt I needed to look into it.

After completing the book I consider it a dead classic, a work which meant a great deal to people once, but whose leaden prose and heavy handed allegory offer little to a modern reader. The only reason I can think of for reading it today is that it used to be such a foundational part of people’s lives that allusions to it were common in books and letters through the early part of the twentieth century. For example, in Paul Fussell’s The Great War and Modern Memory he writes that the authors of World War I memoirs frequently used quotes or made references to it to help them make sense of the conflict they were engaged in.

To a modern reader one of the things that stands out about this book is how absolutely certain John Bunyan was about his beliefs, thundering condemnations and consigning people to eternal damnation for what were, in effect, just matters of opinion based on shaky translations of the Bible. Of all the various people representing errors that the pilgrim Christian meets, the one that exemplified this for me was the character of Ignorance. He tried to be a good Christian, led a humble, pious life, performed charitable acts, and sincerely believed he was living as the Bible commanded. He also faced the same hardships and dangers as the Pilgrim as he made his way along the path toward salvation. However, he did not believe what the Puritans believed, which was that mankind is fundamentally wicked, so he was hauled off to hell just as he approached the gates of paradise. No doubt many readers then, and perhaps some now, were smugly sure he got just what he deserved. It is such a narrow minded and intransigent interpretation of Scripture that it actually made me think of a near contemporaneous 1650 quote by Oliver Cromwell, “I beseech you by the bowels of Christ, think it possible you may be mistaken.”

Bunyan would never admit he might be mistaken; he probably could not have recognized even the possibility of that. It is one of the ironies of history that his Puritan brethren left England, where they were being persecuted for their beliefs, to come to America and persecute others for their beliefs. These are the kind of people who could burn someone at the stake with a clear conscience and the unshakable certainty that they were doing god’s will.

So, the book follows Christian on his journey toward salvation. Along the way he meets the embodiments of good, such as Piety, Charity, and Faithful, and bad, such as Hypocrisy, Atheist, Despair, and, inevitably, Pope, and explains at great length exactly why they deserve their names. Bunyan may have been incapable of doubt about his beliefs, and he was just as incapable of subtlety, irony, or humor. The characters whom Christian disagrees with are mocked, belittled, and dismissed. Even for an allegory, this feels like being bludgeoned with theological arguments both turgid and tendentious.

Bunyan had a vivid imagination, and some of the scenes he creates are interesting, well written, and memorable, but even when he is at his best he is so endlessly pedantic that the reader is left thinking that if these are the kinds of people who get into heaven, hell doesn’t sound so bad after all.

For all its reputation as a classic work of English literature, this one can be skipped.