Rating: 5/5

“The Floating Girl” is Rei Shimura introduction to the world of Japanese Manga. As with every new book, Sujata Massey takes on a distinct cultural aspect of Japanese culture and makes it the central piece into a murder mystery with Rei Shimura as amateur sleuth. To add to her unsteady income as an antiquities dealer, Rei has begun to write articles for the Gaijin Times (which was in fact the name by whom the ‘entertainment” English version of the Japan Times aimed at foreigners was know unofficially, sadly but true nevertheless! Even if the newspaper in the book is a fictious one and not the real English Japan Times, the name has a real root).

Rei is feeling the pressure of working in a Japanese environment, which increase as the owner has the brand-new idea to change the outlook of the journal from a traditional newspaper to a manga magazine. Rei might not have any insight into historical manga, but she is eager to delve into the subject. As Rei works into an article on the history and culture of manga, focusing on the subject of Showa manga, she discovers ‘Manga Girl’ and accompanies its creator Kunio Takahashi on Tokyo’s up and down neighbourhoods, trying to solve the murder of the floating girl. Sujata Massey’s depiction of manga in Japan is insightful and provides some valuable points for the layman. 

Sujata Massey’s “Rei Shimura” is a mystery series featuring the eponymous character, an American Japanese woman in her late twenties (at the start of the series) who relocates to Tokyo to reembrace her Japanese roots and start an antiquities business. The books mix classical sleuth mystery, with Japanese cultural observation and biographical bits, into a nice, easy to read and fully enjoyable series. Some mysteries remind the classical clean mysteries of old, while other (especially on the later books) deal with very serious historical events, but in each case the stories remain easy-to-read mysteries with Japanese flavour. While an in-depth study into Japanese culture, should not be expected, the books offer a very credible insight into Japanese everyday life, from the point of view of American foreigner with the added bonus of having a real Japanese heritage, that allows her to blend in and navigate the country with credible ease. Every book in the series can be read as a stand-alone from the mystery point of view, as the arc-story only pertains to Rei Shimura chronological development. 

Massey, a London born, who has herself a mixed Indian-German heritage and has expended (due to her own husband work) several year in Japan, excels by interweave her own biographical data with fictional bit into one of the most original and interesting series in the genre. Rei Shimura’s character development and her reflections on the country evolve organically with the experiences in the country. Sujata Massey succeeds in showing the changes in Rei’s personality and reflections to the environment. A must-read for all fans of female slaughtering and/or ‘light’ Japanese culture.