Rating: 3/5

Hobsbawm's early book, Primitive Rebels, isn't really about anything primitive, or rebels as such. It's basically about education, or what you do when you don't have any. Or not enough. Or one specifically political, in a proper Marxist sort of way. Yeah, I know. You're shocked out of your shoes that another.book of purported history is really just propaganda from another leftist British historian. Get over it. I had to. Hibsbawm's narrowly focused subject is social rebellion in Southern Europe between the time of Napoleon until the arrival of a suitable translation of Das Capitol to a town near you. Some of the material in this book remains fairly interesting to this day, though Hobsbawm admits his sources used are scant, and now dated. Gramsci's theory of the north versus the south is ever present throughout this text, naturally. Social, meaning pre-political, uprisings are sketched as either conservative in nature, or those more radically inclined are allied to messianic concepts, if not with actual functioning religious sects. Some of Hobsbawm's suggestions seem mostly intuitive, as Bakuninists being unable to get a sufficient foothold in the cities they wished to destroy because working classes needed them to work in, but lweak on factual buttressing. The background theme that Hobsbawm insists on is that the revolting masses utilized what they had ready on hand, usually not requiring much if any thought, which was weak beer until Marxism came along. Until the suffering masses received their political education, they were forced to wallow in their social(primitive) revolts. I couldn't help but think that the "build a barn" approach to social problems which conservatives sometimes espouse contrasts mischievously with the "burn a barn down" approach that Hobsbawm's primitive rebels often utilized to vocalize their discontent. This conforms with Hibsbawm's message that revolt before Marx is in essence a mug's game. Ultimately, this book prompts some thought, but, alas, not enough to make me grateful that I've read it.