Rating: 4/5

Harvey Cheyne Jr. an arrogant fifteen -year- old, greatly disliked by the annoyed passengers, spoiled son of a multi -millionaire railroad tycoon from San Diego, ( my hometown) is being taken to Europe by his parents on a luxury liner, a steamship, set in the late nineteenth century. As they enter the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, a fertile fishing area, Harvey is seasick, not helped by smoking a strong cigar, he needs fresh air fast, going on deck his legs are a bit wobbly, 
 head aching too, a rough sea's giant wave throws him overboard, the unconscious boy floats on the foaming surface...doomed. Fortunately the fishing- fleet is all around there and a Portuguese fisherman, Manuel, from Madeira Island, (been there also) on a dory, a small fishing vessel used to catch cod, is surprised seeing the strange object, as Harvey will be when he awakes on board the parent boat. At first the teenager doesn't know where... but soon telling the owner captain, Disko Troop, of the seventy- ton schooner, "We're Here ", from Gloucester, Massachusetts, to take him to New York. His rich father will pay him a vast amount of money for this little trip. The skeptical man cannot believe this fair tale from a penniless boy, instead hires him at ten and a half dollars a month as a common fisherman, indignant...yet Harvey needs to eat. The captain's son the same age, Dan is, becomes his best friend, the bright kid learns fast, helping the other eight men on board the boat, they quickly give him their respect, through hard work, in the back-breaking, slimy job, he has rightly earned. The environment turns strangers into friends , then family ( his busy father and emotional mother neglected him), the dangers of the treacherous ocean, where many of the brave die, lost in the thick fogs of the banks, are almost forgotten, for the first time in his life Harvey feels useful, he is contributing to a cause, joining with fellow men...happy, even when he recites stories of his wealth, they the fishermen smile but don't believe, it does not anger Mr. Cheyne anymore, he is a man now...Kipling is a magnificent writer, he shows how people interact with each person in a realistic way, the emotions and despair of everyday life. This short novel will entertain but also give the reader something to think about , if you give people a chance , most will reciprocate the kindness.