Rating: 3/5

I read this when I was in college because it was written by one of the professors at my school. I think it helped kick off the furor for higher standards and, eventually, a common core. Still, nothing like a common "cultural literary" standard has ever been implemented--i.e. a large, common vocabulary of people, places, concepts, etc. There is a small common vocabulary, however - things you are bound to pick up in 90 percent of schools, but this common cultural vocabulary seems to grow smaller with each passing generation. 

I was fairly widely read from a young age, but I recall reading his list in the back of this book of common cultural references (from scientist and writers to battles and theories) everyone should know and finding I didn't know quite a few of them. I remember my father, who as long as I could remember devoured books of all kinds on all subjects, highlighting the things he didn't know well so he could look them up, and he had more highlights than I would have expected. That is to say, while I may agree with Hirsch's general concept that we need more common cultural literacy, the details are where things get hung up. His details may be a bit unrealistic, and educational theorists will always fight over the particulars, and perhaps that is why nothing useful like an information-rich, specific curriculum ever seems to get implemented in education. 

I don't think our biggest problems in modern education are class size or funding or the quality of teachers - I think it's curriculum. The curriculum used in most public schools today just isn't very good, and it keeps changing, from one poor curriculum to another. Kids love to learn and memorize at a young age, but we don't really pump their little brains full of as much cultural information as we could, of people and places and epochs and such. Vague standards written up in academic gobbledygook isn't what I mean here - but rather very content-specific curriculum. Have you ever tried reading the description of what your kids will learn in, say, 3rd grade from a public school website? I mean, just tell me, what specific mathematical operations will they learn? What specific historical figures and periods will they learn about? What specific books will they read? No vague generalities about process and standards using academic jargon, please. Tell me the actual STUFF. But finding that information is like pulling teeth.