Rating: 5/5

At first I wasn't sure how to feel about this book...on one hand, it's got wonderful, fluid prose. On the other hand, the main character (Scully) was frustrating beyond words, especially as the book progressed. The sole reason for this is because the synopsis leads one to believe that the book is going in an entirely different direction with its intentions. 

The synopsis isn't exactly misleading per se, but it does give the impression that the novel will move along at either a regular- or fast-paced speed. This is not true. In fact, Scully doesn't go to the airport to pick up his wife and daughter until page 90-91 or so. 

The book is essentially about a man's withdrawal from sanity or at least an emotionally healthy state, as he searches nonstop for his missing wife. She's not missing as in "someone took her" but as in "why didn't you come home with our daughter?" kind of way. &lt;--this is not a spoiler, don't worry.

In essence, this novel is not really about Scully's search for his missing wife. It's truly about Scully himself, and how he reacts to situations he puts both himself and his daughter Billie in. The story takes the reader through Scully's journey of madness, and his spiral into the abyss of illogical behavior and a severely emotional reaction to his wife's choice not to come home. 

One of the best part of the books is the character development of the 7 year old daughter, Billie. She's a special little girl, and it was almost breathtaking to see how the author let this character bloom into herself naturally, and let the chips fall where they may in regards to her reaction to events she finds herself being involved in. 

Very few authors can write children with such razor-sharp intuition, especially when the child character experiences stressful and/or painful events. In real life, these types of things would alter not just how a child behaves, but how they view the world and react to future events. In a sense, we're seeing Billie's evolution in this book; it's of a little girl who deals head-on not just with her father and his behavior, but with her mother as well. 

The writing here is stunning, and the journey that the story will take you on is unique, and not just because it involves delving into a broken man's psyche, but in the way it gives the other characters the respect they deserve to be well-developed.

I've noticed that the lower ratings from this book mostly have to do with the reader not being prepared for the type of story they find themselves reading, and that is entirely the fault of the synopsis. I found myself getting frustrated as well, but that was due to my own expectations. Once I accepted the fact that this story is a sprawling coming-into-madness-from-a-broken-heart story, I accepted the story for what it is: an undoubtedly beautiful piece of art.