Rating: 4/5

I found out about this book a long time ago via some book list on the internet, whose synopsis was something like 'time travelling cheetahs' and I could never find it, although it did lead to me reading that author's more famous book, Ratha's Creature. In fact I was a bit scared to finally read Tomorrow's Sphinx in case it was a letdown. Well, I wasn't disappointed, in some ways it's better than Ratha's Creature. I think I would have enjoyed it even more when I first started looking for it. Not sure of the exact target audience but it's probably "YA". If you are interested in a book from cheetahs' POV and/or a fantasy set in ancient Egypt you may like this book. 

The start of the book is a bit hard to get into, it's a bit like those 'realistic' depictions of animals in the wild where everything is a struggle for survival and horrible. When I first found out about the book I assumed 'time travel' meant to the future, but it seems the travel is an ancient cheetah to/from the past, in Ancient Egypt. As soon as the book started being from the POV of the cheetah in Ancient Egypt it was much more interesting. In fact the author seems to have written the book 'inspired by' some actual ancient Egyptian artefacts. These include ones that definitely depict cheetahs and also black artefacts that have variously been interpreted as either cheetahs or leopard. The author even breaks the 4th wall by having some characters call the main character a 'black leopard' as an insult. 

Now this isn't a fantasy, domestic cheetahs really did used to be a thing. Unfortunately for cat lovers, they didn't really continue as a popular pet. The only speculation I have read elsewhere about why is that they were relatively difficult to breed in captivity and could not fully adapt to domestication. So I think this is a bit of a speculative what if story, about the cheetahs that through selective breeding were more friendly and domesticated. And as we know from other domesticated animals, they are often appearing in other colours like black, and so do most wild cats although only a few actual black cheetahs have been recorded in contemporary times.
If you think it would have been great to have a friendly domestic cheetah, the book is a bit bittersweet. 

As for the other cheetah in the future who is returned to in the final section of the book: well I won't spoil the ending, I think you will enjoy the book more if the plot isn't spoiled. 
As soon as I finished the book I felt like it had put a different perspective on the first parts of the book so I wanted to re-read it. This book loses points in that the start of the book wasn't engaging when I first read it. Someone might like it, but it was a bit of a chore for me. It's actually hard to rate the book, it is amazing. Yet it feels like something is slightly off about the writing and parts of it needed to be rewritten slightly differently, I'm not exactly sure what it is. Not being perfect doesn't detract from the book's overall impact when you read the entire thing though.