Rating: 3/5

I am a fan of Age of Sail books and I'm slowly reading my way through Forester's Hornblower series. My slowness is partly due to delayed gratification and partly because I am not terribly impressed with the series. I have read all of O'Brien and especially liked Woodman's Drinkwater series. Compared to these two authors Forester's adventures are merely okay but nothing special. I suppose there is an additional problem with any book in this genre in that they all are about warfare between the British and French navies during the Napoleanic Era which was only about 15 years. Given the limitations of time and participants it is hard to imagine anything new and entertaining while maintaining some adherence to history. Nevertheless, a good sea yarn can some times be just the change of pace a reader like me needs and this one did not disappoint. I would have been slightly more generous with my star rating but the author did commit what I consider a major sin and that was to leave the reader with a cliffhanger. Cliffhangers are a cheap gimmick to sell books and if an author can't sell books based on his/her talent then maybe they should chosen a different line of work. So this book gets my 3 star, good book worth the time and the money expended on it.

As for the story itself Hornblower is now a post captain in command of a 2 decker ship of the line. His ship is part of 4 ship squadron headed for the Northeast corner of Spain to assist the Spanish in Catalonia in resisting the invader French. There is background material regarding Hornblower's marriage and his romantic interest in a woman that appeared in the book previous to this one. This woman is a relative of the future Duke of Wellington and is now married to a talentless but politically connected admiral that is now Hornblower's commander. There is a satisfactory amount of sea battles and the dangers of the sea while in a wooden boat powered by the wind. Over all this is a more than adequate adventure for any fan of this genre but there is nothing to set it apart.