Rating: 3/5

After learning that her father intends to marry his mistress--a servant and her mother's former maid!--little Frederica, last of the Armitage sisters, decides she'd rather run away from school and find work as a servant, than return to her father's house. On her last day of freedom before giving up her identity, she dines at an inn and meets the breathtakingly gorgeous, but cold, Duke of Pembury. The next day she enters the Duke's service as a chambermaid. Drawn into a battle of words between one of the guests, Lady Godolphin, and the Duke of Pembury's ex-mistress, Lady James, Frederica is outed as a lady of quality impersonating a servant. Luckily, Lady Godolphin is so impressed with little Frederica that she invites her to stay at her residence in London. En route, Frederica gets lost in a storm and takes shelter in a hut, where she is found by an extremely angry and concerned Duke. They pass the night together innocently enough, except for one shockingly sensual kiss which Frederica believes to be part of a dream. Knowing that in society's eyes, Frderica's reputation is already in ruins due to spending the night alone with him, the Duke fears that Frederica may try to force him to marry her in order to restore her honor. However, after Frederica laughs in his face and explains to him that he is far too old for her, the Duke realizes how little he knows this childish miss. Throw in a villain mad for revenge, a shunned mistress ready to do anything to capture her ex-lover's regard, a Duke afraid to admit his feelings, and a young school girl trying desperately to break out of her shell and show herself and the world that she is not so different from her sisters, and you've got yourself a crazy, wacky romance called Frederica in Fashion.

Following a spree of really good regency romances from Georgette Heyer and Joan Smith, I found this book a little disappointing. Although I understand the novel is quite short (really closer to a novelette) and that it is difficult to create rich and dynamic characters in so short a time, I found both the hero and heroine flavorless and boring. Frederica is your typical shy, plain, mousy, book-loving schoolgirl, while her love interest, the Duke of Pembury, is your stereotypical rich, arrogant, handsome, powerful older man. This combo has been done too many times to count, with different degrees of success. In this case, I felt Chesney was not in the least successful. I think the author wanted to pull the frequently used "usually plain but dazzling gorgeous when she smiles" trope; however, since Frederica's beauty was only remarked upon once or twice in the novel (while her plainness was heralded everywhere she went), it was difficult to believe that Frederica was in fact attractive. Pair this up with her youthful age (decidedly a negative in this novel), scrawny figure, her frightened and hesitant nature, and general lack of personality, and it becomes absolutely astonishing that anyone could fall in love with this plain, unappealing and underdeveloped heroine (whether they be duke or reader). 

As a very squeamish reader who loathes reading about characters in awkward and embarrassing situations, I almost put this book down halfway, fearing the scene when the Duke of Pembury discovers Frederica is not a servant. Surprisingly though, the scene was not uncomfortable at all--in fact it was quite humorous, in thanks to the comedic relief, Lady Godolphin. 

While not terrible, this book was not exactly great either. If you have your heart set on reading one of the Six Sisters books, I would recommend Diana the Huntress. However, if you're looking for a good Regency romance, I would drop M C Beaton/ Marion Chesney all together and pick up a Heyer.