Rating: 3/5

"Jinn" is a novel that gets most of the basics right: an interesting idea, a good story, a few twists and turns, a potentially scary monster/villain to focus in on. Unfortunately, it's also a book in which the details get lost in a confusing, and sometimes contradictory, set of occurrences.

The book opens promisingly enough, in the heat of battle in World War II. The reader is promised a cross between "Saving Private Ryan" and "The Relic," and here it is in the first 50 pages. Astute readers will also notice a strong similarity between this early part and the film "Predator" -- other than the setting, the two could almost be the same story. Later in the book, the author throws in some of our other favorite movies, like smatterings of "Aliens" or hints of "Jurassic Park," just to keep us guessing.

The plot moves along briskly enough, but it never really engaged me on the right level. I never found myself anxious to get back to its pages to see what happened next, and in fact sort of dismissed the book when people asked me about it. It has a fairly strong beginning, a frayed and disjointed middle, and an end which, while rushed and overly reliant on happy coincidence, does manage to tie together most of the loose plot points in a relatively satisfying manner. Like I said, all the correct elements for a good book are in place, but "Jinn" still misses the mark.

It might have been the cardboard cutouts for characters that did it for me, or the one-too-many contrivances used to carry the plot along, or the leaps of sudden insight that led the characters to just the right place at just the right time...but really, I think it was just the obvious way Delaney telegraphed his story. Though I'm sure the ending was intended as a twist, I pretty much had it figured out from midpoint in the book, and my predictions nearly all came true.

"Jinn" is one of those books with a great deal of potential, which only winds up realizing a small fraction of it. It's an OK book, a decent lazy summer read when everything else has been read and you're looking for some brain-candy. However...original, it's not. Rich in characterization or powerful drama, it's not. And memorable? No, it's not really that either. It's largely a forgettable book, moderately enjoyable while you're reading it, mostly forgotten once it's set aside.