Rating: 5/5

I learnt about these books last year, I can't even remember how I happened into them, it could've been my boyfriend telling me, or after reading about this somewhere else. Either way, we started looking for them ever since and we managed to download a few on Kindle, but the reading experience is a bit hard there.
Finally I found these on my library and I decided to take this one out, which I saw had lots of endings. I absolutely loved it!!! 
This one has 42 different endings, and after reading the whole thing (which took me about 3 hours, because I was keeping track of my decisions to make sure I covered them all), it feels like I read 42 different stories. Each decision takes you to a completely different place, different adventure. You die more than once, you get pulled out of the search, you even find Atlanteans, but each time you encounter them they are different, they're not even the same Atlanteans, and I loved that, because it means you can go back, make different decisions and have a new adventure all together. And part of the amazingness of the book is that you can have very common endings (like the kind where you decide not to explore anymore so you go back to the surface and no Atlantis is found), simplistic ones (like when you decide to blow up something and you screw up everything), or really complex ones (where you find Atlantis and things turn into a really hard core scifi adventure with a different race). 
The writing is very simple, it couldn't have been done any other way I think, because you can't cram 42 endings with a complex narrative in such tiny books. You need something that takes you decision after decision quickly, and that makes you feel like all the adventure is under your control, which it totally is.
I can't believe how much I enjoyed this. They might be made for kids, but man, this is great for adults, I haven't had this much fun playing with a book in forever. And never had I been able to make so many decisions on a story. I'm in love, I want to read them all.