Rating: 4/5

Trigger warnings: a metric shit ton of graphic violence. Like, so much violence. People get shot, stabbed, blown up, eaten by killer whales, and a bunch of other gory things. There's also a graphic description of eyeball trauma, which FUCK NOOOO. Miscarriage is also mentioned. Also animal death. 

7/1/2022
Nonstop action and ridiculousness from start to finish. I was personally offended this time around by the age of the characters. Shane Schofield is THIRTY TWO? Not here for it. 

13/4/2020
Is it ridiculous? Yes. Is it weirdly comforting in a global pandemic? Also yes. Is Lianne wrong in disliking this book? Very much yes. 

26/1/2019
I love this book. It's like reading an action movie where everything is ridiculous and nothing quite seems plausible but you go with it anyway because deep down you kind of half buy the idea of Dwayne Johnson jumping from a crane into a skyscraper without any problems. This book is that. And I know Reilly has said he wrote Shane Schofield with Tom Cruise in mind, but my 2019 headcanon is Zac Efron. 

22/7/2017
This book is hella ridiculous. Like, the most ridiculous of all the ridiculous. And I kind of love it. Everything I said last time stands. 

28/2/2014
This book is approximately 75% contrivance. Solutions to major problems appear in the nick of time left, right and centre. Guns fire despite having just been submerged in water. Characters discover traps and reset them so that they go off in the faces of those who set them. 30 year old scuba tanks prove to be viable for several dives. A 30 year old plane still has power. 

So yes, it's packed with contrivance. But it's so fast paced and so fun that I'm willing to completely overlook it. I love Shane Schofield. The chips are down time and time again, and he just sighs, picks up his Desert Eagle and his anti-flash glasses, and fucks some shit up. So yeah. It's ridiculous from start to finish. But it's the good kind of ridiculous, not the kind that makes you want to stab yourself in the eye so you stop reading.