Rating: 4/5

Rumpole on Trial is the 9th collection of Rumpole short stories by English author, John Mortimer. It's the 5th collection I've enjoyed so far. Mortimer is reliable, humorous, tells entertaining stories.

Rumpole is a barrister working out of a practice (Chambers) at 3 Equity Court; headed by 'Soapy' Ballard, with QC Philida, her husband, the reproachable Claude Erskine-Brown, who is jealous of his wife's success and has a wandering eye, the other barristers and staff of the court. As well, we are entertained by Rumpole's stern, but caring wife, Hilda (fondly known as She Who Must Be Obeyed). 

Each of the 7 stories deals with cases involving Rumpole, his 'battles' with the judges in court and his dealings with issues in Chambers and with his wife. Rumpole has a way with getting to the crux of each case and also provides his wisdom to the staff at Chambers, often with the unwanted assistance of Hilda. 

In this collection, we've got devil - worshiping children and holier than thou Social workers; the conniving of Erskine-Brown to get his QC and also to have Rumpole replaced. This latter issue comes to a head in the last story, Rumpole on Trial, where we find Rumpole with a severe tooth ache, an irritating murder, an irritating judge and where Rumpole begins to feel maybe he needs to move on to other things.

He's a great character, witty, crusty, smart and a pain in the arse to his head of chambers and to many of the officious judges he presents against. There are other excellent characters and for the most part they are the women who Mortimer fondly portrays; Hilda, the social - climbing, but practical wife; Liz Probert, one of Rumpole's younger compatriots, who is a radical and helps Rumpole even when the doesn't want it and new clerk of Chambers, Dot, how has all the men in a lather, especially Erskine-Brown and her fellow clerk, Henry. 

The cases and suspects that Rumpole represents add nice color to the book and make the stories rich and entertaining. An excellent book and you even learn a bit about the British justice system, which makes the stories even more enjoyable. One of the better of the Rumpole collections I've enjoyed. I'm glad there are still a few more in the series. (4 stars)