Rating: 5/5

“Everything is changed for you. But it is still the same, too. The loneliness you feel has come to you because you are no longer a child. But the world has always been full of that loneliness.” 
 The Human Comedy ~~~  William Saroyan

Have you ever read a book that makes you want to go out into the world make it a better place? Or maybe it makes you want to write a letter to get ahold of an old friend, or call your mother. Have you ever read a book that can make you optimistically happy and affectionately sad ~~ a book that can make you long for another time and place?  William Saroyan's  The Human Comedy is that book. In Saroyan’s world, human beings are at their very best, and a message of sincere, unabashed hope leaps off the pages.

 The Human Comedy takes place in the California town of Ithaca, where fourteen-year-old Homer Macauley is being dragged into adulthood before his time by a world at war. Homer’s father has recently died; Homer is forced to work long hours delivering telegrams to support his family. This job brings him into contact with Mr. Grogan and Mr. Spangler, two of the sincerest, nicest men ever. They are his supervisors at the telegraph office; it is here he learns of life, love, work, and values. Homer's job also exposes him to subjects that he is perhaps too young for; as the messenger, he is responsible for delivering notices to war mothers telling them that their sons have died in war. While he takes on all these adult responsibilities, Homer is still just a boy. He goes to school, is unwavering to win the track race, and is resolute in winning the love of Helen Elliot.

Homer's family is a close one. His mother, Mrs. Macauley, exhibits quiet resolve and wisdom, and is there for both her sons no matter what. His little brother, Ulysses, wanders innocently around the town and acts as a magnet for all the goings-on and eccentrics of Ithaca. Through his child's eyes, all the odd happenings and peculiar encounters of a small 1940s town are recorded. Their sister, Bess, is looking to find her place as a young woman in the world. The oldest sibling, Marcus, is off at war, dreaming of his cherished homeland and sending letters back to his beloved family members. Homer looks up to Marcus greatly and only wishes he would return home from the war.

While reading  The Human Comedy, I was struck by the moving human interactions defined by the undying force of love.  The Human Comedy is filled with goodness. It is said that nowadays the world is much more complicated than it was in the simpler time in which  The Human Comedy was written. But does it have to be? Perhaps if we slowed down, and focused more on our families, and communities rather than the world at large, our world would be a simpler place. The message of  The Human Comedy is that we should strive to be the best human beings we can be; then the beautiful portrait Saroyan paints of both a family and a community in here that will not seem so distant.  The Human Comedy will stay with you for a long time.