Rating: 3/5

You can check out my full review here: http://beckysblogs.wordpress.com/2013...
An odd little book about adolescence and first loves with a few gangsters thrown in.
Well, this book was an experience, I can definitely say that. It had such an odd jumble of ideas within it that somehow didn’t quite work in cohesion with each other.
The Butterfly Tattoo was written three years before Pullman’s famous book, Northern Lights/The Golden Compass. While there are significant glimpses into his brilliant writing in this earlier novel, it is far more patchy and a little harder to find. There are some remarkably insightful observations throughout about the growing pains of adolescence, the reality of honesty and the naivety of first loves. In a few cases I stopped just to reread a sentence three or four times to take it in. On the other hand, there is also a lot of painfully tedious writing in The Butterfly Tattoo that has the potential to send even the most enthusiastic reader to sleep. You’d think it would be hard to make such a short book drag, but it certainly happens in places.

Another issue I had with this book was the plot, apart from the opening chapter the novel moved slowly with several bits of unneeded filler. I think one of the key reasons for this issue was the first sentence of the book: ‘Chris Marshall met the girl he was going to kill on a warm Oxford night in early June.’ While I loved this as an intriguing and ominous start to the novel, it meant that I as the reader knew what was going to happen before it actually did. This probably explains in part why everything seemed to flow so slowly, it was as if I was waiting around for the prediction to come true, making me care less about the everyday intricacies in-between. On the other hand, one element that did impress me was the number of interesting themes and ideas that Pullman tackled. I felt at it’s heart, this story was about the corruption of innocence. Chris starts off as a young chirpy teen full of hope, and in the course of the novel he becomes aware of how many people close to him often lie and cheat, that the truth is rarely black and white and not everyone is who he believes them to be. 

I found the characters in this book quite frustrating. I enjoyed reading about them to a point because they were used to tackle the interesting themes, but mostly they felt like stereotypes. Pullman gives just about enough depth to pull it off, but it’s a thin line and they could have used some further development. I also felt bizarrely detached from the characters while reading, which meant I felt impartial about what happened to them at the end of the book.

So, that about sums up my reading experience of The Butterfly Tattoo. My honest opinion? Probably more of a miss than a hit, although I did enjoy aspects of the novel.