Rating: 5/5

Midsummer madness abounds in A Midsummer Night's Dream – one of William Shakespeare's most consistently popular comedies, and one that contemporary audiences still find to be openly, unabashedly, and understandably funny. The mischievous sprite Puck, or Robin Goodfellow – whose use of magical powers makes him an important catalyst for the play’s misadventure-laden plot – famously says at one point in the play, "Lord, what fools these mortals be!" And yes, he means every one of us, as Shakespeare makes clear throughout A Midsummer Night’s Dream.

The play, as most of us probably know by now, seamlessly weaves together three plotlines:

Plotline #1: The Fairies. In the world of the fairies – supernatural spirit creatures who wander “Over hill, over dale,” unseen and unknown by humans – Oberon and Titania, the King and Queen of the Fairies, are involved in a sort of custody battle over a changeling (a human child abducted by and brought up among the fairies). Titania has the changeling, and Oberon wants the changeling – all of which explains the harshness with which Oberon greets Titania upon their first meeting in the play, saying, “Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.” 

As Titania refuses to surrender the changeling, Oberon concocts a plot to humble his proud wife. Puck will be involved in this plot, as Oberon once saw the love god Cupid unsuccessfully shoot one of his love arrows at “a fair Vestal [Virgin], thronèd by the West”. The arrow fell to the ground, while the untouched Vestal walked away “In maiden meditation, fancy-free”; where the arrow fell, a flower was spawned, and its juice has the power to make one fall madly in love with whomever he or she sees. 

Oberon, who knows where Titania is sleeping during their estrangement – “I know a bank where the wild thyme blows” – sends Puck to gather this flower, with plans to make Titania fall in love with a particularly lowly mortal, someone far beneath her in social station. Puck assures Oberon that he will move quickly to get the flower – “I’ll put a girdle round about the Earth” – and Oberon grimly apostrophizes Titania once she has left him: “Thou shalt not from this grove/Till I torment thee for this injury.” 

Plotline #2: The Nobility of Athens. Don’t expect this play to feel terribly Athenian – it seems to have about as much to do with Athens, Georgia, as with Athens, Greece – but it is, at least theoretically, set in Athens, where a sort of love quadrangle is in play among four noble young people of the city. Briefly, Lysander and Demetrius both love Hermia. Egeus, Hermia's father, wants her to marry Demetrius. (Why? I really couldn’t say. Maybe Egeus and Demetrius are drinking buddies.) 

Hermia loves only Lysander, and wants nothing to do with Demetrius; meanwhile, another young woman, Helena, desperately loves Demetrius. An angry Egeus invokes an Athenian law setting forth that Hermia must either marry Demetrius, take a vow of lifelong chastity, or be executed; Theseus, King of Athens, reluctantly agrees that the law must be enforced. Small wonder that Lysander tells his loving Hermia that “The course of true love never did run smooth,” as the two plan to run away from Athens in hope of finding happiness somewhere else. Demetrius, informed of the plan by Helena (whose love he nonetheless sets at naught), plans to follow.

It will be understood if the modern reader or playgoer, observing these elements of the plot, finds him- or herself thinking of the J. Geils Band’s 1980 hit song “Love Stinks”: “You love her,/And she loves him,/And he loves somebody else,/You just can’t win.”

Plotline #3: The Common Folk. The above-mentioned Theseus, King of Athens, is about to marry Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons – and indeed, part of the reason for his reluctance to support Egeus in applying the harsh Athenian marriage law against Hermia may be that doing so is not likely to incline Hippolyta toward a quick acceptance of connubial bliss. Yet the plans for the royal wedding continue to go forward, and a group of ordinary working men of Athens want to put on a play in honor of the upcoming nuptials. Their plan – one no doubt influenced by Shakespeare’s reading of Ovid’s Metamorphoses – is to stage the tragic, Romeo and Juliet-style story of the separated lovers Pyramus and Thisbe. Among the artisans – or “rude mechanicals,” as they are called at one point – one Nick Bottom, a weaver, stands out as a particularly eager and enthusiastic would-be actor.

At this point, the three plotlines start to be brought together. The woodland to which the four noble lovers have repaired – Lysander and Hermia having fled there together, while Demetrius pursues them, and Helena pursues Demetrius – is also the woodland where Titania is taking refuge with her fairy attendants. While Titania’s attendants sing the fairy queen to sleep – “You spotted snakes with double tongue,/Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;/Newts and blindworms, do no wrong,/Come not near our Fairy Queen” – Oberon steals onto the scene, and, unseen, by any of the fairies, anoints Titania’s eyelids with the love juice. So far – from Oberon’s point of view – so good.

But then fate, or chaos, takes a hand. Oberon, having seen Helena’s expressions of love for the disdainful Demetrius, and having taken pity on the distraught and despairing Helena, has told Puck to sprinkle some of the love juice on Demetrius’ eyelids, so that he will return Helena’s love; but Puck mistakenly applies the juice to the eyes of Lysander, who abandons his beloved Hermia and begins pursuing Helena.

As another part of his busy day, Puck interrupts the drama practice of the artisans, gives Nick Bottom an ass’s head, and arranges things in such a way that Titania sees Bottom immediately upon waking up, and falls uncontrollably in love with the donkey-headed man. Was Shakespeare looking back upon his earlier life and expressing his sense that he was once in love with someone who turned out to be a real ass? I suppose we’ll never know.

Oberon soon learns that Puck applied love-juice to the eyes of the wrong Athenian youth; Puck dutifully applies love-juice to Demetrius’ eyes; and before long, both Lysander and Demetrius are running after Helena, declaring their love for her, while Hermia, once loved by both men, is now scorned by both. Helena meanwhile is convinced that she is the subject of a cruel practical joke: “O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent/To set against me for your merriment.” Lysander and Demetrius declare their readiness to fight to the death for Helena’s love, while an angry Hermia chases a frightened Helena through the wood. It is in this context that Puck makes that famous declaration of “Lord, what fools these mortals be!”

Yet A Midsummer Night’s Dream is a comedy, and therefore all ends well. Oberon, having won his argument with Titania and gained custody of the changeling, relieves the enchantment she was under, and the fairy queen awakens, thinking nothing more than that she has had a very strange dream. Puck removes the love-charm from Lysander’s eyes, and his love for Hermia is restored; Demetrius remains charmed, so that his love for Helena will continue. Love quadrangle resolved! And oh, yeah – Nick Bottom loses the donkey head and gets his real head back.

Theseus and Hippolyta enter the woods on a pre-nuptial hunt – Hippolyta recalls how “I was with Hercules and Cadmus once/When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear” – when they find the four sleeping lovers, who like Titania awaken thinking all has been a dream. Seeing that these four once-unhappy lovers are now paired-off as two happy couples, Theseus decides to disregard the law that would have let Egeus dictate his daughter Hermia’s marriage choice – “Egeus, I will overbear your will;/For in the temple, by-and-by, with us,/These couples shall eternally be knit”.

Why couldn’t Theseus have just said that in the first place? Why, so that William Shakespeare would have a full-length play to write, of course – and so that the literary critics of subsequent centuries could write books and articles about how fathers in Shakespeare plays are always trying to dictate their daughters’ marriage choices, and always fail.

The happy-ending triple-wedding goes forward as planned, giving King Theseus a chance to reflect upon the madness of love: “The lunatic, the lover, and the poet/Are of imagination all compact.” The artisans’ less-than-competent post-nuptial staging of the tragedy of Pyramus and Thisbe gives the newly married couples a good laugh, and the play ends with Puck asking the audience to place themselves in the position of those characters from A Midsummer Night’s Dream who believe that what they have experienced was but a dream state:

If we shadows have offended,
Think but this, and all is mended –
That you have but slumbered here
While these visions did appear.
And this weak and idle theme,
No more yielding but a dream,
Gentles, do not reprehend.
If you pardon, we will mend. 

The play has been filmed successfully a number of times -- the 1935 film with James Cagney, Olivia de Havilland, and Mickey Rooney; the 1968 film with David Warner, Diana Rigg, Helen Mirren, Judi Dench, and Ian Holm; and, most recently, the 1999 film with Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Everett, Stanley Tucci, Calista Flockhart, Christian Bale, David Strathairn, Sophie Marceau, and Roger Rees. Look at that list of actors, and you'll see that this play has drawn some serious talent to it. 

The poetry of A Midsummer Night’s Dream may not be Shakespeare's very best -- he throws in lots of rhyming couplets where rhyming couplets may not absolutely be needed -- but it is a comedy whose humour remains resonant for contemporary audiences, 400 years after the play’s first staging. Truly, it remains a dream worth dreaming.