Rating: 3/5

SWEET LAND OF LIBERTINES

If you fancy yourself a moralist, you may wanna skip this one. As the undoubted precursor to/playbook for modern-day soap operas, Cousin Bette involves: 
marital cruelty, sexual blackmail, spite-filled revenge, prostitution, unconscionable adultery, women with irresistible sexual allure to men, men and women having a number of different sexual partners (in a day), theft, poisons, passion-filled murder, and just about every other sin and demoralizing character defect one can imagine. 
It seemed realistic and true to the human condition... an exploration of a society uninhibited. Balzac wrote Cousin Bette in 1847 in France at the height of the "libertine" philosophy holding that one need not be restrained by the morals of society, including monogamy and marriage, but should instead seek out and enjoy all of life's pleasures (particularly a variety of sexual partners) with no regard to harm done to others (Note: my uneducated synopsis of Libertinism, which also fits my idea of biblical Sodom and Gomorrah).

Here, money and sex are bartering and blackmail chips; virtues like honor and loyalty take second seat to instant gratification and debauchery. Guilt and regret are non-existent.

The name is somewhat misleading. Cousin Bette is the old maid jilted by her infatuation for Wenceslas in favor of her angelic cousin Hortense Hurlot. As a result, she schemes to ruin the Hurlot family through a temptress named Madame Marneffe, who is as easy as an old shoe. Daddy Hurlot and the Mayor are also sleeping with the Mdme. I cannot start describing the rest of the story without going down a path littered with raunch and degradation.

I wanted to read at least one Balzac novel so I picked this one and read it a few summers back [review updated from then]. I give it 4 stars because there is something to be said for keeping all this straight and being the primary trailblazer of realism in fiction. Plus this is just a part of a larger, loosely-tied sequence of novels and short stories, La Comedie humaine, in which Balzac presented his panoramic view of life in France after Napoleon's downfall in 1815. So many great authors followed his lead in the 20th century in Europe and America and set the world afire down so many different paths toward truth and humanity that are each so unique.