Rating: 4/5

A very good historical novel which itself has an interesting history.
Apparently Balzac planned to write a novel about the Battle of Aspern-Essling (1809) and got to the stage of visiting the battlefield and writing notes, but he never got around to the book. French author Patrick Rambaud took up the torch in the 1990s as part of a trilogy about Napoleon, and made a very good job of it.
Balzac apparently chose Aspern-Essling as he was ambivalent about Napoleon's legacy and wanted to depict him, and his sanguinary career, warts and all. The battle was the first for a decade in which Bonaparte was personally defeated, and also the one which Balzac felt marked a change in warfare. Rambaud makes reference to this through the voice of one of the French marshals - the French Revolutionary armies carried all before them from Fleurus (1794) onwards as a unified force of Frenchmen fighting for their new form of government against interfering foreigners employing armies of mercenaries. But as Revolutionary France triumphed and became the Napoleonic French Empire, Napoleon's Grande Armee itself transformed into a polyglot force of mercenaries, adventurers and press-ganged conscripts - it was now their opponents fighting for their homelands, and warfare had greatly intensified and become "national".
The story of the battle is told through the experiences of two (historical) staff officers in Napoleon's army, Louis-Francois Lejeune and Henri Beyle (later the novelist Stendhal). The author also includes Napoleon himself and several of his senior commanders, with a smattering of fictional ordinary soldiers. This allows him to describe both the confused, desperate, and gruesome fighting, and the overall course of the battle, very much a la Tolstoy in "War And Peace". High praise indeed from a fan of both Tolstoy and military history ! He uses a little artistic licence for dramatic effect (No examples to avoid spoilers), but generally the battle is described accurately.
Faults ? The translation lets Rambaud down a little, with some infelicities and clumsy phrases which I'm pretty sure didn't come from the original French text. This may also have affected the military detail about contemporary weapons and combat - e.g. a French general is described as being wounded by a "a hail of roundshot". Roundshot are single (cannonballs of various sizes) - presumably canister or grapeshot was meant. And some of the action sequences feel a little far-fetched.
But I was impressed, and will look out for the other two books in the trilogy.