Rating: 4/5

This book is changing my life! I knew it would be good, but I didn't know it would read like a thriller...The first pages, anyway. :) I recommend it to every parent everywhere. And also to anyone who knows kids. Seriously, I bring it up in conversations frequently. 

Now that I've finished, here's what I want to note:

We already have what what is necessary to protect ourselves and our kids. It is the whispers of intution. We need to listen more to our wild brain, which is unfettered by emotion, politics, and politeness. Too often we give control to our logic brain, which is burdened by judgment, slow to accept reality, and spends valuable time and energy thinking about how things ought to be, used to be, or could be.

Often we worry about outcomes that are not likely (see goodreads quote about lava). "Worry is not a precaution; it is the opposite because it delays and discourages constructive action." An exercise for excessive worriers is to ask highly specific questions about a given dreaded outcome, or mark the expected date on a calendar. 

"Many parents go from worry to worry, never stopping long enough to see that their children are prevailing through life's challenges day in and day out. This is like surviving an air crash and then pausing at the top of the evacuation slide to worry about whether your luggage will make it on time. Sometimes, taking a moment for some gratitude keeps a few worries away."

"The best antidote to worry is action. Your choices when worrying are clear: take action, have faith, pray, seek comfort, or keep worrying."

If I'm worried, the best thing to do is acknowledge that I feel anxious about something, find some comfort, and move on without trying to build a case against the worry with my logic brain.

In order for a predator to nab my child, he needs ACE: access, cover, escape. What I can do to prevent this is: get close to my child or get him in view, taking care of access and cover, and place myself between my son and routes that lead away from public view, taking care of escape.

Women and girls should beware if they are alone with a man who has PC: privacy and control. Ask yourself how he got either of these, was it planned or conincidence, and how do you feel about it?

The Test of Twelve is a great list to help realize if your child is ready to be alone in public. My friend Teri Lund listed all twelve, so check out her review. Some important items are to make sure kids know they don't have to obey all adults, and it's okay to be rude or even violent if they feel they are in danger. If someone says "don't tell" or "don't yell", telling and yelling are exactly what they should do. All kids should know to fully resist going anywhere with someone they don't know, especially if that person is trying to persuade them. Your kids need to know that you as parents are strong enough to hear about any experience they've had, no matter how unpleasant, and above all, kids should know to honor their feelings/intution.

From the chapter on sexual predators: we need to teach our children about touch, the body, boundaries, communication, assertiveness, and sovereignty over the body. 

Children should know that it's okay to withdraw consent at any time; their body is theirs; how to talk about the body; how to say No; to keep telling if nobody listens and if nobody makes it stop.

Tell children that no adult or other child should: put their hands down your pants/ up your skirt; touch your private parts, even through clothes or pajamas; ask you to touch their private parts or ask you to remove their clothes; take off your clothes; take pictures of you with your clothes off; take their clothes off in front of you.

One convicted child molester said "parents are partly to blame because they don't tell their children about sexual stuff. I used that to my advantage by teaching the child myself." According to one law-enforcement expert, a child who knows nothing about sex is a highly qualified victim. 

Assertive kids are less likely to be molested. We need to teach kids to be comfortable with assertiveness. We can't shy away from teaching the dangers of sexual exploitation because we think it will frighten kids. Fear is diminished when prevention strategies are provided.

From the chapter on guns: we need to teach kids, especially boys, about guns. Know if there is a gun in the homes of your child's friends. Guns should always be LOCKED, not just locked in a cabinet. Never think that a gun won't be found by a child in your home. 

"Just like adult men, young men in our culture are discouraged from showing emotion. Violent boys are frequently expressing what William Pollack calls 'the only  acceptable  male emotion--anger.'"

This book is an incredible resource for parents! I feel so empowered by De Becker's information, and although some of the vignettes were painful to read, I am able to spend less time on uselses worry. I have taught my boys to look for a mom or a woman if they are lost, and we have talked about "tricky people" and listening to our instincts. I am less worried about politeness and more assertive about my duty to protect my two precious gifts. 

I already knew that being alert and aware was important, but now I feel like I could take action in a stronger way. For instance, I can rebuff overly helpful guys who seem a little creepy. And while jogging, if I were being trailed by a man who seemed sketchy, rather than casting a glance over my shoulder and crossing the street, I feel like I could first turn and face him with a glare to let him know "I am no victim."