Rating: 5/5

It is hard for me to think of a fair rating for a book which is about the spiritual reflections of a person - since it is a deeply personal journey, and extremely tormenting for even a seeker to understand at times. Hammarskjöld's work is of importance, even today and the one that I thoroughly enjoyed. 

It is clear that he could never break free from the clutches of his identity. He was a great economist and a man of influential position in the United Nations, and had to endure the challenges of overwork, physical suffering but his own conscientious - of being useful to others. What you're drawn to, or care about, will also bind you. 

And yet, he didn't flinch from remaining true to the Way (the inner work) and being an instrument of God. It was a matter of sheer will and courage. He encouraged : "to keep alive the incentive to push on further, that pain in the soul which drives us beyond.'

A man with a social standing like him, would have risked being mocked at - if he was vocal about his inner, private life and that is why, he didn't intend, until the end of his life, to publish 'Markings.' It includes ruminations about nature, surrender, self realization - a deeply personal account of one's conversation with God.

It is a gift to have a book like this in this world. A spiritual path is often looked as something which one can only follow if he/she were an ascetic. But Hammarskjöld's legacy proves otherwise - one can be busy in the temporal world, and yet seek solace in the spiritual.

There were moments in the book, when a seeker such as myself could relate how clear Hammarskjöld felt about self surrender and self realization. Then, there were transitions into loneliness and anguish. 

Thus, Hammarskjöld felt that he was a victim to occasional suicidial ideations - unworthiness. It would appear that these traits were matters of flaws in personal life, but no, they are actually products of spiritual distress, since the crumbling away of a personal identity in order to merge with something higher, is a shattering process. Hammarskjöld had uninterrupted success and a fortunate life, but even such a life cannot make up for the longing for something deeper - the eternal. 

He responded to the sense of unworthiness, with defiance and not as a victim of vanity. While his belief drove his life, his intellect always challenged their validity - and thus, a man is left in an overwhelming state.

Hammarskjöld must have also suffered from a great fear of LOVE, yet his reflections are profound and poignant - which I share with him. Unlike him, I will not uphold that a great love is always unreturned but this - one understands love by first understanding what love is not. If one's love receives warmth and shelter by it's counterpart, there is a possibility that such a love will not grow to it's ultimate maturity - a love that thrives even after the loss of 'object' of love. Thus, Day Hammarskjöld's reflections are apt - "One's love had a long way to go before it would mature into - Love." Such a Love is deeper than Ego-Love (such terminology would be fairly understood by a seeker). 

In case of a spiritual aspirant, the ego-love, in love's effort to shelter it, can create a cold around the Ego - which slowly eats it's way inward towards the core. But if one transcends this pain, love matures and the Self dissolves - which is both liberation for the lover and the Beloved - for such a love will not bind another. 

Despite these reflections, it is hard to ascertain why Hammarskjöld flinched from love, as there's no note about his relationship anywhere. Interestingly, he writes towards the end (in 1961) writes - "Far away/ For the last time/ I heard the scream/ The scream of terror/ The voice of loneliness/ Screaming for love."

I'm not sure if poetry were his strongest element but some surprised me - his anguish and longing for the eternal, quite evident.

This book also introduced me to WH Auden's translation work, and it is commendable.