Rating: 4/5

Between the Other and Half Worlds

A good reread in a retro way, the concepts behind these two clever Heinlein novellas have held up nicely over time. In the first, Walter Farthingaite-Jones, aka Waldo, is the victim of a childhood disease that leaves him overly weak, yet he compensates in inventiveness, creating at age 10 a remote control robotic arm. The patent gives him the financial means to relocate to a personal fortress of solitude in zero-g low earth orbit where his lack of strength is not a liability.

The conundrum of the story is the world’s dependency on radiant (wirelessly transmitted) power which is used world wide to supply electricity for everything from flying cars to the home, copper transmission lines having been abandoned and mined. The key device, the de Kalb receptors, have exhibited a random pattern of failure. The North American Power Authority (NAPA) deems this a Waldo class problem, with the wrinkle that NAPA indirectly cheated Jones out of a different patent, making it problematic to deal with him. Waldo however is prodded into taking on the task, and the solution is somewhat magical in nature, requiring the supposition of a secondary universe, also referred to as the “Other World”.

Magic Inc takes place in an alternate modern world where magic is routinely used as an essential element of business production. The protagonist, Archie Fraser runs a legitimate construction business, and is approached by a somewhat demonic shakedown operation to only use magicians from a certain guild. Deeming this a restraint of trade, Archie refuses, and the game is on. Archie contacts a friend of his, Joe Jedson, a savvy garment manufacturer who also is dependent on magic. As events progress, with nice touches of humour and a tour (and of course commentary) on the legislative process as the Association attempts create a legal monopoly through oversight and approval on the provision of magic as service, a violation of the RICO act (1970) had it been in place when the story was written in 1940. The trail for a just resolution leads to Hell (the Half World) itself.

Logic, and spatial geometry figure prominently in Hell and in Waldo’s space station home, and even the fantastical aspects of both are subject to reason and logic. The a prototypical boldness that defines the Heinlein hero – though condescending in part to everyone else, that boldness transcends any antipathy - as long as you are good at what you do, no other judgement can carry. Both story telling and characterization are good, and Heinlein’s libertarian spirit, while always present, is never overwhelming.