Rating: 2/5

Why I chose to listen to this audiobook:
I read this book back when I was in high school during the late 1970s. As a young, impressionable reader, I had given it 5 stars. A few years ago, my daughter and her husband gifted me with a copy of this book after they watched (and liked) the 2017 movie version. I found an audiobook recording to follow along with the book.

Praises:
1. a memoir written by Henri Charrière, focusing on his unjust incarceration at a penal colony in French Guyana during the early 1930s. It's an action-packed adventure story of perseverance and survival as he attempts several escapes from various prisons; and,
2. the hardcopy contains a Glossary of various French terms used, as well as a map outlining a couple of Papillon's lengthier escapes.

Niggles:
1. although written as a memoir at least 40 years after this time period, Charriere is extremely detailed in his conversations, which is amazing, because I can't recall what I said word-for-word with anyone that I spoke to a couple of hours ago. Personally, I felt there was TOO MUCH DIALOGUE which got boring at times;
2. there was a lot of tell, not show, and a lot of repetition;
3. I was mystified as to how often Papillon was welcomed and adored wherever he went, given free rein, gifts, and money. He was revered as the center of attention by prison wardens and indigenous peoples alike, even though everyone was highly aware that he was an escaped prisoner convicted of murder;
4. the audiobook recording was confusing as there were huge amounts of dead air between "notebooks"; and,
5. I was totally disgusted when he is welcomed into a Colombian indigenous tribe during his first escape, "inherits" two young wives, 17-year-old Lali and her 12-year-old sister, Zoraima, impregnates them both, and then leaves them high and dry in order to continue his adventure.

Overall Thoughts:
Well, this is the second book in a row that I loved in my youth, only to be highly disillusioned with in my 60s as I reread them. I often questioned the overall authenticity of this "memoir", and it appears that I'm not the only one. Many parts just seemed so wrong.
This is just proof that books sometimes affect us differently throughout the years.