Rating: 5/5

Another delightful little murder from Ngaio Marsh that I devoured in one long afternoon/evening of reading. The Lampreys are SO likeable and charming that they made the book but ruined the murder as I didn't want any of them to be guilty! (Well, except maybe Frid who WAS a bit grating at times.) I just loved spending time with the Lamprey family, and seeing them through Roberta's adoring eyes. They gave her a pet name of course, Robin, and she has been with the family for years, ever since Frid invited Robin home for the holidays back in New Zealand. Robin loved the family and the family loved Robin and she became a happy accessory for many of the school breaks, until the Lampreys returned to the old family pile in London when the next infusion of cash came from a long distance aunt who's demise couldn't have been more timely. That's not even the beginning of the mystery! 
It's when Robin ventures to London after she tragically loses both her parents. She's reunited with the Lampreys and barely a full day passes when there's a murder! The family is in dire straights once again, and their uncle Lord Wutherford (old money bags) won't pay out. There's a shouting match between the brothers in the library, stodgy old miser won't cough up and storms out after giving his younger brother a dressing down, and the next thing you know they find his dead body in the lift. Enter Alleyn and Fox and even eventually Nigel Bathgate. The interviews are almost entertaining as each of the Lamprey's tries a different tactic with Alleyn, who struggles not to be amused and taken in by the family charm along with everyone else. 
He does uncover the murderer, of course, and it is a satisfying ending, but I have to say I wasn't as excited to play along in discovering the culprit on this one because I just enjoyed all the suspects so much! So five stars for an incredible cast of characters, three stars for the murder plot that suffered slightly for it, landing at a solid four stars. Will definitely revisit for another read someday just because it was so fun.