Rating: 2/5

Oh man, I have such mixed feelings about this book. There are so many things it does so well, and some really important things it does badly.

First of all, nobody writes about the oppressive weight of racism like James Baldwin. Nobody. It is savage and relentless, it permeates every thought and every relationship and every action, it is painful and full of rage, and it is unforgettable. No one does it better.

Second, he’s exploring issues that I feel like are so relevant to our current moment in history, and he is doing it back in 1961. He’s exploring the complexity of male sexual identity and sexuality, the ways liberal whites failed the black community (it is different and less malicious than overt racism, but still does harm), and the ways our location and its accompanying culture impact who we can become, and he does it all with a lyrical, psychologically-rich, jazz-influenced style. 

And yet.

Here’s the thing. This is not my first novel where a male protagonist commits sexual assault. There are a lot of authors out there showing how racism and other social forces create these men that leave me feeling, yes, rage against the rapist, but also against the culture that created him. Toni Morrison does this brilliantly. And she is so effective because the pain of the victim feels every bit as important as the pain of the assaulter.

The pain of the victim never feels as important in this book. Frankly, the lived experience of any woman in this book never feels as important as what a man feels. Maybe Ida’s last chapter comes close, but there are an awful lot of pages to wade through to get there. The only woman whose pain is given any dedicated time is Cass, whose story can be reduced to, “Ennui, I guess I’ll have an affair,” and her woes include not feeling like her relationship with her lover has progressed to the point where she could clean his apartment for him (?!?!?!?!?!?!??!). Yves’ pain is more important than his mother’s, Vivaldo’s self-actualization is far more complex and powerful than Ida’s, and the battering of multiple women just seems like it just couldn’t be helped given the circumstances.

Baldwin does acknowledge the pain that Rufus’s actions caused Leona, but he writes it so it feels like an unfortunate side effect of racism, and frankly, it implies that she deserved it because of choices she made. And I just can’t go there. If you want me to sympathize with the assaulter, you darn well need to make me sympathize with the assaulted. A woman’s suffering should never be a footnote to a man’s suffering.

I am still eager to pick up more Baldwin, but I just can’t go any higher for this one. 

*Also, if you want to read Audre Lord call Baldwin out on the way he privileges male pain at the expense of female pain, you should really check out this interview she did with him. There is also a lot of fabulous conversation there where they agree with each other in important ways. The whole interview is quality.