Rating: 4/5

I became interested in the history of psychiatry and psychology in college, obtaining a degree on the subject in seminary and pursuing the study afterwards in graduate school. Indeed, by the end of college I fully expected to become a depth psychologist.

While, as with so many other interests, I've kept my hand in since, reading the books I come across on these matters, I gave up the idea of a career in the field through the ancient Chinese method of "a thousand cuts". The church-based program I had planned to work for, thereby avoiding the odious problematic of taking money from suffering persons, was defunded, still I interned in NYC, but fell in love &amp; moved to Chicago to discover that what counted for certification in the one state didn't in the other. I worked at a low level with adolescents diagnosed as psychotic for several years, paying off school loans. Getting fed up with getting nowhere, I returned to school to finish a dissertation of the philosophical roots of analytical psychology, but the only faculty person qualified to supervise my work, a psychoanalyst and philosophy PhD fron Northwestern University, had his contract not renewed. Then, my assistantship having run out, I landed a peachy job as an academic administrator and decided to stay with that while working on a further graduate degree which would allow me to teach in one of the university's professional schools. Finally, having become an academic dean, I and several hundred others were laid off during a budget crisis and my university division was abolished, leaving me the overeducated and effectively, I learned, unemployable creature that I've become. 

Oh, there's more on the subjective side. In addition to having always been uncomfortable with the oxymoron of being paid to be considerately kind, I had increasingly become disenchanted with most of what passed for psychotherapy. The field of analytical psychology in particular seemed almost entirely adverse to empirical research and my study of depth psychology in general had raised serious doubts about some of its tenets and their pertinacious proponents. The more I mastered the often arcane formulations of the discipline, the more I became disenchanted with the supposed science and the more I recognized the relative importance of the character, intention and common sense of the analyst. While I still believe that serious relations between persons can and should have a therapeutic intent, I have come to see this more as like a Socratic dialogue than as an office consultation.

This having been said, I naturally found the story of Masson's own enchantment and disenchantment with psychoanalysis a sympathetic one. Whether or not his claims for the incidence of child abuse in Freud's Vienna is factually the case, he does demonstrate that there was a retreat from the initial, quite serious if true, hypothesis.