Rating: 4/5

Not the most profound of stories amongst the cannons of romance. Wanting to read something lighthearted and simple (after taking a spine-chilling detour through the wicked halls of horror) I indulged myself with Sapphire and Silk. Although Nicholas, Lord Silverblade was supposedly considered a wild 'libertine' of a man, he did not give Johnny Depp a run for his money in the film of the same name. Instead of the bodice-ripping action I sought after, I met with a very sweet tale. I immediately loved the two main characters right off the bat. Not only does the hoydenish heroine and charismatic hero have great names, they compliment each other very well in the ways that a pleasing match would.
 I liked that it wasn't an insta-love (even though I don't have a problem with that) sort of thing for Aurora. In fact I believe she thought Nicholas to be an insufferable rake. But of course that didn't stop a part of her from being intrigued by him. 
 There were glimpses of the usual romance tropes in her backstory; like a drunk father offing himself after gambling away everything. Leaving Aurora no choice but to seek out refuge with her estranged sister who plays live-in mistress to an overbearing, self-indulging, lascivious, and controlling Lord Overton aka Halley. 
 As the plot progresses with its gossip and misunderstandings, the protagonists struggle with the common notion that people aren't always whom they seem to be all while trying to keep their pride as well as their wits about them. Throughout some misadventures, Aurora may have needed rescuing but she wasn't a complete damsel in distress. She was a tough copper-haired cookie who was trusty with a sword and pistols, not to mention a skilled horse whisperer/rider able to tame the wildest of equestrian beasts. Appreciated that she didn't come across as annoying in her obstinance as some heroines succumb to in other books. 
 There are other plot points I could remark on, but I really don't want to give too much away.