Rating: 5/5

In 1981 Vito Russo published a pioneering analysis of homosexuality in the movies, The Celluloid Closet (later made into a documentary which is a different animal and no substitute for the book, which I read and reviewed with a rave here in 2009). That book brilliantly read the "codes" of gayness that creators in the repressive time of Hollywood's censorious golden age slipped into mainstream films.

William Mann takes Vito's work several steps further by tracking down and telling the stories of the gay and lesbian men and women who worked within that system--from the biggest stars, producers, directors and writers to the "little people" behind the scenes who decorated the sets and designed the costumes--showing how their own lives and attitudes informed their creative work and what audiences saw on the screen. Even though it is not as scintillatingly written as Vito's classic, Mann's meticulously researched book is every bit as important and significant; a much-needed and enormously enlightening history of a subculture that shaped the iconic images seen by millions, while doing its best to survive both in a Hollywood and in a general social order hostile to the desires and identities of its individuals. This is essential reading for anyone who is the slightest bit interested in movies or in the struggles of gays and lesbians in the 20th century. I was surprised at just how much I learned from reading this, and I learned a LOT.

One thing that Mann discovers in his quest for the overall story of Hollywood's gay and lesbian creatives is that Hollywood during its pre-Stonewall history was probably the best and safest place on earth for someone "in the life" to be. But being there, of course, also required a balancing act: of being circumspect and in the closet just enough to not bring unwanted attention to your employer, the studios. Mann deeply examines the politics and the psychology and the morality of the times, how gays and straights blended in the social and professional mix, which jobs gay men and women were most likely to take in the studios, how different stars and crew handled their particular lifestyle and professional challenges, and a whole lot more. In his investigation he finds amazing stories and even some heroes and heroines, as well as some tragic figures. It is Hollywood, after all. Mann fills in great gaps in the biographical record, telling the stories of neglected and important figures for the first time. And, if nothing else, the book offers the most complete listing I've ever read of who was gay in Hollywood, including some people I had never thought were. Such was the triumph and enduring legacy of the Hollywood publicity machine. Image, as many Hollywood gays realized, was everything. 

I had intended to go into more depth, but, suffice it to say the book is pretty amazing, though the density of information and the sheer number of names and mini-bios presented made it a tad slow-going. But this is a great book of Hollywood history, and goes right to the top of my essential movie-reading list. Magnifique.

A postscript: I don't think this is either a spoiler or an outing, but when Mann released this book in 2001 he mentioned on page 259 his failure to secure an interview with a major (unnamed) star of the 1940s who at that time of the writing of this book was still alive and still in the closet. Taking the bare hints he gives, I was able to ascertain that he was talking about Van Johnson, MGM's heartthrob of the bobbysoxers and for a couple of years the number two star at the box office. When Johnson died in 2008 it was noted in the press that he was indeed closeted among the general public but well known in gay circles to be gay. Maybe this will be updated if Mann ever publishes another edition.