Rating: 4/5

This was the first non-geology McPhee book for me — and a test to see whether I started to find geology fascinating or whether it’s McPhee’s writing chops that did the trick for me. Well, maybe geology rocks indeed, but McPhee is where the magic is. A good writer is like a wizard with words. Obviously.

 “Alaska is a foreign country significantly populated with Americans. Its languages extend to English. Its nature is its own.”

 
Here we get to see 1977 Alaska, which is a beautiful but strange place. A remote and huge expanse of land with competing ideas to apply the frontier approach to it or keep it as preserve of nature for those who have little in the way of pristine nature elsewhere, a place that attracts wilderness enthusiasts and people who’d prefer to be left alone as they make their living in whichever way they please whether they are permitted so or not, those who’d prefer use and exploit and those who wants to conserve, the spirit of individualism and collectivism, and the ever-receding wilderness. All that in the same place and time, and sometimes even in the same people.

   “They invite a question. To a palate without bias – the palate of an open-minded Berber, the travelling Martian – which would be the more acceptable, a pink-icinged Pop-Tart with raspberry filling (cold) or the fat gob from behind a caribou’s eye?”

We see the forests and rivers where bears roam and salmon swim, the tiny remote towns full of tensions and dramas, and the efforts to move the state capital from Juneau to a bunch of other places (the campaign that as we know 50-ish years later ended up unsuccessful). It’s pretty much three books in one - wild Alaska (Salmon River), rural Alaska (Upper Yukon, the settlement of Eagle) and urban Alaska (Juneau, Anchorage).
 

McPhee’s own presence is stronger in this book than in his geology series. He’s here hiking though the wilderness, terrified of bears, taking a canoe down the river, fishing, and hanging out with quite a few characters whose rugged quirks are fascinating. And he shines through the crisp clear prose with sharp vivid observations. The imagery is strong, the descriptions are crystal-clear and fresh and often surprising and wonderfully effective.

   “Looking over the side of the canoe is like staring down into a sky full of zeppelins.”

One thing I got out of this book is that I’m not Alaska material, but enjoying it through McPhee filter was lovely and oftentimes a bit scary.

4 stars.
——————

Also posted on my blog.