Rating: 3/5

2.5 
Okay not much to say, because I was mostly bored reading this. But let’s list things properly,
Characters 
I enjoyed some of them. Tavi and Bernard are my favourites. I enjoyed Tavi’s perspectives, but hated Amara’s. Felt neutral over Isana and didn’t care much for Fidelias, even though I was impressed at the beginning by how cunning he is. It didn’t last long though. 
The writing 
The writing is descriptive, which isn’t necessarily always bad, but in this case I almost gouged my eyes out. It was so dry and so distant from the characters and their feeling and what they’re thinking. It’s the reason why the characters felt so two dimensional and unlikable. I wanted to care for them but I couldn’t, I didn’t have it in me. The writing made the experience so dull and boring at times. 
The magic and world-building 
Pokémon and Roman inspired. Cool, right?? Yep, and it was cool. At least the Pokémon part. Using the furies was fun to witness. But I wish it was explained a little more than that because at some points I was confused on what having the furies enables you to do and what not to do. 
The Roman part however, was meh. I think it lacked because of the lacking in the world building. I still don’t have my head wrapped completely around the world, honestly. I feel like only the places that are mentioned in this book are the only ones explored, and not throughly at that. 
The plot 
Typical, not gripping, and a little uninteresting. Because of the lacked world building I found myself not caring much about the plot. Because I already knew how it would go. 
The conclusion 
This wasn’t a bad book really. You might love it more than I did, and/or find none of these problems for you. But I wish the writing wasn’t dry. Because it’s the reason I didn’t fully love this book. I kept hoping I’d make some connection to the characters and start caring about them but nope! The writing prevented that. 
I might continue on the series, because people say it gets better. Unfortunately my main problem isn’t the plot as it is the writing, and I doubt that’ll change.