Rating: 2/5

Here we are again. Still reading 'em, dunno why. This one was more sci-fi and less wandering ramble, and while still not what I'd call GOOD (or even average), for me it gets one star more than the previous two.

Still present is the absurd morality. All the good characters are SO good, so selfless, so without crime or sin or even bad thoughts. It's uninteresting and it's gross. The parents constantly glaring at their kids when they make the smallest gaffe, the kids constantly looking to the parents and basking in their approval at the tiniest evidence of goodness. So gross.

More random irritations:

... summoning the resident pets: Coonies, Darbuls...

What the hell is a Darbul? For that matter, what the HELL is a Coonie? Just introduced one day in a previous book, and I assumed it was some kinda cat-creature except then it started doing things that weren't cat-like at all. Now we have a "Darbul," and I've searched the book and it's never explained at all. Terrible writing.

Jeff Raven chuckles, and then one of his inimitable chuckles reaches their ears. Ugh. She does this a lot, awkwardly repeating words and actions. Editor is sleeping on the job.

About 'Dinis:

"These are just mature attendant females who haven't gone out of the village yet."

Um what they have no gender right? Did I miss them having a gender? Did they suddenly develop gender?

Mur gets sick on canned air in a spaceship. Mur must be physically imperfect.

Weird way to phrase it, aren't we all? I guess not the exalted Primes, who are just so perfect and without fault or sin to the point of being irritatingly boring and insipid.

Talented parenting involved the perquisite of reading a child as deeply as possible -- especially highly Talented children -- to correct any psychological quirks before they became established and warped a personality.

Holy shit wow, ew. Like, ew. Entire dystopian horror novels are dedicated to shit like this, and you write it like a good thing? Absolutely fucking creepy. This is the worst morality tale story I've ever read, if that's what it even is.

So after wondering for more than half the book who the "Malice" character out to get Thian was, his elaborate plan to catch him is to suddenly mentally scream "GOTCHA" at dinner, and the guilty party has a brain-stroke and passes out? Um, how come they all didn't? He didn't know on whom to focus because he didn't know the person's identity? Like, oh, someone hurt me so I'll shoot everyone in this room and the bullet will only go through the guilty party. Am I missing something, or is this just stupid?