Rating: 5/5

I agree with the reviewer who wrote, "The plot summary may make it look like porn but, if so, it's the most thoughtful, affecting porn I've ever read."

It is porn -- sort of. But not really, actually. For a book that's about sex, the proportion of actual graphic content is surprisingly low (although there is some; it wouldn't be like Geoff Ryman to write a book about sex and then not deliver). But it's not just a titillating bonk-fest, all fun and games. That would be porn, and more to the point it wouldn't have much point; it wouldn't be -- what shall we call it? -- art. Here, the protagonist, Michael, has problems at the outset: he can't take any pleasure in his sexuality, he has relationship problems, problems with trusting or being open to people, problems getting it up, problems liking himself or feeling comfortable in his own body. The quasi-magical gift he's granted allows him to explore his sexuality by probing not only his fantasies, but, more to the point, his own past. It allows him to revisit his encounters with people he's known and has loved, valuably or fruitlessly; who he's hurt, and who have hurt him. That's what the emotional development of the book is about. That's why it's not just a boink-fest, but a psychologically astute, open, and moving novel.

Which is not to say it doesn't have sexy bits, or humor. The parts where (for instance) Michael takes Johnny Weissmuller, as Tarzan, around on his arm are priceless. What's interesting, though, is that although the premise of the book is most easily described by invoking celebrity names -- what would you do if you could have sex with Billie Holiday? Pablo Picasso? Jessica Rabbit? Lawrence of Arabia? -- the encounters that mean most in the end are those the protagonist has with "obscure" people, non-famous people, but people he has really known and cared for. Which seems obvious, when you think about it. But I'm not sure how much time I usually spend thinking about it. So the effect is kind of transcendent.