Rating: 5/5

Walt Whitman is a complete original in the history of Western literature. His poetry of nature, transcendence and sexuality does not really have any antecedents. "Song of Myself" and "Children of Adam" and many others are truly great, original poetry, sprung from the beautiful and powerful spirit of Whitman, with his profound experience of nature and of life. "Song of Myself" is his masterpiece, I read it a few times, once out loud, and found it to be a spiritual experience as much as a literary one. I have a slight preference for the slightly rawer 1855 version, which springs unfiltered from Whitman's sensibility.

Much of Whitman's poetry is obscure and difficult. But when he is good, there is really no one better, and he is almost a religion unto himself. He has absolutely no fear when writing, and I'm glad he stood up to Emerson's criticism of "Children of Adam" and wrote the way he did. Not that he scorns the Western tradition, but he is truly his own person, pouring pure soul into his verses. Perhaps the simplest statement of his approach and separation from tradition is "Spirit That Form'd This Scene", but the concept is fully thought out in "A Backward Glance o'er Troubled Roads."

Just as astonishing as Whitman's poetry was his prose, especially the descriptions of nature in Specimen Days, which I found to be as stirring as his best poetry. Is there a greater thing ever written than "A Sun-Bath - Nakedness"? He writes about trees, birds, the stars, like no one else. Where Whitman fails is when he writes about American democracy and politics (although his comments on the Civil War are intriguing, and when he writes about seeing Abraham Lincoln on his horse, or when he writes "When Lilacs Last...." in Lincoln's memory, there is no one better). His writing about other writers can be very weak (Carlyle) but I liked his critique of Emerson and his comments on British Literature had the ring of truth. 

Also striking about Whitman is his humanity, both in the care and love he shows to the wounded American soldiers, and his great undying love for America in his poems and travels. He is so kind you feel sometimes a sort of holiness about him. I think he exemplifies the poet as a great person in life.

My edition was the Library of America, which had the 1855 version of Leaves of Grass and then the final one, and then all of Whitman's prose that he wished to keep after his death. In all it amounted to over 1,300 pages, which made it the second to longest work in the entire Powys' list. Because of the difficulty of a substantial number of Whitman's poems, it was very slow reading, and towards the end I did not read the poems as closely as usual. 

So in the end, what is there to say? I view Whitman as essentially the father of most American poetry, and whatever is uniquely American about it. I also find him to be much greater genius than I think others do, mostly because of the originality and intensity of his style and his absolute fearlessness. Note that much of his poetry is sexual (and explicit), although it is never offensive or degrading. Of course it receives my highest recommendation to everyone - and in particular, I would encourage those who have never explored his prose, to take a look at "Specimen Days", which it just as memorable as his best poems. Whitman is a "monstrous genius", a true great, and pioneer in literature.