Rating: 4/5

I bought REGENCY QUARTET because of one of the authors. In my experience Elizabeth Lowther aka Irene Northan has written some very good historical romances. I was surprised by the content of some of the other short stories. The link between the four short romances is the heroines. Each has attended Miss Gordon's Seminary in Bath. Also, each story has a wide age span between the hero and heroine. In most cases 10 or 11 years but these young women needed the maturity and experience of someone older so it made sense.

The first is Frozen Hearts by Janet Grace. It begins right after the marriage of Harriet Ogbrook to the much older Max, Lord Trenarth. Eighteen and naive, Harriett overhears gossip that Max loves another. Green with envy she shows her jealousy by shutting him out. At twenty-eight, the Earl of Trevereux loves his young wife but wonders what is going on. Lightly written and a little over 90 pages long, this short romance is about learning a lesson. **** 4 stars

A Singular Elopement by Elizabeth Lowther takes place first aboard a ship and then a trip to Italy. Lucinda Winterton is almost eighteen and on her own between semesters at school. She is young and in love with Bernardo, an opera singer. He is to meet her at the port and they are going to elope. She has already boarded and on her way when she realizes Bernardo is not on the ship. Instead, she comes into contact, literally, with an older gentleman and they have words. They meet up again, banter some more, and Sir Gareth Chalfont finally succumbs to assisting her. The journey is longer than they both anticipate and over a couple of months they both develop feelings for one another. A sweet romance. **** 4 stars

Pride House by Gwyneth Moore aka Patricia Veryan is about a soldier who returns from war in ill health and looking for someone special. It was something nice but I gave it *** 3 stars.

The Eccentric Miss Delaney by Gail Mallin started out with a misunderstanding and a silly wager. Athena Delaney was attempting her independence by running an inn. Confusing her for a maid, Nick aka Lord Verlaine, starts off their relationship by kissing her. Realizing he has erred he soon begins his pursuit of the enchantable young lady. **** 4 stars