Rating: 5/5

A monumental history of a massive undertaking: the joining together of the East and West coasts of the United States via rail. Bain is an excellent storyteller and a gifted writer, not to mention a prolific researcher. In the latter compartment, he spent a decade researching and then putting into words this incredible tale. The research is borne out by the detailed Notes section. This is one of those books where - at the end of each chapter - I would turn to the Notes to read through them for any additional context or stories that Bain captured. 

So many famous figures are involved in the making of the competing railroad lines: the Union Pacific (starting westward from Omaha) and the Central Pacific (starting eastward from Sacramento). Abraham Lincoln, William Tecumseh Sherman, Ulysses S. Grant, Andrew Johnson, James G. Blaine, Brigham Young and Leland Stanford are the most well-known. But, countless other people were involved in this endeavor - sadly many of them for their own personal gains. Bain spends ample time on all of the main players, especially the directors of both companies. He provides biographical information and illuminating character sketches on each of them, but never does this slow down his narrative. Whenever possible, he allows them to speak for themselves by quoting mounds of letters and telegraphs that they all sent out. Specifically noteworthy was the correspondence - on the Central Pacific side - between Collis Huntington and his partners Edwin Crocker and Mark Hopkins (all three were directors of the railroad, along with Charley Crocker and Stanford). On the Union Pacific side, communications between Oliver Ames (nominally the President of the Board) and General Grenville Dodge (Chief Engineer and former Civil War hero) was particularly enlightening. 

Bain is scrupulously fair and plays it neutral - hardly anyone comes in for favorable treatment here. And that is because hardly anyone deserves it. Almost every single person appearing in this book - aside from Lincoln, Johnson, and Dodge's predecessor Peter Dey - were motivated by one thing: MONEY. And lots of it. Each person who was on the Board of Directors for either of these railroads (in particular the consummate schemer and backstabber Thomas Durant of the Union Pacific), each person who bought (or was given) stock - and this includes a long list of Congressmen (including future President James A. Garfield), each person who worked on the railroad, successive Secretaries of the Interior, Army officers, and naturally the laborers, all wanted to get rich, either directly by profits from the railroads, or indirectly by land made valuable due to the proximity to the railroads. This is a tale of greed as much as it is anything else, although the creation of the railroad is truly incredible when one stops to consider everything that it took in terms of planning, financing, manpower, political clout, and materiel that was needed to make it a successful venture. 

Continually alternating back and forth between both railroads, Bain keeps the story interesting by focusing on the personalities involved. He also leaves room to discuss the issues concerning American Indians during this time period. He chronicles the bloody battles on the Plains, the senseless violence and murder committed by both sides, and the gradual loss of the Indians' land by the U.S. Army. At a few points, Bain describes suffering and individual death in detail - enough to make one pause to shudder at the barbarism employed by both sides. But he does not dwell excessively on this subject. 

Concurrently, this book would not be complete without a review of labor standards during this period. The Central Pacific, being based on the West coast, at first reluctantly - and then willingly - recruited Chinese laborers. The typical white racial superiority views of the time entered here, with Charley Crocker and his foreman James Strobridge almost despairing at first of hiring anyone aside from Strobridge's Irish work-gangs. Only after the Chinese have proved themselves to be far superior and more industrious workers - largely immune to the temptations of whiskey and women that so plagued the Irishmen - do they then actively try to hire more. But they ruled all of the workers with an iron fist, refusing to capitulate on most demands for increased wages, and exposing these men to atrocious working conditions. 

To give an example of how fluidly and easily Bain writes, here are the opening lines from Chapter 29, on page 506: "Four summers before, Samuel Benedict Reed had found the outdoor life in the deep, shadowy Weber and Echo gorges to be magnificent. He drank in the scenery, feasted on the abundance of mountain trout and wild berries, in the cool nights slept on buffalo and beaver robes and felt, upon awakening and emerging from his tent for the next day's survey work, remarkably collected and clear-headed. Now, in June and July 1868, nothing was clear; he was deep in a canyon - a canyon of confusion, only partially of his own making." 

There were a few loose ends that I would have liked to have seen tied up. One is the relationship between Dey and Dodge. Bain quotes many letters that Dey sends to Dodge, but never really describes the return correspondence emanating from Dodge. Another is that, late in the book when Congress is investigating charges of corruption and bribery among its own members, he is oddly silent about Grant's thoughts (Grant was President and had just been re-elected). Also, while there were several full-page maps, I would have liked to have seen a few more added as Bain was describing certain areas where the railroad was being built. But this is a great book, and I highly recommend it for anyone interested in U.S. History during the Civil War/beginning of the Gilded Age, transportation or railroad history, or just interested in reading a great story. 

Grade: A