Rating: 4/5

This is quite the adventure story and I loved that it wasn’t very predictable either! 

Ralph Rover is a young man who has the sea in his blood, so naturally, and with his parent’s permission, he joins a trading crew sailing for Oceania. His mother makes him promise two things: to read the Bible every day and to pray to God every day. These he gladly promises. 

After befriending two other young boys on ship and being out to sea for a time, the crew hits a storm and is shipwrecked. The boys become separated from the rest of the crew and find themselves on Coral Island. 

From there, the boy’s wild tales begin and will have you glued to the book! 

This is an old-school book (originally published in 1857), so the writing is excellent, as is the strength of moral character the boys portray throughout the story. One thing I found a little startling was the more detailed depictions of cannibalism and human sacrifice performed by the island natives. This, I’m sure, was to contrast the native’s lifestyle to that of the Christian civilizations, as the author also went into detail about the need for missionaries in that part of the world and how Jesus Christ and the salvation He brings changes all men for the good. Because of the strong depictions, I do recommend this for a more mature audience. 

A great story! 

Ages: 14+

Cleanliness: cannibalism and human sacrifice are talked about and described often and with enough detail to know what is going on, i.e. people are batted on the head, cut into pieces and roasted. Mentions babies being thrown into a fire for sacrifice to a god. 

**Like my reviews? Then you should follow me! Because I have hundreds more just like this one. With each review, I provide Content Considerations, mentioning any objectionable content I come across so that parents and/or conscientious readers (like me) can determine beforehand whether they want to read a book or not. Content surprises are super annoying, especially when you’re 100+ pages in, so here’s my attempt to help you avoid that!
 
If you’re considering a book or looking for a new title to read, check out my highly categorized shelves, read my reviews and Friend  or Follow  me to spiff up your feed with clean, wholesome, living books. 

I have an  Instagram account that’s pretty bookishly unique too!