Rating: 2/5

The book includes selected poems from Intellectual Things (1930), Passport to War (1944), This Garland, Danger in Selected Poems (1928-1958), The Testing-Tree (1971), The Layers in The Poems of Stanley Kunitz (1928-1978), Next-to-Last-Things (1985), Passing Through (1995)

I have been trying to read past post laureates, and as a two-time laureate, I had high expectations for Kunitz.  So many readers love his work!  This collection was the only book my library has, so I borrowed it and dove in.  I found myself confused and disappointed, especially with the earlier poems.  These poems do not speak to me. So many reviewers praise Kunitz for being a straightforward writer, but I don’t see it. I was so confused by most of his poems. Many seem so tied up in rhyming and meter that they lose sight of what they are trying to say.  

 In the 70s (the era of The Testing Tree, his poems did become more accessible for me.  Maybe I should've just skipped the first half of this book (but how could I have known, if I hadn't read them?).  It looks like Kunitz made the selections for this volume, and I wish he had selected just a few early poems, and leaned heavily on the more recent poems.  The very last poem of the book, Touch Me, is incredibly powerful and moving.  Would they were all like that.  (I won't include it here, this review is long enough, and it's easily found online.)

I enjoyed almost all of the translations, but it was confusing to have translations scattered among Kunitz's own work, I didn't realize at first that they were translated from other poets (I thought "from Anna Akhmatova" - for example - just meant he'd been inspired by one of the other poems and wrote this one in reply).  It would have made more sense to collect all of the translations into their own section; their original publication dates could be preserved in the Notes.

Most of the time, especially with the older poems, I have no idea what Kunitz is saying.  I think maybe you need a degree in Literature to understand these poems.  I’m not a stupid person, and I’ve read quite a bit, but I am not very good at parsing out that this symbolizes  that because it’s an allusion to some other classic work I haven’t read and it means this other thing, and I suspect that’s what’s going on in these poems.  I'm used to the more personal, confessional style, in which the poem is actually saying something about the poet's life.  These poems seem to often just be inspired by things (such as a poem inspired by watching a show on UFO abductions).  I would never know about that connection if the information was not included in the Notes, the poem does not stand on its own.

For example, The Man Upstairs seems to be telling the reader something, but I don’t know what he’s saying.

The Man Upstairs
The old man sick with boyhood fears,
Whose thin shanks ride the naked blast,
Intones; the gray somnambulist
Creaks down interminable stairs,
Dreaming my future as his past.

A flower withers in its vase,
A print detaches from the wall,
Beyond the last electric bill
Slow days are crumbling into days
Without the unction of farewell. 

Tonight there suffers in my street
The passion of the silent clerk
Whose drowned face cries the windows dark
Where once the bone of mercy beat.
I turn; I perish into work.

O Magus with the leathern hand,
The wasted heart, the trailing star,
Time is your madness, which I share,
Blowing next winter into mind .. .
And love herself not there, not there.

Something seems to be happening in The Way Down, but I don’t know what.

The Way Down
1
Time swings her burning hands
I saw him going down
Into those mythic lands
Bearing his selfhood's gold,
A last heroic speck
Of matter in his mind
That ecstasy could not crack
Nor metaphysics grind.
I saw him going down
Veridical with bane
Where pastes of phosphor shine
To a cabin underground
Where his hermit father lives
Escaping pound by pound
From his breast-buckled gyves
In his hermit father's coat,
The coat without a seam,
That the race, in its usury, bought
For the agonist to redeem,
By dying in it, one
Degree a day till the whole
Circle's run.

2.
When the magician died, I wept,
I also died, I under leaf forgot
The stars, the distaff, and the crystal bowl.
I hugged the ignorance of stone
Under the line of cricket's thunder
Where the white chariot of the winter sun
Raced to the axle pole.
Why am I suddenly warm all over?
By the small mouths of the rain
I'm tempted. Must I learn again to breathe?
Help me, my wordlings, leave
To the hoot owl in the dismal wood
His kingdom of blight
And empty branching halls.
Air thickens to dirt.
Great hairy seeds that soar aloft
Like comers trailing tender spume
Break in the night with soft
Explosions into bloom.
Where the fleshed out root stirs,
Marvelous horned strong game,
Brine-scaled, dun-caked with mould,
Dynastic thunder-bison, Asian-crude,
Bedded in moss and slime,
Wake, and the rhythm of their blood
Shoots through the long veins of my name.
Hail, thickets! Hail, dark stream!

3.
Time swings her burning hands.
The blossom is the fruit,
And where I walk, the leaves
Lie level with the root.
My brave god went from me,
I saw him going down
Incorrigibly wild
In a cloud of golden air.
O father in the wood,
Mad father of us all,
King of our antlered walls,
Our candelabrum-pride
That the pretender kills,
Receive your stumbling child
Drunk with the morning-dew
Into your fibrous love
With which creation's strung;
Embrace him, raise him high,
Keeping the old time young,
And hold him through the night
Our best hopes share, as bright,
As peerless as a cock’s eye.

My best guess: this is using the image of elk or deer hunting to represent doubting God as you age?  I could be completely wrong though.  What is going on here? What’s going down? Where is down?
Every poem is like this, clearly saying something, but  hiding behind metaphors and allusions.  I found it very frustrating to never understand what was being said.

I thought I understood this poem, but then I didn't:
Three Floors
Mother was a crack of light
and a grey eye peeping.
I made believe by breathing hard
that I was sleeping.

Sister's doughboy on last leave
had robbed me of her hand;
downstairs at intervals she played 
Warum on the baby grand.

Under the roof a wardrobe trunk
whose lock a boy could pick
contained a red masonic hat
and a walking stick.

Bolt upright in my bed that night
I saw my father flying;
the wind was walking on my neck,
the windowpanes were crying.

So, okay, I can see some meaning in the first two stanzas, his mother peeks on his sleeping, his sister is spending all her free time with her soldier-boyfriend, but ... why does he see his father flying?  why is the wind walking on his neck???

The Mulch
A man with a leaf in his head
watches an indefatigable gull
dropping a piss-clam on the rocks
to break it open.
Repeat. Repeat.
He is an inlander
who loves the margins of the sea,
and everywhere he goes he carries
a bag of earth on his back.
Why is he down in the tide marsh?
Why is he gathering salt hay
in bushel baskets crammed to his chin?
“It is a blue and northern air,”
he says, as if the shiftings of the sky
had taught him husbandry.
Birthdays for him are when he wakes
and falls into the news of weather.
“Try! Try!” clicks the beetle in his wrist,
his heart is an educated swamp,
and he is mindful of his garden,
which prepares to die.

What does it mean?  who is the inlander?  why salt hay? what is there a leaf IN his head?

I know this review is getting really long, but I want to include one more poem, which was originally published in his 1985 collection.  This is a perfect example of how strong his later poems were.  This poem really charmed me, and it doesn't seem to be online anywhere.  (CW for death of a dog.)

Raccoon Journal  
July 14
rac-coon’, n. from the American Indian (Algonquian) arahkunem,“he scratches with the hands.”
    —      New World Dictionary 

July 17
They live promiscuously in the woods
above the marsh, snuggling in hollow trees
or rock-piled hillside dens,
from which they swagger in dead of night, 
nosy, precocious, bushy-tailed,
to inspect their properties in town. 

At every house they drop a calling card,
doorstep deposits of soft reddish scats
and heavy sprays of territorial scent
that on damp mornings mixes with the dew. 

August 21-26
I’ve seen them, under the streetlight,
paddling up the lane,
five pelts in single file,
halting in unison to topple 
a garbage can and gorge
on lobster shells and fish heads
or scattered parts of chicken.
Last year my neighbor’s dog,
a full-grown Labrador retriever,
chased a grizzly old codger
into the tidal basin,
where shaggy arms reached up
from the ooze to embrace him,
dragging his muzzle under
until at length he drowned. 

There’s nobody left this side
of Gull Hill to tangle
with them, certainly not
my superannuated cat,
domesticated out of nature,
who stretches by the stove
and puts on a show of bristling.
She does that even when mice
go racing round the kitchen.
We seem to be two of a kind,
though that’s not to say I’m happy
paying my vegetable tithe
over and over
out of ripe summer’s bounty
to feed omnivorous appetites,
or listening to the scratch of prowlers
from the fragrant terraces, as they
dig-dig-dig, because they’re mad
for bonemeal, uprooting plants and bulbs,
whole clumps, squirming and dank,
wherever they catch a whiff
of buried angel dust. 

October 31
To be like Orpheus, who could talk
with animals in their own language –
in sleep I had that art, but now
I’ve walked into the separate
wilderness of age,
where the old, libidinous beasts
assume familiar shapes,
pretending to be tamed. 

Raccoons! I can hear them
confabulating on the porch,
half churring, half growling,
bubbling to a manic hoot
that curdles the night air.
Something out there appalls.
On the back-door screen
a heavy piece of fur hangs,
spread-eagled, breathing hard,
hooked by prehensile fingers,
with its pointed snout pressing in,
and the dark agates of its bandit eyes
furiously blazing. Behind,
where shadows deepen, burly forms
lumber from side to side
like diminished bears
on a flat-footed shuffle.
They watch me, unafraid.
I know they’ll never leave;
they’ve come to take possession.
        —      Provincetown, 1984

I was doubly surprised that I didn’t enjoy these poems, because the prologue is spectacular.  It’s so spectacular that I feel the need to reproduce a big chunk of it here:
   Years ago I came to the realization that the most poignant of all lyric tensions stems from the awareness that we are living and dying at once. To embrace such knowledge and yet remain compassionate and whole – that is the consummation of the endeavor of art.
At the core of one's existence is a pool of energy that has nothing to do with personal identity, but that falls away from self, blends into the natural universe.  Man has only a bit part to play in the whole marvelous show of creation.

Poems would be easy if our heads weren't so full of the day's clatter. The task is to get through to the other side,
where we can hear the deep rhythmns that connect us with the stars and the tides.

I keep trying to improve my controls over the language, so that i won’t have to tell lies.  And I keep reading the masters, because they infect me with human possibility.

Our poems can never satisfy us, since they are at best a diminished echo of a song that maybe one or twice in a lifetime we've heard and keep trying to recall.

I like to think it is the poet’s love of particulars, the things of this world, that leads him to universals.
A badly made thing falls apart. It takes only a few years for most of the energy to leak out of a defective work of art. To put it simply, conservation of energy is the function of form.

We have all been expelled from the Garden, but the ones who suffer most in exile are those who are still permitted to dream of perfection.

... At my age, after you're done - or ruefully think you're done - with the nagging anxietiesand complications of your youth, what is there left for you to confront but the great
simplicities?  I never tire of birdsong and sky and weather.  I want to write poems that are
natural, luminous, deep, spare.  I dream of an art so transparent that you can look through
and see the world.

If only his poems had been that straightforward and beautiful.