Rating: 3/5

Erle Stanley Gardner was a writing “machine.” He turned out more than 80 Perry Mason novels, as well as circa 30 of the Bertha Cool and Donald Lam books. Double or Quits is one of the latter. These were written under the pseudonym, A. A. Fair, seemingly so that the ESG/Perry Mason Brand wouldn’t get oversaturated. They have a very different feel. ESG’s famous trial lawyer is all about justice while Bertha Cool is all about the money and Lam is interested in money unless the justice involves an attractive woman. Some of the Cool and Lam books, like Spill the Jackpot, gave ESG his chance to explore gadgets and mechanisms. In that case, it was slot machines. In Double or Quits it involved a garage door.

Lam is clearly the smarter of the two eventual partners in the agency, but he needs the grounding of Cool’s worldly wisdom to stay out of trouble. Together, they make a formidable pair and Lam takes the setting of Double or Quits as an opportunity to extort Cool into the full partnership that lasts the rest of the series. Originally hired by a wealthy medical doctor who thinks his secretary has been framed for the theft of his wife’s jewels and some important papers from a safe of which only he knew the combination, the locked safe mystery quickly takes second place to a murder categorized as suicide and another murder to cover up the initial murder.

As usual, Lam walks a tightrope between law, ethics, and his schemes to bring about justice and, as usual, ends up with Lam potentially “in the slam.” Without quick wits, his knowledge of the law, his gift of gab, and boxing lessons gained in Spill the Jackpot, Lam would have lost license, job, and his freedom. So, Double or Quits turns out to be a high-stakes mystery. I thought it was an excellent mystery with plausible “red herrings,” including at least one mechanical “red herring.” When Lam becomes a partner, however, Bertha Cool seeks another kind of fish.

I like this series better than Perry Mason. Interestingly, the Wikipedia article on these novels indicates that the character of Lam was based upon Gardner’s literary agent. Not only did the agent have some of the same moves and fast-thinking as Lam, but Gardner and he became real partners in the Perry Mason television series—a major part of my formative years and something from which I still stream episodes. I wish I could have seen the late Art Carney as Donald Lam in the television one-shot shown in January of 1955.

The more I read these, the more I enjoy them. They are the equivalent of the Rex Stout Nero Wolfe novels in my escape reading. If they evoked more emotion, I would rate them higher, but they keep me coming back for more due to the comical moments and the well-crafted mysteries.