Rating: 5/5

“Scandalous occurrences, of a public nature that is, do not often take place in small towns. Therefore, although the closets of small-town folk are filled with such a number of skeletons that if all the bony remains of small-town shame were to begin rattling at once they would cause a commotion that could be heard on the moon, people are apt to say that nothing much goes on in towns like Peyton Place. While it is true, no doubt, that the closets of city dwellers are in as sad disorder as those of small-town residents, the difference is that the city dweller is not as apt to be on as intimate terms with the contents of his neighbor’s closet as is the inhabitant of a smaller community. The difference between a closet skeleton and a scandal, in a small town, is that the former is examined behind barns by small groups who convene over it in whispers, while the latter is looked upon by everyone, on the main street, and discussed in shouts from rooftops. In Peyton Place, there were three sources of scandal: suicide, murder and the impregnation of an unmarried girl…”
-	Grace Metalious, Peyton Place

It’s always fascinating to read books that were deemed controversial in an earlier age. Doing so provides a unique insight into a society’s mores, its conception of itself, and its fears. Plus, it’s super amusing to find out what gave your parents, or your grandparents, or your great-grandparents the vapors, especially since the goalpost on those things have moved so dramatically in the last hundred years. 

When it was first published in 1956, Grace Metalious’s Peyton Place was derided as “salacious” and “trashy” and “wicked” and “cheap.” Libraries refused to lend it. Booksellers refused to sell it. Despite – or just as likely, because of – this, it became a huge bestseller. It later spawned a movie, a sequel, a sequel to the movie, and a television series. 

Unsurprisingly, given its age, Peyton Place feels positively tame by today’s standards. To be sure, it covers a whole host of hot button issues that would not be out of place in a novel written today: murder, suicide, abortion, incest (sort of), premarital sex, extramarital sex, class inequities, and substance abuse. Nevertheless, Metalious handles everything with a great deal of discretion. For instance, there isn’t a sex scene in this book that goes past second base. Furthermore, Metalious – despite her famed insouciance – is pretty rigorous in punishing her characters for transgressing moral boundaries, almost as though she were operating under the Hays Code. By way of example, a “peeping tom” literally dies while watching her neighbors make non-procreative love on their patio. 

Since this is not nearly as scandalous as its reputation implies, the question becomes: is there a reason to read Peyton Place? 

The answer is yes. 

It’s a great book. 

***

A summary of Peyton Place is difficult, because there is no grand arc to it. Unlike the movie, which pared Metalious’s sprawling work down to a traditional (and somewhat boring) coming-of-age story, the novel does not have a traditional plot. There is no central protagonist, no single conflict, no obvious through-line. Instead, this is an epic block party where you get to meet dozens of the citizens of this small, curiously-named New England town. I guess the best way to describe it is as an edifice constructed entirely of subplots. 

Peyton Place begins in 1937 and ends around the conclusion of World War II. It is written in the third-person omniscient, plunging into and out of the lives of various characters, showing us their hopes, fears, and secrets. 

Many, many secrets.

If you like secrets, especially the ones that only slowly come to light, you should really think about renting an Airbnb in Peyton Place. 

***

It would push the limits of my word count to list everyone who is featured in this book. To use a sports term, Peyton Place has a deep bench. Suffice to say there is an interesting swath of humanity on display. 

If pressed, I would have to say that top billing goes to Constance MacKenzie, a single mother and successful small-business owner who is raising her rebellious daughter Allison, while trying to keep her from making her same mistakes. Hopefully it doesn’t spoil anything to say that this mistake involved the physical act of love. Constance enters into a slow-burn courtship with Tomas Makris, the school’s new principal. An outspoken out-of-towner, Tomas is often the voice of reason. Additionally, as a man with Greek heritage, he is what passes for diversity in the otherwise all-white municipality. 

These three all live on the good side of town.

On the other side, in a slum of drafty shacks, lives Allison’s best friend Selena. She is smart and beautiful and ambitious, but finds her plans thwarted by an abusive and lecherous stepfather. Selena’s response to her stepfather’s advances, and the long-term consequences that follow, comprise one of the biggest and longest running threads in the book. 

While the paths of Allison and Selena constitute a major portion of the narrative, their storylines are joined by many others. 

The guest stars of Peyton Place include Dr. Matthew Swain, who is the closest we come to an all-around decent human being; Kenny Stearns, a raging alcoholic who is also a fine gardener; Norman Page, a runty kid with a disturbingly overprotective mother; and Rodney Harrington, the rich kid who has it all, and lets you know it. 

Many of Metalious’s characters initially present as archetypes. Her gift is in giving them multiple dimensions. I think it is a testament to her talent that – with the exception of Doc Swain, with his flexible ethics – there isn’t a single person in Peyton Place that I totally and thoroughly liked. Everyone is flawed, or damaged, or somehow twisted by life. Some are able to overcome this. Others are not. 

***

Peyton Place is glorious in its evocation of place. I got a real sense of the town, its history, its layout. Though it doesn’t exist in reality, it took shape and depth in my mind. I felt like I could walk around it, past the squalid shacks, or Doc Swain’s hospital, or Constance’s dress shop, or the five-and-ten. I could close my eyes and see the two church steeples bookending the town’s outer limits. Metalious is precise with her descriptions of geography and weather, and uses those factors as additional characters. 

*** 

Metalious’s prose is seldom subtle – especially not her sultry depictions of an Indian summer – but it is effective. Her ability to create an effective set piece – such as a mini-arc featuring all the town’s drunks holed up in the same cellar – is really quite astonishing. About halfway through, I realized that while the book was oversold in terms of outrageousness, it has been grossly undersold in terms of literary merit.

Just recently, I finished Winesburg, Ohio, a so-called “forgotten classic” that features a cycle of vignettes regarding the citizens of the eponymous town. While Winesburg struggles and strains for a profundity it never comes close to achieving, Metalious effortlessly mines far deeper human insights while also being incredibly entertaining. Alas, because of that entertainment value, Peyton Place’s reputation is not nearly as lofty as it deserves. 

***

Recently, my wife was diagnosed with breast cancer. On the day of her rather-lengthy surgery, I went to the hospital with a copy of Peyton Place under my arm. Over the course of that extremely long day, I finished the entire book, which is something I seldom do. It was a strange kind of blessing, being able to slip into the lives of these people, all of them alternately broken and hopeful, far-seeing and blind. The old cliché of fiction as an escape from reality never felt so true. Peyton Place became an immersive escape. I wouldn’t want to live there, but it was a hell of a place to visit.