Rating: 2/5

I didn’t enjoy the first book, didn’t want to continue reading more in the series, but I bought this one when I got the first one, so I feel like I have to read it. 
Stevie really annoyed me and her antics at the beginning of the book made me wanna DNF. It’s an unwritten rule to leave gates the way they were when you found them, and also cutting across someone’s pasture isn’t a good idea, but Stevie convinced them to and as they’re riding their horses through a bull comes charging at them and they all have to jump their horses over the fence, even new rider Lisa. Thankfully this was Stevie’s only stunt in the book.

‘“What has four legs and a trunk,” Stevie asked.
“An elephant going on a trip,” he shot back.
“And what do you call Carole when SHE goes on a trip?” Stevie asked.
“Forgetful!” he said.’

“I’m so hungry, I could eat a—“ Stevie paused. “Elephant,” she said, giggling.’
‘“Well, you know the old joke about how a camel is supposed to be a horse—designed by a committee?”
It meant that when a lot of people get together to accomplish something one person SHOILD do alone, the results are often goofed-up.’

-Their instructor laughing when Lisa fell off her horse was so unprofessional and not funny.
‘She looked at Max. There was something in the way he asked the question—was he worried about her? No, that wasn’t it. Lisa was almost certain he was trying to control a smile—or maybe a laugh. 
“I looked pretty silly, didn’t I?” she asked, suddenly getting the full impact of what a funny picture she must have made.
“Well, perhaps a little bit undigni-ni-ni—“ And then, there was an unmistakable snort of Max’s laughter. 
Lisa lifted herself up into the saddle and burst into giggles herself. She didn’t hurt anyplace. “I guess both getting back on the horse AND laughing about it are the best cures,” she said when she stopped giggling.
“Only when it’s funny,” he said. And then Lisa realized how fortunate she was!’

-A skunk walks by: “You know, that one’s almost cute,” Stevie said to her friends.
“ALMOST,” Lisa agreed. “But don’t get him angry!”

-“First we have to—Yipes!”
“What is it?” Stevie asked.
“We’ve got to get back to camp and put some clothes on before Max and the boys see us in our pajamas!”

-“That was the best Saddle Club merrier ever had!” Lisa said excitedly. 
“I wish they could all be like that,” Stevie agreed. 
“So do I,” Carole said. “Gee, remember how beautiful it was when the deer—“
“Stevie!” Max barked. “Your turn to get water for us. Lisa! I need some more kindling! Carole! You’re on oats today!”
He almost broke the mood, but not quite. 0i remember,” Stevie assured Carole. “I’ll always remember.”
“Yeah, forever,” Lisa said. And that was how they all felt.’

Nice mention of the Blue Ridge Mountains, which are in my state!
“You know, I think I could build a nice little lean-to near that bluff we passed this morning. Two lean-tos, one for me, one for Delilah. We’d love there, ride every day, and have a great view of the Blue Ridge Mountains. What do you think of that?” Carole asked.
“I think it’s time to get you back to civilization,” Stevie said matter-of-factly.’

‘“Have a good time,” Max said. “But don’t fall for any of those Nowth Cahalaina howses, yuh heah?!” he teased in a southern accent.’
That was cringe-worthy. He was actually cool until then…

Carole acted pretty unrealistic. Her mom had just died the year before and she’s teasing her dad and pushing him to marry again. And doesn’t seem very sad about her mom.

I couldn’t believe the author killed Cobalt off, the mean girls horse that Carole took care of and wanted for herself. Him breaking his cannon bone, and how it’s almost impossible to keep the horse’s weight off, and how if it’s a million dollar race horse, they might suspend them in a sling long enough for the bone to heal, but it still might never race again, was just like the movie Dreamer.

‘“Look, are we horse crazy, or what?” Stevie asked.
“We’re horse crazy,” Lisa agreed.
“So, our only choice is to keep riding and try to help Carole come around. After all, she’s horse crazy, too, but right now, she’s more crazy than she is horse.”’

-“You’ll be a champion by august.”
“You mean I’ll be as good as you?” Lisa teasers
Stevie, who was very proud of her own hard-earned riding skills, glanced sideways at Lisa. When she saw the sly grin on the older girl’s face, she knew Lisa was joking. 
“Oh, that’ll happen about the same day Max sprouts wings!”
“I noticed some feathers on his back today,” Lisa joked.’

-“you know, that’s not the only source we have,” Lisa said after a moment
“Sure, we can check with the crystal ball lady at the fair when she comes to town in august,” Stevie said.
“Crystal balls are supposed to tell the future, not the past,” Lisa said, giggling.’

-“Can’t she do that herself?”
Stevie knew she had to be very careful now. Of course Mrs. Reg could do it herself, but Carole wasn’t to know that. “I’m sure she can. Don’t worry about it. She’ll do it when the pain goes away.”
“Pain?” Carole asked. Her voice was filled with concern.
“She said her arthritis was hurting her all this humidity, you know? She’ll get better when it cools down.” (i)Perfect,(/i) Stevie told herself. (i)You’re doing it perfectly. After all, it wouldn’t cool down for months!(/i)’

-‘When Carole made a promise, she kept it. When somebody needed her help, she got it. And when Carole needed help, her fiends gave it to her—even if she didn’t think she wanted it!’

-“Let’s face it, the man was invisible.”
“Maybe he never existed,” Lisa said. “Should we consider that possibility?”
“No way—not until we’ve exhausted everything else. Besides, if our Max is Max the Third, there HAD to be a Max the First. Right?”
Lisa had to agree that it was logical.’

It finally said the book took place in Virginia. 

They’re trying to research Max the First, their riding instructors granddad. 
‘At least she wasn’t going to have to read any more about the controversial town sewers!’
‘She bit the end of her pencil, hoping that would help her think. In books and movies, people were always biting the ends of their pencils so they could think better. It didn’t make Stevie think better. It just got pieces of eraser in her mouth. She picked them out carefully. Then she stared into space. Sometimes THAT helped people in books and movies. All it did for Stevie, though, was distract her.’
It was disappointing hearing none of the rumors about Max Regenery were true, he was just a dull man who told his students horse’s don’t speak English and they couldn’t jump within a year, just like their teacher Max does. People just made up stuff about him to sound more interesting. 

“Is that a date?”
“Well, I’m not sure I’d call it a date. It’s just sort of, you know, like a—well, a date, I guess.”
Carole laughed at her father’s stammering.’
‘“That’s the John Wayne movie about the Marines in World War Two. I’ll make the popcorn this time. Is it a date?” he asked slyly.
“Well, er, uh,” Carole stammered, teasing her father. “I’m not, uh, exactly, well, sure I’d call it a—er—DATE.”
“Okay, then YOU make the popcorn. I’ll see you later, you rascal.”’

It seems like max should have known Delilah was pregnant and had Carole switch horses much earlier.
It was funny when Carole comes back to the stables and some girls are telling her Max the Furst was captured by pirates and stole horses and rode with Billy the Kid out west and was a horse rustler. Knowing Stevie and Lisa started those rumors.

I suppose it’s possible Veronica did have an awakening after her horse Cobalt died but it didn’t seem believable, her studying up on jumps AFTER she repeatedly rode hers recklessly, ignoring her teacher’s instructions which ended up killing her horse. She should be banned from riding. Max is seriously stupid where she’s concerned. Just because her dad is rich and owns the bank or whatever.

-“I never could have done it without Lisa,” Stevie said. “She had a lot of great research ideas. Burning you ever get curious about a certain Mrs. Rappaport, or the town sewer system, just ask me, okay?”
“You’ll be the first person I’ll ask,” Carole assured her.’

This was pretty funny, much more humorous than I remember the first book being. This took some buckling down to read, I was not interested at all after the first one. The characters were better in this one, mainly Stevie, besides the beginning of the book. I was surprised by a turn the book took but I guess that’s just horse life.