Rating: 4/5

3.75 stars. First of all, let me get my complaints out of the way. I'm not an expert in ancient history, but I'm pretty sure Ms. L'Engle got some of the history wrong. Likewise I'm no geologist, but I know that it takes more than 3000 years for "tall mountains" to erode down to "ancient hills."

One other thing that really bugged me, not just in this book, but the entire series, is that the recurring characters seemingly have no recollections of the events in previous books. For example, in this book, the Drs. Murry continue to be disbelieving about the time gate that Bishop Colubra and Polly have been entering. Why? Time travel, via unicorn(!), was a big part of the plots in A Swiftly Tilting Planet and Many Waters. And Polly's grandfather himself tessered to another galaxy in A Wrinkle in Time, with Mrs. Whosit &amp; co. who were definitely not human, so it seems really inconsistent - and unnecessary! - for them to maintain such skepticism.

That said, however, I very much enjoyed the story in this one and am willing to overlook the inaccuracies and inconsistencies. There is a lot more supernatural and theological stuff in this book than in the other books since AWIT.

Polly O'Keefe, daughter of Calvin and Meg, has come to live with her grandparents for some tutoring; she isn't being challenged in her normal high school. Soon after the story begins, she is contacted by a young man, Zachary, that she met on a prior trip to Greece. Zachary is a law intern at a nearby office and wants to see her. It soon becomes obvious that Zachary is ill, and he tells Polly that he has an untreatable heart condition and isn't expected to live very long. 

Polly is walking in the woods one day and sees a strangely-dressed guy with a dog. Later, while swimming in her grandparents' pool, Polly sees a young woman dressed in leather clothing with dark braided hair who appears to be a Native Anerican. These two people, Karralys and Anaral, are from the past; they are members of the tribe known as People of the Wind (mentioned in ASTP), trained as druids, with the ability to move between "time circles.". On a walk to the star-watching rock, Polly finds herself in the past with the PotW. Karralys and Anaral tell Polly that she is "part of the pattern." They are in a drought and there have been raids by their traditional enemy they call the People Across the Lake.

Dr. Louise Colubra's brother, a retired Episcopal bishop, is living with Dr. Louise. He and Louise are present when Polly tells he grandparents about her experience. The bishop confesses to Polly and the Murrys that he thinks that several months earlier, he inadvertently opened a time gate to the past and that Polly appears to have been "caught" inside a tesseract. 

Louise the Larger, the snake who lives in the stone wall by the vegetable garden, also plays an important part in this book. Another important character is a dog who appears at the Murry house one evening, just as Ananda did in ASTP. Polly names him Ogam, the written language of the People of the Wind, because he was sent to them by Karralys to be a companion and protector for Polly. She calls him Og for short. 

The theme of AAT is love and sacrifice. There are many layers involved, between Polly and Zachary; between Polly and the People of the Wind; between the PotW and the People Across the Lake. The following quote by Dr. Louise sums up this theme:

'I'm a doctor, Polly, not a theologian, and lots of Christian dogma seems to me no more than barnacles encrusting a great rock. I don't think that God demanded that Jesus shed blood unwillingly. With anguish, yes, but with love. Whatever we give, we have to give out of love. That, I believe, is the nature of God.'

Zachary is the archetypal villain; his besetting sin is selfishness (as it is for many of us). When he is forced to confront the fact that Polly was almost killed as a result of his actions, he is overwhelmed by debilitating guilt. 

'Zachary.' The bishop spoke softly but compellingly. 'William Langland, writing around 1400, said, "And all the wickedness in the world that man might work or think is no more to the mercy of God than a live coal in the sea."' 

(What amazing imagery!)

Instead of being punished for his actions, Zachary is "healed," both of his physical condition and his mental/spiritual selfishness and guilt. In theological terms, he is "redeemed" (even though he continues to declare he doesn't believe in God.) Polly forgives him and plays a part in his "healing" but refuses to see him further, and rightfully so.

Polly could have possibly been fleshed out a bit more, but I understand from other reviewers that the books in the O'Keefe series give more info about her. I plan to read those sometime. So, in summary, this is not my favorite book of the series, but I liked it a lot.