Rating: 4/5

It's difficult to write a review of the works of Isaac Babel, for me, at least. So much of his work is infused with the strident socialist idealism of the early Soviet period. At the same time, he wasn't a regime hack. He openly criticized leaders and decisions in about as open a manner as one could, which would eventually lead to his demise during the Stalinist purges of the 1930s. He's at his best when he's not being political, just telling stories, either of the denizens of the Jewish ghettos or life among the “Red” Cossacks during the Soviet-Polish war. 
Babel studied his predecessors well. Of the writers in Russian, only Chekhov is his peer in short story form. It is unfortunate that the turgid partisan Gorki was an even larger influence. His short stories have the ability to capture nuanced mood and character in under ten pages, but whereas Chekhov is dour and ultimately misanthropic, Babel seems to find redeeming and human qualities in even brutal gangsters and bloodthirsty cavalrymen. It's not a total moral inversion. The gangsters are still profiteers and the cavalrymen still sadistic bigots, but no one is a caricature... well, until we get to his longer writing with its noble/tragic socialist heros, but even there he stills sneaks in some sly references to show he's knowingly doing so. There's a lot of degradation and brutality in his stories... but at the same time there's a bit of joy, even if it seems derived from finding the humor and irony in some very dark situations. He's not as skilled a prose stylist as Chekhov or Maupassant, he's not as able to create mood via physical description, nor craft evocative passages. At the same time he's managed to write with a far wider emotional range in some respects.
I have the omnibus edition of all his surviving works compiled. To be honest, I'd skip the dramas and screenplays. They're fairly mediocre. Some of the stories are “meh” as well, and likely I think the author would agree which is why they weren't published in a collection. That's the thing with these sorts of editions, you get the good and the not so good. The afterword written by his daughter is a great piece of literature in and of itself, a personal reflection of a father she barely knew as she lived an early life of poverty and insecurity in exile with her mother.
Four out of Five stars