Rating: 5/5

(March 17 2012) Last year I read one of the most incredible books of my life - The Worst Journey in the World (WJITW), an account by one of the surviving members of Scott's last expedition. Hardly a day has gone by since that I haven't thought about that expedition or those on it and so, with the hundredth anniversary of Scott's death approaching, I thought it was about time I read about it in the words of the man himself...

(March 29 2012) Well, I've now finally pulled myself together enough to try and write a review (though through still swollen eyes).

Firstly, I'm glad that I had read WJITW first, as it gave me a solid background in which to place this reading. Cherry-Garrard's exemplary book was a comprehensive, in-depth look at every aspect of the expedition, from the start to the bitter end; this being Captain Scott's journals it naturally comprises his daily thoughts and feelings and therefore lacks some of the wider details and descriptions that he would have no doubt added from the other records of the party had he returned and produced something for consumption by the public.

That said, even without that wider detail these journals are never less than compelling and, considering that they were only notes initially intended for himself, extremely eloquent. Naturally, living in constant contact with a group of people gives way to occasional small irritations and annoyances and the appendices were a rather rich source of these, many of which were cut from original publication in order to spare the feelings of those mentioned who had survived (Gran and Evans in particular may have found these difficult reading) and to portray Scott in a finer light. Personally, I don't think that these asides cast anyone in an unappealing light - anyone who can claim to have lived in such close confines with a large group of people and to have never been troubled by similar feelings is, quite frankly, a liar and quite possibly not human.

Knowing what would be the outcome of the expedition made this incredibly heartbreaking reading at times, particularly when the party was at its most optimistic. It was so easy to get swept along and almost start hoping for a different outcome, only to have your hopes dashed as time went on. This was particularly so for me whenever it came to Bowers. Having developed a rather serious case of hero worship of the man during WJITW, I roller-coastered back and forth between feeling immensely pleased that Scott found him so impressive (to the point of adding him at the last minute to the party making the last dash) and being horror-struck at knowing that his awesomeness would mean his untimely demise.

Once the party reached the Pole, discovering they had been beaten there by Amundsen, the journals took a more melancholy turn with February 1912 being difficult to read and March completely heart-rending. As the party got further and further into difficulty I had to take frequent reading breaks to blink away the tears and gather my strength for the next entries, and by the time I got to the last entry I was virtually inconsolable. The courage with which these men faced certain death is incredible, and the fact that Scott took the time as he lay dying (when lesser men would have been in the foetal position, weeping uncontrollable tears of self-pity) to write to the relatives of his comrades (offering comfort and endeavouring to see that their families would be taken care of) speaks volumes of his character. Those letters were also some of the most beautiful I have ever had the privilege of reading.

In his 'Message to the Public', discovered with his body, he finally writes: "Had we lived I should have had a tale to tell of the hardihood, endurance and courage of my companions which would have stirred the heart of every Englishman. These rough notes and our dead bodies must tell the tale..."
Even if it's just in one tiny corner of his hometown, this Englishwoman's heart was well and truly stirred and my soul captured by their tale, and though they're now long gone Scott and his comrades will never be forgotten for as long as I live.