Rating: 3/5

Oh sweet Jesus.
Michelene is married to Bernard, an awful cheating asshole who's banging a married woman. His mistress's husband finds out, and manages to kill Bernard during a lancing "accident." Good times.
Michelene, who thinks her husband was the best thing ever, is devastated. Her best friend Aimee invites her to go to the French court to take her mind off things, and Michelene agrees. While there she draws the eye of the French king, whose mistress Anne is super jealous. Anne manages to talk King Henry VIII into arranging a marriage between Michelene and a playboy English lord, Andrew, son of a duke.
Andrew's not down for that, though, so he and his friend Jeremy head to France to check out the woman Andrew's being forced to marry. He poses as a portrait painter with little means, and Francoise asks Andrew to paint Michelene. Of course Michelene is attracted to him, but she's also found out that her dead husband was an asshole and her heart is broken and she never wants to love again. Anne arranges for the two of them to be snowbound in a cabin for a night, and... well yeah, of course they have sex, duh.
Michelene is still reluctant to give in to her feelings, and also someone's FUCKING TRYING TO KILL HER. Someone poisons her and she's crazy woozy and when Andrew asks if she loves him, Michelene babbles some nonsense and he's like "fuck this, back to England." Then she realizes she loves him and follows him to Paris, where he's staying for the night, and waits for him in his bed, naked, as you do.
So, hooray, Michelene and Andrew are in love. Except Michelene doesn't know Andrew is her arranged marriage partner. She finds that out, and that Andrew has a mistress, Iris, whom he completely abandons in favor of Michelene. Andrew also has a jackass sniveling half-brother and wife, and a little sister. Said little sister is insanely jealous of Michelene.
Anyway. So Michelene gets pregnant and the half-brother and wife are trying to kill Michelene and Andrew so the evil half-brother will inherit. Michelene just dismisses all the murder attempts until her half sister in law FUCKING DRUGS HER AND THEN SETS FIRE TO HER EFFING BED. She's saved by the (full) sister in law, who finally feels bad for all her teen angst bullshit and actually kills the evil half sister in law. Good times.
So, yeah. Michelene saves Andrew (jackass half brother managed to have Andrew thrown in the Tower for treason/attempting to seduce Anne Boleyn) and hooray, happily ever after.