Rating: 4/5

Star Surgeon is the second novel in the Sector General Series. Compared to the first one, Hospital Station, it is a lot more streamlined. The book still is somewhat episodic in nature, but there is a consistent story arc, following Dr. Conway and his associates trough medical, social, and in the end even military crises. It was originally published in two parts 1961 and 1962 in New Worlds, and while it has aged well, the age does show through occasionally. 

The premise of the series is that of a a giant, multi-species space hospital, operated by the Galactic Federation, which has a lot in common with Star Trek's United Federation of Planets - but with real aliens. In this book, the Federation makes contact with a (comparatively small) empire, resulting in a not-so-small war. However, the focus is not on the series of space battles around the hospital, but rather on the endless stream of wounded soldiers from both sides that need treatment. 

The romance of Dr. Conway and Nurse Murchison is somewhat cringeworthy from a modern perspective (she is "well endowed with shock-absorbing equipment", and the couple is once broken up by the robot concierge pointing out that they "have been in close juxtaposition for a period of two minutes forty-eight seconds", in violation of "Regulation Twenty-one, Sub-section Three regarding the entertaining of visitors in DBDG Nurses’ Quarters"). 

There are more, and less funny, instances of 1960s gender perception in the book ("the girls", i.e. human nurses, apparently cannot upload physiology tapes - brain recordings of alien specialists, used by doctors to quickly acquire specialised knowledge - because "their pretty little brains" would suffer "severe mental damage"). Another area where the age is visible is the computer technology. While the (single) computer of Sector General can translate between different human and alien languages, it apparently cannot do word processing or text replication. Reports are still being distributed on paper, and, if needed, copied by a writer. 

Anyways, these quirks do not really distract from what is an excellent story, told well, and with a lot of humanity (if that is the right word ;-). Highly recommended. With regard to the sexism: If I remember correctly, Nurse Murchison will not only marry Dr. Conway, but will also become a doctor in her own right (and presumably learn how to handle physiology tapes in her "pretty little brain") in future volumes of the series, so this is really just a sign of the time.