Rating: 3/5

I enjoyed this book a lot, though maybe not quite as much as the first one. This book focuses entirely on the people who successfully escaped earth and their attempts at surviving in the new environment of the new planet, and the dangers they face along the way. A lot of standard post-apocalyptic themes are introduced here and though none of them are handled with a whole lot of depth, it's impressive to see the breadth of consideration that the authors had when writing this book (especially since they had so few other post-apocalyptic forebears to borrow from).

I was still impressed with the quality of it all and the writing was fairly good. I particularly enjoyed the overall grounding in science, considering it was written in the 1930s, though I felt the story meandered away from its stronger scientific grounding as the plot moved along. 

My biggest complaint with this book was that it felt a bit more distracted and without focus, seeming to have sudden changes in tone and plot and theme. I enjoyed the first part of it most, seeing it as a more "survivalist" type of story and how they started in the early days. Even when they began to encounter the existence of others, it was interesting because of its mystery. When it transitioned from there, it was OK, though a bit more mundane, and the final ending seemed incredibly rushed without much of a finale (in large contrast to the first book). In addition to that, the book seemed less character-focused than the first one. There were times where the characters were the highlight, but it was more like the author toyed with it from time to time and then later gave up on that approach, rather than it being a central aspect to the book.

Overall though, it provided a good-enough follow-up to "When Worlds Collide", because I'm sure any reader would want to know *what happened next*. But if you're expecting the same solid tone and caliber of focused plot and character development as well as fairly strong reliance on known (or soon anticipated) science... then you'll be a bit more disappointed. Still not bad though and an enjoyable short read, especially for anyone who enjoys post-apocalyptic books and old-era science fiction.