Rating: 3/5

Randall's biography of Jefferson is extremely detailed -- EXTREMELY detailed -- but not always where you'd like it to be. For example, I really didn't need all of the information about what coffee houses Jefferson frequented, the lineage of his horses, the 7 pages about his tours of English gardens, and his 22 pages -- yes, I said 22 pages -- about the Italian countryside. It makes little sense to me how a 600-page book can expend such finicky detail on gardens and less than 100 pages on his term as Vice President and his TWO terms as President.

Also, Randall's biography is apologetic to the point of being equivocal. My overall impression of Jefferson is that he was, to put it politely, a man of contradictions, or, to be less polite, extremely hypocritical. There's no denying he was a genius, but Randall seems to spend a lot of time trying to convince his readers that Jefferson wasn't the bastard that he frequently proved himself to be, and the result was that I don't find this biography to be completely credible. 

There was much downplaying -- and sometimes a hint of denial -- that Jefferson seduced (on more than one occasion) his friends' wives. There was also much made of Jefferson's anti-slavery tendencies, despite the fact that he never made a move to free any of his slaves within his own lifetime, used the sale of slaves as a way to pay his compulsive-shopping debts, and advocated, if the slaves ever were freed, their immediate deportation to areas uninhabited by whites. 

In addition, Randall dismisses Jefferson's rumored affair with Sally Hemmings as being "preposterous suppositions" and furthered speculation that the real father of Hemmings's children was his nephew, a son of his sister and Dabney Carr. In the next few years, however, "a consensus began to emerge after the results of a DNA analysis in 1998, which showed no match between the Carr male line, proposed for more than 150 years as the father(s), and the one Hemings descendant tested. It did show a match between the Jefferson male line." So much for preposterous suppositions.