Rating: 3/5

The word, haywire has a few definitions. Erratic behavior, for example, meaning a person who is behaving irrationally and is emotionally upset. It can also be about chaotic situations where little goes right. Basically, it applies to anything that goes wrong or is not in proper order. “Haywire”. It’s the perfect title for this book written by Brooke Hayward, a Hollywood scion who grew up in a world where nothing was really what it was supposed to be.

Brooke Hayward was the daughter of silver screen actress Margaret Sullavan and producer Leland Hayward. They are less known now, but back in the 1930s-1950s, they were famous in their professions. The author details her childhood, along with those of her siblings, as the family moved from coast to coast in the United States, chasing celluloid and stage dreams. We get to read about the erratic behavior of each family member, as the book is broken into chapters devoted to each one.

Momma had already been married to film star Henry Fonda and to film director William Wyler, so she was on her third spouse (there would eventually be a fourth). Temperamental, spoiled, and suffering from hearing loss, Momma Sullavan would prove to be a difficult parent. Never able to let go of the apron strings of her children, she ended up a suicide, which seems to have been a common outcome for many either in show business or related to show business. The show does not always go on.

Papa Hayward would eventually find other wives, more interested in his work than his family. Sister Bridget showed early signs of mental illness, although reading about it, one believes she inherited her mother’s penchant for drama. Another suicide. Brother Bill also spent much time at mental institutions, another one who made mountains out of molehills. Eventually, Bill (who helped produce Easy Rider) would kill himself with a shotgun in 2008. The only family survivor, Brooke, also had her own personal demons, but she seemed to be made of stronger stuff. Perhaps by writing this book, she was able to expunge some of those spirits.

This is the original publication, but the author added a new edition in 2010, which would be interesting to read. While I rolled my eyes at the “travails” of the family throughout this book, not having much sympathy for the rich and the spoiled, I nevertheless was absorbed in Hayward’s telling. She conducted interviews with various Hollywood personnel, such as Jimmy Stewart, Joseph Cotton, the Fonda Family and various directors. She then included snippets of each to enliven a chapter, thus providing a better background for the reader to understand why people living in luxury could barely get their butts up in the morning. The fact is, this is a well-written book, a reminder that some people just have a tendency to fly too close to the sun.

Book Season = Winter (cold, cold hearts)