Rating: 4/5

This has been on my TBR for so long, and it absolutely lived up to my expectations. I expected a sweeping multigenerational family saga taking readers across pivotal eras of 19th- and 20th-century Vietnamese history, and that’s what I got, along with a healthy dose of tears.

THE SACRED WILLOW is subtitled as the story of “four generations in the life of a Vietnamese family.” The book starts in the mid-19th century with Mai’s great-grandfather and grandfather, who rose to prominence as esteemed educated mandarins in the old, Confucian Vietnamese society, and depicts how they adapted to changes to social prestige under French colonial rule. I found this part of the book fascinating as I haven’t read much about this period of Vietnamese history, but I appreciated learning about the struggles that previous Vietnamese generations experienced as they decided whether or not to stick with their old values or to adapt to new governing, education, writing, and legal systems.

Most chapters of this tome linger over the war periods, of which there are many. We follow various Duong family members as they fight against the French and Japanese in the 1940s-1950s, and then again on various sides of the War of American Aggression in the 60s-70s. If war stories bore you, you may struggle to get through these sections. I did find many of these chapters tiring to read, but appreciated how Mai represented different sides of these conflicts in a balanced way. Too often mainstream media portrays one side as completely evil and the other as completely good, but in THE SACRED WILLOW we get nuance, particularly as Mai herself learns more as she moves with her family south to Saigon, and then moves to the US for university.

Despite the hardships they endured, the Duong family is decidedly middle class, and that’s the framework through which we experience events in Vietnamese history with them. The majority of the Vietnamese middle class did not participate directly in armed conflicts. I did wish that we had gotten some working class perspectives on the wars but also understand that Mai chose not to write a comprehensive Vietnamese history, but one that is seen through her family’s eyes.

The final chapters leading up to the Fall of Saigon and Mai’s family’s evacuation out of Vietnam in April 1975 were fraught with emotion. I read the chapters with my heart in my throat and my hands clutching the pages. Reading about familiar Saigonese landmarks and streets, particularly ones so close to where I currently live, unleashed a torrent of emotions in me, and I found myself sobbing several times, which speaks to the way in which Mai was able to convey her and her family’s emotions during those moments.

For readers who want to learn more about Vietnamese history, told in an emotionally engaging way, or for those who want to learn more beyond what Western education teaches them about Vietnam, I cannot recommend THE SACRED WILLOW enough, especially for those who loved multigenerational family sagas such as Jung Chang’s Wild Swans: Three Daughters of China, Honorée Fanonne Jeffers’ The Love Songs of W.E.B. Du Bois, or Abraham Varghese’s The Covenant of Water.