Rating: 4/5

[Edited, spoilers hidden 9/14/23]

This tale of a curmudgeonly Irish father and his effect on his five children was short-listed for the Booker Prize in 1990. While reading it, at first I thought of A Man Called Ove, another curmudgeon. But Ove was not a father and Ove softened up over time. Michael, this father, did not. As the story went along I thought more of Stoner; even though no one would call Stoner a curmudgeon, but, I thought: this is his life, this is the way he is, this is the way things are, it is what it is, he’s not going to change, what did you expect?

The father, Michael, is a farmer. He has small pension from having been in the Irish Army, but money is tight. He spends his days in backbreaking work dawn to dusk on his family farm, bringing in hay, tending the animals, mostly cattle. We learn quickly that he is the master of his roost. His wife and three daughters wait on him. He is served food first at a separate table and the rest of the family eats together afterwards. 

He is stern and has ‘black moods;’ “…silence and deadness would fall on them” when he walks into a room. If a dish is dropped in the kitchen everyone freezes and looks to him for his reaction. His wife feels “inordinately grateful when he behaves normally” and “inordinately grateful for the slightest goodwill.” Yet his girls and youngest boy love him especially in those rare moments when he might dance around the room. Perhaps he is manic depressive?

The father says grace before and after meals. He leads the family in Catholic prayer every evening – a full rosary on their knees. His blackest moods come about most often  when he thinks of his prodigal son, the oldest boy who ran off to London and never came back. The son keeps in contact with his brother and sister but never comes back home. He sees his father once at one of his sister’s weddings and they speak politely for a minute. They exchange one polite letter. That’s it. He does not attend his father’s funeral. 

The girls and his wives accept his dominance; the boys rebel. All his children will eventually leave home to get work.  The prodigal son owns a business renovating houses in London. The oldest daughter is a nurse in London; she visits home two or three times a year. The two younger girls get civil service jobs in Dublin and they come home every weekend until they both marry. The youngest boy, spoiled by his three older sisters and the second wife, rebels in a big way. When he is only fifteen, he takes up with an experienced 22-year old girl visiting back home for the summer from New York. The boy stops attending school and flees to London with help from his sister and brother living there. But unlike the oldest son, he makes up with his father and frequently returns home.  One daughter also rebels a bit as she gets older. She resents her father discouraging her from taking a scholarship to go to university. 

The story is a wrap-around. It begins with the family gathering for what may be their last get-together with their father. It ends with that gathering, his death and funeral. 

There’s good writing: “She was as far from ugliness as she was from beauty and she was young and strong and spirited.” There’s humor: When he lets his second wife set the wedding date, she notes that “…he was more like a man listening to a door close than one going toward his joy.” And “The man’s head was designed to keep his ears apart.”

Most of the story is told by an omniscient narrator with focus alternating on the characters. For example we get his courting of his second wife from her point of view (or, I should say her courting of him) and the young son’s escapades are told from his from his perspective. 

The author has an easy, understated style of writing, quite a bit like his countryman, William Trevor. The story is slow at times and a few scenes get repetitive – such as too many weekend visits by the daughters. But all in all I thought it a first-class read. The Guardian considered Amongst Women one of the all-time 100 best novels in a 2015 list. McGahern’s first novel, The Dark, was banned in Ireland for its content related to family sexual abuse. 

The geographical setting is in northwest Ireland near Sligo, near the coast and close to the border with Northern Ireland. This is near where the author (1934-2006) grew up, in Ballinamore, County Leitrim. 

Top photo, Sligo, from cloudfront.net
Landscape painting by Charles J. McAuley from woolleyandwallis.co.uk
The author from /i.guim.co.uk/
Main street in Ballinamore, the author's home town, from wikimedia commons