Rating: 1/5

I'm sorry, Ian McEwan, but I don't believe you.

There is nothing about this book that convinces me that any of these people could exist in the real world. I cannot work out how Mary and Colin could be encountered anywhere but in a bad novel. I cannot work out why they - apparently boring, middle class nonentities - would take up with someone who is so obviously a criminal from the first moment that they meet him. I also cannot work out why they would agree to stay at his house and then, after he reveals himself to be an aggressive, violent bully, I cannot believe that they would actually go back the next day for another visit! In short, there is nothing psychologically convincing about this book. 

Furthermore, I am thoroughly irritated by the lists of objects that pass for a descriptive evocation of Venice. I also find McEwan's reluctance to name any part of Venice to be the most ridiculous affectation. (Does McEwan even name Venice itself? Possibly not.) For example: 'they decided they were suffering from lack of exercise and made plans to catch the boat across the lagoon the next day to the popular strip of land whose beaches faced the open sea'. The last ten words of this sentence can be substituted by four letters: Lido. McEwan's repeated insertion of long descriptive clauses instead of proper names seems more like the kind of pointless exercise that might be set on a creative writing course than what I want to read in a novel.

The only redeeming feature of this book is that McEwan is good at setting up situations that seem really creepy and that make you feel that something awful is about to happen. (For example, the Lido scene - there you are, I wrote it... Lido. It wasn't hard, Ian. Try it.)
 
Unfortunately, the basic narrative of this novel is so implausible that, when the nasty thing does happen, my only reaction is that I have been expecting something much more interesting and much less obvious.

PS I'm not an Ian McEwan hater - really. I enjoyed Amsterdam and Saturday and I have Atonement on my list of books to read, but I'm afraid that this one just exasperated me beyond my limit of tolerance. I'm putting it down to the fact that this was an early work and he got better.