Rating: 2/5

Kathy Reichs is a fairly good writer. She does have an obsession with clumsy similes that are often so bad they take me out of the story completely, but that aside, she generally is a good writer. That said, this book annoyed the hell out of me.

My first complaint is that Reichs constantly creates fake mysteries that are only mysterious because she won't state what the characters figure out. At the beginning, Tempe (her main character) discovers something important about a would-be-saint from the 1800s. Throughout the novel we're constantly reminded that there's some major twist regarding the would-be-saint's bones that might cause a problem. And Reichs refuses to reveal that twist until the very end, even though it's inconsequential (it has nothing whatsoever to do with the main story) and feels like a major letdown once she reveals it. That would be bad enough, but she does the shell trick with every single thing that happens in the story. Any details regarding anything that takes place in the story cannot be revealed until Reichs has avoided revealing the details at least 241 times. Honestly, if Tempe ordered lunch from a deli, I would fully expect to find out via a major revelation 200 pages later that a pickle was included in the deal, a pickle that (gasp) she did not ask for.

Reichs doesn't create suspense, she creates annoyances. It's the literary equivalent of the cat jumping out of the shadows in a grade-Z horror movie.

But as annoying as that might be, her biggest flaw is that she loves creating several different storylines and then revealing that everything is related (and extremely personal), even if the convergence of events makes no sense whatsoever. In her first book, Reichs sacrifices Tempe's best friend (which is a blessing, since the friend is one of the most gratingly awful characters ever created in a work of fiction) in a desperate attempt to make the mystery as personal as possible. In "Du Jour", the role of the lamb goes to Tempe's previously unmentioned sister, who conveniently becomes involved in a series of events spanning from Texas to North Carolina to Canada.

Which is my biggest problem with this book. Tempe is asked to examine the remains of a would-be-saint, then is asked to investigate a torched house where several people (including two infants) were viciously murdered. There's also the body of a woman who was literally fed to the dogs, and when Tempe's on vacation with her niece, the bodies of two other women are found on the remote island she's visiting. Although we don't find out that it's TWO women (instead of a man and a woman) until chapters later, because oh yeah, fake mysteries. The fact that it's two women instead of a man and a woman changes nothing whatsoever, but Reichs idea of suspense is to wait until long after anyone would care to reveal the gender of the second victim.

And oh yeah, every single event is related, from the saint to the tortured babies to the victim of dogs to the remote island corpses. Because that's what passes for logic in this book.

And let's not forget that every fifty pages Tempe is either attacked or has cat bones thrown into her apartment (I kid you not) with the warning that she needs to back away, even though no one ever specifies what exactly she needs to back away from.

This is the second novel I've read by Reichs after reading her debut novel (which was actually worse). And yes, this will be the last novel I'll read by Reichs. She's a fairly good writer as long as you ignore the all-too-frequent flaws. But I'd rather read a book by someone who writes without all the obvious flaws. Thanks anyway.