Rating: 2/5

I decided to re-read this because it was on my shelf from a previous "pirate phase"...but I surprisingly couldn't remember much about it. Well, as with The Dead Travel Fast: Stalking Vampires from Nosferatu to Count Chocula - it turns out that that's because it isn't very good!

I don't understand. You could easily fill a book of this modest size with one chapter each on famous female pirates like Anne Bonney or Zheng Yi Sao...but instead this is composed of a hodgepodge of stories, including many ladies who are only tangentially related to the sea. For example: Cleopatra...because she and Marc Antony lost a sea battle? Or Tomyris, queen of the decidedly STEPPES BASED Massagetae...because there were some river boats involved in her conflict with Cyrus the Great?

Worse, there's a lot of inaccuracies! A lot of the stories are just copied uncritically from the (often very sexist) chroniclers of the time, without much input from historians or archeologists on what is likely accurate or not. For example, the Cleopatra bit talks a lot about her beauty and seductiveness...when, really, that was probably simply Romans ASSUMING that's how she got Caesar &amp; Marc Antony's loyalty (rather than that she was also a very skilled politician). Worse, we get statements about female vikings wearing horned helmets or being revealed as women by their long hair...when actual viking helmets didn't have horns (that was made up for operas in the 1800s) and, even if the monks writing about it centuries later assumed otherwise, VIKING MEN ALSO WORE THEIR HAIR LONG!!! Likewise, there's a statement about village women in China being vulnerable to pirate attacks because their bound feet would make it hard to run away...but that would probably only apply to RICH women, because poor women had to work for a living and so often DIDN'T have bound feet!

If I'd been able to bring myself to finish the re-read, I'm sure I could go on...but I didn't see much point. It has some entertainment value if you don't have much knowledge of this area of history, and might inspire someone to go learn more (which is why this is 2 stars rather than 1) - but, if you already have a lot of interest in and knowledge of history, it is super frustrating.