Rating: 1/5

This book was almost mildly entertaining until it became disgustingly unbearable. In truth I only listened to half of the book. I decided to listen to it based on fond memories of the tv show from when I was a child, but It was honestly a complete waste of 4 hours of my life... even though I was working...
The writing of this book is completely lost to the ages and changes in societal beliefs

Enter this father that seems to know every little thing about surviving in the wilderness, so much so that even though they knew they had a crate full of medical supplies he didn't even need to open it until 2ish years after they landed because he knew how to extract medicines from plants.(and keep in mind he has like 3 young boys)

This douche narrates a story that is almost more like a wilderness survival guide than a story, except for its lack of any pertinent information on how to actually survive a similar situation.

This douche is seemingly the only man in the world that 'god' cares for because every time a situation appears that would pose a massive challenge he simply prays and it magically appears (ie bees hollowing out the exact tree they had decided to use as a tree house from the bottom to the top so that he could simply build a spiral staircase on the inside (good thing that among studying with a surgeon, learning about natural medicines (in this exact climate), learning how natives turned random nuts into bowls and learning how to tan leather, he also studied as a carpenter and a ship builder (fuck))

And amazingly having all these skills going into this situation, this douche still sits there preaching about 'god', as if his douche life of learning completely random skills didn't luckily douche out and douche him into douchery.

But I douchegress, Don't waste your time on this book. it will only leave you wanting for a sweeter time in your life, a time when fairies still danced upon the morning dew. A time when thunder sounded like a brave lions roar. A time when geese flew in perfect V's and not strange Tilde (~) shapes. A time long before you decided to open this book of rank douchery.