Rating: 4/5

Another installment in the magical land of Oz has come to an end and I am not ashamed to admit that I enjoyed this adventure pretty much the same as I have all the previous ones. 
Yes, it is very simple.
Yes, it follows the same formula that made the original successful.
Yes, I don’t care. It was fun to read nonetheless. 

Characters: 4

This is the main attraction of Oz adventures to me. I am expecting a travelogue, since that is just what it is, but what never ceases to amaze me is Baum’s ability to create whacky characters who are too ridiculous to be thought of as characters in just about any other piece of fiction on earth.
I mean think about it:
A talking gramophone not good enough? Ok. I give you a broken up talking gramophone. Not good enough still? Ok. I give you a broken up talking gramophone that everyone in the story hates!
Oh also there is a sort of a girl made from sawn together pieces of quilt (all multicolored like a gleeman’s cloak in R.Jordan’s “Wheel of Time” series. Not sure why this is the association that i get.)
And oh, lets not forget a dog of sorts, made from stacked up rectangles who speaks, has exactly 3 hairs which are impossible to pull out on its rectangle tail, thinks it has the most fearsome howl and shoots fire from its eyes. 
I mean...this is either someone high on some illegal substance, or someone with imagination that acts the same way as it the person was high on some illegal substance. 
I don’t even know who the main characters are and I really don’t care. 
Oh almost forgot!!! Horners and Hammerheads??? Fantastic. Simply fantastic.

Plot: 3

Basic but steady. Much the same like in all the other Oz stories. There is not much to really say. If you have read all the previous Oz books, (and I imagine pretty much just about everyone would not be starting a series on #7) you know exactly what to expect from a plot. Although I did think that the ending was a bit rushed. It felt like Baum just kept going on and and and on and thought, oh wait, I kind of need to wrap this up. And BAM. 

Setting: 4

I really enjoyed the setting in this books also. In truth, this rating is a bit inflated. I did not exactly enjoy this specific book setting enough to warrant 4 stars. I gave 4 stars to the overall Land of Oz. The build up and familiarity at this point are innate. I know what country is where, I know who lives where, I know some of the characters mentioned here and there, which makes me feel immersed in the land faster and faster. I imagine this is why Baum was getting requests to write more books after he wanted to wrap up the entire series. The story at this point would need to be really bad for me to not like it, so there goes the unfair 4 stars. 

Overall, if you are this deep in the series, keep reading. Might as well wrap it up. 
I know I will surely be coming back to Baum’s OZ in the near future. Plus probably delve into some of the retelling as well. 

Roman “Ragnar”