Rating: 5/5

This book was excellent. I can understand why many people disagree. This is a young adult mystery suspense but it was published in 1979. Many people, many young people would not enjoy this because it is young adult from a different era. 

Is it irony that this was one of the reasons that I enjoyed it so much? Having been a teenager in the 1990's I did grow up without the modern technologies that we take for granted today. Also having been a teen in the 1990's, I read many young adult novels right on par with this one. It was such a different time and these older novels don't have much in common with young adult novels today. Many young people will probably think its so old fashioned that its boring or that they simply are'nt able to connect with the characters. That may be true enough, but is it fair?

When I'm rating a book I put a lot of checklists in place. For instance, is the book well written for the time and for the intended age group of that time? This book was. I never judge young adult books by the same standards that I judge adult. I never judge children's books like I judge young adult or adult. There may be all kinds of reasons that I could like a particular book More, but it might not fit with the genre or the intended audience age group. I think that you have to make an honest attempt to be objective in that sense. I find quite often that most people rating books are not placing anything but their personal opinions into book ratings. 

The truth is, this is an excellent book, it is concise and well written. The writing style is early young adult from around 1979. If you can accept this book knowing and understanding these things you might actually really enjoy it. It was refreshing to me in so many ways specifically Because of the time it was written. There were no mentions of modern technology, teens were respectful to their parents, there wasn't a lot of slang or cursing, there wasn't a bunch of sex or characters longing to have sex and there weren't a bunch of old tropes! As an adult reading this, yes it was simplistic - but in a way that you would expect young adult novels to be back then. It was actually written with a good pace. It is well written for a young adult novel from 1979. It was dramatic without being too dramatic, parts were frightening but not too frightening. What I am getting at is that this novel had an excellent balance. Its a good mystery. I read a lot of mystery and I usually figure them out but this book did keep me guessing until the end.