Rating: 5/5

I genuinely feel sorry for Peter for having to cover such an atrocious war, an abomination of civilization that serves as a reminder that we are not at all yet civilized, and after reading this book I feel dread for the amount of time and the amount of events such as this that need to happen for us to become civilized. Then again, maybe such a state will never be achieved simply because of the fact that manipulation is such a fundamental experience so easily bestowed upon human kind, even more so in the age of technological mindlessness. I also felt sorry for myself for 30 years for being a child of said war, for loosing a happy childhood, for living in a psychological and financially ruined society. Peter has masterfully captured the disbelief of the Yugoslav people with their own cruel destiny, people intertwined together with language, culture, marriage, family, history threads, that still feel that the war happened upon them, not with them. Peter is mesmerized, drawn into and consumed by this "evil" that lurks within us all at all times, and he abdicates his safety many times, even thought you can feel through the whole book that he is not aroused by the violence like some other reporters, that in many instances he would like to be somewhere else. The actual thing is not so metaphysical in it's core, it's simply an observation of how people can be tricked into doing the worst things given the right medium and circumstances. If people of the same color, same language, and the same history could slaughter each other, imagine what people of different color could do to each other, if somebody divides them too much, like it's currently happening in the world. It is always and exclusively done by people in power, and exclusively for their own interest. The best solution when this is happening would be to back off and try to get a clearer picture of who, and for what reasons, is dividing people. 

I congratulate Peter like a dear friend for scorching his soul in Bosnia, and for fighting for the truth. It gives us people of Bosnia hope that we are not forgotten, and it gives us strength to not look away, to also fight for the truth. I only wish Peter would find the strength to publish another updated edition with a personal review of everything that has happened since 1996. I am sure he was devastated as I was to learn that the war surgeon that operated in Srebrenica on more than 1200 surgeries without any equipment or medicine, Dr. Nedret Mujkanovic, has committed suicide. Also this would be a great opportunity to add the ebook version to Kindle, since it is not yet published.