Rating: 5/5

I first read this book not long after it came out. It was required reading back then. I didn't know anything about it being a part of a TV series and have only recently watched the TV series from start to finish. This brought me back to the book, but my original copy had long since gone into the hands of other borrowers. I managed to get another copy secondhand. It seems quite mad that a book as good as this should be out of print and unavailable in a new copy and edition.

This is THE best non-fiction book I have come across on Vietnam and it still sits proud above the rest - dispassionate in it's analysis and as fair-minded as it is about possible to get. It's really great to find a book that covers the complete period from the re-arrival of the French, through their defeat and the stumbling into war by the USA to its eventual defeat.

It becomes more and more apparent that America really did stumble into this one and having got itself into it, found it almost impossible to withdraw 'with honour'. Firstly the States funded and supported Ho Chi Minh and the forces of 'Indochina' in it's harrassment of the Japanese and then, having taken a position post-Second World War against the reacquainting of the old colonial powers with their pre-war colonies, with the US from it's historical position as republic coming out of the ashes of British colonialisation, they clandestinely supported the Vietnamese in their struggle against the French. This is very similar to positions taken on behalf of other countries struggling for national identity and anti-colonialism throughout the world post Second World War.

At the same time they were embarking upon the classic 'americanisation' and cultural 'colonialisation' of the south through the promotion of the 'Free Market economy', globalisation and unfettered capitalism. Though it was never OK for the North Vietnamese to declare a desire for nationalism and self-determination with communist affinities (particularly with Russia - the Americans NEVER understood the legacy of history and the hundreds of years that Vietnam had struggled and fought Chinese invasion and hegemony, that the Yanks concern and worry that there would be a 'domino' effect as 'Red' China took over and controlled state after state in South East Asia was a completely baseless hypothesis), it was OK for the richest country in the world to overrun a country with their cultural and economic pornography and 'rest-and-recreationalise' a whole region. The problem was between supporting nationalism and national identity under the vision of anti-colonialism, but when that might embrace a shift to the left, then American alarm bells started to ring very loud. This happened in a number of countries from around that time, the most clear other example is the fuzzy way American geopolitics led it down various paths in Iran post Second World War. South East Asia is still the whorehouse of the west - not so much Vietnam now - but nip over to Thailand and its still soiled by the sordidness of cheap clip joints and massage parlours for GI's-on-leave now turned into young-to-old white western men on the look out for a bit of horizontal with some eastern promise on the cheap. The whole of the Thai tourist industry appears majorly funded on the premise of male commonly white porno-tourism.

For people of my generation - I'm mid-50's born - this is an extremely important book. For many others younger I would say read it and read how America by wrong and poor assumptions, by pure blind stupidity, by hawkishness on the part of those seen as liberals, by the stubborness of mules and sabre-rattling of technocrats stumbled into a useless and tragic war which should never have happened. The process of supporting nationalism and opposing any move to the left or move to a more egalitarian society NOT based on hyper-consumer capitalism has never been resolved by the US. Then think about Afghanistan and Iraq and Iran. Think about 'the World's Policeman' and the deficit of analysis in the States. Think about what equality means and how it is promoted.

A thoroughly worthwhile history book - one which should fundamentally make everyone that reads it ask deep questions on the future of the world we live in and to learn lessons. If we fail to learn anything by looking at our past mistakes then then we will be condemned forever to stumble into the same disasters and condemn our species to the charnel house.