Rating: 4/5

It's taken me ten years to get into the Dalemark Quartet enough to finish it, but here I am, finally, at the end. I really enjoyed this book but some things bothered me about it which is why I downgraded my rating to 4 stars. It's a fun and engaging read with lots of tension and twists along the way. Like most Diana Wynne Jones books, I couldn't put it down, partly because I was desperate to know who ended up as King (though I had a suspicion, which turned out to be correct). I also wanted to know how all the threads from the previous books would be drawn together. I think Diana Wynne Jones put in a good effort, but I'm not sure it was entirely successful.

So, onto the things that bothered me. 

It seems like in every fantasy book, the story ends with a new King ascending to the throne and restoring order to the kingdom. But why does it always have to be a King? Why is the long-lost heir to the throne always male? Why couldn't Noreth have been the one to take the crown? When she was first introduced I was like "yes, a lady-heir reuniting the kingdom!", and then she dies. So that was disappointing.

I also hated what happened to Hildy. She was such a great character in Drowned Ammett, and she didn't come across as being a gigantic snob, so I don't see why she had to change like that. It bothers me because Hildy is the only female main character in Drowned Ammett and Maewen is the only female main character in The Crown of Dalemark - and of course, when they meet, they hate each other. This is a frustrating cliche that I wouldn't have expected in a Diana Wynne Jones books, but perhaps it came about due to Dalemark being more "high fantasy" than her other books, so there are many more male characters. It makes me sad that Mitt, Moril, Ynen and Kialan got on so well but Maewen didn't have a single female friend.

The other thing that bothered me is that Maewen is a completely passive character. Her entire arc is controlled by other people (eg Wend and Kankredin), and she just sort of goes with the flow for the whole book without taking charge and changing events herself. I was really excited when Kankredin turned up in the future at the end because I was like "yes, she's finally going to do something!", but then she just stands and watches as Mitt defeats Kankredin. What a let down!! It kind of felt like she was just there watching a show rather than participating in it, which was disappointing because Diana Wynne Jones usually writes such great female characters with lots of agency.

As I said before, I'm not sure if this book really succeeds in tying off the series. I still feel very confused about a lot of things, especially the ending (did Kankredin actually die or what?), but it was a good read and I did enjoy it.