Rating: 4/5

Alyssa Pagan
Felita 
January 31 2012 

 The main are Felita Mom Dad Tito and Johnny. Felita is a nine year old Porto Rican girl. Her parents are sweet and kind people. Tito is a 13 year old trouble maker. And Johnny is the oldest kid. He is very smart caring and kind. 

 The opposing character is the grandmother. She is the one who is always there for her and understands her. The grandmother is sweet kind and caring. She gives advice to Felita when she needs it.

 The major conflict is Felita and her family moving to a new neighborhood because it has better schools. But these mean girls mess around with her and push her around and get a whole bunch of people to mess with the family just because there Porto Rican. 

 I think the lesson is even though bad things might happen in the beginning things will turn out ok at the end. In the story the family had to move to a neighborhood where they were not wanted. But at the end they move back to there old neighborhood. 

 Where this took place in 2004 in the United States Of America.

 Felita finds out she is moving to a new neighborhood. She doesn't want to move. She has all of her friends there and lived there her whole life. She is moving in 2 days. And only has a few hours to say good bye to all her friends. Especially to her best friend Gigi. They been friends since she moved there.
 They moved and everything is bigger then there old apartment They lived there already for 2 week and she hasn't went out to make some friends . Her mom told her to go down and make some friends. When she goes down with a new dress her mom bought for her. She makes some friends or so she thought. When the girls parents came down to see who they where playing with. When the saw is was Felita they told them to be mean to her so they started hitting her. 

 They moved back to there old neighborhood and the whole family is happy again. For a little while. Fires started happening near the house. Felita wont get along with her friends or her mom and her grandmother dies.

 The turning point in the story is when all her problems go away. They go away because her grandmother gives her advice. And tells her what to do in any situations. 

 The major conflict is resolved because they move back to there old neighborhood. and never have to go back or hear from those mean girls again.