Rating: 4/5

About a month or so ago, I attended a theme party to celebrate a friend’s birthday. This was the third or fourth theme party I’d been to in the past twelve months. For whatever reason, as we get older, my social circle has decided that nights of raging drunkenness need some patina of class. Thus, the period costumes. 

During the party – celebrating the speakeasy era of gangsters, flappers, and moonshine – we started planning other theme parties for the future. Mostly, this conversation consisted of me trying to convince everyone how much fun a lumberjack-themed night would be. (Beers, bacon, flapjacks and flannel!). As we talked, we hit upon the idea of a One-Hundred-Years-Ago-Tonight party that would celebrate the fashions, foods, drinks and dress of people who walked and lived this day a century before. 

The idea stuck in my head, and I pondered it the next day, while I battled a raging hangover. One hundred years ago from right now (this moment, already fleeting) would place us in 1913. The last year of peace and hope of a fresh century, about to turn into the bloodiest years in human history. 

Next year, of course, means the one hundred year anniversary of the start of World War I. That’s kind of crazy. One hundred years. No living memory of the first totally modern war. 

Even before its centennial, World War I existed in the shadows of its bigger, bloodier brother, World War II. Despite its importance, it is usually relegated to a footnote, that footnote being: World War I is the reason that World War II, the war we actually care about, ever happened. 

World War I has lately come to fascinate me. I have been circling the subject for awhile now, plucking books here and there, imprinting the story’s broad strokes in my mind. Alistair Horne’s The Price of Glory, about the infamous battle of Verdun, marks the point at which I start to narrow my reading, focusing on specific details. 

The Price of Glory turned out to be a great way for me to dip my toe into the gory specifics of the Great War. It is a slim, brisk telling of a bulging, complicated battle, a battle that came to define the wastefulness of World War I. 

The battle took place between February and December of 1916, on the rough ground north of the French city of Verdun. It began with a German offensive designed not for a breakthrough, but to draw French troops into a slaughter pen. The Germans’ initial forays were unexpectedly successful, leading to the capture of strategically valuable French positions. Instead of letting that territory go, the French decided to take it back. Seven hundred thousand casualties resulted. All from a battle the Germans started with no intent of winning. 

Horne focuses his telling on the human element. He is not overly concerned with troop movements, of the alphabet-and-roman-numeral soup of corps, regiments, and companies marching this way and that. It’s just as well, because the maps that are provided are essentially useless. If you are a reader concerned with orders of battle, you should probably look elsewhere. 

This is a bird’s eye look at Verdun, presenting the biggest picture possible while often swooping in low for a detailed look at a person or situation.

Horne pays close attention to the generals, of whom he creates some indelible portraits. Of Petain: 

What manner of man was this amorous general who was soon to earn from his countrymen so much honor and love, that would later be replaced by so much hatred and dishonor? At the time of which we write, Petain was a bachelor of sixty, with commendable vigor for his age…With the commanding posture that was the unmistakable and indelible mark of St. Cyr, and clad in the uniform of ‘horizon blue,’ there was no more impressive sight on a French parade ground. To have seen him and de Castelnau together, one might well have assumed that Petain was the born aristocrat, the squat and rather swarthy general the peasant; though in fact it was the reverse…

However, unlike many histories that tell their stories from the top down, Horne does not neglect the infantrymen in the trenches. To the contrary, his look at the common soldier is exceedingly intimate, and bolstered by the fact that Horne was able to interview many of them while they still lived. This results in a lot of impressive first-person testimony of the nasty, close-in fighting among the French fortresses surrounding Verdun. 

Horne is a highly respected historian and writer. He was educated at Cambridge and this book is best read with the voice of a British professor stuck in your head. The prose is witty, erudite, at times strangely beautiful. He can be at times maddeningly broad, while at other times sharply incisive. There are certain pomposities built into the text – namely Horne’s frequent use of foreign phrases that he wouldn’t deign to translate – but that is part of its charm. 

The tragedy of World War I goes a long way towards explaining France’s ignominiously early exit in World War II. This was a country and a culture psychologically ravaged by the German occupation between 1914 and 1918. Four percent of the total population of France died. Four millions soldiers were wounded. Untold millions bore the haunted memories. It’s enough to explain the reason the Maginot Line was built, and also why it didn't matter. 

When The Price of Glory was originally written in the 60s, memories of Verdun were still strong. The battlefield was still extremely dangerous and potted with unexploded ordinance. The landscape had not been altered. The participants still walked the earth. This book benefits from all that. It has the lingering horror of Verdun coursing through its veins. It creates a vivid impression of yesterdays that keep getting farther away.