Rating: 1/5

What a huge - I emphasize it: HUGE - disappointment The Reprieve (1946) is... A terrible experience - but, by now, I know Jean-Paul Sartre is hit-or-miss. In The Age of Reason (1946) - part one of a planned tetrology called The Ways of Freedom - Sartre used the lives of handful of people to explore his extentialist philosophy in practice. He described the lives of these people during two days in the hot summer of 1938. Each chapter or distinct part within a chapter centres around one person and the reader gets to know the inner thoughts, moods, experiences and decisions of the person involved. All stories are interwoven into one great narrative which centres around Mathieu Delarue, a 35 year old philosophy teacher at a Lycée, living a bohemian life out of resentment towards the bourgeois lifestyle, and who tries to come up with 4000 francs to pay for the abortion of his long time girlfriend Marcelle. 

But how different is The Reprieve! Gone are the personal stories, the existentialist perceptions of the characters involved, the narratives within a narrative. Sartre throws all this out in order to cover a more historical story: the week in september 1938 when Hitler was on the verge of invading Czechoslovakia, dragging France - and with this Europe - into another World War, and British PM Chamberlain flew to Munich to try to come up with some sort of peaceful solution. Theoretically, this is a majestic setting for a novel, especially when it is tied to existentialist themes, emphasizing the pluarity of perspectives involved. 

What went wrong? Well, already from the first sentence we can read how Sartre attacked this target from a whole new angle. He now includes many more characters, switches the perspetive and narrative in one or two sentences at a time, and connects seemingly unconnected persons, locations and events. The result is a totally different book, in all possible ways of being different. And it's not simply 'different' - it is barely readable. Being more than 1/3 in the book, I still couldn't make out what I was reading, which story connects to which character, and vice versa. 

No, I feel no impulse to reading on: I am not just disappointed (after finding The Age of Reason kind of majestic), I am unable to understand and follow this book. A shame... but I guess disappointments like these makes you appreciate the rewarding books even more, so I'll rather stick with my memories of The Age of Reason I guess.