Rating: 5/5

Two weeks ago I arrived at Aberdovey, a small seaside village on the Dyfi estuary in west Wales. So to discover sun, and thus an ideal day for the beach, I needed a book. Having no luck finding a bookshop, and minus my Kindle, the young man in the pub mentioned that the RNLI were selling books. So when I saw the smiling face of Mowgli on the cover of “The Jungle Book”, well I had to purchase it and also support the Lifeboats as they do such marvellous work.

I had read this collection of short stories as a child but had forgotten the names and the animals and so what a delight it was to reread them.

Who cannot possibly be excited and enthralled by the adventures of Mowgli (who was also known as Frog), a young abandoned man cub, who wanders into a wolf’s den in the Indian jungle? As this is fiction, he would, of course, not be eaten by its occupants but I was somewhat astonished by the child’s age and what he was able to do:

“Directly in front of him (Father Wolf), holding on by a low branch, stood a naked brown baby who could just walk, as soft and as dimpled a little thing as ever came to a wolf’s cave at night. He looked up into Father Wolf’s face and laughed.”

How could the wolves not possibly love him and welcome him into the pack? But still there were struggles for Mowgli from members of the pack; however, with the help of such staunch friends as Bagheera, the panther, and Baloo the bear, he managed to overcome them. When Mowgli is kidnapped by the Monkey People (the Bandar-log), Bagheera and Baloo enlist the help of a rather villainous Rock Python called Kaa as the monkies were terrified of him; I was too and could that snake move. Phew…

What is sad though, despite the child learning all about the laws and languages of the jungle, Mowgli was never really accepted by the wolves (apart from his adopted parents), nor human beings either, when he was forced to leave the jungle and go and live and work in a local village. Sadly, he was betwixt and between. Also, did I miss something in that he remained naked all the time? That could have caused serious problems surely in the jungle, especially?

Out of the other short stories, I definitely preferred “The White Seal” and Kotick the seal that at birth was white and caused great amazement to his parents:

“Sea Catch,” Matkah said at last, “our baby’s going to be white!”
“Empty clam-shells and dry seaweed!” snorted Sea Catch. “There never has been such a thing in the world as a white seal.”
“I can’t help that,” said Matkah, “there’s going to be now”.

And Kotick would indeed benefit from being white. What fun that was to read.

I’m so pleased that I discovered this little gem of a book. Also to think that it was first published in 1894 and still gives immense pleasure to its readers, as can be seen by its place on Amazon’s best sellers’ list in the US.