Rating: 4/5

I'm a fan of Elaine Barbieri and I'm trying to read all her books. The majority of this book was a 4 star read for me; however, the last about 100 pages was frustrating for me and 3 stars. The book encompasses a time period of 14 years, 1856 to 1870.

Both Allie Pierce and Delaney Marsh are orphans who travel West by train to Michigan with a church group and 46 other kids to find new homes. Allie is ten and Delaney is fifteen (however, I thought Delaney was also ten for the longest period of time!). Allie is drawn to Delaney from the very start, partially because of a necklace he wears with the Lady on it. The Lady is a religious symbol of Allie's mother's Irish Catholic faith. Delaney becomes Allie's reluctant protector, and when they reach their destination, they refuse to go with any of the adults unless they take both of them together. The Case family takes them in. The Cases have two children, Sarah and James. Sarah is rude to Allie from the very beginning and obsessed with the handsome Delaney. James only warms up to Allie and later falls in love with her. However, he has been resentful of Delaney ever since Delaney arrived and thought that Delaney was a good-for-nothing prison brat who would turn on them as soon as he was able. 

Delaney also has ambitions that don't include staying on the Case's farm and being a farmer. He wants to be a newspaper writer like his father. 

Warning: Both characters have intimate relations with other characters besides each other, but there is no cheating.

 Sarah lies, telling Allie that Delaney also fathered her child the same night he fathered Allie's. Allie feels betrayed that Delaney could lie with Sarah right after she and he finally consummated their love in the most meaningful way, and this is the main reason she decides to wed James, who's been in love with her and wants to marry her. 

I honestly wasn't sure how Allie and Delaney were going to be together at the end, because James (if you didn't see my spoiler, he and Allie marry) wasn't going to give Allie up. The only way I saw them being together was if James died. The end also frustrated me because Allie wouldn't tell Delaney what was wrong and if she had just asked him about her fears  did Delaney really father Sarah's child? , they could have been together sooner. They almost didn't get together! Fate &amp; so many people were conspiring against them to be apart. They only finally got together in the last paragraph of the last page, a fact I'm not too happy about. 

 Also, if Delaney didn't overhear Sarah's words at the end, he would have never known that Margaret--named after Mrs. Case--was his own daughter! Allie would have never told him out of respect for James because James wanted Margaret to be his and asked this of Allie. 

Not that most of the novel was sad (because it wasn't), but it ended on a sort of bittersweet note that I tagged this as "sad". I also could have used an epilogue, because like I said, they only got together on the very last page. I assume they went back to Chicago to live there because Delaney's work was probably more important than the farm, but I don't know for sure without the epilogue.  Also, I would have liked Margaret to know that Delaney was her real father. I'm sure Delaney eventually told her, but I would have liked for it to be written in the book.  

Can't wait to read more Elaine Barbieri!