Rating: 4/5

This was a puzzling novel, which, I suppose, is a credit to its originality. Even so, it reminded me greatly of Vonnegut's Sirens of Titan, its point being mostly to point out that narrative and life are pretty much incompatible, or, as Al Stewart's great song inspired by the latter novel puts it, "I was the victim of a series of accidents / As are we all." Consequently, the "plot" here reads a bit like a picaresque journey through the slow collapse of the late stages of post-industrial capitalism, its primary surprise being how easily everyone accepts the apocalypse and just struggles on. Although this is perhaps a great truth, it dawns on the reader quite slowly as you go, so the text itself is kind of sweeter in the reader's post-reading ruminations than in the actual process of reading what seems to be a rather plotless series of events. (I've heard this said of the old Monty Python's Flying Circus TV show as well, that it's far funnier when repeating the sketches to and with your friends rather than in the puzzling moment of first viewing such shenanigans.)

Along the way there are some perspicaciously absurd satires of certain American proclivities--our primitive native post-puritanical and nearly fascist Christianity, race relations, the marginalization/fetishization of the arts, our oddly moral approach to life in general--including hustling and crime, etc. All of this was quite delicious really, but also pretty clearly not the point--again, in a novel whose point seems to be that there really isn't much of a point. Even the ecstasy of flight, which would appear at first a possible point of reference, is ultimately described as appearing utterly banal from the outside, as if it were only a continual state of pleasure completely without value from any sort of exterior viewpoint, thus mere hedonism. This leads me to question my own American post-puritan morality, and that, perhaps, is the point after all.

One certain praise I can give is that, even after 40+ years since the novel's composition, its vision of the future is without a single contradiction yet and thus is still quite possible, so it hasn't at all dated since 1979. That's rather remarkable.