Rating: 3/5

That's October in a small Colombian village. The weather hesitates between scorching heat and torrential rain. That morning, the rain greets César Montero when he leaves his home: the rain and a leaflet plastered at his door. So, instead of seeing his animals, Caesar goes to Pastor and kills him without a word. The flyers appeared one night in the village; since then, they have insulted, denounced, and divulged little secrets and embezzlement. The mayor lets it go to not give importance to what does not have it, but Father Angel worries about his parishioners' moral health. When the mayor decides to act, he uses excellent means: armed rounds and curfews. The leaflets become contestation bulletins. Nevertheless, peace had been breaking out.
To understand all the subtlety of the Mala Hora, you have to look at the history of Colombia because Gabriel Garcia Marquez does not date its history but sprinkles it with clues. The facts unfold, he said, two years after the end of the civil war and the establishment of a new government of national reconciliation. Therefore, we can situate the events around 1955, two years after the seizure of power by General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla. He amnestied the liberal guerrillas and advocated a loyal, courageous Christian Colombia. The peace thus established was imposed, often by force, and remains precarious. But of all this, Garcia Marquez said nothing. He is content to install his characters. The arcade, both mayor and police chief, is discovered to be the victim of a terrible toothache that has made him suffer for several days. We could pity him. He strives to maintain peace in the village despite the pain that diminishes him. But we quickly feel that something is wrong; the respect shown to him seems constrained, and why does the dentist refuse to treat him? Another representative of the law is the judge.
Little inclined to work, he is content to follow the mayor like his shadow, acquiescing to all his suggestions, undoubtedly cooled by the fact that his predecessor was shot by the police sitting at the desk he occupies today. But then, Father Angel, satisfied to have restored moral order in the village, discovers throughout the story that his flock hides many secrets and that his precepts have only applied to the facade. Besides his three tutelary figures, the villagers. The profiteers, the traitors, the adulterers, the cowards, the rich, the needy, and the hidden and avowed opponents. Who among them is the flyer collector? Which one initiated the distribution of clandestine bulletins that called for civil disobedience? The answer is that each villager who has welcomed peace without believing in it submitted to the terror put in place by the mayor, who keeps the gene of protest and revolt within him. The government then appears to be corrupt and a liar. He announced the change, but nothing has changed; the torturers of yesteryear are still in place, and behind their smiles and good manners, violence is just waiting to provoke.
It is a short but demanding book that requires specific knowledge of Colombia's history. It had also read as the universal story of political and religious oppression undermined by the desire for freedom. It was arduous but enjoyable political work.