Rating: 5/5

I read this because of my love of the Age of Sail. I also read it because I knew the author was a Harvard boy, who set sail from Massachusetts on a trip around Cape Horn to the Pacific. I'm originally from Mass, so it strikes a nostalgic chord. However, I did not know that Dana's destination was the California coast, which was my destination after I left college. So, I immediately felt a kinship with the man and his book. Ok, granted I didn't sail along one of the most dangerous routes in the world to get there. The most arduous part of my "voyage" to California was that unbearable stretch of Highway 70 through Kansas where there was nothing to look at and the only radio station I could pick up played evangelical sermons. (Why didn't the roadmap makers include a Midwestern "There Be Dragons" warning?!?)

The connection goes a step farther. The ship The Pilgrim upon which Richard Henry Dana sailed was a merchant vessel contracted to ferry hides up and down the California coast. One of the ports the ship put into was Santa Barbara, my home for several years. Santa Barbara is a beautiful city/town tucked between sea and mountain. It's a holiday destination. People come from all over the world to visit. Dana hated it, lol! For good reason, back in the time of his voyage 1835/36, Santa Barbara and really the whole coast of California had little to offer. But Santa Barbara in particular was an inhospitable spot for sailors. There was no harbor just a choppy channel in which to anchor, an awkward Southeaster to contend with, and the surf, while good for surfers, was a trial to navigate when coming ashore. And once ashore there wasn't much to see or do. The "town" was up a hill a half mile from the beach and nothing much more than a few shanties built around the Presidio, the old Spanish fort, which every coastal Californian town was built around back in those days. It's a lot different now, although, there is a local law on the books which maintains that semi-historical, orange Spanish-tile architectural aesthetic in the city center.

The memoir of the voyage itself is at times harrowing. The megalomaniacal captain of The Pilgrim must have been fodder from Melville's Ahab in Moby Dick. There are passages filled with adventure and danger within Two Years Before the Mast that rival some of the best seafaring fiction.