Rating: 4/5

Elizabeth Ann is nine years old. Both parents died when she was six months old and ever since Elizabeth Ann had been raised by her Great-aunt Harriet and Harriet's daughter Frances. Aunt Frances especially concerned herself with Elizabeth Ann. Can you say helicopter? Because Aunt Frances was a helicopter parent before there were even helicopters to inspire the phrase! 

Frances caused Elizabeth Ann to become the most nervous, anxious, frightened of everything under the sun child that you could imagine. She wanted Elizabeth Ann to be just like she herself was, you see.

But when Harriet gets sick, Frances must transfer the weight of her attentions to her mother, and Elizabeth Ann is taken to another relative in the city. 

But that relative (truthfully or not we will never know) tells Frances that there is scarlet fever in the house and to send the child to other relatives far away in Vermont. The very country cousins who were surely not fit to raise a child (according to Frances)! 

But there was no choice, so off goes Elizabeth Ann to the home of Great-uncle Harry, Great-aunt Abigail, and their daughter Ann. 

Elizabeth Ann is nine years old, remember? But she looks much younger because she is so thin. And she cannot do anything for herself, Aunt Frances has never allowed her to try. What in the world will she do at a country house with relatives who don't seem to pay any special attention to her at all? Who treat her immediately as one of the family and expect her to DO things?!

This was a sweet story, very satisfying and enjoyable to read. My only problem was that I had just finished reading the author's book explaining the Montessori education system. I kept expecting Ms. Fisher to jump out from behind a maple tree and say "You see how being in a Montessori school would have helped this child?! Imagine being nine years old and not having any idea how to brush your own hair or even dress yourself! What was Aunt Frances thinking?!" Even when it was obvious that such a thing was not going to happen, I never quite got over the expectation of it. lol

I do think I will take a break before reading the next Fisher title on my list, because she will be writing about France during World War One, inspired by what she saw while she was living there at the time. No one should be distracted with silly thoughts while reading such a book.