Rating: 4/5

This first novel, published in 1994, is an absorbing plunge into non-linear narration. Yes there is an overall arc which serves as some kind of structure. Yet it is the way characters come and go, dropping bits and of folk wisdom, jaded one-liners and occasional acts of bravery, that truly propels the story. This is not plot driven. And what a breath of fresh air.

Things start in the Ukraine, specifically in Rozdorizha, a mythical city bordering Poland and subject for centuries to invasion and waves of military comings and goings. What haven’t they seen? Their share of Tartars, Germans, and communists, certainly. In the midst of the maelstrom we are introduced to Zenon Zabobon and his eventual wife, the dark-eyed peasant woman Natalka. Long story short Natalka ends up in New Jersey with her daughter Lastivka and her daughter’s suitor, Arkady, who woos her over the long days of waiting in a displaced persons camp in Germany. There is a son, the enigmatic Bo. Also with the family is Zenon’s cosmopolitan brother Stefan. The clan has somehow been uprooted and laid down new roots in America.

OK, not a new story. But here it’s the described as if the family is the Ukrainian folk. It’s the Ukrainian consciousness that has been transplanted, not this individual or that. The whole culture is adjusting to hot dogs and sleeping pills of suburban Jersey. Melnyczuk uses small vignettes, snippets of dialog, raised eyebrows, shrugs and gestures to relate how the entire culture adjusts and, in a way, thrives. At least we assume it thrives, just as we assume we all will.

Individuals die off, without drama or wailing. Zenon the historian, expert in Rozdorizhian myth, dominates the plot until he doesn’t—he’s summarily executed by the Germans. But it’s not about the individuals. It’s the Ukrainian spirit that has found a home, despite the odds, in America. 

Melnyczuk intersperses myth and weird history throughout. The shadow of King Toor hovers in the background as he floats down the river on his back, daydreaming. This all makes sense, until we get to New York and Jersey Shores, and the mythical background flattens out into the long now. The immigrant remembers things, and reassembles in a constant whirl of memory.