Here's a minor literary mystery that has been bothering me this morning. On p 176 of La vieillesse, Simone de Beauvoir quotes a French translation of Shakespeare's Sonnet 73, which in the original goes as follows:That time of year thou mayst in me behold
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
Which by and by black night doth take away,
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
As the death-bed whereon it must expire,
Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
To love that well which thou must leave ere long.. Her translation is presented thus:«Tu reconnais en moi ce moment de l'année
Où pendent aux rameaux qui tremblent dans le froid,
Chœurs nus et délabrés, quelques feuilles fanées,
Où des oiseaux naguère on entendait la voix.
En moi tu vois aussi le feu crépusculaire
Qui decline à l'ouest au coucher du soleil
Et que doit emporter bientôt la nuit austère»

«Car le temps sans répit mène à l'affreux hiver,
L'été, pour l'y détruire, et la sève se glace,
Plus de feuillages drus, la neige a recouvert
La beauté ; en tous lieux la sterilité passe»

«Donc ne laisse l'hiver, de sa main decharnée
Ravager ton été sans l'avoir distilée...»I thought the first seven lines were excellent, the rest somewhat less so, and wondered who the translator was; she doesn't say. After a little googling, I find that the initial portion is from a 1970 translation by Jean Fuzier. But who wrote the rest of it, and why has she performed this strange piece of mix-and-match without even telling us what she's done? I suppose that now I know part of the story, the quotation marks do give a clue. Should we conclude that there are in fact three translators?
________________________

I must have been very sleepy this morning. On looking at them again, the second and third passages can't possibly be from Sonnet 73, no matter how loose the translation. And indeed, after a little more searching, I find that the second passage is these lines from Sonnet 5:For never-resting time leads summer on
To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:while the third comes from Sonnet 6:Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
In thee thy summer, ere thou be distilled:I still haven't figured out who translated them though.