Rating: 1/5

This is the first time I've read anything by this author, Irwin Shaw, of a few decades ago. Being in the mood to read a "Vintage" book from my "Vintage" bookshelf I chose this book. This book is copyrighted 1965. What I have researched and read about Irwin Shaw, after I read the book...most reviewers say this was not one of his best works. And I have to say I totally agree, however this is the only work of his I have read. Irwin Shaw was born (February 27, 1913 and died May 16, 1984) he was a prolific American playwright, screenwriter, novelist, and short-story author whose written works have sold more than 14 million copies.

Overview...
Four decades of American life are re-created through the dramatic reminiscences of Benjamin Federov, a typical yet very special man, son of Immigrant Jewish parents, a husband, a father, an admirer of women, a one-time soldier ... and finally, and always, his own man. Federov's story is relived while watching his teen-age son play baseball in the sunshine of a summer day. It tells of the intrigue and exultation of his first love affair, his war experiences, the volatile warmth of his marriage, and the special meaning of his infidelities. Through it all is his quest for a point of balance as he stands on the edge of conventional society, desirous of entering, refusing always to do so.

My Thoughts...
This book is what I call "A Blast From The Past" kind of book. It was long before cellphones, texting, and email. It kind of brought back memories of when we needed to call someone. Sometimes we agreed to a time to call and discuss when and where we would meet, or whatever was needed to discuss. No instant messaging back in the 'good ole days'. 

I didn't find this a very interesting book to read, I actually didn't finish it, I read to page 173 of a 253 page book. I figured it was a waste of my time reading this book, so it got thrown on my "pile of never to be finished reading pile." On a scale of 1-5, I gave it 1 star. I would say it was not a favorite book of mine.