Rating: 3/5

"I don't know what it is. I don't know who does it. I can't figure it out at all. The only thing I want to know is, what about my brother? That's all I want to know. Nothing like this has ever happened to me before. When my father died, it was different. He had lived a good life. He had raised a good family. We were sad because he was dead, but we weren't sore. Now I'm sore, and I haven't got anybody to be sore at. Who's the enemy? Do you know, Mr. Spangler?"
This question of Homer Macauley, echoed in thousands and thousands of households, is a universal question that's raised when families lose their young ones to an uncomprehending war. The war may arise out of necessity, and, understandably, some sacrifices are needed to establish peace, yet the challenge is how the individual families each process the loss and grief. 

The fourteen-year-old Homer, the protagonist of the story, doesn't understand why his brother had to die. War is a distant, incomprehensible thing for him. And he is confused, angry, and at a loss as to how to process his loss. Macauley family is a model of thousands of families that lost their sons/brothers/husbands to the war. And through that model family, William Saroyan demonstrates how one must process loss and grief, and become resilient. "Death is not an easy thing for anyone to understand... but every life shall one day end... as long as we are alive... and remember him, nothing in the world can take him from us. His body can be taken, but not him."
The story is a nice coming-of-age novel. The war, deaths, his own loss and grief lift Homer Macauley from his immature adolescence to mature youth. Written as short vignettes, the story narrates various adventures of Homer, his family, and friends. There was no cohesive flow to the story, but each episode was engaging. Saroyan's understanding of human feelings amazed me, and his empathy and wisdom moved me. The novel is not perfect but satisfactory. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/