Rating: 5/5

I was inspired to read this just after the 50th anniversary. WXPN, a great indy station in Philly, spent Woodstock's 50th anniversary weekend playing all the audio footage (announcements and crowd noise as well as concert footage) according to the actual festival schedule. WXPN streamed the broadcast worldwide via website, captivating a large audience. I was surprised how moving it was to hear so much of the festival in real time, or near real time (there were gaps in the original footage, and the broadcast of the final performance -Hendrix' iconic set- was broadcast on Sunday morning rather than Monday morning-- I guess due to those gaps). Reading this was a way to transition out of the immersion of the all-weekend broadcast, which included some late nights so I could hear some of the many performances that took place in the middle of the night right through to dawn. Over the course of the broadcast, there was a lot of Twitter talk about the power of listening close to the actual weekend schedule-- many who tuned in out of curiosity were surprised at how hooked they got on the collective experience of listening to the concert as it occurred-- more or less. 

But onto this book. Like any oral history, there are contradictory testimonies, often back to back. For me, that's part of the charm of this approach. I'd go further and say that the shifting, conflicting points of view shed light on the very nature of memory as well as history. Some of the most compelling passages deal with questions like security, stage construction and the role of Max Yasgur, the farmer who rented his fields to the organizers. Yasgur died of a heart attack just a few years after Woodstock, but so many of the Woodstock cast of characters (organizers like John Roberts, Yasgur's widow Miriam and others) paint a larger-than-life picture of the farmer-- a lifelong Republican who believed in free speech and expression. It's easy to find the iconic clip of Yasgur ascending the stage to talk to the crowd. After describing himself as "not a speaker," he spoke briefly but so eloquently from the concert stage about "three days of peace and music." This book describes not just that moment but what led up to it, and I was fascinated with the portrait of Yasgur that emerged in this book-- what it meant to so many to have a non-counterculture figure support the concert. 

I've misplaced my book but will add some of the most intriguing passages when I put my hand on it again. The cumulative effect of dozens of points of view conveys the symbolic power of the Woodstock moment and what it continues to mean to so many who were there and many who were not. I watched the PBS documentary which was visually appealing but did not cover as much ground as this does. For instance, that documentary covers the Hog Farm's "Please force" influence but never mentions the organizers' exhaustive efforts to secure guidance from an experienced police official in New York City (they found one! and it's incredibly interesting to follow the politics). The organizers were careful to interview police and assess who would know how to protect kids rather than persecute them. One of the many delightful anecdotes described here is that after hostile officials in the NY police force banned police from working the event, the organizers nevertheless enlisted and interviewed found a way to hire experienced officers. To protect the officers from reprisals by the force, they let it be known that they would accept pseudonyms (hiring dozens of cops called "Errol Flynn" and "Robin Hood" and paid the off duty cops in cash. It's one example of the astonishing mix of rule bending, good will, leaps of faith and reckless and savvy decisions that drove so much of this festival, making Woodstock succeed against all odds. 

Hard core fans can look into Rhino Records limited edition recording of the entire weekend (including announcements etc as described above)-- that's what WXPN broadcast. Think there are only 1969 copies! And also shorter "highlight" versions. I also like the concert film that came out quickly after the concert, and the three album set which includes several of the iconic announcements mixed in with a selection of performances. Treasure the copy I bought in high school.