Rating: 5/5

Rating: 5 / 5

I'm not sure why, but every time I re-read this book, for some reason I keep thinking that I won't like it, as Gordon's part of the story is...well, rather sad, or I get the impression that it'll be boring because it detracts from Lily's part of the story.

But in fact, neither of these two assumptions is true, for which I'm heartily glad.

Also, in retrospect, a LOT is set up in this book that becomes super important later on, such as the Golden Child and who the heck created such an evil thing, the hole-in-the-stone portals, and also the first mention of King Dragon and the Great Dragon War that we learn a lot about later! It really builds and adds on a lot to what started out as a smaller story in Lily Quench and the Dragon of Ashby.

All in all, no complaints and lots of love towards this book and this series.

Rating: 4.8 / 5

While the first book in this series progressed according to a fairly standard story with low-key risks and adventure, Prior's second installment into the Lily Quench series takes things much further in terms of plot development, world-building, and scale. The risks are higher, the characters facing more complex threats than before, and the climax extremely dramatic.

All this to keep in mind for a children's novel, of course, so I'm considering it that way.

In this book, we are immediately introduced to Gordon, the Black Count's son--which already sets things as being more risky and on a greater scale of things than in the first book. He and Lily share the novel as sort of co-protagonists, and this is partly because Lily's mission in this book is simple: to find a rare blue lily that is the essence of her family's Quenching Drops, used against dragons and/or all forms of metal. To find this flower, Lily must go into the Black Mountains, which is where the Black Count has his citadel.

For most of the book, it's one chase after another, a capture and a chase, a runaway and a chase, etc. But then, right at the very end, when Lily, Gordon, the Black Count, Queen Dragon, and more or less every other important character from the book is brought together in one location, what happens is dramatic and impactful, and definitely leaves room for a sequel. Not quite a cliffhanger, but definitely left me with some questions as a kid.

All in all, a great improvement on the first book, and overall an enjoyable read.