Rating: 3/5

Delightful is not a word that can be applied to this series. Appropriate words to describe these books would be depressing, discomfiting, distressing, and desperately important. These books are so good for young readers, because they are all about children being gaslit at every turn. Adults cannot be trusted to take care of the Baudelaire orphans, even when they are good hearted. A kind heart does not make a good listener or an active protector. Caring about someone does not empower an adult to act in that person's best interests. The world is not a simple place and adults will not always help, or even accept that there is a problem, not even when children really need them to. 

The lessons of these novels are always on point. The moral of the Boy Who Cried Wolf ought to be don't live in places where wolves run about freely because sometimes lying is useful. It is rational to fear a monster under your bed because there might very well be a monster under your bed. While it is easy to say that trying your best is important, when you are really in danger the most important thing is actually getting to safety. And my very favorite, "But like most impolite things, it is excusable under certain circumstances. Stealing is not excusable if, for instance, you are in a museum and you decide that a certain painting would look better in your house, and you simply grab the painting and take it there. But if you were very, very hungry, and you had no way of obtaining money, it might be excusable to grab the painting, take it to your house, and eat it." 

Obviously, I am also quite fond of the style and humor in these books. In particular I appreciate the vocabulary building that comes from using challenging words like Brobdingnagian-a word which here means gigantic- and then defining them immediately in the text so that low level readers can enjoy uninterrupted reading. Naturally, this trick might get tedious if overused, but it goes to the broader theme of Snicket, the storyteller as a character, and his personality. It's a very interesting technique. 

I highly recommend this series for children in search of good chapter books. Regarding this particular e-book collection of the first three novels, I would recommend it more for adults looking to catch up than for the target audience. Though the fact that my kindle only does black and white was not an issue, as only one of the bonus materials is in color.