Rating: 5/5

This is a masterful novel, the kind of work that reaches philosophical dimension without being one bit pretentious neither in ambition nor in execution. 
A story of personal growth, of the meandering paths a young man needs to take, getting astray, losing his way, only to find his own tracks again to walk towards a meaningful end. Because this is what this book is about: finding the meaning of life, the random patterns that compose the texture of happiness, of fulfillment. 

Philip Carey could be the protagonist of a Charles Dickens’ tale; insecure, with a club foot and orphaned at an early age, he is left under the care of his stingy uncle and becomes a rather shy but highly sensitive boy. Defying his uncle and escaping from his aspirations to follow his steps and become a rural parson, Philip flees first to Germany and then to Paris pursuing a career as a painter. Art in multiple forms is ever present in the novel, offering a counterpoint to the more mundane occupations that provide a salary to Philip, and presenting the reader with the eternal dilemma of choosing between unprofitable vocation and colorless profession. 
Nevertheless, the cornerstone of the novel revolves around the idea of desire and its dangerous tangent to obsession, presented almost in Proustian fashion. The irresistible and almost irrational bondage that Philip feels for an unremarkable waitress that brings him to total submission, close to self-destruction, serves to illustrate Maugham’s bigger picture; that of a human condition that makes little sense, of love that grows with suffering, of a life that allows degrading jobs, random sickness, cruel poverty, of women’s plights in a man’s world and the futility of aesthetics, of beauty, when hunger pierces body and soul.

Not only a coming of age story, “Of human bondage” combines the narrative clarity of a classic and the philosophical depth of a modern novel, shining with all the virtues of a rare work of art.
Beauty is to be found in ourselves, and Philip’s journey will finally reveal that happiness does not only exist in the abstract, it is within one’s reach, if only we are brave enough to grasp it, and hold it tight, no matter what. And I have to say that, after my own ramblings, Philip’s concept of happiness, and I wonder if also Maugham’s, is very close to my own.