I first read this book in 2004. I had chosen to read it because it was shortlisted for the Booker Prize, not because it was about Henry James. Thirteen years on, I rarely read books in the Booker shortlist but I'm definitely interested in Henry James so it was with a certain curiosity that I picked this book out of a box I was unpacking and opened up its yellow-tinged pages. 

In the years since my first reading, I'd always maintained in any discussion about Toibin's books that The Master was the best of his I'd read, partly because of a powerful scene that has remained vivid in my memory, and partly because his book seemed so much better than David Lodge's version of Henry James's life, Author, Author, which I read around the same time (again not because I was particularly interested in Henry James but because I was a fan of David Lodge (though I failed to finish a later book of his so I should probably now call myself an ex fan)).

Tóibín chose the year 1895 as his starting point for this fictionalised account of the Master's life. James was fifty-three at the time, and living more or less permanently in England. Tóibín describes the next four years in great detail, and while the the book is mostly concerned with those years, Tóibín also roams back in time to what he clearly regards as significant moments in his subject's experience. He doesn't project forward however even though James lived on until 1916, and wrote what I think of as his best work during that later period: The Wings of the Dove, 1902, The Ambassadors, 1903, and The Golden Bowl, 1904. I'm conscious now of a certain relief that Tóibín didn't visit those years in James's life.

If I'm giving the impression that I liked Tóibín's fictionalised biography less second time round, that is only partly true. The book is sprinkled with excellent paragraphs and it's clear that Tóibín has done a lot of research, some of which I was grateful to discover. 1895 to 1898 was the period when James wrote What Maisie Knew, and as I'd just finished reading that book when I picked up this one, finding out what inspired it was interesting. Tóibín describes a house party James attended in 1895 where he came across a little girl who seemed to be exposed by her neglectful mother to all sorts of adult occupations and preoccupations. The detailed descriptions Tóibín gives of this episode recall certain scenes from The Turn of the Screw which James wrote around the same time as the Maisie book. Since I found those two books quite different from the rest of James's work, and since I was curious about why he picked those themes, Tóibín's scenarios helped to satisfy my curiosity. They also underline what seems to be one of the main rationales of Tóibín's project: searching for exact parallels between James's life and his books. As I read, I found myself wondering if James would have appreciated such a close investigation of his motivations and inspirations. And apart from my curiosity about the oddity that is What Maisie Knew, I'm not very interested in knowing who or what inspired this or that aspect of James's work. 

I'm also less interested than I expected to be in the details of his life, who he might have loved, who he might have regretted not loving enough. If he told no one while he was alive, if he carefully edited his letters and papers, and destroyed many of them, it is surely because he wished to guard his privacy. Tóibín frequently stresses James's desire for privacy yet he tries to uncover his innermost feelings at every turn. Take the following episode, for example, in which his friends tried to reserve holiday accommodation for James although he'd indicated he hadn't yet made up his mind to travel and would in any case make his own arrangements:
Slowly, in the weeks after he received the news that she and Mrs Curtis had been searching for an apartment on his behalf, he felt a powerlessness that he had not felt since he was a child. 
When I read a sentence like that, I find myself exclaiming, How can you possibly know the strength of his feelings or what they even were in the first place! And why give such banal arrangements so much consequence? I exclaimed more and more frequently as I read on. Here, for instance:
In the months that followed neither William nor Henry ever mentioned the name Gus Barker to each other. Each of them felt, Henry guessed, a guilt that they did not wish to admit to, or discuss.
So Tóibín is guessing at what Henry James might have been guessing about what he himself might have felt. Such pointless speculation really irks me. And the repetitions of 'he felt' and 'he thought' ruin some otherwise good passages, as for example: 
She came from a distinguished family of alluders, he thought; her mother and her aunt and her uncle the novelist usually succeeded in breaking silence on most matters and did not have many unspoken thoughts. The raised eyebrow and the pointed remark ran in the family, he thought...
That passage is otherwise so very like James's writing that it could be directly out of one of his novels. There were other passages that reminded me of James's turns of phrase: 
Her manners too were brilliant...It was as though a thunder and lightening storm of the happiest kind had arrived by carriage at Lamb House in plenty of time for lunch and was playing itself out cheerfully in the drawing room.
In the Afterword, I found this statement from Tóibín: I wish to acknowledge that I have peppered the text with phrases and sentences from the writings of Henry James and his family. It would have been nice if those pepperings had been in italics or otherwise signaled but of course that would interfere with the notion that this is a fiction. I asked myself as I read through the book if there was perhaps another way to fictionalise this 'life'. Tóibín doesn't give us all of James's thoughts so why give us any? Why not take example from the Master himself - I can think of several characters in his books whose thoughts are never revealed. The characters move about, they speak, they act, but they remain essentially private. I would have liked more of that privacy for Henry James.
……………………………
 So not only have I become an ex fan of David Lodge, I also seem to have become an ex fan of Colm Tóibín. However, the vivid scene that had stayed in my mind from the first time I read this book was still as good as I remembered it. So not quite an ex fan - more like a vexed fan.