Rating: 3/5

A gift from a friend. This book had a Christmas sentimentality in it, but it also had sweetness. Each chapter was its own short story with a different author. Part of the reason it didn't hold a higher rating for me was that I'd read many of these stories before: Dina Donohue's "Trouble at the Inn," Howard Schade's "The Gold and Ivory Tablecloth," O'Henry's "The Gift of the Magi," and Wendy Miller's "Charlie's Blanket." In particular, I've read O'Henry's contribution several times before, most recently in a collection of O'Henry's writings.

I did enjoy Bess Aldrich's "Star Across the Tracks," David Grayson's "A Day of Pleasant Bread," and Joe Wheeler's "The Belle of Christmas," among others.

On contentment, I liked this quote from Temple Bailey's "The Candle in the Forest":

"Why don't we have ...?"
"Because we are content... It is making the best of what God gives us."
 
"Everything with you has a happy ending." I wish I could have that attitude. It made me smile.

I liked the joie de vivre in David Grayson's "A Day of Pleasant Bread," and this quote:

"It seemed certain to me that something unusual and adventurous was about to happen - and if it did not happen offhand, why, I was there to make it happen."

I loved that quote so much that it was still ringing in my head hours later when my husband, at the steering wheel, asked me, "Wanna go on an adventure?" before veering off onto an unknown road to chase Christmas lights.

On anticipation, I also liked David Grayson's quote, "You have comforted my mind with the joys of anticipation." I love that, because, of course, anticipation does bring its own set of joys, and perhaps, even comfort.

I'd consider reading some of his other works, "Adventures in Contentment" or "Adventures in Friendship," I liked David Grayson's work in this collection so much. 

The surprise ending of Joe Wheeler's "The Belle of Christmas Eve" got me with whom his protagonist was. I don't want to give it away, but I've read one of her works earlier this year: "A Long Fatal Love Chase." That's not one of the ones for which she's well known, but it ought to remind me if and when I'm looking back on this review.

"One of the greatest tragedies of our time is the shattering of the family unit; without it, no nation has flourished long on the planet." - Joe Wheeler, in the intro. Interesting assessment, no backing research, but it wouldn't surprise me. I have heard before of the status of the United States, in decline, has been compared to that of the Roman Empire's decline during its moral quagmire. But to claim that NO nation has succeeded without viable family units goes even further.

"Unquestionably, the golden age of Christmas stories occurred during the first third of this century [now the last century]; actually, it began in the 1890's and receded in the forties. Clearly, this was a period of spiritual renewal in America ... and, not surprisingly, it parallels the Social Gospel Period. This was born with Charles Sheldon's 'In His Steps,' in 1898 ... these authors held a deep conviction that the essence of Christianity is not sterile doctrine, but the application of Biblical principles into a caring relationship with all those with whom we come into contact on a daily basis." - Joe Wheeler, in the intro.

That quote makes me sad on number of levels. I have read and enjoyed Charles Sheldon's 'In His Steps,' and I think it has some valid, essential points about trying to live our our faith, or, as summarized later, asking ourselves, "What would Jesus do?" But it makes me sad to link that book to the Social Gospel, which later lost all semblance of hope and truth, all knowledge of what is good about our God, in favor of just doing the right thing. While doing the right thing is important, there's something profoundly sad about a movement that forgot what Jesus has done for us, in sacrificing Himself to save us from our sins. There has to be both right action and clear understanding of Jesus, not just one or the other. I didn't know that Sheldon's work had been tied to the Social Gospel, which came later, and went far afield from what he'd said. 

The Social Gospel was so-called because it replaced God's gospel, that is, the gospel of the Bible, with the good, positive help and interactions of other human beings, social aid, or humanitarianism or social gospel. It was a social good news, not the good news of Jesus coming to save us. "For God so loved the world that He gave His one and only Son that whoever believes in Him will not perish but have eternal life." - John 3:16. But, as I said, it should be both. Gentle, real compassion as well as understanding what Jesus did for us and loving Him for it.

For example, this kind of thinking could be seen in Paula McDonald's "The Last Straw," in this collection. The meaning of Christmas is NOT our kindnesses to one another, although our gratitude to God and to each other should spark that. The meaning of Christmas is that Jesus came as a baby to earth, to die. Hebrews 10:8-10: "First he said, "Sacrifices and offerings, burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not desire, nor were you pleased with them" (although the law required them to be made). Then he said, "Here I am, I have come to do your will." He sets aside the first to establish the second. And by that will, we have been made holy through the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ once for all."

The meaning of Christmas is not the gifts we give each other, although that makes it sweeter. The meaning of Christmas is the Gift that God gave us.