Rating: 3/5

i remember kind of liking this book.
there were some good things and i liked how the girl ran away and he tracked her down.
it was also a sweet gesture that he cut his hair,but i totally hated that he cut it!
there were some serious problems in here,though.
like the fact that he could never get with her because he was the last of his line and had to get with sum1 who was a native american also. &amp;yet he was dating this bimbo.&amp; u just knew they were sleeping 2gether. ugh! so why did he nvr get w/the main girl b4? 
of course u dont rlly like situations where it seems there isnt a way out of,but ur always excited to c how it will end.but i was disappointed w/the way this book ended so..perfectly.
like it turned out he dint need2 worry about securing the line or w/e so he could get w/her in the end.it just happened to perfectly.i kind of wanted the guy to say idc about the line,i wanna be w/ her no matter wut.but alas,it didnt happen.
-review after reading it for the 3rd time-warning-its kind of long.
“he steered clear of white women.” apparently not. because you got close to Audrey &amp;have dated several others like her.
“she would never be beautiful.” wow, that's nice.
Her flirty teasing is a little much.
They made it so obvious something was going on between leta and matt.idr it happening that way, or so soon.
“the silence in the car was pregnant.” couldn't you have used a better word there?
I kind of wished she would have stayed at Colby’s apartment that night after the party. 
I don’t like the dated feel to the book. They say things like “cellular phones" and "prophylactics." 
“at least one of them should have worn something high-necked, she mused, with her collarbone and skinny neck so prominent.” That was just mean, and I’m personally offended. Are skinny people supposed to wear turtle-neck sweaters 24-7?
I like how Cecily gets digs in at the guy when shes mad, but I hated how at the festival, she just starts talking normal to him about his mom. You should have given him the cold shoulder. 
“all audrey’s charms hadn’t been able to erase the memory of cecily’s wounded, accusing eyes.” how can u say something like that, and then not have slept with her?
If Audrey is bashing the res, why are you still with her??
why didn't anyone realize before that tate looked like matt?
‘He looked down at Audrey. “I’m not ready to cash in my chips yet.”’ WTF! &amp;we nvr heard that he did that to make Cecily jealous.
I find it hard to believe that a strong man, a CIA agent like Tate would confide in some stupid blonde about cecily’s education. Wth was he thinking?! And why is a guy like him letting himself be led around by Audrey?
Did he seriously not know she was 25?? He was off by 5 years!
Some things are better the first time reading it. when she tells tate sex without love is just sex, it had so much more impact the first time around. so was tate going after Cecily in Tennessee. I also wished her and tate would have drawn out their “relationship” to make tate more jealous. Because it hardly lasted in here. And why would matt be the one to tell tate she would never let anyone touch her but him. how does he know she’s never been with a guy before??
So then tate somehow knows that she lied about getting with Colby, and then goes to his moms house and just sleeps with her. She, of course, lets tate do whatever he wants, whether hes with someone or not. Everything is happened way too soon in here!
Sometimes I felt that Cecily could be a tad self-absorbed. Colby would be talking about serious stuff, and she would either change the subject, or make light of the situation instead of sympathizing and really talking things out with him. 
It annoyed me when I thought she was going to just go to the dance with him because he said so-which wouldn’t have been surprising, because she goes along with whatever tate wants-but then I was disappointed when they didn’t go. I wish the author would have wrote more of reservation life and the dances they do there. For a book about native americans, she sure didn’t include much about their culture.
“wasn’t intimately involved with her.” how did I not remember that?? every time I thought of this book, I would be upset because I thought he slept with Audrey.
Their kiss happened way too soon. &amp;hes still with Audrey!
I had no idea the secret was out so soon about tates dad.
Did he seriously not know Cecily loved him?
“he was aroused &amp;she knew. He’d let her know, for the 1st time.” What about in the chair at his moms house?
Everyone has been married &amp;their spouse has died or is out of the picture. Matt, leta, Colby, and Audrey.
“I’m supposed to try to seduce you, not the reverse.” Pathetic.
How could she think he’d bought her a ring?! 
After leta gave her the advice to stick to her guns and resist tate, im surprised she didn’t listen to it. then again, I think she’s always desperately wanted tate’s kid. You don’t go and lie about taking the morning after pill when you have no intention of doing so! She’s like those girls who traps the guy into marrying them.
I really hate that they never even had a relationship and then just had sex and immediately got pregnant. A baby doesn’t solve things, and it doesn’t mean happily ever after. I hate when characters don’t have time for themselves before they have kids. 
&amp;how did leta suddenly know that Cecily knew about matt and her? I mean, she could have just been saying “sometimes the rewards are worth the price.” How did she know there was a hidden meaning?
When Cecily finally thought to bring Audrey up, tate says he hasn’t seen her a while. Not-I broke up with her and laid into her about telling you my secret and looking down on the culture im so proud of. 
Its kind of messed up that tate didn’t want to touch her until he knew Colby had slept with her. 
Does someone really feel how Maureen did? She didn’t mind knowing that Colby had a little apache in him, but when she found out he was full-blooded, or close, she left him. who does that??
I don’t understand why tate wont give Audrey the slip. Matt says ‘“in case you don’t recognize that attitude, you might ask your friend Audrey why she wont go out there with you. Or are you afraid of the answer?” tate stiffened and his eyes glittered at the older man. His fists balled at his lean hips. “go to hell.”’
he acted like he really liked her.
I hate how, when she finally decided to move on, and was basically turning him down, he decides he finally wants her. And right before it, he adamantly stated that he didn’t want kids with a white woman. So right after, he’s like don’t take the pill. Someone had a real quick change of heart. 
He acted like sex was an experiment, basically to see if she still had fears about men. “let’s get rid of the ghosts. If you can get past the fear, I wont have anyone else from now on except you.” What if she hadn’t gotten over her fears? Would you go out and get with everyone?
Stop lying to tate! This is serious stuff here. How are we supposed to like the main character when shes acting like an idiot?
“he wouldn’t marry her because there weren’t going to be any children; not any that he knew about, she amended.” How can you keep him from knowing about a child? 
“im cultured, im talented, im quite beautiful, and I’d be willing to do anything you liked in bed.” who talks about themselves like that?
“gloriously beautiful.” Who talks like that?
His mom saying “put on the heat” is so wrong. That whole convo. was too personal!
She says she wont tell lea &amp;then tells leta with hardly any provocation what matt told her. 
Colby tells tom he wont tell Cecily &amp;then does. Are you in the CIA or not?! And can no one keep a secret?
All of a sudden tate feels a connection to matt. 
Since when does Cecily have waist-length hair??
She always keeps it up, in a bun for goodness sakes, and only lets it down before bed. Who does that? And you sound like an old lady. 
If he was with Audrey &amp;she was with Colby, why did he keep kissing her &amp;why did she let him? that’s so irritating!
The explanation points in here are seriously annoying. As are the periods. “flowing….!”
“was…the…explosion!”
“Never…”
“except the…pleasure!”
“I wont cling. I’m not the type.” But you will throw yourself repeatedly at a guy.
She made it sound like she only slept with him to see if she could. &amp;he wasn’t even offended. 
“adopted mama.” Mom would have sounded so much better there.
“feast of the senses.” Gagggg.
Why would you go out to lunch when you think he’s back with Audrey? &amp;why would you give the silent treatment just to blurt out what Audrey told you? Way to make a stand. 
Why are we just now finding out leta’s whole name? “Leta Warwoman Winthrop.”
All of a sudden, tate mentions that he had known that him and matt resembled each other. How have we not heard from anyone that they noticed similarities?!
&amp;I thought matt was going to try to make it easy on leta and not lay the blame on her to tate. But he leaves saying, “I could have spared you, and her, if I’d only known the truth!”
Why would you just let him have sex with you just because he needed comfort? That’s like letting him use you.
She thinks him and Audrey are living together, so she just lets him have sex with her. 
Sometimes the author will say that something hurt the characters, without explaining how exactly it hurt them. like this-‘“&amp;that’s why after 8 years, Cecily has had one raging affair after the other,” he said facetiously. The words had power. They wounded.’ 
Why would they wound tate when he knows she’s never slept with anyone? He only thinks shes slept with Colby recently. 
DUMP AUDREY, for goodness sakes! You mean to tell me you so desperate for company at the wedding that you invited the devil to go with you, even knowing how scheming and evil she is. 
the cutting the hair thing was so incredibly sweet, and an interesting part of N.A. culture. But I hatedddd that he did it! especially when Cecily isn’t exactly worthy enough. 
I remember reading this the first time and wondering how it was all gunna play out. would he finally decide Cecily was worth more than his cultural beliefs? I found it a tad too convenient that he ended up not being full-blood Lakota. It ended too nicely. It would have been more sweet had he been full-blooded and decided that he’d be with her anyway. 
I forgot Cecily cut her, too. I hate that!
Its kind of weird and creepy to have matts…sweet spot, or w/e u wanna call, it the same as tates.
Matt&amp;leta married so suddenly. And I don’t see her wanting to leave the reservation. 
Colby wanted her, and now this random Mr. Johnson does. I thought she wasn't pretty. and that mr. Johnson comment didn't need to be in there. it was so random.
The ‘new assailant’ is beating up your attacker, so why would you think he was gunna harm you?! Didn’t you think it was someone helping you?
He wasn’t full-blooded, even if matt wasn’t his real dad. WTH! I did not remember that, and I cant believe hes been lying to everyone about it.
“she was so intensely preoccupied that she hardly realized what he was doing until she was standing equally nude before him.” who doesn’t realize they’re being undressed? And he must have done so remarkably fast. 
“his own heir who lay under cecily’s heart.” The baby isn’t under your heart.
The ending was so drawn out. I took my time reading this book, and didn’t rush through it, and I got tired of reading it towards the end. They kept beating subjects to death towards the end and it was a little too chatty for me. they’d mention something serious that had really hurt them, then they’d be fine and joking after, only to mention something serious again. get over it!!!
the book kind of contradicted itself at some parts. tate would think Cecily was a virgin, then not. he kept bouncing back to that. it was irritating. 
it started out pretty good and then slowly went downhill. in the end, I was just over it. and I hated how the characters changed. Cecily turned into a psychotic woman who only wanted a baby at any cost, and literally lied to get one. 
Why is there a horse on the cover? There wasn’t one horse in the book!
If leta was so mad and bitter over the past when matt called her, why would she suddenly agree to marry him? you haven’t talked in over 30 years.
“we both know I’d crawl to you over broken glass to do anything you liked.” Pathetic!
Why would leta ask if she looked okay if it was just Colby coming to dinner?
Tate’s age was never mentioned outright. The only way I knew was the “thirty-six year old secret” that lasted his whole life. So im assuming he’s 36. Which is quite a big older than 25 year old Cecily. 
Some things in here don’t make sense. Like this-‘”wheres your sense of adventure?”
“hanging in the shower trying to dry out.”’
Its so weird that one of his guys looking after Cecily just dropped dead of a heart attack. I thought that man would turn out to be alive and actually a bad guy who would go after Cecily. 
When did Colby punch pierce?
And I wanted to hear more about pierce and his wife.
“I love you more than my life.” 
In the end, it’s like she didn’t even care about matt &amp;leta. She was okay with leaving and never seeing them again. and when tate said they were already buying things for the baby, shes like “all our baby needs is us.” She’s already an annoying mother. 
In the end, tate said he never got an apology for the crab bisque, but Cecily had already apologized for it. cause that’s when he said the area it landed on wasn’t affected. 
Married in a suit with a hat and short veil. Wth! Are you 70 years old?
The author is clearly writing about someone like herself. Big thick glasses. Need I say more?
What does a bandaged wrist have to do with wearing contacts?
How did he not get the phone call saying she didn’t start the story. That was never addressed. Did Audrey delete the message? 
Convenient that Audrey is a drug addict. Were we supposed to feel sorry for her? She didn’t get the ending she deserved.
Tate changed in the end, suddenly mischievous and joking. 
I liked the fact that Cecily was an anthropologist, but if she dropped out of college, how did have her degree?
decided to change my rating from 2 stars to 3. parts of it were good, others-not so much.