Rating: 5/5

Robert Remini is best known for his exhaustive trilogy on Andrew Jackson, turns his attention to Jackson's chief rival and longtime antagonist, Henry Clay. While I liked Remini's volumes on Jackson, I found some flaws in his overall portrayal of Jackson, and considered him to be somewhat too sympathetic at times towards his subject. Thus I was wondering if his effort on Clay would be similar. To my pleasant surprise, this was an outstanding biography of a political titan in he first half of the nineteenth century.

Aside from Jackson, three other men dominated the American political scene from the War of 1812 up to the early 1805s: Clay, Daniel Webster, and John C. Calhoun. Of those three, Clay seemed at the time - and seems to me now - to be a slight step ahead of the other two. He was a statesman of the first order, yet simultaneously partisan, petty, and blinded ambition. Clay was immensely talented at legislating, as evident when, on his first day in Congress in 1811, he was elected Speaker of the House. Imagine that happening today. As Remini writes on page 84: "...Henry Clay seemed to know instinctively the time-honored aphorism that the purpose of politics is power, that the purpose of power is to govern, and that the purpose of governing is to advance the welfare of the nation, even at the risk of sometimes supporting unpopular positions." Obviously, when surveying the today's members of Congress, that philosophy is sorely missing. 

When Clay was young, he was a "War Hawk" and pressured President James Madison into declaring war on Great Britain. Clay, as Speaker, immediately established his presence as someone to reckon with, and seemed to wield more power than Madison and his successor James Monroe did. But despite his hawkishness about the war, Clay become much more well-known for his decades-long advocacy of internal improvements - which ultimately came to be called the "American System". Clay was identified with this proposed policy, which consisted of building roads and bridges to help facilitate the rapid westward expansion of the young nation, as well as a protective tariff to help bring in revenues for the government to fund these improvements. Clay wanted the federal government to have the power to regulate commerce. Unfortunately for him, despite his decades of public service, he never realized his goals and the American System was never implemented. 

If Clay was so influential and powerful, then why did he fail at seeing his pet project carried to fruition? Primarily it is because Clay spent almost his entire Congressional career in the minority, in opposition. Both Madison and Monroe held strict constructionist views of the Constitution and what they deemed permissible under it. When Clay had four years in power as Secretary of State under John Quincy Adams, he had no control over Congress due to the circumstances surrounding the "Corrupt Bargain" of 1825. When he moved to the Senate in 1831, Jackson was President, and he hated Clay with a passion (that hatred was returned in pretty good measure). After Jackson, Martin Van Buren came into office, and even though he and Clay got along quite well personally, they were opposed politically as Van Buren was a Jacksonite. Throughout the 1830s, the remnants of the National Republican Party morphed into the Whig Party, with Clay as its de facto head. He lost the 1832 election to Jackson in a blowout. When the Whigs finally won the Presidency in 1840, Clay was not the nominee, and the Whig President, William Henry Harrison, died after just one month in office. His Vice President, John Tyler, took over. Tyler was a former Democrat, and never really was a Whig. He and Clay clashed immediately and Tyler stymied almost everything that Clay wanted to do. Then the Presidency shifted back to Democratic hands with James K. Polk. The only other Whig to be elected President, Zachary Taylor, was not close with Clay and he thus had very little influence in his administration. By the time Taylor died and Millard Fillmore took over, Clay was too sick and old and too worried about the Union breaking up to be able to focus on his American System. In this sense, Clay was ahead of his time as, with hindsight, we can see that transportation improvements were key to the development and prosperity of the country. 

Clay essentially ran for President for almost thirty years. He wanted the office in 1820 but could not go against the incumbent Monroe. But he did try in 1824 in a four-way race between he, Adams, Jackson, and William Crawford. While none of the candidates garnered a majority of the electoral votes, Clay finished last and was thus eliminated from consideration by the House of Representatives. However, Clay had enormous influence over several state delegations, and he used that influence to obtain for himself the next best position to the Presidency: Secretary of State. While there is no written record of it, in essence Clay had an understanding with Adams that, if Clay supported Adams in the House and was able to deliver the necessary votes to put him over the top, then Adams would in turn appoint Clay as Secretary of State. At that time, becoming Secretary of State was viewed as the best step that one could take towards the presidency. Thomas Jefferson, Madison, Monroe and Adams himself all used that position as a springboard into the White House. Remini does not charge Clay with consuming the "Corrupt Bargain". Remini primarily bases that on the absence of any specific evidence showcasing that there was an explicit arrangement between he and Adams. But it seemed obvious to most people at the time, and it seems obvious now. Remini does astutely point out that Clay already didn't like Jackson, and that he couldn't support Crawford because the latter had suffered a debilitating stroke the year before. Plus, of the three men left, Adams was closest to Clay politically. Either way, whether there was a corrupt bargain or not, Clay made a huge mistake, one that would hound him for the rest of his life and contribute to the denial of his ultimate goal. 

It is ironic too that, in making the decision to come into Adams' Cabinet, Clay not only severely tarnished his future political prospects, he also had a disastrous and ineffectual term at the State Department. Adams was a highly intelligent individual who had attained several high appointments, but he was an ineffectual President. Both he and Clay were also hobbled by the Corrupt Bargain charge, and Congress went into full opposition mode. Anything that Clay wanted to do, such as help recognize the burgeoning South American republics, was stymied by a hostile Congress. He was ill for much of his time in that post, and accomplished very little. Clay later said that it was the single biggest political mistake that he made.

Throughout most of the 1830s Clay repeatedly clashed with Jackson, with one of the sticking points being the rechartering of the Bank of the United States. Clay spent most of this decade fighting losing battles with Jackson over pretty much everything: the Bank, internal improvements, Indian relocation. Clay didn't stop hankering for the Presidency, so much so that he blinded himself to Jackson's popularity and actually thought that he could beat him in 1832. He tried for the Whig nomination in 1836, and really tried in 1840 and thought he had it wrapped up, but internal Whig political factions defeated him. That was unfortunate too because basically whoever got that nomination was almost sure to defeat Van Buren due to the poor economic conditions at the time. 
Clay managed to get the nomination in 1844 and once again thought that he would win, dismissing Polk as a political second-rater. While that probably was true, Polk narrowly defeated him. Why?Clay was frequently his own worse enemy: as Remini writes on page 159: "He never seemed to know when to keep his mouth shut and simply walk away from the controversy he had provoked." And that doomed his election prospects in 1844 due to his attempt to straddle the Texas annexation issue that had the country in turmoil. This was something that Remini showed numerous examples of - Clay consistently trying to keep both the North and the South happy. 

Remini also zeroes in on why Clay was a three time loser in presidential elections. On page 669 he writes: "The first two times he ran against an impossible hero, a man of towering popularity. But how could he lose a third time? And against a relative unknown and one widely believed to be third-rate? In large measure the fault was his own.... Many Americans loved him, of course, but many more distrusted him. He always appeared cocky and overconfident, as though he were doing the people a favor by running for office.... Clay seemed disappointed in the American people because they failed to appreciate his great sacrifices on their behalf.... He invariably behaved as though he knew what was best for the American people, whether they agreed or not. This condescension, this superior tone, this arrogance seemed to suggest a basic mistrust of the people's capacity for self-government." 

Despite being a Virginian by birth, Clay had moved to Kentucky as a young man and established his power base there. Therefore, more than a Southern man, he was a man of the West. And being in a border state, Clay's demeanor and his politics reflected his central location. He was against slavery, yet he owned slaves. He was for Western expansionism, yet wanted it kept in check by tamping down on the ardent desires of both the abolitionists in the North and the fire-breathers of slavery in the South. On sectional issues, Clay tried to have nuanced positions and give something to each side. The end result of this political philosophy is that he pleased almost no one while angering both sides. 

Remini really hits the nail on the head when writing about Clay's relationship with slavery. He condemns him for being a hypocrite, while also acknowledging that he genuinely wanted the practice to end, that he abhorred it, and that he truly thought that it would eventually die out. Misguided as he was, Clay appeared as a voice of moderation in comparison to someone like Calhoun. But make no mistake about it - Clay was a racist. He believed that blacks were inferior to whites, and that Indians were savages. Are these views disgusting? Yes. Were they also widely held during Clay's lifetime? Yes. On page 619 Remini writes: "The implied and overt racist opinions by Clay... unfortunately reflected the beliefs of most Americans in the nineteenth century. Repugnant as they are today, they represented the considered view not only of slaveowners but of many northerners as well, including many abolitionists. American statesmen, like Clay and Jefferson and Madison, professed a belief in equality and eventual abolition but not at the expense of the white race and not if it endangered the Union." 

Clay's personal life is not neglected here at all. Remini examines Clay's long marriage to his wife Lucretia, how Clay wrote to her constantly but she never wrote him. At all. That struck me as really odd. And this is not a case of someone burning her letters; Clay told others that she didn't respond to his letters. And Clay was constantly writing to her and others because he was always on the go. Clay traveled. A lot. From his time in Ghent as a peace commissioner in 1814-1815 to a trip to Cuba in 1851, a year before he died, Clay never seemed to stay in one place for long. In an age where railroads either did not yet exist or just started coming around, Clay went all over the country. Consequently he spent a lot of time away from his Kentucky estate, Ashland. Perhaps one reason for this is because the grim reaper seemed to hover over Clay. While he and Lucretia had many children, most of them did not survive him. For example, all six daughters pre-deceased him. His favorite son, Henry Jr., died in the Mexican War. Several of his grandchildren also died. Honestly it seemed like someone was always dying whom Clay cared deeply for. 

Remini is in top form throughout the book. He provides plenty of context to help understand Clay's world, while not getting bogged down in it. He makes pithy observations, such as referring to James Buchanan as an "incompetent booby" (page 475). His analysis is spot-on, and his view of Clay - while clearly admiring from a talent and dedication to the Union perspective - does not excuse away any of his less admirable behavior. He respects Clay but does not idolize him. Remini left me recognizing that Clay did a great many things for this country (the Missouri Compromise, the compromise on the tariff in 1833, and the Compromise of 1850 being three prime examples) while simultaneously not wondering why Clay never became President. Despite being almost 800 pages (footnotes were included on the bottom of all pages) I did not at any time feel that the book was too long. In fact, I am sorry it ended. A masterful portrait of an influential American.