Rating: 2/5

I decided to give this book two stars instead of one because as a novel about wolves it is something. That being said, aside from the fact the that characters were wolves, The Sight didn't have anything going for it.

First of all the dialogue had issues. I am definitely not a fan of the characters using each-others names in each line of speech, especially when only two characters are talking!

Also Clement-Davies did not do enough research about wolves. Every time he had one of the wolves 'soaked in sweat' I wanted to throw the book across the room! Wolves can't sweat, instead, like dogs they pant to release excess body heat. The only sweating they can do is through the pads on their paws.

The overall style of the book made reading very cumbersome and slow. I found myself focusing more on the way the book was written instead of what it was trying to say. I came across multiple typos, including one of Morgra's name being spelled Mogra and the line 'Larka's eyes opened as she stared back.', What was the author's intent here? That her eyes widened? Actually, I got the feeling that The Sight was originally written in a different language than English and translated, which would explain the jumbled writing style, but no.

As for the plot, I can't help but compare 'The Sight' to 'Watership Down' and I find Clement-Davies book extremely lacking. There's so much he could have done. I would have far more enjoyed the story of the every wolf trying to survive. Not the chosen one, not the chosen family pack, just a average run of the mill wolf. It didn't have to be grand and spectacular. The wolves' legends were also copy paste from Christianity with an extra deity and extremely distracting. of course the author chose it that way so that he could ram home his belief in evolution.

Why in all these books about animals must the end moral be against man? One of those, only-you-can-prevent-the-down-fall-of-planet-earth, lessons. We hear that in every single book. I am tried of it! Having characters lament global warming doesn't make me want to recycle and reuse. It makes me want to throw the book across the room!

I wish there were more animal centric stories that didn't involve man. Just cut him out all together, or give him a very minor part -That doesn't make the balance of the earth hang in his hands- I read books with animal characters to read about animals, not humans, not global warming, just animals.