Rating: 4/5

Two books away from finishing Dostoevsky's canon, Idiot and Demons, leaving the latter for the summation as I've heard it's his most challenging.

Dostoevsky is my favorite novelist although as a stylist, he's subpar. Where subpar, is a relative term of course depending on what academia deems the most current fad of style is.

My theory on Dostoevsky is that in the 2000 years of human existence, he is the only author who can genuinely connect the mind to literature. This is apparent in his style. Similar to Flowers for Algernon, the mental state of the author will of course change syntax, grammar, etc. Clearly, a high-minded intellectual will write better(subjective) than a retarded person. 

Dostoevsky's style is a frantic, dream state of writing that transfers all the anxieties and worries of the protagonist into the reader's mind. In fact, just a Google search will give accounts of people who after reading Crime and Punishment go into a week-long bout of sickness. 

So, reading this book alongside his biography, it's a very interesting account of someone who is clearly writing to portray the demons inside of his mind. What you see is the hypersensitivity of emotion. You can truly feel the author's own angst and anxiety bleeding through each page. Dosto was constantly attacked with epilepsy leaving him in bed for weeks. This epilepsy only occurred after his mock execution.

Most evident, is Dostoevsky's theme of hallucinations. In all of his major novels, a major character will undergo a regression where in his final state before suicide or death, he will begin to perceive demonic hallucinations. Ivan Karamazov, in his final monologue before death, professes his angst to the devil who he believes is sitting on a couch across the room. We know today that these symptoms are those of schizophrenic and manic depressives. Dostoevsky was ahead of the curve in psychology.

If you want a way to non-ironically access the deep recesses of your mind and memory, then Dostoevsky is the way to go.

“It is clear to me now that, owing to my unbounded vanity and to the high standard I set for myself, I often looked at myself with furious discontent, which verged on loathing, and so I inwardly attributed the same feeling to everyone.”