Rating: 3/5

This is Dryden’s fourth book and his first novel, a book he said he wrote to better understand some of the constituents he represented following his appointment as The Youth Commissioner of Ontario. Dryden wanted to better understand the people he was acting for and set out to try and understand the average Canadian man, his thoughts, his dreams and his hopes. He wanted to know how they spent their time and what really mattered to them. So he spent a week living with a man and his family and crafted the fictional biographical character of Frank Bloye, a man who came to reflect what Dryden discovered during his research. 

Frank is forty-three years old, has been married for twenty years and has three children. He is a Catholic, is of Irish descent and lives in Scarborough Ontario. He works as a customer service representative for Imperial Oil, nine to five, five days a week, Monday to Friday. 

There is nothing outstanding about Frank’s life. He has no special achievements nor has he experienced any devastating tragedies. He is pretty much like most of us, trying to make a life for himself and his family. He pays his bills, watches TV, putters in the garden and does the usual minor repairs to his home. He seldom goes to the movies and is not much interested in politics. The milestones in his life are far from unique. He is simply “everyman”, a reflection of ourselves. 

Frank was the second youngest child in a large family and growing up he had a sense of isolation and a depression that occasionally still haunts him. His father was always working, so Frank wants to be sure he is there for his family in a way his own father was not. And so he leaves work at the end of each day without pondering the intricacies of a proposed merger. He’ll leave that to the managers and his company’s employers. He leaves concerns about the recession to the politicians and worries more about the strains on his own personal household budget. His attentions are fixed on issues in his own personal world, his house, his backyard and the needs of his family, especially his eldest daughter who is dyslexic and needs special education classes. 

Dryden’s narrative moves back and forth between the first and third person and often lacks quotation marks, so it is difficult at times to know who is really speaking. Whose opinions or interpretations are these? Are they Frank’s, or Dryden’s? A tighter edit might have helped here.

Interestingly Dryden has chosen a white, middle class, heterosexual living in southern Ontario for this portrayal of his “everyman”. Even taking into account the publishing date, the reader might question whether this portrait truly represents the realities of a middle–age, middle-class Canadian. But Dryden still deserves our kudos for his attempt to better understand those he represented. What political appointee has taken the time and energy to do that recently? It provides an interesting read.