Rating: 3/5

Summary: King’s Blood Four has an interesting setting and magic system, but suffers from a meandering plot and a somewhat dull protagonist. It’s a fun read, but doesn’t follow much up on its ideas.

Recommended for fans of classic fantasy

Not recommended for those who dislike young protagonists

Recommended for those looking for a magic system that informs the setting

Not recommended for those looking for a deeper story

Oh boy, what a cover this book has. King’s Blood Four is the tale of a fifteen year old names Peter, at a school to learn about the True Game. When he is manipulated and used as a pawn against the King by his older, supposed friend Mandor, he is sent away from the school to learn elsewhere.

The setting is a somewhat unique one, where the rules are all that matters, and you’re either a player, or a pawn. The players have abilities, and are given titles based upon what abilities they hold – Demons can read minds, Armigers can fly, Princes can beguile others, and a plethora more combine different abilities albeit in weaker form than those that just have the one. Then there are the rules, which seem to be terms of conflict codified for the entire world. There are many things that are forbidden (but people often do them anyway).

It’s an interesting world to explore, and Tepper does touch upon the power disparity between those who have abilities, and the Pawns (regular powerless people) who are expected to be used by them. Peter’s friend and travelling companion Yarrel is a pawn who has ideas about how things could be different, and I get the feeling that some of this is setup for events to come in a later book.

Peter himself is a pretty standard classic fantasy character, young boy, with some mystery surrounding him. He mostly lets the other characters pull him around until towards the end of the book, where things get a bit more exciting. He starts the book incredibly naive.

Once he leaves the school, Peter is chased by a pawner (slaver) for reasons unknown to him, and he also gets tangled up in a couple of other conflicts of other characters that come to a head. The plot involves a fair amount of travelling and escaping.

The characters in general I liked, but didn’t love, it’s a short book for the amount of things that happen, and many main characters barely get described or developed beyond a few key traits.

Despite my misgivings, I enjoyed reading King’s Blood Four. There’s a certain classic charm to it that just worked for me, and I can see a lot of other people having a good time with it too. Recommended for those who don’t mind a somewhat cheesy classic fantasy with a somewhat novel setting.

Rating: 6/10

Find more reviews on my blog