Rating: 4/5

"Stand in the darkness, listen in the stillness, hold your gaze on the stars, and you'll hear the music that stretches across infinity, that binds every possibility into a wonderful certainty."

Obviously, as is illustrated by the above quote, this book is extremely well-written. I'll begin with the bad then make my way to the good of this book (please be aware, this book is the sequel to the book Can of Worms).

So this book is a sequel, however the first book is narrated by Mike Pillsbury and this book is narrated by Scott Schreiber. Now don't get me wrong, Scott is great, and you can tell when he inserts his opinion in the narration that it is not Mike speaking. However, the book is written in a style that seems too similar to the style of the last book, making it clear that the book is written by the same person. Perhaps Mackel (the author) is attempting to create a signature style that will make her writing recognizable, however, with this book being spoken through Schreiber, who is the complete opposite of Pillsbury, I'd expect the narration to be completely different, and because it was not, that lowered my opinion of the book.

The plot itself was incredible and I enjoyed this book much more that the first with plot and especially with character development. In the first book, Mackel does not have time to develop characters because she must introduce all these aliens to the reader and introduce us to a universe of which we know nothing. Now with the world-building over, and with this book being the second set in the same world, Mackel can focus her writing more on developing the characters Scott and Mike rather than discussing all the different aliens of the universe. Mackel also narrows down the aliens within the book, which is a definite plus. Though there are references to Boms and other creatures, the reader must only know of the Shards and the Lyras, and though there is one Sirian character, the reader has already been introduced to those aliens in the book before. Overall, Mackel's clarity in plot, writing, and characters is much better in this book.

Something that I both liked and did not like was how Mackel dealt with the alien idea. In the previous book, one questions whether or not Mike Pillsbury is an alien. This book introduces the idea that perhaps Scott Schreiber is an alien. However, as one progress through the book, this idea gets muddled in one's head and it seems to take a complete 180 from what would be assumed from the beginning, also changing the idea of whether or not Pillsbury is an alien. Though Mackel leaves you with a definite idea of whether these boys are aliens or not by the end of the book, she could likely change that idea again in the last book of the series, but I guess I'll have to read that one to find out what happens.

One last note I'd like to add is that I really liked the idea of Scott Schreiber narrating rather than Mike Pillsbury. Pillsbury is a sort of boring character who only has his genius going for him. Scott is a football hero but behind the "Mighty Schreiber" there is so much more, and Mackel made a great decision in focusing this book on Scott rather than Mike.