Rating: 5/5

Words fail. Anyone who has ever tried to convey a serious thought has come up against the inadequacy of language to describe a scene, a feeling, an impression. If we struggle to describe a sunset, how could we ever describe an artillery barrage, a gas attack, or dodging from shell hole to shell hole across a fire-swept No Man’s Land?

I took a literature class in college that was taught by a professor who had been a twenty year old Second Lieutenant on Guadalcanal, and still bore the scars, physical and emotional. He had nothing but contempt for what he called the pornography of war, the books and movies where the good guys (our guys) are always brave and plucky and patriotic, and each is a genre-type: the farm kid, the wise guy from Brooklyn, the quietly religious one, and each has a pretty girl waiting back home. All officers are competent and paternal, all sergeants tough and experienced, and everyone is in it “for the team.” They fire the imaginations of young men and lead them into the abyss. As Siegfried Sassoon said in his poem Suicide in the Trenches:

You smug-face crowds with kindling eye
Who cheer when soldier lads march by,
Sneak home and pray you’ll never know
The hell where youth and laughter go.

Hynes’ book is the antithesis of the pornography of war genre. He has chosen his authors for their ability to look deeply into themselves and their surroundings, trying to make sense of the madness. There are few histrionics in these selections, because the terrible events speak for themselves. Instead, there is only the detached recounting of events, and it is up to the readers to try to wrap their minds around the insanity.

It is interesting, but not surprising, that each war engendered writings that were similar in overall style. The Great War literature started out by calling upon the pastoral and elegiac themes of the literature the authors had grown up with, then, as the war dragged on, spit them out, mocking the entire idea that there was something noble, or even worthwhile, in what they were doing. It is Wilfred Owen darkly reminding everyone, even generations yet unborn, of the old lie: dulce et decorum est, pro patria mori.

The Second World War was notable for its detachment and sense of irony. They may have believed in the cause they were fighting for, but they no longer believed their leaders were noble, just, or wise. They looked around them and saw cowardice, selfishness, and venality, and accepted them as par for the course for this war, for all wars. This attitude would find its finest expression in the malign incompetence of Catch-22.

By the time of Vietnam even irony seemed insufficient to make sense of the situation. Nihilism seemed to only answer. Assume every official statement is a lie, every mission planned by incompetents, and everyone you were there to protect hated you and wanted you dead. Although there were memorable books to come out of the experience in Vietnam, the best epitaph for it is probably from World War I, Kipling grieving over his lost son: “If any question why we died, Tell them: 'Because our fathers lied'”.