Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars. 

A sexy, pompous, self important Duke meets a beautiful, wholesome, strong willed half Italian country girl who gives as good as she gets and turns his orderly life upside down ! 

This is the H, the Duke of Rutland:

This is the heroine, Rosemary:

In this slow burn, clean traditional Regency historical, Barbara Hazard weaves a little mystery into a romantic tale about two polar opposite MC's whose mutual attraction is almost as strong as their mutual distaste. And it's obvious, from the blurb, that this H is a major jerk and egotistical jackass. But that just made the story more entertaining to me, because I enjoyed watching him battle his feelings while telling himself that the heroine was the most unsuitable woman in the Ton. 

Like most traditional regencies, this novel is more than just the MC's romantic storyline. The author focuses heavily on a strong ( and sometimes strange) cast of ensemble characters, who play important roles in the developing mystery. There's even a slight gothic element, when the heroine moves into Lady Emily's eery, dusty old London townhouse. 

My favourite character is Rosemary, the heroine of the story. In some respects, she immediately reminded me of Thomas Hardy's heroines, in novels like Tess of the D'Urbervilles, The Return of the Native and Far From the Madding Crowd. Unlike those heroines, Rosemary doesn't suffer too much and she gets her HEA with her true love. 

Rosemary is an effervescent and fabulously beautiful 18 year old orphan who lives in the country, with her prudish and judgemental paternal aunt. But, like Hardy's heroine Tess, beauty turns out to be a curse for Rosemary because most of the minor characters aren't willing to look beyond the superficial to appreciate her kindness, joie de vivre and empathy for others. 

The heroine attracts too much attention from all men ( literally ! ). Her cousin Henry, her uncle, her cousin Eleanor's male suitors, the male servants and even the men from the village all seem to fall into a literal daze whenever she's in the vicinity. 

In fact, men ( including the H ) consistently behave like greedy dogs, chasing after treats, when they see the heroine. LOL...

Consequently, she's always viewed as a threat by other women; younger unmarried ones are jealous of her beauty, matrons think that their daughters won't receive marriage proposals if they cultivate a friendship with the heroine and new brides think she'll steal their husband's attention. 

This is why her prudish, sourpuss aunt sends her to London, to stay with an estranged elderly relative named Lady Emily. This weird old woman is an eccentric, agoraphobic widow who's reminiscent of the villainous Miss Havisham from Dickens' Great Expectations. 

In London, Rosemary develops a friendship with a sweet, disabled girl named Belle, who lives in the mansion opposite Lady Emily's townhouse. Belle's the H's younger sister and he's against their friendship been he thinks that Rosemary is just using his sister to foster a closer relationship with him. Desperate, title hunting women have done that before and Mark ( the H ), doesn't want his sister to be hurt again. 

He's also got these fake, preconceived notions that the heroine is a wanton, Jezebel maneater who's put on earth to destroy men with her seductive wiles. That's because he himself developed an intense insta-lust when he first saw her and he's never reacted that way to a woman before. He's also incapable of staying away from her or taunting her about her pseudo feminine wiles. 

The funniest and most endearing thing, is that the heroine, while fully aware of her own attractions, goes out of her way to avoid giving men the wrong signals. And a few other characters, like the plain Jane, pastel wearing, 4 years on the shelf spinster OW, Lady Margaret, spurn the heroine, based on envy and/or malice. 

Lady Margaret has been waiting years, for the H to propose to her and she's very territorial about him - even though he's never kissed her or hinted at an imminent proposal. She soon starts to freak out when she notices how the H is easily affected by the heroine. This leads her to meddle and spread vicious lies about the heroine, in an effort to destroy the latter's reputation. 

As if that's not bad enough, the strange Lady Emily ( Rosemary's London guardian ) unravels into an unhinged meltdown mode ! This is linked to the novel's mystery storyline and to the titular cloisonne locket itself. Lady Emily, like Miss Havisham in Great Expectations, has been a recluse for over 30 years. Relatives think it's due to the death of her husband. 

The truth is more dramatic, because it lends an insane twist to the story. Three decades ago, Lady Emily had been the lover of the H's late father. The late duke had been unmarried at the time and, like most men in the Ton, often felt it was safer to engage in affairs with married women, like Lady Emily. 

Things had been fine until Lady Emily's husband suddenly died and her expectations changed. She was obsessively in love and hoped the duke would propose to her. The duke, meanwhile, had already earmarked a young debutante as his future wife. Lady Emily begged and grovelled, but all she received was a cloisonne locket with a miniature picture of the duke inside. 

Like all proverbial scorned women, Lady Emily has been waiting for decades, to get her revenge. She can't seek vengeance against her former dead lover, but she's determined to destroy his lookalike son - the H. She gets this opportunity when she observes the H's developing attraction for her ward, Rosemary. Just like Miss Havisham had done to Pip and Estella in Dickens' masterpiece, Lady Emily schemes to use the heroine to break the H's heart. 

I won't go into all the details, because this is one long novel, but I will add that Lady Emily includes her lecherous, gold digging nephew Mr. Edson and her awful servants in her dark plan to destroy the H and prevent the MC's from getting their happy ending. She takes extreme measures, like imprisoning Rosemary in the attic while telling the H that the heroine had eloped with another man. 

I was quite prepared to give this novel 4.5 stars, because I really enjoyed the overall story. I didn't even mind that it was a clean regency with an ultra slow burn storyline. That's because I was keenly interested in the unfolding events of the plot and the minor characters were well fleshed out as well. 

Unfortunately, the final section and the resolution of the story occurred too quickly and the ending was rather abrupt. The MC's had waited such a long time for their HEA that I wished the author had added an epilogue or extended the ending to include a wedding. I was also disappointed that the villains received inadequate punishment. 

Lady Emily absconded into the night with her nephew, her servants, her bullying dog Prinny and was never seen again, while the wannabe OW, Lady Margaret, got her off page comeuppance when the H confronted with her with her lies and told her that he's not going to be proposing marriage - ever ! 

There were a lot of memorable quotations I would've loved to include in this review, but couldn't because I borrowed this from Open Library online. Fans of clean, well written, slow burn traditional regencies with a memorable cast of characters, might enjoy this novel. 

Safety: No sex, no cheating, a wannabe OW and numerous wannabe OM who kept hanging around the heroine.