Rating: 3/5

I enjoyed this book,and ended up taking quite a few notes, but when it came down to it, I am not sure that I quite liked how this book was organized. The myths were fascinating, but I feel there may have been a way to arrange them that would make everything easier to follow.

That being said, there's a lot to consider in this collection. Some things I jotted down as interesting:

I found Loki's role as the god of mischief turned evil fascinating. He started out neutrally troublesome and become something much more sinister. Super thought-provoking.

I loved the parallels I caught between the myths and stories we tell today; for example, the story of Brynhild and the similarity of fairy tales like Sleeping Beauty and Snow White (at least, until you get to the tragic Romeo and Juliet part). I even caught a little Arthurian thread in there (Sword in a tree, anyone?).

It was also awesome being able to trace some Tolkien imagery to ideas found in these myths. Never having read some of these stories, I didn't realize how heavily Tolkien had borrowed some of his ideas (A cursed ring? A treasure that turns a man into a dark creature? Where have I been?).

Other things weren't so much parallels as things I found interesting to ponder. For example, when Odin and Frigga wager on who is more kingly, and you can see the competition between wisdom and strength taking place in the myth. Wisdom wins, and yet, bravery is supremely important as shown in the story of the Valkyries, and Brynhild and Sigur.

You can also contemplate the price of a life in the story of Loki and the Otter... and yet the gods send Valkyries train men to die and take their places in Odin's Ragnarok army.

And okay, one last contradiction to ponder: Thor feels shamed when he dresses as Freya to fool the giants and Loki mocks him, and yet how many times does Loki borrow the falcon dress to change his shape?

Speaking of the giants, isn't it fascinating how much power giants, dwarves, and witches have over the gods themselves? I found it so. I kind of wanted to know more about the gods just so I could understand that better.

There's so much more I could write - I literally filled a page full of notes. I don't think I would be successful putting it coherently, though. I'm not sure THIS has been coherent. And while again, I didn't love the setup of this book, it definitely piqued enough interest that I will do some future research into Norse mythology. And I might work on my pronunciation of some of these Nordic names as well.