Rating: 5/5

The Evolution and Stagnancy of The Women's Rights Movement 
The World Split Open written by Ruth Rosen is extremely telling and raw in its depiction of the evolution of the women’s rights movement in America and its impact on the world. The book chronologically explains the challenges women faced and endured over time along with their lasting effects and social impacts. One of the most complex and greatest challenges this group has yet to overcome is the fact that women have not been and are not completely free. From the beginning of this movement in the early twentieth century to the present day, the government has had its hand in holding women back from achieving the same titles, positions, and respect that come so easily to the Christian, heterosexual, white man through the push for consumerism, stereotypes, as well as the Cold War. 
Stereotypically, the sole job of a woman in society is to be a mother and wife. However, the twentieth century brought about a third view of women as they were now the target consumer for advertisers who preyed on the idea that women needed new products to maintain their “good homemaker” status. These companies prayed on the insecurities of wives and mothers all over America, pushing them to scramble into employment. However, this led to endless consequences undertaken by women in that they would be shamed for working as this would make it impossible for them to be present enough for their family, yet if they did not work, they would be guilted for holding their family back from experiencing financial and consumer prosperity. This manipulative tactic used by corporations distressed women in America as the new “average” life grew to be more and more expensive. America’s capitalist government fully endorsed and encouraged this veiled attack against its own citizens and felt just in doing so as it was not a “communist threat”, which was the primary focus of the time. With these new consumerist demands, financial issues soon grew common in each household. How were women expected to work and sustain the lifestyle they were being told was necessary when they were simultaneously receiving no help and subtly being discouraged to work? 
Due to the increasing paranoia of communist influence within the nation and its government, American women were denied public aid programs that may have been perceived as resembling communism. The American government criticized the Soviet Union for obtaining a steep control of its people and interfering in their personal lives, all the while acting in the same manner and hiding behind ideological differences. Although the rights of American women and their place in society was legally the most progressive they had ever been, socially, oppression remained an obstacle. They were still faced with little to no accessible support for the average working mother in terms of child care. Instead of the government helping, there was a great deal of time, funding, and energy wasted on trying to expose the majority of these women wanting a better life as communists through FBI infiltration of women’s rights groups. In this and many other ways the American government acted in every way that they condemned. Their deep fear of communism ultimately hurt and held Americans back instead of helping them prosper. However, women did not remain stagnant and submissive to these actions and were able to propel themselves somewhat forward. As a result of their steadfast foremothers, eventually women were able to work and infiltrate fields long reserved for men. Unfortunately, the long standing stereotype of women being solely responsible for the domestic duties did not disintegrate as their rights progressed. Instead they were expected to work as hard as a man, usually even harder as many women needed to prove themselves to their male coworkers and employers, and still be a present mother. 
Women across America still face an inordinate amount of challenges. Being taken seriously in the workplace, being unfairly judged based on their appearance or equating their worth to their looks, and receiving equal pay are some of the issues still plaguing working women today. While progress has been made, as society continues to advance, new obstacles rooted in sexist ideology will arise. American society must be purposeful in prioritizing the needs of women in order to prevent a repeat of past events.