Rating: 5/5

“And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.” – Revelations, Ch. 20, v. 15, quoted in The Whereabouts of Eneas McNulty

So, having a bad day, are you? Well, let me tell you about Eneas McNulty. By my calculation, he had about fifty years of bad days, some worse than others, but only a very, very few that could be placed in the “good” category.

And it wasn’t his fault.

He was an innocent, compassionate, and morally upright man who through no fault of his own was dealt a bad hand and who spent most of his adult life struggling to play it the best he could. He was a man of good intentions, but he could never escape the entangling historical events that combined to overwhelm and perplex him and transform his life into a tenuous and potentially lethal existence.
 
Eneas’ problems began when he returned home to Ireland after serving in the British Merchant Navy during WWI. He soon discovered that “the war finishing was only a signal to the hidden men of Ireland to brew their own war,” a civil war for independence from the British crown, led by the Irish Republican Army.

Besides the violence and political turmoil, Ireland was also experiencing an economic depression and jobs were hard to come by. As Eneas searched for employment without any success his father suggested that he join the Royal Irish Constabulary, which was the English-led police force.

In the guerilla war and violent reprisals by both sides that inflamed passions in divided Ireland the policemen became targets. And though Eneas was apolitical and only took the job in order to get on with his daily life, he became a marked man. His name went on a blacklist and the IRA issued a death threat against him.

His only recourse was to become a wandering man without a country, one who was forced to forsake his homeland and drift from nation to nation.

Besides being a critically-acclaimed novelist, Sebastian Barry is a talented playwright and as many passages sprinkled throughout his prose demonstrate, he is also a gifted poet.

For example:

How quick they come, how quick they go. Friendship. Oh, well. God sails his boats on the pond of the world and at fall of darkness goes off through the rubbed-out roses with the boats under his arms like a fabulous boy. The clock is the terrible high clouds fleeting to some unknown meeting. In the city encircling the park of the world lives are lived quickly, the admired baby soon the dreaming old bastard in the narrow suntrap under the lee of the church. Quickly quickly everything goes.

Thank you, Teresa, for guiding me to this book as well as Barry’s WWI novel, A Long Long Way.