Rating: 3/5

My first Le Carré novel after reading The Spy Who Came In From The Cold over forty years ago. Therefore, I was ready for the anachronisms, the misogyny, the archaic technology and spying techniques, the introspection, the deception. But there was more.

Set in Bonn, a temporary capital, “a house draped in Catholic black and guarded by policemen,” and the eponymous small town in Germany of the book’s title, the plot hovers around a British embassy official who has gone missing with valuable documents on the eve of a Neo Nazi demonstration to be held in the city, and on the eve of Britain’s bid to enter the European Union with the support of Germany against the opposition of France.

The omniscient narrator seems to lose himself between the dialogue and the action, for sometimes I found it hard to figure out who was saying what, or what was happening, but it all jelled in the end because there was a lot of overwriting that amounted to the author philosophizing or trying to raise his prose above genre into literary – much of it dispensable.

Suffice to say that the action centres around the British Embassy in Bonn and its staff, its cloistered life, its protocols, its hierarchy (A level staff do not fraternize with B level staff, and so on), and its secrets.

The missing official, Harting, is a German émigré to Britain who threw his lot in with his adopted country against the Nazis. His hunter is Turner, a brutal and relentless security official who tries to get into the mind of the hunted and gain understanding of his quarry. Much of the investigation hovers around Turner’s obsession with minutia: what did Harting eat, who did he have sex with, what did he dress, what were his movements before he went missing – obsessive to the point of me wanting to drop this book midway. However, the plot gradually emerges—mostly through dropped threads in innocuous dialogue—into something larger than anticipated, and the last few chapters are unputdownable. 

What bothered me was Turner’s relentless hounding of the British Chief of Chancery, Bradfield, and the other embassy staff and their wives, goading them on, ostensibly to provide the reader information we are unable to derive from the narrative – a sort of double agent of a kind. An oft-used device, but one to be used sparingly these days, even by genre authors. Turner is abusive and not above beating-up women in the course of his investigation, especially when Harting grows in his mind into a sympathetic character worth saving instead of sacrificing. 

Britain and its representatives are portrayed as the bad guys, hedging their bets with all players, German Feds and Neo Nazis alike, and willing to sell their people down the river if it benefited them. They have conveniently ended the persecution of war criminals and handed that task over to the Germans who grin and nod at the many with shady pasts who are in positions of power without sanction. As Bradfield says, “Hypocrisy is a virtue of the British. We are a corrupt nation.” He even has a reason for why they are pursuing their quarry: “Harting has broken the law of forgetting, of moderation.”

Despite its jerky narrative style—and I put this down to the book being one of the earlier works of the author—this shorter Le Carré novel has a particular charm in capturing the small town in Germany, Bonn, and its political events before it vanished into the background by becoming just another German city after the re-unification of the country and the restoration of the original capital, Berlin.