Rating: 4/5

Armino Fabbio (ne Donati) was the youngest son of Aldo Donati and Francesca Rossi. His father was the superintendent of the ducal palace in Ruffano and he grew up with all the tales of the mad Duke Claudio, the "Falcon", who had run the city in the 16th century. Evidently the Duke had some form of God complex (he had a painting commissioned where he took the place of Christ) and he believed that it was up to him alone to mete out "justice" to the citzenry for any perceived slight, misdemeanour or crime. For example, a page boy once forgot to provide lights for his evening meal and he had his head set alight and left him to die in agony.

Armino apparently left Ruffano aged 11 just after the war, his father having died in a camp and believing his brother, also called Aldo, to have been shot down from his plane in the fighting. Following a degree in modern languages in Turin, he lands himself a job as a courier for a holiday company, Sunshine Tours. While escorting a party round Rome he sees a woman he recognizes from his childhood, Marta - the family nurse, begging in the streets. Pitying her and feeling guilty, he gives her a ten thousand lire note which had been given to him by a client who had been hoping for a little extra "room service". The next morning, however, she is found murdered and it at this point that the story really gets going. He finds himself returning to Ruffano after a twenty year absence intent on unraveling the mystery of her murder. He finds Ruffano a hotbed of intrigue and mystery itself - a secret university society and various "rags" being perpetrated, so it would seem, by rival factions of students against each other.

The pace of this novel is extraordinary once Armino is back in Ruffano. All the events of the novel take place within a week or so and they are many. Practically every chapter ends on a cliffhanger. I found all the characters believable and fully realised. Du Maurier's descriptive prose was as sublime as ever. A couple of the plot points I was able to guess in advance, but not sufficiently early to mar my enjoyment. Du Maurier created a brilliant atmosphere of intrigue and forboding.

I thought this was wonderful and highly recommend it.