Rating: 1/5

First off, I'm not summing up the plot. You want to know what this book is about, Goodreads supplies it. Also, there will be a lot of spoilers, so if you are going to read this book, you should stop right now!

I honestly think I'm just tired of Ellis Peters' formula. If this had been one of the first books, I would have liked it better. But I found it similar to all the other books and I was just tired. There's always a murder, which is fine, that's the point of a mystery. But they ALWAYS pick the wrong suspect. And then Cadfael has to sleuth around and figure it out. Why couldn't one of the mysteries just have an unknown killer that everyone is looking for?

In this case, it's Elis, the Welsh boy who is being held for a prisoner exchange. He falls in love with the Sheriff's daughter who, coincidentally, he's being exchanged for. And they're both beautiful people who fall in love immediately. Why couldn't a character, for once, be average? Would that be so hard? They fall in love as well.

This book, like a few others, have these determined women who know which man they are going to marry and are just going to do it. That's not romantic, that's stalking. And, I know this isn't a happy ending, but not all couples end up together. That's life. Once in a while, couldn't there be some sadness? Why do the couples ALWAYS end up together?

Also, Elis is a suspect because, after Malicent tells him not to go and talk to her father, he attempts to. And then he's shrouded in suspicion. Why didn't he listen to her? Why didn't he respect her? It's her father? Couldn't he trust her?

Also, she is the one who accuses him of murder? But don't worry, he forgives her basically right off the bat. Why? Why are the characters so unrealistic? I mean, is that going to be a great story for the kids? "Gather round and let me tell you the HILARIOUS story of the time your mother accused me of murder and threw me to the proverbial wolves?"

Again, if this had been my first Cadfael, I might have liked it better, but I was just sick of the formula.