Rating: 4/5

A very special kind of book, there's no doubt about that. But I'm not sure what to feel about it. 
The first third is a mix of diary excerpts, memories and reveries, especially about the youth of Abel Tiffauges, a crippled garageholder in Paris. It's difficult reading, but it's clear enough Tiffauges looks at reality in a very strange way, with special attention to young children (yes, indeed); he sees himself as "childbearer", and Saint Christopher his patron-saint; but a girlfriend refers to the 'oger'-myth, a humanoid monster in fairy-tales that hunts children.
Then the perspective changes: the Second World War starts and Tiffauges is prisoner of war in a camp in East-Prussia, deep in Germany. He is afforded a lot of freedom, becomes an aide of Göring and eventually ends up in a castle-school of the Hitlerjugend. In the slipstream of nazi-rigor and cruelty he can develop his special "talents". It is here the link is made with the known poem of Goethe, "the alder-king - Der Erlkönig". I'm not going to reveal the end, but in the midst of the apocalyptic sceneries of the fall of the Third Reich, Tiffauges comes to repent his sins. This part in Eastern Prussia is much easier to read, as an interesting developing story. But this also has a perverse side-effect: hunting red deers, maniacally dissecting and analysing of racial and phyiscal characteristics of children, atrociously training of the Hitlerjugend, ... at a certain point it becomes attractive! Add to this the beautiful depicting of the eastprussian landscapes (dark woods, lovely lakes and grand castles of the teutonic order), all very wagnerian and attractive. 
Tournier has drawn a lot of criticism for this, as though he wanted to make nazisme likeable. I don't agree, on the contrary; he has succeeded in exhibiting the perversity in every human soul, and he clearly shows the excesses this can lead to. 
In short, there is a lot in this book to make it a beautiful, but shocking work, but in the end I can not say this was pleasant to read. So a very mixed and ambiguous judgment.