Rating: 3/5

This book was okay. I'm glad i read this, and it's a great way to get into the Christmas spirit, but was lacking in many ways in several different parts.
The illustrations are really cool, but all of the elves and evil guys are hideous. 🤷🏻‍♂️

The story seemed dry at certain parts and many things were left unexplained
(or explained in a poor way: "It's JuSt mAGic"🤦🏻‍♂️🤦🏻‍♂️). Not the best writing. I bet even a child would be bored by this.
The story was sort of all over the place and never stayed on a good part long enough.

L. Frank Baum's "The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus" is one thousand times better than this book. Every moment of that book is perfect and explains everything amazingly! There are also gorgeous illustrations in that book. Pass this up and read Baum's origin story for Santa!

📚🎄🎁Some parts i liked from the book:

"Do you know why I like giving gifts, Nicholas? I'll tell you.
It's because it keeps me from feeling poor. Why, even the simplest things become priceless when they are given out of love. That's why you can never feel poor if you're able to give something to someone."
-Santa’s dad Anselm

"I began simply, using a trick that my father had taught me years before, and if you'll let me, I would like to teach it to you now.
Wherever you are at this moment, simply stop and look around. You can look at the patterns in the grain of a wooden floor, if you like, or if you are sitting by a fire, watching the flames will do nicely. I've always found that clouds on a sunny day work best of all, but it's all a matter of preference. Now, once you've found something to look at, concentrate very hard, and soon you will begin to see that there are pictures in everything, even in places you might never have thought to find them. The longer you look, the more pictures you will see as the patterns move and change.
The reason for this is that everything, everywhere, has a story it wants to tell, and so if you are ever stuck for an idea, all you have to do is let the world tell you its stories. The same is true for carving wood, Anselm always said, for the wood already has an idea of what it wants to be, and the finest work is done when you just let it guide your hand." 
-Santa

"There is truly nothing that makes the days go faster than the sweet anticipation of something special. It's that feeling of excitement that comes with the first rumblings of a thunderstorm, or the beginning of spring, or - as you and I have both come to know so well - before the magical dawning of Christmas day. This was the kind of anticipation that I had as the last toys were painted and the final preparations were being made for my very first journey."
-Santa

“All in good time and all time is good, so listen and you will understand."
-Giraldus

"But I thought..." | began, only to be interrupted by a tiny voice from my left ear.
"Thought! A thought is no more than an itch on your brain!"
"That's right!" chimed in a second voice into the other ear.
"Why do you suppose everyone always runs about saying, 'Scratch that thought! Scratch that thought!'"
Both voices promptly broke out into great hiccups of laughter, tickled silly by their own joke.

"The moral herein is to think for yourself, And don't believe all that you hear.
Never judge at one look what's inside of a book,
Unless the cover is perfectly clear."
-Poem spoken by Giraldus &amp; Estivus