Rating: 4/5

Pretty amazing book by Charriere; basically his 'adventures' and escapes from various French penal colonies in French Guiana. Henri Charriere, known in the underworld as Papillon (butterfly, due to a tattoo on his chest) basically cracked safes for a living, but ended up being framed for murdering a pimp and was sentenced to hard labor for life in the late 1920s. 

The prose is rather amateurish but full of heart to say the least. After a few years kicking around some truly grim French prisons, Papillon gets shipped to French Guiana, which seems to consist of several penal colonies, each one a horror. Hard to believe that such conditions still existed even in the 1930s! Papillon has one overarching desire-- escape and starting a new life. Escape means going by sea to somewhere else-- a 'cavale' in the lingo-- and hence one needs to first leave the prison and then find a seaworthy boat. The problem is the British colonies will only allow French escapees to stay (say in Trinidad) for a few weeks. The Dutch give the escapees back to the French, as due the Venezuelans (although they work them hard for a few years first!). Papillon (or Papi) dreams of going to Costa Rica, or perhaps Honduras, but dreams and reality alas often clash. 

The depiction of the prisons resembles something from the middle ages. Papi ended up spending one stint of 3 years in solitary in a French prison there (punishment for his first escape). Speaking was not allowed and the prisoners never left their cells the entire time. Many suicided, went mad or simply died, and Papi depicts in some detail how he kept himself sane. Other prisons were even worse. Papi's first escape eventually led him to Colombia, where he was arrested (no papers) and lived in a cell which partially flooded on each high tide, bringing in biting crabs, huge poisonous centipedes and other vermin; after a few weeks there, he emerged covered in bites and seriously ill.

On the one hand, this is a tour of prisons in Northern Latin America circa the 1930s and 40s, but on the other, a striking adventure novel chronicling Papi's cavales. All in all, he tried escaping something like 10 times, but only made it twice. The first cavale took him first to the mainland of Guiana, then to Trinidad and Columbia, where he lived for half a year with an indigenous tribe before being captured. The second cavale took place in 1941 where he left a French penal colony on a raft of coconuts in bags and fought the sea for days before the mainland. The details of mere survival are amazing. Imagine being in a small boat baking in the sun, battered by hurricanes, little food or water for weeks at a time. The man had brass balls for sure!

Since he survived to write his 'memoirs' in 1967, you knew he eventually earned his freedom, but the adventures along the way are priceless, as are his (albeit rather sophomoric at times) reflections on civilization and the human condition. I did not really expect this to be such a page turner and was pleasantly surprised. Good stuff! 4 Papillons!!