Rating: 4/5

Remini’s biography of Henry Clay is thorough and highly readable. After spending decades writing his masterful biography on Jackson he shocked his colleagues by revealing he would write his next biography on Jackson’s eternal antagonist. I expected that Remini’s preference for Jackson would lead to a highly biased and defamatory perspective on Clay but was pleasantly surprised that this was not the case. Remini admirably states in the introduction that he took this biography on Clay as an opportunity to get inside the mind of Whig thinking and to see things from a new (anti-Jackson) perspective, a goal that he convincingly achieved. 

Remini shows a great appreciation for Clay’s talents as a statesman and as a social creature. He constantly throws in stories of Clay’s hilarious quips and devastating jabs in Congress that give the reader a strong sense for Clay’s personality and popularity among his peers. Clay was the partying type, often staying up late drinking and gambling, but also cultivating an intoxicating popularity that he could lean on when it mattered most in the political arena. 

Clay built his reputation on his ability to compromise and his strong emphasis on maintaining the integrity of the Union. Most of his political stances supported the idea of a strong central government encouraging the growth and strength of the nation through investment and protectionism, via the use of Tariffs and public infrastructure… and a central bank. He saw this not as a force of corruption, but one that yielded a net positive for everybody. But he also recognized when to concede some of these points when it came to appeasing political opponents for the sake of compromise and cooperation. Clay was apparently one of Lincoln’s heroes because of his unending desire to put the Union first before all else. 

Sadly, Clay also had an insatiable ambition that left his family in shambles. He left his wife at home in Kentucky while he worked in DC for most of their marriage, neglecting his home affairs and his children. He witnessed all 6 of his daughters die, while his sons became petulant drunkards with such uncontrollable fits of rage that they had to be committed to insane asylums. All while Clay was partying in DC and having extra-marital affairs throughout his lifelong career. His wife’s correspondence with him was next to non-existent, which probably indicates just how bleak their relationship was. 

And at the expense of his family life Clay grasped for the Presidency through four election cycles, only to come up short every time. The last two elections seemed exceedingly desperate, yet Clay still managed to maintain a general respect and admiration among the public afterwards. My one complaint about the book is how repetitive the coverage of these elections became. Each election cycle involved a circuit of tours and speeches that seemed to follow a very predictable pattern, yet Remini continued to follow these cycles meticulously; citing dates and locations along the way for each one. He probably could have saved the reader 50-100 pages by omitting some of these details on the elections while still maintaining a highly thorough record of Clay’s public service. 

Overall a very informative read and entertaining throughout because of Clay’s highly engrossing character, though not a book that can be considered compelling.