Rating: 5/5

On my recent trip to France, I stayed for a time in a village called Gigny, situated on a plateau of farmland where Upper Burgundy meets Champagne; a town of about 30 houses total, close-knit, yards cordoned off by tall stone walls overgrown with lilac and ivy. The entire countryside was dotted with similar clusters of ancient towns, each of them radiating from a small square dominated by a church bearing dates of construction beginning in the fifteen or sixteen hundreds. The roads connecting these anonymous hamlets were often only a lane and a half wide, dusty, skirted on each side by sloping fields brilliant with rapeseed in bloom, or emerging sunflowers, young wheat undulating in the breeze, or channels of dense, deep green forest; the wind running across the stalks of plants would culminate in a sound not unlike hearing the ocean break from across a bluff. In our rental car, we would pass through one of these farm towns in a matter of minutes, sometimes less, and then be again amid the ranging expanse of fields- it was a beautiful, enchanting desolation. We would comment now and then on that peculiar desolation, on what seemed to be the lifelessness of these towns secluded in the foothills east of Paris that spread on toward Switzerland and Germany and the heights of the Alps, populated by buildings that looked, from the exterior, as if no one had tended to them for a century; and then we were out again across another broad expanse, another village, a spire, an agglomeration of terracotta-tiled houses and unpeopled streets.

A common feature of these towns, besides the tiles and the spires and the stone walls and the little gardens, quickly became apparent- a tall obelisk set on a stone base, engraved with the dedication “Pour les morts” and the years 1914-18, and on the reverse side the same inscription followed by the years 1940-45. Sometimes, even more affecting, “Pour les enfants morts”. Every one of these villages had a monument to their war dead, still tended, with wreaths and flowers decorating them, sometimes set in the church square and sometimes erected on a well-chosen overlook, so that one could contemplate the sacrificed and the landscape that was sacrificed for all at once. Considering that seventy percent of the French Army at one time or another found themselves involved in the battle of Verdun, more likely than not a great number of these engraved names bore witness to that horror. It also came as no surprise to find, in the opening pages of Alistair Horne’s book, a familiar reference to the strange isolation of these towns in Champagne-Ardenne that we had observed, towns whose very topography, very essence, spirit and form, were grievously altered by their proximity to the front lines of the World Wars. Part of it can be explained by the simple fact that their children never returned, and even a hundred years later the landscape of France is being influenced not only by what occurred in Verdun during those ten months in 1916, but by everything that followed in the first half of the 20th century- everything that Verdun gave birth to.

The cottage where we stayed in Gigny had a small enclosed yard with a stone barn and a well, in the morning magpies and doves would fly from tree to tree above and sing, a truck selling fresh bread would sound its horn as it paused on its route, and the wind would make a constant song; in the evenings owls called out and the hours were accompanied by the regular tolling of bells resonating from the church spire. It is so difficult to imagine, after these idyllic impressions have taken hold, a century ago the sound of artillery echoing over these same places like the mad beating of muffled drums, or the thought that farther eastward, on the other side of the Meuse, French observers watched as these same style of church spires, usually visible along the horizon, disappeared morning by morning (they were leveled so the Allied guns had fewer sighting points), and that this lush, verdurous landscape that I experienced was at one time long ago so immolated that one aerial observer compared it to the “humid skin of a monstrous toad”.

The particular tragedy of WWI, and holocausts like those that occurred at Verdun and the Somme, is the fact of their being wars not of men against men, but as is so often reiterated in this book, of men against material. What is flesh and bone and blood supposed to gain against multi-ton iron-encased shells, whose shrapnel fragments alone took two men to lift and pulverized instantly the bodies that weren’t incinerated by their initial blasts? What could lines of bodies do marching into the firing zone of hundreds or thousands of well-barricaded machine guns? What use rifles against Big Berthas and what resistance does flesh and reason hold to flame throwers, phosgene gas that penetrated masks, and beyond that, the simple lack of food and water and sleep in a landscape barren and burned, bereft of hiding places and forests reduced to smoldering splinters, and unremitting shelling that so churned the earth that bodies were interred and spat up and interred again, so that when forces dug into their trenches at night, in the morning they beheld that their walls were lined with corpses? This was the first instance in history of mass armies colliding with the new death machines of industrialized war; in some ways it was a grand experiment in mass murder; for the first time air forces were formed, machine guns utilized to their full extent, flamethrowers and gas attacks and unimaginable long range artillery barrages employed- it was a grand preview of what progress was to make of the battlefield in the 20th century- and the wretched souls who walked into it did not know what was waiting or quite what to do about it. Eric summed it up very well in his review of this book, that “disparity, that failure to come to grips with a merciless new order, that suspension in a bypassed culture... a powerful image of human bewilderment before change, and time passing.”

Old Europe was being obliterated on the mill of the Western Front, and you get the sense that not even those in command had anything approaching a full appreciation of the changes that had come over tactical battle. A quarter of a million people died at Verdun, many of them in missions that were suicidal from the outset (toward the late periods of the battle, battalions took to cynically bleating like sheep on their way to the front lines), many of them meeting their death simply because of poor planning, or incomprehension at the consequences of the new technologies. For a time it seemed that the battle itself had become some malevolent force, independent of those fighting it, some kind of “Moloch” or “Minotaur” or “Ogre” (as soldiers began referring to it), that demanded more blood, whose raison was no longer some tactical positioning or the possession of some particular fort or tract of land, but the ritual of death itself; the Totentanz enacted in February of 1916 was sustained of its own inertia.

As the summer of 1916 dragged on, the strategic importance of a victory at Verdun became less and less relevant for both sides, but the symbolic importance of maintaining the battle rose in inverse proportion. Disastrously, for the fates of countless souls, Verdun became the all-important symbol of vitality and tenacity for both armies, for the success of the War in general, and as Horne observes “In all man’s affairs no situation is more lethal than when an issue assumes the status of a symbol. Here all reason, all sense of value, abdicate.” Thus the butchery grimly dragged on through Autumn.

What Horne does so well in this book is to give a heartbreaking, human picture of those that participated in the battle, along with a virtuoso recreation (that belies phenomenal amounts of research) of the ebb and flow of the battle. Individuals are so carefully and lovingly recreated, heroes and villains, brave men and fools dropped into the narrative of the battle so fittingly that you would think Horne was inventing; alas he was not. Single sentences describing individual soldiers could easily be expanded into book-length portraits, and the Great Leaders of the armies on both sides are not spared when they were ridiculous or cruel, blind, bull-headed or prophetic, and even occasionally noble. Perhaps the great achievement of this book is that it takes one of the most distinctly inhuman events in history, and fills it to overflowing with humanity.