Rating: 3/5

“Every century has disliked its own modernity; every age from the first onwards, has preferred the previous one to itself.” 

Published in 1967, this novel starts the series even though it is sixth in the historical chronology. Resonates with current America. The others, from Burr to Hollywood, cash in on this book’s success, though Vidal planted seeds of those earlier stories in it. Vidal’s voice is less assured than the later (chronologically earlier) installments. Racial epithets common to that age will offend current sensitivities. More soap opera; less history. 

"On principle they detested the President, and despite that magnate’s power to loose and to bind, The Club ruled the Senate in its own way and for its own ends, usually contrary to those of the President."

Focuses on Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his manipulations to get the country into World War Two. Again the death of a powerful president passes the scepter to a political unknown. Unlike other volumes of this series, Vidal backs away from interactions between his fiction characters and the movers of mid-century American politics. Perhaps because it was too soon. (And too many actual actors still lived.) 

“I suppose it’s warnings women give to one another.” “Warnings about what?” “Men. What else? The common enemy.”

New fictional characters appear as a new generation pushes the older off stage. As usual most of Vidal’s inventions are on the wrong side of the times. Notably absent is fictional Caroline Sanford, half-sister of prominent publisher Blaise Sanford. She was a moving force of Vidal’s Hollywood, published 22 years after Washington. Vidal’s prescience of twenty-first century America enthralls. Vidal’s The Golden Age published in 2000, overlaps with this volume, takes the reader deeper into Washington than he dared thirty three years earlier.

“Perhaps one should abandon the whole system.” “We have abandoned it. We now live under a Presidential dictatorship, with periodic referendums which allow us to change the dictator but not the dictatorship.” “Perhaps that is the only way this sort of society can be governed.”