Rating: 2/5

a month of Sundays: a cross between winter light (grim bergman movie about a priest who loses his faith) and hot and saucy pizza girls (70s porno)… from some kind of desert sanitarium for holy men gone bad, reverend marshfield writes a memoir about his days of preaching fucking and sucking. one sees where updike was going with all this, but he never gets there. The anguish and frustration is occasionally felt, but for the most part, one imagines the author at his type-writer with half-wood, a smirk, and the desire to shock. montambo refers to this book as 'putrid' -- i don't think i'd even give it so much credit. the nabakovian wordplay and subject matter is fun, but for the most part it's all a bit pointless. check this passage:

“Say you don’t believe in God. Say you think God is an old Israeli fart. Say it.”
She wanted to, she even took breath into her lungs to utter something, but couldn’t. 
“How can you believe? How can any sane person?”
“Many do,” she told me. Then amended, “Some do.”
“It’s so ridiculous,” I said. “It’s always been ridiculous. There was this dreadful tribal chauvinism of the Jews. Then some young megalomaniac came along and said, Look at Me. And about a dozen people did. And then… We don’t know what happened, nobody knows, all we know is that as the Roman Empire went rotten one mystery cult prevailed over the many others. People were as messy then as they are now - it could have been any cult. And the damn thing’s still among us. It’s an establishment. A racket. The words are empty. The bread is just bread. The biggest sales force in the world selling empty calories – Jesus Christ. What is it? A detergent? A deoderant? What does it do? This invisible odorless thing?
“It lets people live?”
“It lets them die,” I corrected. “It likes to watch them die.”

…I hit her. First a tap with a cuffed hand, then really a hit, with open palm and stiff wrist so our chamber split at the noise, and all the gossamer threads her love had spun were swept away. “You dumb cunt,” I said, “how can you be so dumb to believe in God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost? Tell me you really don’t. Tell me, so I can fuck you. Tell me you know down deep there’s nothing. The dead stink; for a while they stink and then they’re just bones and then there’s not even that. Forever and ever. Isn’t that so? Say it.”
“I can’t”
“Why not, sweet? Why not? Please… …You know there’s nothing. Tell me there’s nothing. Tell me it’s a fraud, I’m a fraud, it’s all right, there’s just us and we’ll die…”