Rating: 5/5

Just amazing. Georgette Heyer wrote this when she was only fifteen years old! How crazy is that?!? Mind. Blown.

The story is an action/adventure with a bit of romance set in the mid-1700s. It's populated by a LOT of diverse characters. 

Lord John/Jack Carstares, the hero, is a disgraced nobleman, but he's actually shielding his brother Richard, who was the one cheating at cards in a gentleman's game. Their father, the Earl of Wyncham, cast Jack off as a result. Jack has been in self-imposed exile for the six years since then, living in Italy, France, and finally returning to England. He pretends to be a foppish gentleman, Sir Anthony Ferndale, while making his living as a gambler and as a highwayman. His valet/servant, Jim Salter, is the perfect sidekick. Even Jack's horse (Jenny) is given a distinct personality. 

The "black moth" is Tracy Belmanoir, a.k.a. His Grace, the Duke of Andover, a.k.a. the Devil. He may be the main antagonist, but his entire family is decidedly unlikeable. That's especially true of his bipolar, overdramatic sister Lavinia, who is married to Jack's brother Richard. Richard (inexplicably) adores Lavinia even though she's childish and irrational. Her three brothers - Tracy, Robert and Andrew - are always coming to Richard for money to pay their gambling debts. 

Poor Richard is miserable. He struggles with massive guilt over allowing his brother to be unjustly shunned. The Earl recently died, and Richard wishes Jack would come back to claim his title and properties.

Miles O'Hara was Jack's best friend before he disappeared, and the two reunite under ironic circumstances involving two unloaded pistols. Molly, Miles's wife, is probably my favorite character even though she isn't one of the major players here.

Diana Beauleigh, a somewhat unconventional heroine, doesn't enter the book until relatively late, but it's her storyline that drives most of the action to bring the various characters together. Tracy wants to bed her and, when she leaves Bath to get away from him, he decides to abduct her. Jack happens upon the scene, and the first swordfight ensues.

There are plenty of other characters who are less significant. As I've noticed in all Heyer novels, even those in small roles are brought to life with their tics and distinguishing features.

There are so many fun moving parts to this story. Perhaps it's a bit unfocused and the resolution of the plot and various subplots are more than a little unbelievable - but, I say again, it was written by a FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD!! Equally impressive is that all those moving parts do manage to converge near the end.

I just loved this.