Rating: 3/5

This true crime book is about a horrific incident that occurred in Kansas in 1995, when a house-fire resulted in the death of two children and a dog. 

Some people seem to be so blinkered and obtuse that you'd expect them to wander into traffic or fall off a balcony. That's how Dr. Michael Farrar struck me when I read this book.

The major events in the story begin when Farrar and his wife, Dr. Debora Green - who wed in 1979 - have been married for nearly 15 years and have three children: Tim (12), Lissa (10) and Kelly (6). The family has a nice home in Prairie Village, Kansas and their lives look serene from the outside. 

Dr. Debora Green

Dr. Michael Farrar

Young Tim, Lissa, and Kelly Farrar

The marriage is troubled though, in part because Debora Green is uninterested in sex; has a cold demeanor; and is a poor homemaker. This last trait is evidenced by the fact that Green leaves the house in a mess and treats the children with benign neglect. (Today Farrar would be expected to pull his weight - at least by me - but those were different times.)

In any case, in 1994 Farrar tells Green he wants a divorce and moves out of the house and into an apartment. Green - who's horrified by the idea of losing her social position - goes nuts. She rails against her husband and constantly tells the kids their dad is a monster who wants to leave them all homeless and starving.

Debora Green with her children 

Before long the family house 'mysteriously' burns down, and Farrar has no choice but to take in his wife - who's now essentially homeless. 

The Green/Farrar couple go on to purchase a large, expensive house and the marriage staggers on for a while. However, things don't get better and the children - egged on by their heavily drinking (and probably drug-using) mother - continually disrespect and bad-mouth their father. This is especially true of Tim, who calls his dad vile names and even gets physical. 

By now Farrar wants out for good, but decides to wait until the family returns from a multiple-family trip to Peru sponsored by the children's expensive private academy, 'The Pembroke Hill School.' 

During the trip Farrar becomes friendly with another parent, Celeste, whose husband is also a doctor. Back home Farrar and Celeste embark on an affair and in 1995 Farrar once more asks for a divorce.

Again faced with the prospect of losing her husband, Green escalates her verbal abuse and erratic behavior, and starts to appear quite demented. Unfortunately, Farrar is even more poorly equipped to cope this time. He's contracted an unknown illness and experiences bout after bout of a severe intestinal affliction that repeatedly sends him to the hospital. Green's doctors speculate that he picked up something in Peru, but don't know what.

Farrar becomes severely weakened, can't work, and deteriorates physically. His worst episodes ALWAYS occur after he eats a meal prepared by his wife, which he appreciates - thinking she's trying to be kind. Farrar's girlfriend suggests he's being poisoned, but Farrar dismisses the idea. 

COME ON!! At this point I figure that Farrar is TSTL - too stupid to live. 

Thankfully, Farrar wises up after discovering castor bean seeds (the source of ricin) in his wife's purse. 

Castor bean seeds

By now Farrar is determined to end the marriage once and for all.....and he packs up and moves out. With Farrar gone, Green spirals down and decompensates completely. She sets fire to the house, apparently meaning to kill all three children. Luckily Lissa escapes, but her siblings, Tim and Kelly - and the family dog Boomer - perish. 

Tim and Kelly

Kelly and Boomer

Interviewed by the police, Green denies everything. She avers that she didn't poison her husband; didn't set fire to the house; and didn't deliberately kill the children. She even seems to think her husband will take her in again. (Can you believe it?!) 

In the book, Ann Rule describes the arson probe; the police investigation; Green's arrest; and what happens before, during, and after - including the adjudication of the crimes and Farrar's continuing illness and numerous operations.

Debora Green

The author also goes back and details Debra Green's (née Jones) entire life. Rule starts with Debra's parents meeting and marrying; Debra's birth and childhood; Debra's high IQ and academic success; Debra's social adeptness and ability to 'fit in'; Debra's relationships with men.....and her first marriage to Duane Green (which ends in divorce). Up to this point, Debra's life seems fairly average for a gifted woman from a middle-class background.

Rule then goes on to write about Green meeting Farrar, their courtship, wedding, and years together. Green seems detached - and a bit peculiar - from the get-go, and I couldn't help wanting to jump into the book to yell PAY ATTENTION (at Farrar) before disaster occurs.

The tragedy happens, though, and it appears clear that Green was mentally ill. Sadly the psychiatric problem didn't become obvious (or perhaps didn't manifest itself) until Green was well into adulthood.

I found the story compelling, and would recommend the book to true crime aficionados.

You can follow my reviews at https://reviewsbybarbsaffer.blogspot....