Rating: 2/5

I've always been curious about this book, so when I heard it mentioned on Rachel Maddow's show a few days ago I searched for it on Google. The PDF was one of the first hits. (No way I was going to pay the publisher any money, especially after the author has disavowed the book and asked that it not be published any more.)

This book works best as an artifact of the 70's, in particular the bummery part of the 70's. There is a lot of talk about revolution, freeing one's mind, and standing up to the man. The philosophy weaved through the book, such as it is, was probably a pretty groovy rap for picking up girls with long hair and headbands, but I don't think it could survive the morning sun and running out of pot.

The first chapter is on drugs because I mean what's the point of revolution if your mind is still in chains, right? Some of the recipes are downright ludicrous like how to get high from bananas and peanut shells. But this is what life was like before the Internet. Misinformation moved slowly like bugs in amber, not like the crazy water bugs we have 30+ years later.

Then there is a delightful chapter on bugging and sabotage. There are handy tips on shoplifting, and how to do it in a way that stays true to the revolution. Then the next page talks about executing people who violate the code of the revolution. What the...? How did we get from stealing ham to killing infiltrators?

It turns out that this book was written by a 19-year-old who basically copied and pasted a bunch of stuff from military manuals and whatever else was laying around. The anecdotes are completely made up, as if the one about buying peyote in Mexico wasn't a dead giveaway.

Then there is a chapter about hand-to-hand combat that would probably only be useful to that poor Star Wars kid from the video.

Then there is a chapter on how to make explosives and how to use them to blow up stuff. There is even a helpful diagram showing the 10 or so places you need to put charges on a suspension bridge to bring it down. It's hard not to smile at the thought of a bunch of guys dressed in 70's clothes crawling around a suspension bridge with their homemade TNT in an effort to stick it to the man. Soundtrack by Isaac Hayes. Or maybe the A-Team theme.

Then the book is over, and you are now a revolutionary. Go out and kill the pigs and wake people up from their sleep and blind obedience to the machine and execute an infiltrator and meet a beautiful hippie chick and make her some pot-laced spaghetti from one of the recipes in chapter one.

If I had a time machine I would go back to 1970 and show Mr. Powell that Nike commercial with The Beatles' Revolution just to break his little revolutionary heart.

Both sides lost -- the hippies and the pigs. The world is controlled by multinational corporations. Hmm, maybe I'll write a book about how to defend yourself and fight back against these corporations. Some jerk can laugh at me in 30 years.

Disclaimer: A lot of very bad stuff went down in the 70s. There was plenty of stuff to protest against, and a lot of brave people protested and made their voice heard. I have the privilege of knowing some of them.

But this book is not the way forward and it is more likely to get you blown up then to change the world. The author agrees with me on this.