Rating: 2/5

Trigger Warnings: underage drinking (the youngest character who drinks being twelve), animal cruelty, physical abuse (as well as various forms of other abuse), incest, and statutory rape.
I’m gonna be honest about the positives first. 
On one hand, the writing and the setting was brought together well. As a family drama all the characters are well rounded and you get a sense of the family dynamic. The southernness of the novel felt experienced and not forced, especially in the language. On the other hand, this book is an example portraying anyone with a disability as a negative stereotype.

 It has a slight advantage above other books including disabled characters that the characters are more well rounded than straw men, but the autistic/Aspergers character in this book is presented as unfeeling, sexually aggressive, physically abusive, and deserving of being put away in a mental hospital. I understand that it is “the point” (and that should never be “the point” when it comes to writing a character on the spectrum). I understand the main focus of the book is toxicity and not disability, and the toxic behavior presented in the book isn’t always necessarily related to disability, (the words “autism” and “Aspergers” are never officially used outside of the blurb and it’s possible that the character in question is undiagnosed in the time period the book it set in), and its goal is to explore toxicity in general as opposed to specifically using a character who is an abuser to demonize disabled people. But every instance any disability is brought up uses negative adjectives. It’s true that there are people in the real world who are marginalized who are also abusive, but to present both so thoroughly in a fictional work without firmly separating the two is a presentation which is reckless and dangerous to people in the real world. It’s rarely stated that the animal cruelty the character exhibits or his fixation for the end of the world is specifically related to his Aspergers, but it’s never denied either. There are multiple other characters in the book who, in my opinion as a neurodivergent person, could be interpreted as being on the spectrum, but of course the only one who actually is only has the most visible and negative traits.

It’s made apparent how disability is portrayed when compared to another character in the book who has a physical disability. He has a wandering eye, but any struggles with his eyesight or visual impairment are practically non-existent outside of symbolic usage. Despite the fact that he commits some pretty despicable actions towards our main character as well, he remains the love interest until the last page. To compare, his eye is described as “chased after his (dead) father…nothing the doctors could do could tempt it back” and the Aspergers is “a black stone in clear water”. Disability is off-putting unless it doesn’t impact their lives or the lives of the people around them in a significant way.

I also found that, like the feelings towards disability, a lot of the themes take a “neither confirm nor deny” stance on what it presents. When our main character slut-shames a statutory rape victim (which is what she is even though the term is never used), is that the narrative doing it also so we’re meant to be on her side, or is it just reflecting the regressive environment our main character is in (it’s mentioned she only calls her a derogatory name because her brother would say that, furthering the “it’s only bad when the disabled character does it!” narrative, but she still says it)? When two underage characters are confirmed to be in an incestuous relationship, and main character keeps insisting that they’re half siblings until the end of the story, is that the narrative also framing incest as not that big a deal as long as they’re “half related” (especially when the narrative almost had the option to make it not incestuous, and yet, lo and behold, it insisted on taking the incest route) or is that also only just the views or the characters, or maybe result of a lack of any supervision in the incestuous characters lives? The narrative never confirms or denies.

There is hardly ever any levity in the entire book outside of highlighting the absurdity of a traumatic situation. This entire book feels like the flashback a character would have to their abusive past which they overcome from a different narrative instead of it being the entire narrative itself, which is only dread. So yeah, if you’re looking for a book including disabled or neurodivergent central characters, this book will make you angry. This book was written more than a decade and a half ago, so I hope that the author has actually done research or spent time with a someone on the spectrum by now. But the book is still out in the world and as it stands does more harm than good. I can see people who enjoy family dramas enjoying this or women seeking validation out of their trauma (unless you’re a fourteen-year-old statutory rape victim, then you’re a “whore”, tough luck!), but it’s all trauma and zero recovery.