Rating: 3/5

for background on what these books are &amp; why i am writing about them, see my review for kristy's big news.

okay, the plot of this book, told from stacey's perspective, is that there is a new boy at stoneybrook middle school. his name is jeremy. stacey &amp; claudia (best friends, if you will recall) both spot him in the lunch line at the same time &amp; invite him to sit with them at their lunch table. stacey feels strangely drawn to him, despite the fact that she has a 15-year-old artist boyfriend in new york city, ethan. it's been hard for stcey &amp; ethan to make time to see each other lately, &amp; their relationship seems to be faltering. but still. does that mean she has feelings for jeremy?

then claudia confesses to stacey that she has a big crush on jeremy. stacey takes the high road &amp; offers to talk to jeremy &amp; try to determine if he likes claudia back. (this is awesome because it is so exactly like middle school.) she pulls a few strings &amp; orchestrates a "date" for claudia &amp; jeremy to go to the mall together. she is sad doing this, because she wants to get to know jeremy better herself, but she does it to be a friend, &amp; claudia is really excited &amp; tells stacey that she &amp; jeremy had an awesome time on their "date".

then stacey &amp; ethan decide to "cool things off," which stacey interprets as "break up". she's sad, but not that sad, since it was a long time coming (shockingly mature for a 13-year-old--again, i know people 15 years older who don't have that kind of logic). then jeremy stops by stacey's house &amp; admits that he has feelings for HER, not claudia. stacey is psyched, because she realizes she Likes jeremy too, but she tells him she needs to clear it with claudia first. very adult. he understands. 

stacey tries to tell claudia, even going so far as to write up a little speech on note cards (it seems like the girls are always doing this--does anyone do this in real life?), but she can't get the words out. claudia always wants to show stacey some sketch she is doing of jeremy, or a bust she is making of his head or whatever. kind of crazy, but...okay. finally it comes out all wrong &amp; claudia's feelings are hurt &amp; they have the most AWESOME fight. stacey bitches at claudia for not bothering to learn how to spell properly &amp; calls her "stupid," &amp; claudia says stacey is a stuck-up snob who needs to get over being from NYC because so are ten million other people. haha! sweet. stacey storms off &amp; tells jeremy she will go out with him. her friendship with claudia is kaput.

a new girl has also moved to stoneybrook--rachel griffin. she used to live in stoneybrook, &amp; kristy, mary anne, &amp; claudia didn't like her. rachel moved to london in fifth grade, before stacey's time, but now she's back &amp; she &amp; stacey are becoming friends. rachel is very understanding of the claudia-jeremy-stacey love triangle &amp; encourages stacey to go for jeremy. stacey is sad to lose claudia as a best friend, but is excited to get to know rachel. even moreso after claudia tells jeremy about ethan &amp; jeremy ditches stacey for a second because he thinks he's a rebound. but eventually he comes back.

DRAMA-RAMA! i liked this book because i related quite a bit to wanting to date someone &amp; having friends freak out on me for it. story of my life. i really have to take stacey's side here, as much as it pains me. if jeremy wasn't into claudia, he's fair game. claudia should grow up &amp; try to be happy for them. stacey probably shouldn't have called her "stupid," but she did try to take claudia's feelings into account, &amp; claudia is just being selfish at this point. AT THIS POINT! soon, in the world of "friends forever," things get more complicated...