Rating: 3/5

I was surprised to discover this book about the rights of chickens on the shelf in my school library. It's not great, but it covers a topic that most kids are completely unaware of in a relatively accessible way. Andrew and Gemma read a book written by a chicken about an alien invasion. The aliens happen to liberate egg-laying chickens so they can repurpose the cages to take some humans home for food. The chicken accurately describes the conditions that 95% of "layers" spend their lives in and examines through the parallel of aliens feasting on humans the hypocrisies in the justifications that people give for exploiting animals for food. The jump from laying hens to broiler chickens wasn't clearly or accurately explained. It seemed a little farfetched for the kids to understand without it being explained to them that hens raised for their eggs are also processed into chicken meat, but misleading as well because the conditions for broiler chickens are pretty different from layers, though both situations are awful.

This book is described as a "humorous story" in the CIP. I really didn't find it funny at all. It was perhaps outlandish from some perspectives, but the odd approach to dealing with this horrific topic didn't make it any funnier or any less chilling. The aliens were eventually won over to the perspective of the chicken that we should treat animals that we're raising for food humanely so that they live happy lives. This is a perspective that many people I know support in their words, even if they don't actually make sure that any meat/eggs/dairy they eat came from animals that lived happy lives and lived out their natural lifespans. Putting in terms of "as long as the people have happy lives, it's perfectly okay if they get eaten at the end" really showed me how preposterous this perspective is unless you really don't value individual lives (human or non-human). The kids in the story both decided that they'd be perfectly fine being eaten, as long as they first got to live happy lives. What??? I don't want to be eaten, ever. I don't think it's okay to raise people (or any other animal) as long as they get to be happy along the way, so that one day we can kill them for food. If the author had used humor to expose the hypocrisy of this stance, maybe this could have passed as a humorous story. But instead it just felt like the author was afraid to take too strong a stance and make readers feel uncomfortable about what they eat.