Rating: 5/5

Tough guy detective Mike Hammer is back from the grave, almost literally, for one last adventure. It begins with getting shot to pieces and left for dead at what was supposed to be a hit on the last of the big-time Mafia dons, arranged by one of the don's sons. After Hammer put a bullet in the face of the Kid-Who-Would-Be-Don, but before he enters what Hammer calls the "black alley," he is bundled into the back of a car by a once-alcoholic doctor who lost his license and is nursed back to a fragile health. Recuperating in isolation in Florida, doing a whole lot of nothing, Hammer is tracked down by NYPD Homicide Captain Pat Chambers, telling him that their old Army buddy, Marcos Dooley, has been shot, hasn't much longer, and is asking for him. 

What got Hammer back into action, and put old Dooley in a grave, was some missing Mafia money, to the tune of $89 Billion. Yep, Billion with a "B." It's not exactly chump change, except to the American government, but even Uncle Sugar's "money mice" want to sink their teeth into this boodle. Of course, everyone thinks Dooley's private dying declaration to Hammer was the location of this trove. The problem? He didn't tell Hammer where it was, only what it was.

Mike Hammer first burst on the scene in 1947 in the unforgettable "I, the Jury." And, yes, that means that the war Hammer, Dooley and Chambers fought in was the Big War, the Good War, the war in which the Greatest Generation saved the hashtag Millennials from having to learn German or Japanese...yes, by this time (1996) Mike Hammer is an old geezer, no matter how you look at it. And though he's recuperating, he's still shot to hell...with everyone looking to add to the bullet count. However, he has one thing going for him that no one can take away...he's still Mike Hammer. 

It's one thing to be a tough guy when you're 25, but quite another when you're a septuagenarian. Mike is fully conscious of the reputation he has built over the past half-century, and he uses as a weapon. He carries a gun ("He always carries that gun," Don Lorenzo Ponti shouts down to his men at one point in the story. "If you think you can take it away from him without getting shot to pieces, go ahead, otherwise send him up.") but rarely does he actually have to draw it. It seems everyone knows somebody who thought he was tougher than Hammer, but wasn't. If they knew how close he was to entering the black alley, maybe they might have taken a chance...maybe not.

By the end of the story, the reader has been to the grave and back with Mike Hammer, has seen both what he can do and what he doesn't have to do. An astute reader will learn that being a tough guy has little to do with being either tough or a guy, that you make yourself tough by going against the grain, and that ultimately you make yourself by what you do, not what you say. A true tough guy like Mike Hammer need not always drawn his weapon, merely let some punk see it, or just give him...the look. Tough guys may get old, but not soft.