Rating: 5/5

5/5

I've completed the next entry in the Dr. Gideon Fell mystery series, Death-Watch, a book that is as wonderful and addictive as its title suggests. Throughout the novel, I was met with several other titles for this novel, namely, "The Mystery of the Flying Glove" and "The Lincoln Inn Field Murders". I'm inordinately pleased that Mr. Carr opted for Death-Watch instead of the others. I am of the opinion that Death-Watch is the more mysterious title and furthermore directs the attention of the reader towards the watches prominent in the story. These watches later prove to be the most instrumental part in decoding the mystery.

Speaking in broad strokes, I absolutely adore this book. One of the most enchanting mystery that I've ever read. The atmosphere, the misdirection, the gradual unraveling of the scene, everything is polished to perfection. The misdirection is in another sphere altogether. Never once throughout my read did I ever suspect the actual murderer. Carr's a bonafide genius of hiding stuff in plain sight and also in knowing when to emphasize the irrelevant, just take the numerous red-herrings that he spread throughout the story. 

In particular, my favorite scene in this whole book is the mock court scene between Dr. Fell and Inspector Hadley, in which both of them submit their views about the murder trying to convict a single suspect. These chapters, present in third quarter of the story surprised me with the sheer amount of information that we could deduce from the clues that we already knew. It was a humbling experience. Within two chapters, Carr made me believe in the guilt of one person and in the very next throughly disproved it. And that too with only the information the reader already knew. These couple of chapters are without doubt one of the best pieces of Detective Fiction ever written. 

Now let's discuss this novel as we usually do:

The Detective and the Method of Detection : 5/5
The Criminal : 5/5
The Method of Crime : 5/5

The Detective of the story is once again Dr. Gideon Fell and he is in his A-game in this novel. He always seemed five steps ahead of everyone. His wit is unmatched. The sheer ease with which he destroyed Hadley's entire case blew me away. And the sheer brilliance of this novel is that Dr. Fell is absolutely certain of the killer's identity in his own mind but the murderer, with his unnatural cunning has left no actual evidence or physical trail. This veritable cat and mouse chase between a Detective that we know to be brilliant and an invisible adversary is mesmerizing to watch. Carr remains adamant in not even hinting at the criminal's identity until the very very end. Throughout the novel, I kept wracking my brains trying to work out who the murderer was but I never actually seriously considered the actual murderer. The fact that an almost century old book can still baffle its reader is beyond amazing. 

Now let's discuss the Criminal. To prevent spoilers, I'm going to refer to the Criminal as they, but they are a single person. Put simply, they are the most brilliant adversary ever faced by Dr. Fell or in my opinion by anyone in the pantheon of Detective Fiction. Their plan was beyond perfect. They accounted for every eventuality, prepared for things that they didn't believe could happen, and even corrected for the most elusive of all errors, the human one. They set their mind to the task, created a plan and implemented it to great success. They had determination, cunning, guile, and the sheer intelligence to run circles around most readers. Their only undoing was their own nerves, steming from the lackluster motivation to actually commit the deed. But, aside from that, they are as close to perfect as any fictional character could ever be. I challenge you to find a better killer. 

In conclusion, Death-Watch is one of the best pieces of Detective Fiction ever written. Any reader even remotely interested in the genre must give it a read.

Can't wait to read more!!!