Rating: 5/5

I have been meaning to read this book for some time, judging it by its reputation. Now I can say the reputation is completely justified. It tells the full story of the pioneers who travelled westwards across America to reach California and the Oregon Territory in the 1840s and 1850s, many to settle and bring up their families, some to find their fortune in gold – or not – depending on their luck.

I was brought up in the 50s and early 60s with B movies and television westerns: Roy Rogers, Hopalong Cassidy, the Lone Ranger, Wagon Train, and so many more. What a load of inaccuracy they were. 

The late Mr Unruh describes the commercial and personal aspects of pioneer emigration. The outfitting firms in Missouri and Iowa, the passenger train organisers, the guidebook writers, the provision suppliers – so many people wanting to make a profit and the pioneers hadn't even started. Following that you had the ferry operators, the bridge and road toll collectors, the sutlers, blacksmiths, and livestock traders in the government forts or on the trails – again so many people wanting to make a profit. To counter that there were the relief expeditions made from Oregon and California to rescue starving and desperate pioneers on the final stage of their trek through the mountains who, for a variety of reasons – miscalculation, carelessness, bad luck – had come within a tantalising distance of their promised land and run out of food or water, or their livestock had died leaving them to travel on foot. Most of such expeditions were funded by individuals or communities as acts of charitableness.

The author emphasises that, apart from the Gold Rush years, the emigration was primarily a movement of families: men, women and children; not gunfighters, cattle rustlers and horse thieves – the West had a home-grown supply of those. Relations with the Indians tended to be peaceful, if distrustful. It was only later in the 1850s that more violent attacks occurred, many of them settlers against Indians rather than the other way round. 

Mr Unruh mentions some points and events which rarely appear elsewhere. Many emigrants decorated their canvas wagon covers with paintings or slogans: perhaps nice depictions of animals, perhaps political opinions, perhaps – especially among the gold rushers – expressions that were a little more explicit. There was the story of Henderson Luelling, who travelled to Oregon with a cargo of young fruit trees, vines and shrubs packed into a wagon that needed three oxen to pull it, and made a fortune as a fruit farmer and entrepreneur. And there were the causes of death en route, one of which, quite prevalent, was firearm accidents. Most emigrants were not expert at handling guns and an effective method of practical suicide was taking a loaded rifle out of a wagon barrel-first.

This is a fascinating study of an event and a period in Western history, made both academic and readable.