Rating: 5/5

Long review for a long book! Incredible one overall, really enjoyed reading it. Great character book, great travel book, and the quote on the front from the Chicago Sun says “conveys a sense of a new time, a new generation” is an accurate summation of the entire thing. I had heard of Michener, hadn’t read any of his books before, but went with this, even though it’s not as popular as some of his others off of my Dad’s recommendation. The book follows a group of 6 kids, high school / college aged, about half of them Americans, other half from around the world as they tour through Southern Europe and parts of Africa. It’s narrated by a guy, Mr. Fairbanks, who kind of knows them all from different places, and winds up joining them on many of their trips. I think there's quite a bit of exaggeration, but hey it's fiction. 

First of all, this is a great character book. Each of the six (eventually seven) main characters get their own chapter dedicated to them to start the book. They each have lots of depth and background which becomes very rewarding as the story gets going, but I’ll admit, was a bit tough to read through at first. Each of their personalities depict a couple of the different pervading ideologies or common experiences happening during this time period. I really liked reading Yigal, Britta, and Gretchen. 

Second, oh my god what an amazing travel book. I mean talk about something that’ll make you want to just drop everything you’re doing and buy a one way ticket somewhere exotic. They cover Spain, Portugal, Mozambique, Morocco, in the backstories you get Israel, Philly, the midwest, Norway, fictional countries like Vwarda. They discuss Egypt, Nepal, Switzerland, England, you name it. Really cool look into what travel must’ve been like before it was so commercialized. No one had phones and you just had to go off of maps and word of mouth. It just seems like such a unique way to live, and the descriptions of these places are done so well and so positively, it’s so enticing.

Third, I think besides Lord of the Rings, I’ve never read a book with so many song lyrics in it. Music is such an important part of the story, it’s brought up very often in discussions about the old vs new generations. Long analysis is done of the modern lyrics, and how they’re inferior to the new age ones, until Fairbanks and Holt sit down with the kids to hash it out and the old balls get clowned. I’m sure it’s the same story repeated each generation, about how the current music is “garbage” and doesn’t make sense. Speaking of music, there is much about the drug culture of this book and more broadly about the psychedelic age. There’s a lot of debate about weed, LSD, and ultimately heroin, how it impacts the young people, how it’s compared to alcohol, and how normalized it was becoming, especially in the music, a key example being Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds. Monica’s arc really serves as an example of the danger in drug experimentation during this period. I enjoyed reading these back and forths on music and someone should go through and make a playlist of all the songs that get mentioned, would be fun to listen to and would capture a good sense of the aesthetic at the time. 

And then last, it should be mentioned how much of the anti-war ideology is shouted out in the book, specifically with Joe dodging the draft. The futility of war really shines through from him, not only because of how the war itself was seen as illegal as it was never declared by Congress, but also because of the existence of the H bomb, so why even fight when an entire nation can be wiped out immediately. But what’s interesting are the three characters around him whose background is defined by war and violence. Yigal fought in war at 17 in the Middle East, Holt was a WWII and Korean War hero, and Cato helped run a violent civil rights group. As you can guess, each of these makes up for really interesting conversation of when is war justified and ethical, and when is it not. Speaking of Cato, and of the Civil rights movement, I was surprised about how much open discussion there was about race throughout the book, just because it has become so taboo lately, I was surprised at how unfamiliar these passages felt to me as I was going through it, because published in 1971, it for sure wasn’t that long ago. That being said, I think a few of these sections do read to be a bit outdated, to say the least. 

At the end of the day, this book really is about what it must’ve been like to be a young twenty something in the late sixties. It must’ve felt very current when it came out. So much of the discourse is about the Vietnam War, the civil rights movement, and the disillusionment of what the government was doing at the time, how the corruption of our institutions caused a lot of the young people to “drift” away from society. Also much a lot of discussion about relationships and the sex culture of this period. Narrated from the perspective of Fairbanks who’s a generation (maybe two) older, you get a really good sense of how it feels like the times were changing, and which parts of societal norms were rejected and/or taken for granted as the youth came up. He serves as a really good foil for the rest of the group. “Each generation has to defend its own values” is a quote which I think sums up this feeling well. You get a continued sense of worry from these older characters throughout that society might crumble once it’s in the hands of the new generation, but looking back now a few generations later, it seems this is a fear which was unwarranted.

It’s hard to read this without thinking about my own generation, drawing parallels from today to what it was like back then when Vietnam and the rejection of Lyndon B Johnson and the draft were so close to the forefront. I think of the major challenges my generation has faced which could be compared. The COVID pandemic that ripped two years of our youth away due to lockdowns that went on far too long. Continued wars in the Middle East and Ukraine. Big tech companies creating algorithms that hack our attention mechanisms for engagement. A divisive and aging government elected by a population that refuses not make concessions or create opportunities for young people (see lockdowns, see affordability crisis). Not to mention how difficult it has become for new graduates to get jobs because of the incoming AI technology. All of these things combined, I feel like there could be a serious return to this “drifting” sentiment from my generation, similar to how it existed about 60 years ago. Prior generations that subsidize the lifestyles of the more fortunate kids while they figure it out, while the less fortunate will either struggle in the wage cage or be set adrift. What’re the values of our own generation we want to defend? There’s so much more pessimism and polarization lately, it’s difficult to say. The space of ideas feels much broader now and it’s not easy refining and pinpointing them.

I do have to say, it was really tough to read this without feeling pretty discouraged about my own job, particularly how monotonous it is, without having my eyes set on bigger or meaningful or autonomous pursuits. (Moment of self reflection to notice this as a common occurrence in like over half of the novels I read lol). There’s a really great line from Fairbanks towards the end about how the leaders will come from both Michigan and Marrakech, and although he calls out that the majority of these (with a much higher success rate) will be from Michigan (meaning traditional institutions), it would be really fun to go out and explore Marrakech. And it is easy to romanticize this lifestyle, but I mean if we return to the outcomes of what actually happened to our group, I won’t give spoilers but for the majority, it wasn’t necessarily the best. I wish there was an easier way to try and chase both paths within today’s system, or at least a way to strive for some of these other goals without feeling like you’re sacrificing huge swaths of opportunity and stability on the financial side.

Lots and lots of good quotes in here. Too many to call out. The section on Pamplona was top notch, that chapter I think had to have been my favorite, but there are so many good ones. I think if I had some criticisms of the book, the first would be that setting up the six main characters took a long time, maybe a third of the book, and more generally, the pacing can kind of stall, it loses its momentum in a few places. Definitely a bit on the longer side too. I was a little confused on the narrator’s role for a bit, he goes on many tangents throughout the book, but once I was on board, I thought it was done well (although like the dude is 60 and he hangs out with 6 20 year olds for like 4 months…). Before I had my bearings though, I almost wanted these long tangents to get a bit more surreal and dreamy, almost like some Bolaño passages, ultimately wasn’t the vibe but it could’ve been and I think it really would’ve worked.

Overall, loved it. For sure hyperbole, but it’s what I was looking for. “Youth is truth”. 5/5. 

Dad, if you made it this far and sometime down the line I quit my job to go romp around the globe for a period of time, all I’m saying is that it’s not my fault because you recommended this one