Rating: 3/5

This is an erratic, unsuccessful novel that demonstrates that great writing is not enough to generate great books. As always, Updike displays his astonishing eye for detail--and couples it with an unusually thoughtful approach to American history--but the parts do not add up to a whole despite twenty pages at the end that serve to complete, or partially save, the text surprisingly well.

Here we have one Alf, an historian obsessed with James Buchanan (the only president from Pennsylvania) conflating his failed attempts to write a unique book about Buchanan with his failed attempt to carry off an affair with another man's wife (while abandoning his own and his children.) All this occurs during Gerald Ford's presidency, hence the title, but Ford gets little play here.

Written in the weakly comic form of a memo to a New England historical association, Alf sometimes reflects on Genevieve, his lover, and their affair, and sometimes offers long historical reflections on Buchanan. There's no one-to-one correspondence between the two parallel stories, just some interstitial ice-dancing by Alf in his attempts to combine the two.

That said, once the lugubrious Buchanan finally achieves the presidency and is faced with the trouble brewing in South Carolina, the actual history here is interesting--as well-informed and better written than similar pieces by Gore Vidal (Burr, etc.). And Alf's broader reflections on his own self-indulgent behavior and the haplessness of contemporary American culture and politics reflect Updike's deep, amused interest in almost everything from the fashions of the day to the performance of Volvos to the varieties of religious experience to be obtained by munching on the part of a woman that is to be found between her legs.

Just reading Updike is to ask yourself how much you miss in a given day that he always captures and puts to use. It is also, in this particular book, to be exposed not only to his supple intellect but also to his firm judgment. He was a devout middle-of-the-roader, perhaps accounting for his interest in the sorely tried Buchanan (caught between north and south). For him (Updike's gone now), the sky was never quite falling and yet bliss--especially the sexual kind of bliss--was dependably transient. 

The amount of research Updike must have put into generating this novel is somewhat mind-boggling. Even though Buchanan, like Alf, is not an interesting character in and of himself, his times, more than Alf's times, were interesting. Romance was not so easy back in the 19th century, gossip was more harmful, and one had to be more careful of one's reputation. By the same token, politics had a certain dignity and formality--and skullduggery, one must admit--that cost Buchanan a lot of effort. He, too, wanted to be in the middle, but where was the middle?

The middle in Alf's case seems to have been the general muddle of the Ford administration. In some ways, the most intriguing moment in Alf's affair with Genevieve comes at its end. He wants to disbelieve her call to order, but she has had enough and does not believe (as he does and thinks everyone in the Ford era does) that his unfaithfulness to her (he's not quite a serial offender, but when he gets a chance, he is) is no big deal.

Both of them go back to their flawed mates and confused children, but in Updike's world, this is okay, how things go, something to observe and ponder, not dramatize.

Updike's essentially benign view of humanity's imperfections derives from two things: 1) his comic spirit and 2) the undamaged narcissism of being an only child.

This probably explains why he brings his story to the edge of divorce and total rupture within two families and to the edge of civil war and total rupture within a nation but does not go into the gory, permanently damaging realities of maimed children and soldiers and societies. Updike was no Ingmar Bergman or William Styron. He was not a writer interested in total darkness taking over his imagination, but it can't be said that he didn't have a well-conceived position on rejecting tragedy. And there's something to what he seems to say: "Life goes on, like it or not."

This novel? Well, I've said it doesn't work, but yet as an artifact of the times and of aesthetic failure, it probably is worth reading all the way through, but that presupposes a willingness to be pleased more by dazzling detail and observation than repelled by a narrative conceit yielding two books, each half written, within the cover of one.