Rating: 4/5

I discovered Delia Sherman through the excellent anthology Fantasy Magazine, October 2014: Women Destroy Fantasy! Special Issue, and though the pacing structure verges on plodding, The Porcelain Dove offers a remarkable glimpse into pre-revolutionary France. Full disclosure: this is an era I normally would have little interest in; the decadence of the "nobility" is already clear enough to make delving into its intricacies seem a bit of a bore. That said, Sherman does a remarkable job enlivening the complicity, complexity, and tragedy of the serving class. Her characters are lively and nuanced.  in the years before the beggar came, Artide was the most interesting man I knew, with his peasant's face and his philosophe's mind that was equally hospitable to Magic and Science, Art and Nature. Ghosts were as real to him as electricity, witches as plausible as mathematicians. I'd never met anyone like him. And besides, he never flirted with me.  The narrator-protagonist Berthe is believably flawed; her short-sightedness, racism, moments of kindness, and so-on lift this tale well above the norm. If there are a trifle too many details about period clothing and slightly obscure French phrases invoked, the former seems justified in the work that it does outlining Berthe's own superficial concerns. The latter not so much, but it's countered by enough good prose that - at the 40% mark - I'm willing to forgive.  without the beggar and his curse, the events of the next twenty years had neither order nor meaning. Jean says this is great nonsense. Things happen. Sometimes they make sense and more often they don't, but none of it means anything in particular. Once a good tale's bought its teller his fill of wine, it has served its whole purpose and might as well be forgotten. He's wrong, of course: he doesn't even really believe he's right.  Thus far, the fantasy element is quite suppressed; will be curious to see how it unfolds in the second half. This is certainly a long read; its pacing gives it the air of a biography - this too remains to be justified. Finally, the editorial blurb is entirely inaccurate: the narrator isn't in the least "irrepressible" nor is the story particularly "dazzling" so far. I would, rather, describe it as "character-driven" or a "detailed rumination on the luscious grotesque life of the moneyed classes and those that support them."