Rating: 5/5

Cathy and Heathcliff, a love story? At the beginning of our narrative Mr. Lockwood a tenant of Thrushcross Grange, visits his landlord Mr. Heathcliff at Wuthering Heights, four long miles away across the cold, eerie, moors, people back then walked a great distance they had few options without much complaining, troubled Lockwood wants to get away from society (he came to the right place). The setting is northern England 1801, in the Yorkshire Moors a vast, remote, desolate and gloomy grassland beautiful and ugly at the same time, a haunting locale. Lockwood is the only person who likes Heathcliff " a capital fellow" in the area, he sees something no one else does on his mournful face, sadness maybe even regret ( like himself) ? Later he learns the story of his landlord's tragic life, through Mrs. Nelly Dean his servant at Thrushcross Grange for three long generations there , she tells him about the life of Heathcliff found in the streets of Liverpool, hungry , crying, dirty , all alone without anyone caring either, at the tender age of two, but the compassionate Mr. Earnshaw a wealthy man , Catherine's (Cathy's) father and takes him home. They never discovered the boy's true identity but because of the child's dark complexion, everyone calls him a gypsy. The two, Catherine and Heathcliff, grow up as brother and sister at Wuthering Heights always together Cathy and the unwanted orphan, playing on the lonely moors, they are soulmates . Resented by Cathy's older brother Hindley, (who beats him many times) in fact everyone does, still the gentle Mr. Earnshaw loves the boy. Morose, showing no emotions he can't afford to, still very angry underneath because of how others treat him, as an inferior, Heathcliff was never given another name. When teenager Cathy decides to marry Edgar Linton from a respected well - off family and Heathcliff hears about it , he disappears to parts unknown the penniless man feels betrayed....Years pass and Heathcliff comes back from America rich, nobody learns how and he doesn't say either, probably not quite honestly and seeks vengeance. The children of each estate the Linton's of Thrushcross Grange and the Earnshaw's of Wuthering Heights, inherit their respective homes, Cathy wants to maintain a friendship and maybe more with Heathcliff, the weak Edgar of course hates the gypsy yet can't stop the two from seeing each other, the attraction is too powerful. The triangle will soon dissolve, people come and go but the moors abide. Strong novel with a bittersweet plot... Love or despise this classic, you cannot help but admire its quality.