Rating: 5/5

As a lifetime Aspie, being allocated to the A-Stream academic program after grade school was nothing short of a highly-unheard-of miracle!

So, my freshman year of high school - Grade 9 in Canuck lingo - was an Utter Drudge for me (my review of that YA Sleeper, Truly Madly Awkward, will tell you more details about that)! Why? First of all, it was tough...

I'll get to more of that in a few minutes...

But for now, I'll tell you Mr. Bonspiel's Junior Band practice sucked BIG TIME. That's because Bonny (aka Hank to us little nerds) told me - poor spoiled Me - that I couldn't play trumpet like our in-crowd ringleaders! 

 "Your lips are too FET!" he barked at me with his Teutonic accent. Whata Storm Trooper, I confided to myself. "You now play TUBA!" he yelled, as I seeped into the very Floor before the giggles of the cute teen coeds.

How would you have felt?

That night I told Mom. "Well, I FORBID you to play Tuba. Tell your Mr. 'Bonspiel' THAT!" AH, the happy whiz of machine-gun crossfire.

 So the next day I proudly told Mr. Bonspiel what my Mom had said...

 "VUT?" Bonspiel fairly shouted at me ( I was by now reduced to a Mere Fet Blob of a kid). "Your MOTHER says THAT???" This time the Whole Class exploded hysterically.

So now, it wasn't just Machine Guns. It was Artillery Shrapnel too.

My new friend David consoled me at lunch hour - he bought an Ice Cream Drumstick, and I an Ice Cream Sandwich (really piliing on the Blubber now, I thought, and turned red). 

I blushed easy in Grade Nine. I told you I am an Aspie.

This time it was because David's father, DOCTOR David, was the most prestigious scientist at my Dad's Research Institute. And David Jr. was FRIENDING big fet me! I blushed again...

And my Dad? Where was HE now?

Far, far away. 

That was the Root Cause of my Blue Drudge.

And now, it was only me (and a rapidly capitulating Mom) against Herr Bonspiel. So I GLADLY accepted David's friendship.

And so my first home room clique was formed. Me on piano, David, Bill the Trombone Player, little short-sighted Ron the clarinetist, and Bill the TRUMPET Player. 

Facing Off versus the gigglers, but backed up all together in a cozy corner of the lunch room!

And the Eagle of the Ninth?

Later, later...

Well, to understand where I'm coming from, you've gotta know that a Big Blue Adolescent Drudge can just about WRECK all your high school years. Remember J. Alfred Prufrock? 

That was ME.

And my Sleepy Yellow Fog of a Drudge tailed me right thru into senior year.

THEN my Dad (now long returned from sabbatical) wrote up an account of an Act of Creation in Vitro for me to use in an essay. 

When the teacher expressed her admiration, I was suddenly an Untouchable Rock Star in senior biology class (thanks, Dad)! My 'own' essay, Biogenesis, gave me a modicum of respect among even my well-heeled peers. 

AND that scam was the first flimsy Domino that caused the Whole Pack of my Mental Dominoes to collapse, Three Years Later.

But that's another story...

And what about The Eagle of the Ninth? That's what all this is supposed to be all about!!!

Well, the Eagle was the first symptom of my lifetime sporadically desultory reading habits. A first victim of the High School Drudge, bereft of my Dad...

THAT was the Trauma that charted the course of my long, crazy life. The Beginning of the End for big fet me!

Cause I never even finished this book.

But NOW, having read my Old friend Dan Lutt's SUPERB summary in his review on this page, I know he can tell you more than I now know.

I say NOW - because I'm about to start it again.

His review is THAT tantalizing! So read it...

And when I do, I PROMISE you there Won't be another review from big fet me.