Rating: 4/5

This book grabbed me right from the start. Where does it start? Russia and Belorussia, more precisely Leningrad and Minsk. We learn first about Lee Harvey Oswald’s wife’s aunt with whom Oswald’s future wife comes to live. Then it zooms in on Marina, she who will become his wife. He marries her on April 30, 1961, during his two and a half year’s stay in the U.S.S.R. I mention this because the book does not state until much later who these people are and how they come to be related to Oswald. I think this is helpful to know. All the time we are learning about him and about her. This part reads as narrative non-fiction but is solidly based on fact. 

The book’s central topic is of course Lee Harvey Oswald. Yet it also gives an excellent depiction of life in the Soviet Union during the 50s and the early 60s. It is worthwhile to read just for this! This part is thoroughly engaging. It is chockfull of details and people. "Here is what is known, so now what shall we make of it?" kind of writing. Writing that pushes you to think and draw your own conclusions.

Once into volume two, Mailer begins to insert his views. The setting has shifted from the U.S.S.R. to America. We shift our gaze from Oswald’s wife, her family and their friends to Oswald’s own mother and brothers and earlier acquaintances. We look at his experiences in the Marine Corps, trained in the US and later stationed in Japan. Then we shift to the period between June 1962, when Oswald departed from Minsk with wife and daughter, through to November 1963 and the assassination of Kennedy. Lee Harvey Oswald’s subsequent assassination by Jack Ruby, two days later, follows. 

Much has been written on Oswald, Kennedy and Ruby. The book presents a thorough review of what is known and what has been speculated. KGB and FBI transcripts, recorded dialogues from Oswald’s bugged apartment, excerpts from Oswald's letters, from the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee on Assassination are sited. Sections from Priscilla Johnson McMillan’s Marina and Lee, Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK by Gerald Posner ad other books are directly quoted. A multitude of known facts are presented. Strengths and weaknesses of viable speculations are presented, weighed and discussed. Conspiracy theories, Haitian and Cuban international affairs and mob involvement are covered in quite great depth. I did not understand everything, but I learned a lot. 

That Oswald was the assassin seems pretty clear to me. You do not get definitive answers on whether Oswald worked alone or in conjunction with others nor why he targeted Kennedy. I don’t think you can expect more than what has been delivered.

Christopher Lane does a fantastic job with the narration of the audiobook; his narration I have given a full five stars. Perfect speed, perfect everything. He captures each person’s voice wonderfully, but at the same time he doesn’t insert himself into the tale. His performance is excellent because you do not even notice he is there. 

********************

Oswald's Tale: An American Mystery 4 stars
Marilyn 3 stars
The Naked and the Dead TBR