Rating: 4/5

"And he prayed that his family would be protected from the atom bomb disease called leukemia."

History learning has many angles, and more often than not, we tend to focus on the big, "exciting" events of wartime action, while forgetting to highlight the consequences of those actions.

In times when leaders in the world seem to have forgotten the impact of the atom bombs in Japan, and seem to think that it is an actual "solution" to a pathetic macho contest, we need to step away from just giving students the statistical details of the war. We need to show them what it really means to a society to be hit by a (comparatively small) atom bomb.

I recommend this short novel to initiate a reflective discussion on the effect of careless politics on the lives of innocent children - not just immediately during the war itself, but long after "peace" has been re-established. The target age is younger Middle School, but it is well worth reading with other age groups as well.

The story line is simple and straight forward, and based on a true event. A young girl, born in 1943 in Hiroshima, athletic, happy, full of plans for the future, suddenly falls ill with leukemia at age 11 and dies of the disease as a long-term effect of the atom bomb dropped on her city when she was 2 years old. She has a strong will to live, and starts folding paper cranes, as an old Japanese myth says she will be granted life if she is able to make 1,000 of them. Obviously, the myth has no power against the reality of the nuclear age, and she stands as a symbol for the many victims of the most brutal of human inventions.

I strongly recommend this as required reading for the next generation, which will hopefully be more capable of empathy and imagination than the ruling patriarchy we see in power in states with nuclear weapons today.

There is no excuse whatsoever for using nuclear weapons against any people. We need to get back to teaching the consequences of reckless, impulsive behaviour along with universal human rights and protection of the weak. The world is not a stage where vulgar power hungry egomaniacs should be given the right to act out their narcissism unchecked. The world is not their property, given to them to play with. Complacency in this case is complicity.

We have to think of our children!