Rating: 4/5

https://undertheradarsffbooks.com/202...

For those of you who follow me on twitter and my reviews know how much of a fan I am for the works of Janny Wurts. Janny writes her stories with emotionally impactful scenes combined with beautiful prose to go along with it. I thought now would be a good chance to take a look at one of the standalone novels written by this amazing author. The Master of Whitestorm is an episodic volume and different than most other stories I have had the pleasure of reading, but the characters just shine on every page and the the true motivations of the two main POV’s will come to the forefront. By the end, you will question everything and ask yourself did the characters not understand each other or was it me?

I won’t go into too many details due to spoilers, but the story begins on a slave ship with our two main characters chained together as oars mates on a Mhurgai galley. Korendir is considered to be a madman due to his silence and sheltered behavior. What these prisoners don’t know is that this is by design as Korendir has a devious intellect for his ultimate plan. Korendir’s mate Haldeth looks to escape the bondages of his captives by any means necessary. Korendir is able to free the two of them and they embark on a long journey to the cursed kingdom of Torresdyr. To free the land of a curse, they first need to uncover a legendary wardstone from a witch. The future of Korendir and Haldeth’s adventures will be riddled with success and pain as the Master of Whitestorm will always be looking for the next impossible task.

As I mentioned before, each chapter is considered the next part and/or episode in the lives of our dynamic duo. Korendir seems to wear an emotional armor for his own protection and in order to hide his true ambitions. I found myself caring for Korendir immensely because I have always had a difficult time expressing myself in my younger days and it is never something you truly learn to outgrow. Some people will call this a defensive mechanism and sometimes it is the only way to cope with the traumas and the shitty parts of life. Everything will heal with time but they are never forgotten. Throughout this journey, Janny’s amazing writing brought me back to my teenage years and made me realize the person I am today is due to my past and not in spite of it. Our two main characters battle magical creatures, elementals, and achieve great glory but will the cost be too great?

If you haven’t read a single work by Janny Wurts, this is a great place to start. Very few authors will provide the emotional impact and the beauty of lyrical prose the way that Janny can. Characters are the shining beacon for this standalone adventure with the emotional gut punches to go along with it. Join me in diving deep into the works of this critically acclaimed author because the best is yet to come.

Cheers!