Rating: 4/5

Another difference distinguished Billy from many of his wartime friends and enemies. Although the newly respectable did not suddenly acquire scruples and cleanse society of its iniquities, they did rely less on violence to advance their fortunes. But Billy remained a gunman, coiled to defend himself or project his will through violence.

Failing in his bid for respectability, the Kid remained the consistent rebel. His criminal escapades, especially as they began to gain him notoriety, affronted and challenged the establishment. In contrast to Dolan, Riley, Matthews, and others who had initially created such turmoil, Billy continued to make trouble. Perhaps men like Judge Bristol, District Attorney Rynerson, and even Governor Wallace saw in the Kid's contempt for conventions and defiance of authority a disquieting reminder of their own pliant ethics and questionable actions. Whatever their motives, they singled him out for special treatment and ultimately, together with his comrades Bowdre and O'Folliard, saw that he paid for his insolence with his life. 

Billy the Kid died as America enthusiastically plunged into the Gilded Age. The transformation of an agrarian nation into an industrial giant launched a frenzy of material acquisitiveness that corrupted national institutions with the same ethical laxity so conspicuous on the frontier. Jimmy Dolan and his friend Rynerson would have felt entirely at home in Boss Tweed’s Tammany Hall or even in Grant’s White House. Only in a quick reliance on violence did the frontier differ from the nation as a whole in the relentless quest for power and wealth, and then it was largely a difference of degree. 

The twin specters of corruption and violence remained embedded in American culture, periodically to surface separately or in tandem. Whether originating in the frontier experience or in some dark stain in the American character, they continue to find ambiguous expression in the legend of a youth who lived both. More than a century after his death, Billy the Kid still rides boldly across America’s mental landscape, symbolizing an enduring national ambivalence towards corruption and violence. 
 
For a life that ended at twenty-one, that is a powerful and disturbing legacy.