Rating: 5/5

If you're a fan of the 1944 Otto Preminger film version of Vera Caspary's novel, you're likely to find the source material of particular interest. 

The book is something of a different animal - yet the film is still a rather faithful, streamlined adaptation. A similarity between the two is possible since the storyline is not complex - outside of the significant, midway twist. In bringing the book to the screen, the screenwriters kept to character basics, reducing (and simplifying) individual shadings in order to deliver a compact, 90-minute flick. 

Caspary wrote a 5-part tale that switches POV 4 times in the telling. The main characters take turns dominating the narrative in a manner somewhat reminiscent of Kurosawa's 'Rashomon'.

Essentially, the film sort of jettisons Caspary's overall tone. Sophistication is maintained but the screenplay's dialogue is only intermittently taken from what the author originally served up. Rewatching the film after finishing the book, I could only occasionally hear what was authentically Caspary. The larger part of the script is still intelligent, it's just a kind of translated intelligence. 

The main noticeable difference of the novel rests in Part One, from the POV of Waldo Lydecker. Frankly, the Waldo of the book is considerably more annoying than the one portrayed on-screen by Clifton Webb. In the book, Waldo is not just prissy or affected. Let me put it this way: in the film, I could give the character (as played by Webb) the benefit of the doubt (to a degree) - but in the novel Waldo appears to be relentlessly gay (as well as imbued with the belief that he is superior to all other human beings); making any inference to Laura as a love interest laughable. 

At one point, Waldo reminds us:
  "... there is no lack of sustenance in whipped cream."
He goes on to illustrate:
  "'Laura, my precious babe,' I said to her, 'we shall drink to your frock in champagne.' It was her first taste of it, McPherson. Her pleasure gave me the sensation that God must know when he transforms the blasts of March into the melting winds of April."
Waldo goes on and on like that. Like... constantly.

(On-screen, a similar thing happens in 1950's 'All About Eve': As bitchy and borderline nancy-boy as Addison DeWitt can seem, beefier George Sanders still possesses the kind of masculine bravado that eludes Clifton Webb. In Caspary's book, Waldo is drawn in a way that perfectly describes the actor who was originally cast but rejected by Preminger: Laird Cregar.) 

In the 20-page afterword provided in the paperback, we learn that Caspary rather liked the overall direction and feel of Preminger's film. She did not, however, particularly care for the way the character of Laura is - as a woman - watered down. I can see Caspary's point; a fair amount of Laura's texture didn't make it to the film.

That may not bother the casual film fan, looking for exactly what Preminger's classic noir offers. But, in finding Caspary, that same fan may end up appreciating the film in a whole new way.