Rating: 5/5

*loud groans that words cannot express*

This freaking series, man. Oh, my word. I just...ahhhh!

Winston Graham is a master of psychology. All of his characters are real. Even the ones I dislike--really, truly, dislike--I can still understand, as Graham explores their inner lives. Few other authors do that, favoring a sympathetic villain, whose motives may be explained but who remains villainous. Graham does not villainize anyone: actions and ensuing consequences are so complex that blame is never fully laid on one person. Instead, each character is treated with narrative dignity, so the motives and thought processes are laid before the reader. Even characters like Osborne Whitworth (the Whitworst™) somehow become understandable to me, if not sympathetic, because I can follow their self-deception through Graham's masterful writing, and grasp their thoughts and actions from their own perspectives. I put off reading this one for a few weeks because I was afraid of encountering my own vengeful feelings regarding Whitworth, but Graham's writing took over, and I found myself in an unexpected place.

Morwenna, my darling child and most beloved character, is treated with a rare respect in this narrative. Her suffering is completely validated by Graham, allowed to exist and fester and perhaps heal, never belittled nor tied up with a miracle cure. Would that all rape victims and those with PPD were treated as fully human in novels. Drake, my other darling child and most beloved character, reminded me so much of my husband. He loves deeply and permanently from a pure heart, without coercion or expectation beyond being allowed to love. What a man, what a man, what a mighty good man.

It's hard for me to pick a favorite book in this series, and I have five more to go. I think I need to split it up by characters and think of my favorite book for each, because there are so many characters and narratives that any book will raise mixed feelings. The Angry Tide in particular is the highest-rated installment for me, because Graham truly impressed me with his literary skill. I sometimes fall into the trap of thinking series fiction/historical fiction is not as ~literary~ as other sorts of fiction, and then someone like Graham comes along and humbles all the English major nonsense out of me. A good book is a good book (even if I did unashamedly skip the portions on the French Revolution). The challenge with the Poldark series is that the quality partially lies in its breadth, and the commitment it takes to stick with a series of twelve very long novels is not right for every reader. Thank goodness it was adapted; my life is much richer for the reading, and I'd not have heard of the series without the adaptation.

And the closing chapters, again....my word. Graham. You did that. My heart is in little pieces all over the place, and I had no love for that character. Yet, you still made me feel for her. Wow. *Gomer Pyle voice* "How'd he do that?" I don't know, but I'm glad he did.

Content warnings: um, everything? Adultery, rape, foot fetishes, murder (more than one), death in childbirth...y'all, it's all here. You will likely be bothered by something. But Graham handles things so well that there are few readers I would turn away because of content.