Rating: 3/5

I inadvertently read this book out of order before 'The Lying Stones of Marrakech', the next in the series. Like that one I found this a mixed bag, but again a decided improvement on the earlier 'Three Little Piggies'.

As usual, what comes across is Gould's admiration for Charles Darwin, and his own co-written contribution to the field of palaeontology with 'punctuated equilibrium': the idea that lifeforms remain static for great periods and then undergo comparatively rapid evolution at intervals, often due to mass extinction events. Again he bemoans the lack of understanding among the general public of how evolution works: relatively rapid changes occur in small populations isolated from the main body of their originating species, and that life does not automatically become 'better' or 'higher/more complex' but changes randomly. Accordingly, in his view the advent of human beings and consciousness was never preordained.

Topics roam quite widely and include essays on the contributions of leading figures of the 19th century such as Erasmus Darwin, Charles' grandfather, and Linnaeus the Swedish scientist who first came up with a way to label lifeforms in a taxonomy not based upon their utility to human beings but more on their resemblances to each other: a system still in use, with modifications, today. 

Among the more interesting for me was an essay on Edgar Allan Poe's publication of a guide to molluscs. Most Poe scholars preferred to draw a veil over this, but Gould's investigation shows it was co-written with an expert who already had a book out but an expensive one and wanted a modestly priced guide to sell on lecture tours, which in the nineteenth century were essential to such people in order to make a living. A lucrative side-line was the selling of related books when delivering a series of lectures at one of the many lyceums and other venues in the USA. The book was part-plagiarised from a British author - the plates mainly - and partly taken from the scientist's own work, but with a couple of innovations. At the time, most books on molluscs concentrated on the shells, ignoring the animals inside. A respected French scientist had written a book on them, and Poe was probably engaged because he was fluent in French due to his background and was able to translate that work and add the information (more plagiarising, but at the time foreign works were fair game in the States). Apparently the guide was also organised differently than such books at the time, so Gould viewed it as not an unworthy effort, after all. 

Other essays of note concern the interest in eugenics in early 20th century America and the taking of such policies to their logical conclusion in Nazi Germany. Altogether there was enough of interest, but I also found the early part of the book and some of the essays along the way slow going. So I had to dip into it over an extended period, and it has taken me about three months to read, a lot longer than anything else of equal or even greater length, so I'm awarding a respectable 3 stars.