Rating: 1/5

Freddie Mercury is everything. He IS an icon and someone I look up to and will forever do so. This magnificent, almost alien-like human being has a story of reaching for a goal and making it big through hard work and then, when faced with adversity -even death-, taking it in stride and making the best out of it with your head held high and always PROUD of who you are. It's not just the music or the performance, it's the way he lived, breathed and died. 

The lyrics to "the show must go on" continue to be the most accurate biography of this man, in my opinion. This I just read... it's petty, it's low and it's disgusting. It comes accross as "Saint Jim saves Freddie Mercury for being a useless idiot" and I fucking hated it from scratch. I do not doubt for a second that they truly loved each other but it is clear that on Jim's end it faded away with time, because you just wouldn't do this to someone you love so dearly. You don't spill the grissly details of a long and painful illness, you don't recount how many times you got laid and you certainly are not entitled to tell the world whether your dead husband was a top or a bottom, that's none of our business!! And that's just the beginning of the book and it pops up without a warning. 

Tiny disclaimer: It's not about the sex, I'm not squearmish about it at all, and I certainly don't give two flying fucks what your sexual orientation may be: it's about the violation of someone's privacy. Just as I don't go around telling everyone whether I like taking it from behind or not, I don't expect to read the same about someone else. If I did, I'd read erotica, not this.

It angered me to read this and I regret doing so, but I just cannot put a book down once I start it and this was to be no exception. But it was truly disgusting. And for someone claiming to be so adamant about his independence, he sure didn't mind making a few pounds off of the private life of the most iconic rock'n'roll singer of all time. Terrible. And I'm not even talking about the writing itself, because then the rating wouldn't be a star, it would be a black hole.

If anyone is reading this, don't fucking bother with this sorry excuse for a book. It's not cute, it's not romantic, it's not nice. Just stick to the official documentaries focusing on the life of this genius as a music legend and leave the rest to your imagination because it's just not worth it. I DID say I'm biased, as being a fan of Freddie and Queen for literally 29 years (I'm 31) tends to have a certain effect. No matter how much you love the man and want to know more about him, just steer clear from this shit.