Rating: 2/5

From the moment I saw the epigraphs heading each section were from Derrida, Foucault, and several other academic sources, I wasn't sure what to expect from this book. I knew it wasn't going to be straight-up sword and sorcery. And, as it happens, that's probably for the worst.

The sword and sorcery aspects of the book are fun, like a more reflective, mellow Robert E. Howard. He divides the book into five separate tales in different times and places in the world of Neveryon. Characters from previous tales pop up in later ones. Nothing really resolves. Characters just age and change circumstances. The first 'tale', of Gorgik, a slave taken from the mines by a slutty courtier to the imperial court, is probably the best. It introduces a world of complex political intrigue, sexual appetites, and architecture. It's all downhill from there.

Delany is obviously an intelligent, sophisticated guy. Reading the academic texts he reads is not easy. My degree is in philosophy, so I have first-hand experience. I like to think he really believed the epigraphs chosen relate to the narrative, that he wasn't just showing his erudition, but the epigraphs chosen are very specific to the texts they're taken from and not easily generalized. I can't imagine why he chose them.

This skepticism about Delany carries into the narrative. He spends inordinate amounts of the text on philosophical discussions that have no real significance to the narrative and have no original insight. Several pages are devoted to some barbarians replaying out Freud's penis envy theory in their own culture. One or two paragraphs, this is amusing satire. Several pages of it and the joke's on us for reading it. He also spends many pages on Derrida's deconstructionism and lengthy but dated discussions on the origin of currency. Money is one of the major themes of the novel, so that's consistent at least. He just has nothing of value to say about it. Philosophical digressions in narratives can do wonders, propel a story to heights. These just fall flat and bog down the narrative. Even worse is when characters that had a fixed personality before suddenly become mouthpieces for this pseudo-intellectualizing.

Delany's abusive writing style doesn't help. All of the great philosophers strove for "felicity of expression" in their best texts. Intellectual depth does not require bad writing. Delany, under the influence of the hip continental theoriests of the '70s like Derrida, writes in a deliberately difficult style. Paragraphs that fill whole pages are essentially a short sentence bloated with parenthetical remark after parenthetical remark. It's just terrible prose.

This is my first time reading a Samuel Delany book. I will certainly give him another chance. He can draw interesting characters with rich, compelling thoughts. Maybe I can find something he wrote before his mind was destroyed by Lacan.