Rating: 4/5

This book is one of those "what if..." stories in a book I would classify as historical fiction in which historical characters and events are seamlessly interwoven with fictional characters and events. I can tell that the historical part has been well researched and that there is attention to details. The story is rich in Victorian atmosphere and beautiful word pictures of Scotland, the historic and famously haunted Glamis Castle, settings, landscapes, people, etc. At the beginning of each chapter are excerpts from Scottish folk ballads, famous authors like William Shakespeare, Robert Burns, Robert Louis Stevenson, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Richard Lovelace, history books of the time and area, etc. There are also references back to two previous storylines which include German spies in "Death at Rottingdean" and Jack the Ripper murders in "Death at Whitechapel". As in each book, the reader is introduced to advances in forensic technology as used by one of the two main characters, Charles Sheridan, which includes blood typing and distinguishing between human and animal blood, ballistic - matching bullets to the gun used to fire them, and continuing advancement in fingerprinting.

It is August 1901 and Queen Victoria is dead and King Edward is not yet crowned. Kate and Charles Sheridan are on holiday at an archaeological dig at Hadrian's Wall across the hills from Northumberland. Charles receives a summons from King Edward to perform a "matter of gravest importance". A special train is waiting for him; and when he arrives, he is met by Colonel Paddington who is non the wiser at what is going on. The train contains a troop of hand-picked soldiers, and the tracks have been cleared all the way to Glamis Castle in the Scottish Highlands. Kate refuses to be left behind which irks Paddington. This could be a heaven sent opportunity to gather inspiration for a new Gothic novel under her pseudonym Beryl Bardwell. 

At their destination, Charles meets an old friend, Captain Andrew Kirk-Smythe of British Intelligence, who reveals the highly confidential plan. Brigadier Lord Sheridan is to investigate the disappearance of Prince Eddy A.K.A. Prince Albert Victor Christian Edward, the eldest son of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra. As heir to the throne, his excesses and mental problems didn't make him a suitable king. In 1892 came the news that Prince Eddy had died of a sudden and completely unexpected death which brought relief to the Royal Family who now consider him a distant and distasteful memory. But, in this version, he was actually exiled to Glamis Castle and has lived there for ten years under the name of a recluse named Lord Osborne. No one at the castle knows who he really is, and he is rarely seen outside the castle. To compound the situation, the servant woman who was in charge of his care, Hilda MacDonald, has been found with her throat slashed in a manner reminiscent of Jack the Ripper. Did Prince Eddy murder her and run away? The Sheridan's need to find Prince Eddy and clear his name, prove he didn't kill Hilda, and keep his true identity a secret.

Kate is given a tour of the castle by the grieving daughter of Hilda MacDonald whose name is Flora. She hurries past the old haunted part of the castle and doesn't let Kate explore. Why? Soon after, she disappears when she learns the Sheridan's want to question her. We learn that Prince Eddy's unstable mind has him thinking sometimes that he is Bonnie Prince Charlie trying to escape the English army in 1746 with the help of a Flora MacDonald. He had come to Scotland in pursuit of the Stuart throne. Prince Eddy is now being helped by the present day Flora MacDonald who is loyal and devoted to him and wants to help him get to Skye where she has relatives. Prince Eddy's sister, Princess Victoria (Toria) shows up at the castle so she can get an update for King Edward. 

Charles uses Kate to interview those he wouldn't be able to get information from otherwise. Some suspects include an itinerant tinker hiding in a band of gypsy's named Taiso who's a master of disguise; a couple of German spies; a nephew of Hilda MacDonald's named Herman Memsdorff; Alan Donovan is a visiting collector of Scottish ballads; Simpson is the Glamis estate factor; Douglas Hamilton, assistant gamekeeper, etc. Other characters include: Oliver Graham is the village constable who is love-sick over Flora and wants to marry her., Dr. Henry Ogilvy is the village physician who has known all along who Lord Osborne is and is very helpful to Charles, and Count Ludwig von Hauptmann is German Intelligence who has a scheme in place when Prince Eddy is found. The German Kaiser, Prince Eddy's cousin, wants him found alive and kidnapped so he could present him to the public at an appropriate time to embarrass the British Royal Family and bring them down.

There is some significant character development for Charles. The reader knows from past books that he willingly gave up his title, but now we find out he also gave up his war accolades and why. In the Author's Note are a list of the ghosts of historic people who have haunted Glamis Castle. It also states that there is no evidence that Prince Eddy ever was exiled at Glamis Castle. But as portrayed here, it is written as a plausible alternative to history. We also meet Queen Elizabeth (The Queen Mother) as an infant. Highly recommended series.