Rating: 5/5

I first read this book, oh gosh, maybe thirty years ago. In fact, it was the very first book I ever ready about the Plantagenets, and one of the first I ever read about the middle ages. What a good choice! His writing style is so smooth (I guess you would call him Popular History) that the book almost reads like a novel. This is a good thing for a history novice. I gobbled up the rest of the series, and I think his interpretations latched into my memory as the definite versions of events. This is the reason I picked him up again; by now I consider myself pretty well versed in the period, and I wanted to see if his books carried the same "punch" they did on the first reading. Amazingly, they do!

Volume one starts essentially with the Matilda vs. Stephen civil war, which leads naturally to Henry II; it ends with the death of King John. Even though I have read many books about my favorite king (which interest was launched, I admit, by "The Lion In Winter"), I still found Costain's descriptions entertaining, and at times original to me. For instance, leading up to the death of Becket: "Before the performance of high mass Thomas a Becket preached in the chapter house...He made it clear that he knew the fate in store for him. With great emotion he referred to the death of Alfege, the primate who had been killed by the Danes, and when he said, 'There will soon be another,' people laid their heads in their hands and sobbed. The backs of the monks in the choir shook with the grief which filled them." To be literal, I suppose Costain couldn't have possibly known whether the backs of the monks shook with grief, but such imagery makes a scene stick in the mind of a reader, and his books are full of this kind of writing. I had forgotten that Becket predicted his end in front of so many witnesses, and little details like this appear frequently.

Admittedly this account is somewhat general, but I think this is to be expected when reading an overview. For instance, in referring to the squabbles Henry II had with his sons, "There was so much switching of sides and betraying of allies that to recite the whole sequence of events would be repititious and would, moreover, serve no useful purpose." On the other hand, he went into detail describing Henry's last humiliating meeting with King Philip of France, who forced him to agree to a long list of demands. Finally: "He had given in and accepted these debasing terms without a protest. His spirit was so broken, in fact, that he said nothing when Geoffrey ordered his squires to lift him from the saddle and place him in a litter." Off to Chinon and the final humiliation of seeing John's name on the top of the list of conspirators. So I would venture to say that Costain would pick and choose the tastiest tidbits to include, but he tied them all together very cleanly.

In the end, it seems he couldn't resist a little moralizing, and essentially concluded that the Norman invasion was a good thing for the country (in the long run). I could have lived without that! However, there are three more books in the series and I have every intention of continuing the story of my favorite dynasty. There are more "facts" I am clinging to that I need to uncover... something about Richard II. But more on that, later!