Rating: 4/5

3.5
My Interest
In part–the usual, I needed an audio book for drive-time. Back on my old blog and in the early days of this blog I enjoyed reading and reviewing a few of Buchan’s other books: Revenge of the Middle-Aged Woman (link is to my Goodreads) Everything She Thought She Wanted, and Separate Beds (link is to my Goodreads). I’ve always intended to get back to reading her books.

But why this one? An older man–younger woman marriage. I can’t explain why these fascinate me. No, no–not the Rupert Murdoch kind. No, not the creepy arranged religious kind. The normal kind. They are still out there and no, it wasn’t “grooming” if both were adults. [For the record I am VERY anti-grooming. But my rule for my kids was if you could have been in high school together it’s fine.] My interest began after hearing about my grandmother’s cousin–a lady I loved, and her first husband. They were very happy and her parents, back in 1927 were happy too. Today we do look at it differently, I admit. I’ve met a few couples since who did fine with it. And an equal number who divorced.

The Story
At 19 Prue was a well-educated [private aka “public” school in UK] legal secretary in Max’s London law firm. His first wife walked out and left their elementary school aged daughter, Violet, with him. They married and had their own daughter, Jane. Over the past 20 years they’ve lived a very AGA Saga-ish life in a village where people commute to London or make due with what they’ve always had in the village. Prue is the bookkeeper for the W.I. and helps with flowers and events at the church while also working part-time in the local bookshop. Daughter Jane is a weekly border at her private school [Americans–this means she comes home every weekend].

Now this Joanna Trollope-ish life is disturbed by Violet and husband Jamie returned from New York to jobs in London, baby Edward and no nanny in tow. They must stay with Max and Prue for a few weeks while they find a house in London. [Don’t laugh–this book is set in 1992]. Edward is a difficult baby, Violet is a perfectionist who doesn’t really care for her child, and Jamie is the classic decent guy who fell for a bitch. Like Violet’s dad, Max, he was dumped by his first partner who took the daughter he’d helped raise and left leaving him devistated. So, Edward isn’t that big of a deal to him–he knows the kid will grow through these dreadful stages of babyhood and the crying and messes will end sooner than Violet thinks. Prue takes charge of Edward and finds a local girl to help.

Meanwhile midlife is stiking a couple of people [no spoilers] and the game of Happy Families is about to be disrupted a bit. 

My Thoughts
1992–Wow! It seems like ancient history. These people had to RUN to the phone and answer it. Computers were shut off when not in active use and still required software to be loaded. The internet and cell phones [except for people like Magnum P.I. who had a brick-sized one] were in the future. Women still got up to do hair, full makeup and tug on panty hose, and then don a suit and jewlery to go to the office. Pumps were worn, except when walking anywhere when we could wear sneakers and put the pumps in our brief cases [remember those??]. Even Casual Friday wasn’t a thing yet! And, anorexia was the new black at girls private schools.

But back to the book…. While Max swanned off on the train to his law office to gleefully accept a European assignment too dreary for anyone younger, Prue-the-family-drudge did the shopping, planned and cooked the meals, petted the cat, made the beds, went to her “little” job at the bookstore, sat on her committees and nearly expired with boredom.

In London, Jamie was stuck with the wife who hated their child and the cheap, untrained nanny who had enough sense to demand her time off. He wasn’t thrilled with his job, either. Violet, like the mother in The Nanny Diaries, but with a career, felt is was ALL dumped on her, of course.

So things happen when people are bored. It isn’t always pretty. But it is always found out. No one can hide an affair. They radiate during it. The sneaking around makes it better, after all.

Interestingly, Max had only ONE Purdy shotgun–not the usual pair. I won’t spoil why it is in the book. This is one of Elizabeth Buchan’s early books so the humor that I loved in the others I’ve read just wasn’t there.

I will say I was compelled to keep listening, but I was let down that the humor wasn’t there. It made the other books so fun.

Question for UK readers: Would someone really say “she QUITTED the platform” [of the train station] Bizarre!

My Verdict
3.5
Perfect Love by Elizabeth Buchan