Rating: 3/5

The narrator of Dostoevsky’s Notes from Underground may well be one of the most self-aware unreliable narrators in literature. The anonymous narrator of the story does not necessarily possess self-awareness in general, but he is aware that he is unreliable, and indeed he practically boasts about it.

The average unreliable narrator is either trying to deliberately deceive the reader, or is deceived him/herself. This may be self-deception or it may be ignorance about what is really going on. In Notes from the Underground, the narrator revels in making statements about himself that he immediately contradicts, and sometimes immediately reaffirms.

This constantly fluctuating viewpoint is occasionally tiresome to read, and it creates uncertainty about how far Dostoevsky identifies with the arguments expressed. I suspect that this most ambiguous of authors enjoyed spinning a web of uncertainty around his own beliefs, which changed so much over the years as to create an identity crisis within himself.

The story falls in two parts. In Part One, the narrator introduces himself, and expresses his opinions about nature, rationalism and hyper-consciousness. Part Two finally coalesces into some sort of storyline, as the narrator describes three incidents in his life. 

He seeks to insult a soldier he dislikes, but his efforts are barely noticed. He invites himself to the leaving party of a friend where he makes himself unpleasant. Finally he visits a prostitute, and seeks to rescue her. However when she visits his shabby apartment, she realises that he is more deserving of pity than her, so this spiteful and insignificant man is cruel to her and drives her away.

Despite its episodic structure and mercurial narrator, the story does have a purpose to it. Dostoevsky had turned his back on his early liberal and rational ideals, and Notes from Underground represents an attack on those beliefs.

As the anonymous narrator argues, the problem with the scientific approach to life is that it risks reducing human beings to mere instruments without any self-will, performing the only rational function that is available to them. Human beings have a natural tendency to rebel against any attempt to turn them into mere organ stops. The desire for free will is important, even if this means the freedom to suffer and behave badly.

The structure of the book reflects this wish to fight for the freedom to behave or misbehave according to irrational impulses. It explains the narrator’s constant recanting and reaffirming of certain viewpoints. This is a jumble of confused thoughts, not a logical, orderly process. 

It also accounts for the three incidents in Part Two, where the narrator behaves badly and in a self-destructive manner. Our ‘hero’ is an unpleasant man because he represents the unpleasant side of human nature, the ‘underground’ of our consciousness.

This is an important counterblast to the more naïve rationalism expressed by some liberals in Dostoevsky’s day. Those who wish to argue for the move towards a more functionalist society often have a tendency to underestimate that which is dysfunctional in human nature. 

We are not all rational beings whose behaviour can be corrected with education and knowledge until we learn to become more perfect. We are destructive and self-destructive, governed as much by spite and self-loathing as we are by reason and logic.

Dosotevsky then understood that human nature is dysfunctional. Where I part ways with the author is in his wish to glorify this dysfunctionality. For Dostoevsky, it is better to have these irrational and destructive tendencies than for us to be rational, which he insists on regarding as a path that leads only to reducing us to machines.

It would not perhaps have been as bad if Dostoevsky was extolling irrational impulses that are helpful or worthy, or if he was acknowledging and trying to understand the dark unreasonable id in human nature, even as he deplores it. Instead he is almost celebrating it. 

In doing so, Dostoevsky provides an apology for himself. Whatever the author’s good impulses, he had a strong irrational and self-destructive streak. He gambled recklessly and spent much of his life in debt. He fell out with friends regularly. He also supported those monstrously irrational structures, the Czarist monarchy and the Russian Church.

The result is a book that expresses a low opinion of human nature, even while showing compassion for its flaws. It has been said that Dostoevsky insisted on portraying all human beings as if they were fallen angels. It might be more accurately to say that he regarded them as sinful children who needed a strong authoritative touch.

This argument is expressed in ‘The Grand Inquisitor’, which is also included in my copy of Notes from Underground. There are a few shorter works for the Dostoevsky connoisseur, but I will dispense with those for this review.

‘The Grand Inquisitor’ is not an independent short story, but rather a story-within-a-story found in The Brothers Karamazov. As the writer of the Introduction to my book hastens to point out, ‘The Grand Inquisitor’ loses some of its meaning when taken out of the context of the larger book, where other narratives provide counterpoints.

However there is some value in reading it as a stand-alone work. When placed in a larger book, the chapter about ‘The Grand Inquisitor’ risks trying the patience of the reader by stopping the tale of the Karamazov brothers cold in favour of over 20 pages of dense theological discussion about Christ. Freed from the book, the reader has the chance to concentrate on this story by its own merits.

At first glance, the story appears to contradict Notes from Underground. It describes Jesus returning to earth during the Spanish Inquisition to look at his creation. He performs a number of miracles, but instead of being pleased The Grand Inquisitor arrests Christ, and locks him up in a cell.

The remainder of the story is a long speech by the Grand Inquisitor justifying his decision to incarcerate and possibly put to death his own god. The Inquisitor argues that Christ’s legacy has been iniquitous, and uses the three temptations of Christ by Satan as examples of Christ’s failure.

For the Inquisitor, the Devil is the hero because he asked Christ all the right questions, but Christ refused to answer them correctly. When Satan asked Christ to turn stones to bread, Christ refused because man cannot live by bread alone. The Inquisitor believes that this was a mistake because giving people earthly bread would enslave them to the church, but Christ gives them freedom instead.
The second temptation of the Devil was for Christ to throw himself off a cliff and be rescued by angels. Again the Inquisitor feels that Christ should have accepted this offer, as the human race needs mystification and miracles to bind them to the church, not free choice. Finally Satan offers Christ the chance to rule all the kingdoms of the world, but this, the Inquisitor believes is what Christ should have done – asserted his rule over everyone to begin with.

The pattern outlined here is that Christ offered people freedom to choose, and to behave well, but that this was wrong. Freedom only makes people unhappy, and the freedom to choose creates an elite of the saved, meaning that the majority of people will be damned. By taking away their freedom, the Inquisitor hopes to restore happiness to the people.

This is a curious notion, and one that seems to have the opposite message to Notes from Underground. But only at first glance. The story is related in context by the atheist Ivan Karamazov, but Dostoevsky does not identify with Ivan. He identifies with the devout Alyosha. Nonetheless Alyosha’s simple pieties are bland and ineffective against Ivan’s eloquent blasphemies. Is Dostoevsky stating the opposite meaning to that he intended?

I think not. Dostoevsky often plays fast and loose with conventional Bible statements, and I suspect it is impossible for any intellectual with a detailed knowledge of the Bible to read it without analysing, critiquing and questioning what he reads. For Dostoevsky however, this process ends in reaffirming the scriptures, albeit with some doubts.

In reality, Dostoevsky is identifying with Christ, even in this story. The Inquisition may be compared to the rationalist liberals in Notes from Underground. They are seeking to take away people’s freedom, but Dostoevsky, like Christ, supports the right of people to choose misery and freedom instead of becoming happy well-fed animals. 

However plausible the Inquisitor’s arguments, they do not alter the fact that he is standing for oppression of the worst kind, and the reader is unlikely to feel that his vision of the world is one that we wish to see. There may be much misery in the human condition, but a uniformity of belief is not the answer. Hence we end up back where we began, with an assertion of the right of humans to be dysfunctional and free.

‘The Grand Inquisitor’ is a brilliantly wrought story. I am less enthusiastic about Notes from Underground, with its repulsive and garrulous narrator and its excess of purple prose. I am not sure that the three stories that make up Part 2 gel together. They seem like fragments that could just have easily been replaced by three different stories making the same point. However the book certainly provokes much interesting thought.