Rating: 5/5

Imagine Michael Pearl's very Catholic and very non-abusive opposite. Where one turns to beating babies with plumbing tubes the other teaches loving and patient parenting. Dr. Popcak very logically lays out some great parenting techniques in this book. He even calls the Pearls out in a few places without saying their names. 

I picked up this book after hearing a few friends discuss it. We have no major discipline issues in this house, but really this is more a parenting book than a discipline book. Popcak mentions a number of times that it is not the job of the parent to break a child's will. I appreciated his advice on how to help children understand actions have consequences - both good and bad. He spends a significant amount of the book explaining how parents can set expectations and help children understand them at the level appropriate to their age.

He does a great job making the connections between the parent and child relationship and how that transfers to adult relationships later in life. It was interesting to read how something as simple as giving time to cool down during an argument can improve relationships with spouses down the road. It helps that Popcak also wrote a book on marriage (before this one), and he is a family therapist. I borrowed this from the library, but I wanted to take a highlighter to it and write in the margins. There is just lots of good advice here.

While Popcak is very much a devout Catholic and he mentions Catholicism a lot in the book, I don't really feel like it excludes other Christians. There is a lot of great content here, and I think it would benefit any Christian parent. You could always skip the parts that are "too Catholic" and move on to something else. 

I enjoyed reading it, and that is something I don't usually say about parenting books. Most come across as preachy or asserting that there is only one right way to do something. I felt Popcak did an excellent job presenting lots of different communication methods, and I enjoyed reading how the way a child responds to his or her parents is tied to the way they learn in school.

It's a must read if you have young kids. There is a lot of great content, and I appreciate the new communication methods I learned from reading it. It is a little dry, but that is pretty par for the course when it comes to parenting books.