Rating: 5/5

Richard Yates was once a speech writer for Senator Robert Kennedy in the 1960s and proclaimed by many of his peers to be the best writer of their generation, so I thought it would be remiss of me not to take him for a test drive.

The first page alone was enough to convince me of his writing ability, so I proceeded with a smile on my face, cookie crumbs on my shirt and great joy in my heart.

The story centres on an eye-catching young middle-class couple, Frank and April Wheeler who, to all outward appearances, seem to have it all. But behind closed doors, they present as two extremely complex characters: she, eager to please yet aloof and ready to self-destruct; him, with a superiority complex but crippled with self-doubt. April is a romantic dreamer trapped in a gilded cage, whereas Frank is inherently shallow and dismissive of other people's feelings and opinions. 
Yates' erudite prose perfectly and creditably captures the zeitgeist of American 1950s middle-class respectability and is firmly set in a time when the white-collar world was heavily reliant on typewriters, filing cabinets and mail rooms. 

Together, April and Frank become as high as kites on idealistic notions, privately pouring scorn on their suburban neighbours and railing against the sentimentality of the American dream without seeming to realise that they are the ones with problems.

ARTY FARTY TRIGGER WARNING! 

Avert your gaze, dear reader, or be prepared to suffer an occurrence of toe-curling pretentiousness as I try to describe one aspect of Yates' writing methodology. 
Here it comes… 
Yates sometimes, very cleverly in my opinion, creates sentences from oblique angles, refracting them as if through a prism (I did warn you!). This allows his readers to evaluate his characters from different perspectives. It's as if the living voice of a person unknown exists in the shadows of these pages. 

ARTY-FARTINESS OVER. 
(Let's all pretend it didn't happen).

In truth, the story is not the star of the show. Yates' keen observations of human quirks are exceptional and his sentences are as neat as fresh laundry. I also liked the explanatory asides that popped up mid-sentence like poppies in a field of straw. Yes, he was overly fond of a semi-colon when the respite of a well-placed full stop would have sufficed, but the fellow's writing was top-notch. 

I'm now a fan of his barbed prose. The guy had skill.