Rating: 3/5

It's August 1948 in an unnamed Eastern European country, and Emil Brod has reported for his first day on the job as the newbie in the People's Militia. He lives with his grandparents, and as if he were a kid off to his first day at school, his grandmother has made sure he wore his best suit. It's tight, ill-fitting, and pure torture in the sweltering heat of the office. None of his new co-workers are welcoming. Instead, he is ignored, finds a threatening note in his desk drawer and is physically assaulted. 

The atmosphere of the office feels like a microcosm of the outside world, poisoned by mutual suspicion, Cold War paranoia, politically motivated imprisonments and executions and secret files on nearly everyone. Bombed out rubble and bullet-pocked buildings still scar the city three years after the end of the war. Russian soldiers roam like hooligans, a constant reminder of the new order.

There is a plot. Janos Crowder, celebrated writer of patriotic songs, intimate of the political elite, and husband of Lena Hanic, heir to a fortune thanks to the machinations of her late father, has been found murdered in his apartment. Emil has been assigned the case because it is politically dangerous. No one wants to be mired in a case with political connections. A convoluted and suspenseful story of intrigue flows from this beginning. 

I have to admit, however, that I found Emil's uncomfortable relationship with his grandfather more interesting than the plot. Emil spent World War II, known as the Patriotic War, on a Finnish seal-hunting boat rather than at the front. He is a disappointment to his grandfather, a staunch communist whose views were molded by witnessing the proletarian uprising in Russia in 1917 and the German invasion during World War II.  “For Avram Brod, there were two events in history: The Russian Revolution and the Patriotic War which resulted in his country's proletarian liberation. In both these events he had been close enough to smell the dead, but too late to make a difference.”  (p.61) Avram projects that sense of impotence on Emil and on his wife with outbursts of brutality and abuse. Avram's idol is a man named Jerzy Michalec, known as Smerdyakov the Butcher for his wartime exploits. Michalec is now a dangerous politico somehow connected to Emil's case. As for the man's wartime accolades,  “Grandfather called it courage, but Emil wasn't sure that courage was the right word for butchers.”  (p.101)

The book is interspersed with flashbacks of Emil's life. His own parents were killed in the war. With his grandparents, he fled to the provinces when the Germans invaded. There, he encountered a growing stream of Jews fleeing from the Germans. He developed a weakness for damaged women. Then he fled to Finland, seeking his own independence from the dogmatism of his grandfather. On the seal-hunting boat he discovered his own skill at butchering seals, and chilling encounters with impulsive violence.

This was the first novel in a series referred to as the Yalta Blvd. Quintet. The succeeding titles are: THE CONFESSION, 36 YALTA BOULEVARD, LIBERATION MOVEMENTS and VICTORY SQUARE. I had mixed feelings about the book. The Eastern bloc mood and Emil's conflicted feelings were interesting. However, at some point the plot veers off and becomes a romance which never felt plausible. This book did not encourage me to complete the series.