Rating: 5/5

Fate can be a cruel mistress. And sometimes she can be wonderfully kind and place all the ingredients in the right place at the right time thereby creating something almost on the other side of wonderful. Lawrence Durrell could have been born in a time and place when he chose or was forced to have a static existence. He might have lived without the funds to furnish his travels and his exploration of all sides of the Mediterranean. Or he might have been born with funds and an unquenchable wanderlust but without the talent to commit any of his observations to paper.

Thankfully he wasn't. 

Instead he lived during a time of political and social upheaval - the dark days between World War I and World War II which made him leave England in search of landscape less bleak and later forced him to retreat from the onslaught of Nazi occupied France and return to Corfu. However far from being some sort of impoverished self-imposed exile, he was able to make these moves in comfort and with funds at this disposal which provided adequate leisure time to read, think, research and observe his new surroundings. 

Durrell's time on the Isle of Corfu (Corcyra) is documented in this short and bitter sweet travelogue. Sparse and sparing like the landscape but also naked, mellowed and smooth like the waves which roll around his island home, this book made it possible for me to fall in love with a place which I have never visited. Durrell's charm is that you don't resent his peripatetic writers lifestyle or the seeming ease with which he blends into communities, not only on Corfu but in Cairo, Alexandria, Paris, Languedo, Cordoba, Rhodes and all the other places he had the good fortune to call his home. He writes with an easy style and gentle manner which is a blend of diary, poetry, history, philosophy and fiction and yet it comes out wrapped up as a travelogue and I probably couldn't dispute that it serves variously as all of these things. 

If you are looking for a book with the ability to lift you out of your armchair and the winter doldrums and transport you to rugged white cliffs, sparkling azure seas and the tug of the sea breeze in your hair then this is what you've been waiting for.