Rating: 2/5

David Macaulay is known for his architecturally-driven texts which combine the appeal of children’s picture books with that of an adult coffee table book; delighting readers of all ages. Being a fan of Macaulay’s “Castle” and “Cathedral”, I next turned to “Mill”.

“Mill” deviates from the norm of Macaulay’s other works and sadly: not in a good way. Although “Mill” is unique in its format of following the construction of more than one mill throughout time; this doesn’t successfully draw attention. Even with more emphasis on fiction (Macaulay has an uncanny way of meshing together educational descriptions with fiction); “Mill” is dry, boring, and unimpressive. It simply is not as well-written as the other books and lacks the concise ability of making the facts retainable. 

Elaborating on this, the text is lifeless and without any zest. “Mill” feels like either Macaulay was personally not as invested in the topic or gave up on his usual style. Whichever reason it is, it is detrimental to the book. “Mill” is too heavy for children but too boring for adults. Furthermore, Macaulay’s standard way of explaining is absent making “Mill” a more suitable read for someone already processing some knowledge on the topic.

The illustrations are also echelons below Macaulay’s usual efforts. Instead of the mind-blowing pen-and-ink talent which grace the pages of Macaulay’s other books; the illustrations in “Mill” are simply mediocre and lack the detail Macaulay is known for.

On a positive note, “Mill” includes unique characteristics such as letters and diary entries of the fictional characters which add depth to the book. Furthermore, it is quite evident that Macaulay performed extensive research and thus, retains historical accuracy. Plus, as “Mill” progresses, both the text and illustrations become increasingly better resulting in the thought: “Here is the Macaulay I know and love!” Although still not comparable to his other books, it is better than the slow beginning. 

Macaulay successfully demonstrates advancements in technology and industry through time making “Mill” informative even though it can become overwhelming. It helps that each page’s text concludes on the corresponding page so that the reader is not flipping back-and-forth in order to understand the illustrations.

The conclusion of “Mill” is creative (albeit, slightly rushed) and solidifies the historical value of architecture. As standard in Macaulay’s work, a glossary is presented at the end highlighting key terms.

“Overall, “Mill” is certainly the weakest of Macaulay’s books I’ve read. Usually, I am stupefied by both the content and illustrations but in this case; the information was difficult to retain and not memorable. Although the book is a good introduction to mills, it isn’t captivating or even necessarily interesting. “Mill” is only recommended to those with specific mill interest or fans of Macaulay who simply collect his works.