Rating: 2/5

Unfortunately a rather weak first novel (1978) but one should be tolerant because the writing is basically very good. The problem is that it is overly ambitious, falling into the gap between an attempt at 'literature' and genre writing for the market - in this case, horror.

As so often when an ambitious new (at that time) entrant into the field cannot decide whether he wants to write something serious or thrill and shock, the work falls between stools - and so fails to achieve either aim to the degree that he might have done if just one had been concentrated upon.

The underlying idea or theme is a good one. It is on the edge of the Lovecraftian (or cosmic). Unknown forces rip a small town and people to pieces but only in random places and ways, blind to the meanings imposed on them by humans, and then just disappears.

The horror that Tessier appears to have wanted to deliver was one that clearly derived from fear of war, nuclear war in particular, but perhaps is even more salient in the age of random terror although the car accident or air crash might be another example.

When bad things happen to ordinary people enormous psychological effort is put into giving it meaning by observers or survivors. Rationally we might generally trace a line of causes and effects but this is not the same thing. People want to believe there was a purpose related to themselves.

The more an outrage is delinked from ordinary cause and effect usual to a culture (such as mechanical failure or human error in ours), the more it gets attributed to conscious malignancy and, if that fails, to abstract evil to which there can be violent reactions.

The key to dealing with evil is always that it should relate to the survivor or the victim in some way. Tessier's 'good idea' is that this relationship may be without foundation. This should represent true horror to many people. The idea is so good that it compounds the disappointment. 

Tessier goes as far as he can with the randomness and untouchability of the 'evil' which may not be evil at all, just outside a concern for humanity and unconnected to humanity. You cannot fight this thing. It has to just go away. Or you have to give it meaning regardless. Or become despairing.

One other solution is hinted at towards the very end - one of acceptance and moving on - but this, of course, does not fit well with the thrills and excitements of genre horror which is generally more than good descriptions of cows, people and property being torn apart.

Substitute a description of a cow being torn apart by a land mine in a war story for the same cow being torn apart by an unknown force in a horror novel and we can see that what is shown to us is the same thing. What matters is the context - war or the unknown.

By making the unknown unknowable, the dramatic tension collapses if the cosmic is set in ordinariness. The horror of the unknown generally requires a lot of cultural and linguistic paraphrenalia around it (as provided by Lovecraft) to allow us to be excited by it. 

In the end, this becomes a war novel without a war to its name. Random destruction in a small town (the small town location being the classic trope of American horror) where the victims care about what causes it all but where the reader loses interest half way through.

Here, bad things happen to good or at least ordinary people in apparently random ways in a world where 'God is dead'. Tessier turns this into a force that might be pagan but might be simply meaningless and random.

Although not referenced in the novel, we might think of the Shoah at this point which might be seen clinically as a set of cause and effects, have greater meaning imposed on it (an incursion of evil perhaps or God turning away), be seen as meaningless or simply be 'accepted'.

None of these approaches is going to change history although one approach might suggest ways of ensuring it does not happen again, another might give comfort, another lead to cynicism (or realism) and another ensure individual psychological recovery.

The fact that there is going to be no resolution in the novel is flagged up so early that we are left with a choice - be disappointed in it as a horror novel without closure or more horrible horrors to come or as a novel about 'meaning' that spends too much time trying to be a horror novel.

The idea is thus not presented with 'bite'. The gruesome images of horror in the first half related to individuals become 'socialised' into small town wreckage along the lines of 'The Blob' only to lose track of the psychology of the victims because the task was too great.

A good genre horror tale and the possibility of a novel about the meaninglessness of ordinary human tragedy and how we humans cope with it as it unfolds compete to get out of the door and then get stuck in it together. 

As a first 'learning on the job' it is still better than a lot of first novels (notably the over-literary rubbish first produced by the likes of Graham Greene which I have reviewed elsewhere) and shows us an inherent writing talent that has made me interested enough to want to read his later works.