One of the oddities of this book, like an awful lot of accounts of the civil war, is that the voices of the slaves who were the cause of the conflagration are remarkably peripheral to it. A lot of the rhetoric of the time was about liberty versus loyalty to the Union, with slavery being often left unmentioned. The early sections of the book deal with the war with Mexico, the formation of the state of California (whereupon there was a degree of controversy about whether it should permit slavery or not) and a series of bank runs in San Francisco. Sherman then secures a role in Louisiana, whereupon it becomes reasonably clear that while he was opposed to the worst aspects of slavery, he was not opposed to the institution itself. 

For example, he says regarding his Senator brother that "I deny that he is considered at home an abolitionist; and, although he prefers the free institutions under which he lives to those of slavery which prevail here, he would not of himself take from you by law or force any property whatever, even slaves." Later he he notes that domestic slaves in Louisiana were "better treated than any slaves on earth" but as this was not true of all slaves in the state "were I a citizen of Louisiana, and a member of the Legislature, I would deem it wise to bring the legal condition of the slaves more near the status of human beings under all Christian and civilized governments." In practice this means things like forbidding the splitting up of families or criminalising the teaching of slaves to read and write.

As the war breaks out, the absurd position becomes apparent that although the casus belli was slavery, there was no legal change to the institution as "Up to that date neither Congress nor the President had made any clear, well-defined rules touching the negro slaves, and the different generals had issued orders according to their own political sentiments. Both Generals Halleck and Grant regarded the slave as still a slave, only that the labor of the slave belonged to his owner, if faithful to the Union, or to the United States, if the master had taken up arms against the Government, or adhered to the fortunes of the rebellion." 

Although black regiments did exist at the time, Sherman didn't avail himself of them, instead confining himself to using emancipated slaves as support rather than combatants. This seemed Hood enough at the time for the Secretary of War to have interrogated Sherman on the subject. The idea that slaves could have fought against the Confederacy seems to have been a particular fixation: Hood wrote to Sherman angrily denouncing the use of slaves as soldiers against the South: "at that very time there is no doubt the feeling of the Southern people was fearfully savage on this very point of our making soldiers out of their late slaves." Of course, the allegation was unfounded and Sherman denied it. 

Towards the end of the book Sherman recounts his time as head of the Army under the Johnson administration: he records a lot of the political struggles that made his role impossible and which eventually contributed to Johnson's removal from office. He doesn't say anything about Johnson's proposals to readmit the Southern states into the Union without any protection for the newly freed slaves.