Rating: 5/5

"We'll all die in Hollywood."
Journey
Power
Awareness
Infinity
Energy
Horizon
Abyss

"It's only when the mortar hardens that the loose bricks become a structure."

Don Juan to Carlos Castaneda "Don't admire people from afar, that is the surest way to create mythological beings."

"Our victories are fleeting. Sorcerers, however do have the upper hand; as being on their way to dying, they have someone whispering in their ear that everything is ephemeral. The whisperer is death, the infallible advisor, the only one who won't ever tell you a lie."
"Human beings are beings that are going to die," don Juan said, "Sorcerers firmly maintain that the only way to have a grip on our world, and on what we do in it, is by fully accepting that we are beings on the way to dying. Without this basic acceptance, our lives, our doings, and the world in which we live are unmanageable affairs." "But is the mere acceptance of this so far-reaching?" (Carlos) asked in a tone of quasi-protest. "You bet your life!" don Juan said, smiling. "However, it's not the mere acceptance that does the trick. We have to embody that acceptance and live it all the way through. Sorcerers throughout the ages have said that the view of our death is the most sobering view that exists. What is wrong with us human beings, and has been wrong since time time immemorial, is that without ever stating it in so many words, we believe that we have entered the realm of immortality. We behave as if we were never going to die - an infantile arrogance. But even more injurious than this sense of immortality is what comes with it; the sense that we can engulf this inconceivable universe with our minds." 

"To recount events is magical for sorcerers" don Juan said, "It isn't just telling stories, it is seeing the underlying fabric of events."

"The universe has no limits, and the possibilities at play in the universe at large are indeed incommensurable. So don't fall prey to the axiom, "I believe only what I see", because it is the dumbest stand one can possibly take". Don Juan.