Rating: 2/5

Well, I suppose I have a unique perspective on this book. I was raised Catholic. Never missed a Sunday. My childhood was filled with going to Mass. At 20 years old I joined a Non-Denominational church and went into the full time ministry, now 26 years ago. I have since received a Masters Degree in Bible and run five Ministry Training Academies. I am now going back to school at the Oblate School of Theology, a Catholic graduate school, to receive my PhD in Spirituality. 

That being said, I know Catholicism and have a lot of respect for it, and I know the Bible well. I teach Biblical Interpretation in our academies. I share all of this to give context to my review of the book. 

The Lamb's Supper is a topical study of the Catholic Mass, comparing it to the book of Revelation. It is interesting in the fact that it is written by a Catholic theologian who converted from a Protestant background. He writes enthusiastically about his discovered excitement regarding the Mass. His enthusiasm is clear throughout the book. 

First the good. I learned so much about the Catholic faith and the reasoning behind so much of the Mass. I wish I knew a fraction of this as a child. It would have given some meaning to my mundane Sunday existence as a young Catholic. I really came to respect the purpose of a liturgy. I now appreciate the repetition and prayers. I understand the great emphasis Catholics put on the Eucharist. Even though I disagree with some of the reasoning and conclusions, it gave me a deeper respect for the Mass. In the non-denominational world, we have swung the pendulum so far away from liturgy and the rituals of communion that it has made it un-special. At least in my experience. It is too bad that we cannot find a healthy biblical middle ground. 

My criticism of this book is sharp.

Unfortunately Hahn's passion leads him to bad exegesis and proof-texting. 

Proof-texting is the grand-daddy of "no-no's" in Biblical exegesis. It is when you get some excited to prove your point that you take scripture out of context to mean things it doesn't. Hahn is guilty throughout The Lamb's Supper. He uses the Bible to establish his reasoning for many points but ignores it over and over again when it doesn't back him up. He makes huge leaps and generalizations. Honestly, his misuse of the Bible discredits him. Unfortunately, to a more Biblically illiterate audience, his quoting of verses and sheer peppering of them throughout the book makes him look like a Bible scholar. For someone who knows their Bible and checks his references, it's quite appalling how he stretches scripture to make his point. 

I would have advised Hahn to use the scripture where appropriate but just state the value of Catholic tradition when the Bible doesn't really apply. Just say it! "This is why, as Catholics, we _______!" Tradition has its place and is valuable. We all have them. We just have to be careful not to try to justify our traditions if they aren't in the Bible! But, I wasn't consulted 😝. And so, I can be honest in my review. 

I applaud his zeal. I applaud his desire to teach others to appreciate the Mass. I even appreciate the thought and correlations that clearly ARE there with the Mass and Revelation. BUT, why overstate, stretch, and misapply the Bible? It just discredits your work for Biblically literate readers.