Rating: 4/5

Looking for some holiday reading that packs a punch, I turned to this novella by Todd Strasser (based on the film adaptation by Valentine Davies). Having seen the movie many times, I decided to try to story version of this holiday classic! Susan Walker has never felt Christmas was anything important. Susan’s never believed in miracles and Santa Claus is just another of those things the holiday season pushes on people without any evidence. However, she goes through the motions to visit him at the large department store, chatting with Kris Kringlez Kris is quite dismayed that Susan is so skeptical, vowing to help her believe. There’s something about their conversation that creates a sparkle in Susan’s mind and she thinks that she might believe, though it will take a lot more than one chat. As Susan begins believing, Kris finds himself in some trouble that will require the courts.
By the end, something magical takes place and Susan is sure that Santa does exist. A brilliant piece that renews my love of the season.

Christmas is the ideal reading time, no matter what genre interests you. This book by Todd Strasser was an especially great treat for me. Not only does he pen the perfect Christmas story, but also touches on the sentimental side of the attentive reader. The narrative builds from the start, creating action and intrigue, while also challenging truths some have created. Strasser creates a path on which the reader will soon discover the honest aspects of the holiday season. True, the book skims over aspects the cinematic version explores at length, but the sentiment is there and kept me intrigued until the final page. 

Characters are present and evolve throughout the piece. Susan and Kris Kringle deliver great themes about Christmas and the power of belief, which hits home for many. Strasser portrays themes with ease through the characters and keeps the reader excited, especially if they have seen the movie. Minor characters prove useful as conduits, helping flavour the story well. I could picture those depicted in this piece, paralleling people from the movie.

Surprises emerge at various points of the story, keeping the reader wondering what’s to come. Those who have seen the movie won’t be overly shocked by the story, though there are some twists to keep things entertaining. I quite enjoyed this version of the piece, which was a great single sitting reading experience. While there were some abbreviations from the movie, this was enjoyable and perfect for adding to my annual reads!

Kudos, Mr. Strasser, as you took some of Valentine Davies’ ideas and put them to work!

Love/hate the review? An ever-growing collection of others appears at:
http://pecheyponderings.wordpress.com/