Rating: 4/5

I was at Wells Fargo once to replace a debit card that I lost, and I figured I would bring a book because I didn't know how long I was going to have to wait and my parents told me that I should never waste an opportunity. Well I didn't actually have to wait because Shian told me that she could help me open an account right away. Her computer started lagging because it had to process my long name through, so she decided to ask me what I was reading. 

"The Skeletons in God's Closet.... it's about how Christians can reconcile the judgment of hell with the love of God."
"Oh..." she said.

It wasn't until after about five minutes of my theological musings on hell that I realized she wasn't interested... or maybe she was uncomfortable about the subject. I wasn't sure. She was probably taught by her supervisors to be friendly at all costs. Poor lady. Since my parents told me not to waste an opportunity and I figured I would awkwardly leeway into the Gospel like one of those awkward Christians. Sure enough, the conversation died before I could even get close.

Well, anyways this book reminded me of Shian and our conversation. And I decided that I would dedicate this review to her. 

Alice Turner, who writes for Playboy magazine(!), did a fantastic job in compiling an enormous amount of information into a readable book on how hell has evolved from ancient Mesopotamian "The Great Below" through the Middle Ages and its bizarre visions of monsters with spears up their butts (I'm not kidding) to hell's eventual "disappearance" in the Freudian age where hell is allegorized as repression. The History of Hell is well-rounded in its approach; combining history, literature, psychology, art, theology, and philosophy. The illustrations were fantastic (it was also a chronicle of how Western art's depictions of hell has evolved). I had to take off a star though because Turner would throw out character names left and right without any context, so I was confused at times, especially the chapter on classical Hades.

Still would recommend it though.
Cheers, Shian.