Rating: 4/5

THE FOLLOWING MESSAGE IS A PAID ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE READ YOURSELF HAPPY FOUNDATION: 

Are you feeling sad, depressed, not quite yourself?
 
Did your youngest child decide to make paper airplanes out of the pages of your 1st Edition copy of Lord of the Rings?
 
Did the brilliantly astute network asshats cancel your favorite television show in favor of a 22 part documentary on the Brittany Spears Comeback Tour hosted by Paula Abdul?
 
Did the video of the “unfortunate incident” at your office picnic recently make #1 "Most Watched" on Youtube? 

Well put down that whiskey bottle and the oxycontin and unload the shotgun because we at the Read Yourself Happy Foundation (RYHF) have a solution Guaranteed*to perk you up like a percocet muffin and a "happy ending" and bring baskets of bliss back to your brain. After a good hour of whiskey drinking and oxycontinmarket research, RYHF has put together the "Jeeves, That's Funny" Happy Package which we are making available to you, the public, for the first and possibly last time depending on how well our new and improved ShakeWeight Lotion Dispenser idea sells.
 
For the low, low introductory price of ONLY $29.95, we will send you the "Jeeves, That's Funny" Happy Package which includes ALL of the following: 

1. A used copy of Thank You, Jeeves by P.G. Wodehouse,
2. An almost new book mark, and 
3. A personalized thank you card from RYHF. 

I know what you're thinking, all that forONLY $29.95. Sound too good to be true? Well here’s what some actual customers** are saying about the "Jeeves, That's Funny" Happy Package: 

Customer #1: Thank you, Jeeves is the definition of a “feel good” read. Bertie Wooster, the well intentioned but crisis prone British Gentleman, and his faithful valet Jeeves have a falling out over Bertie’s refusal to desist from playing his banjolele. Irritated over the loss of Jeeves, Bertie goes to stay at a friend’s country cottage and a complicated and HILARIOUS series of events transpire. The dialogue is quick, crisp, dry and quintessentially British and will keep a smile on your face throughout. A classic of comedy literature. 

Customer #2: The "Jeeves, That's Funny" Happy Package is the greatest thing since Doc Bottoms Aspray and I use it almost as much. After working out with my ShakeWeight, I love to Slap Chop some veggies, curl up in my  Snuggie and read Thank You, Jeeves and for just a little while, forget about my failed hopes and dreams.  

Customer #3: Being a crack whore keeps me very busy and doesn't leave me a lot of time for book shopping. The "Jeeves, That's Funny" Happy Package was the perfect opportunity for me to get a great book and the guys at the RYHF were nice enough to work with me on flexible payment arrangements. Thanks RYHF. 

BUT WAIT, THERE’S MORE!!! If you act now, RYHF will send an additional copy of Thank you, Jeeves ABSOLUTELY FREE***. You will not find a better offer unless you look so don't waste time. Call today and soon you'll be LAUGHING away the blues. 

Act now while supplies last!! 

Supplies limited. Terms subject to change without notice. This offer not available in states with consumer protection statutes. RYHF reserves the right to keep your money and suspend activities at any time if it determines that such action would be awesome and the RYHF believes that it can get away with it. 

* Not a Guarantee 

** Paid actors used as spokesmen and not actual customers (except the crack whore)

*** An additional shipping and handling charge of $29.95 will apply