Rating: 2/5

The problem with prominent journalists crossing over into thriller writing is that publishers and editors tend not to want to criticise your work too closely. If you also happen to be a very high-profile journalist - and the BBCs political editor no less - they know that people are going to buy your book whether it's good or bad; and I suspect Tom Bradby doesn't have a very large stack of rejection letters to use as a booster cushion. 

I wanted to like this book, it has all the elements I like and the synopsis seemed interesting but I couldn't get beyond the first few chapters. Aside from the narrative being quite tedious I simply couldn't get past the fact that his cast list includes a bevy of White Russian prostitutes all of whom have masculine surnames. That the BBCs political editor doesn't know that Russian surnames are gender differentiated is astonishing; that not a single publishing executive, sub editor or proof reader picked up in this less so, as I suspect the project was green-lit without too much scrutiny, because, you know, it's Tom Bradby.

I suppose it's possible that in 1920s Shanghai, the White Russian population dropped their gender differentiated suffixes although, as they were the "conservative" arm of the Russian people at the time, it would seem a strange thing to do. It's also possible that the error - if indeed it is one, and I am not misguided in my criticism - has been corrected in later publishing runs as I bought the book the week it came out.

I'm glad that some people enjoyed it, as I don't bear Tom Bradby any ill will, but it might be an idea for him to take a page out of this veteran guitar-maker's book: never build your first guitars under your own name, lest they come back to haunt you. There is a reason writers adopt "les nom-de-plumes"; I'll let you guess what that reason is... 

The problem is that now, I will be very unlikely to buy another book under the "Tom Bradby" brand. I trust that he won't be too bothered by this.