Rating: 4/5

Am I the only one who doesn't get skeeved out by "Gigi"? I do get skeeved out big time by Maurice Chevalier singing "Thank Heaven for Little Girls" because, well… duh! That's a pretty fucked up song… But the actual Colette novella (that I have read in French countless times - as Colette is one of my mother's favorite authors and her books were all over the house I grew up in - and in English for the first time just now) never struck me as creepy.

Maybe it's my weird mix of French and Italian cultural heritage, or a healthy perspective on the social and historical setting of the story itself (or maybe I got into Anaïs Nin short stories way too young and a Freudian analyst would have a field day with my brain…), but I found "Gigi" to be a charming and comical, albeit rather unusual, coming-of-age story.

Some potential spoilers ahead…

Gilberte comes for a family of demi-mondaines; that's a fancy French way of saying high-class courtesans or kept women. These women were beautiful, educated, elegant and experts at entertaining men in every imaginable way (including, but not restricted to, sex). In return, said men would buy them houses, pay their servants, cover them in jewels and fancy dresses. While this was not the most reputable way of making a living, they were not considered prostitutes, but a social class unto themselves, and their lovers were invariably wealthy, often aristocrats or industrialists. Gigi (as her family affectionately call her) is being groomed for that life by her aunt Alicia, a retired courtesan of great fame. A family friend, Gaston Lachaille, is a fabulously rich but bored playboy who enjoys Gigi's company and slowly comes to realize that his fraternal affection for her is changing into something else.

The story is a lot more about Gigi leaving childhood behind and becoming a woman than about the idea of her shaking up with an older man. In fact, Gaston fully admits to feeling uneasy about their age difference - not to mention that Gigi doesn't exactly make herself easy to get. Of course, that sort of gender relation is terribly dated, and no one in their right mind would condone a similar arrangement today, but again, this is the Belle Époque in Paris: age, love and sex were not viewed in our modern North American way at all... I also feel the need to point out that this is not "Lolita": Gigi actually rejects the lifestyle that her family encourages her to pursue in favor of *gasp* marriage and respectability! Not exactly what Humbert had up his sleeve for his little Lo…

And let's not forget that beyond subject-matter, there is Colette's prose: beautiful, whimsical and disarmingly honest. Colette, not unlike Gigi, lived by her own rules and didn't care much for the sexual restrictions imposed on her by proper society. In some ways, Gigi is the proto-manic-pixie-dream-girl who shakes a male character out of the depression and boredom brought on my vacuous women and an empty and unfulfilling lifestyle. Interestingly enough, when the novella was first adapted for Broadway, Colette herself demanded that a young woman she had seen on the beach be cast in the title role: that young woman was Audrey Hepburn. Please don't let the PC rear-view mirror stop you from enjoying this little story… My only problem with it is that its too short! I wanted to know more about these women's lives and the society they lived in.

My edition comes with another short story titled "The Cat", which I hadn't read before. It is about a young couple, Alain and Camille, who have unfortunately mismatched libidos. That... and Alain is really into his cat Saha, a gorgeous Russian blue female cat, who also passionately loves her master. Camille eventually becomes jealous of her new husband's pet. Now that can sound a bit trite, and jealousy between a woman and a kitty but when you know that the original French title (and word for "female cat") "La Chatte" can have another meaning, it suddenly makes a bit more sense...

It actually reminded me of a cat I had years ago, who followed me everywhere, slept on the pillow next to me every night, cuddled me when I felt sad or sick. And then I got a boyfriend who started using the cat's pillow and all Hell broke loose... The cat refused the food the boyfriend gave him to try and make friends, peed on his backpack, the whole nine.

But my personal experience in possessive cats didn't endear either Alain or Camille to me: I found them both rather insufferable, and while the story is an interesting study of jealousy, I didn't like it as much as "Gigi".

4 stars for "Gigi", and 2 for "The Cat".