As a teen, I went through a Vampire phase. But not the sparkly sort of vampires that populate more modern YA romances (although Louis from the Interview With a Vampire was pretty freaking emo). I liked scary vampires...who are actually VAMPIRES. 

And this vamp was particularly evil and tricksy.

I should note that this is the rare book of this sort (80s-90s YA Paranormal) where the main female character isn't a drop dead gorgeous creature with stunning green eyes and flowing red/golden hair. Yeah...for a while those physical characteristics were a thing. Just ask any Christopher Pike book from that period. However, this Ugly Duckling trope is a plot point. And Devnee isn't exactly ugly...she's just...well...ordinary. Like 98% of the population. But this is an unspeakable sin in her mind. She wants to be pretty SO. FREAKING. BAD. She reasons if she were pretty, all her problems would be solved and life would be all sunshine and rainbows and pink fluffy unicorns. Yeah, dude. Pretty fixes everything. GREAT message to be sending to teen readers, btw, many of whom are also feeling the awkward effects of puberty. Because you KNOW this is what they'll take away from it.

Oh, Devnee. If you only had a brain. (but more on this later)

Now most girls facing an identity crisis and looking to improve their appearance would get some new makeup and YouTube some tutorials (or, since this was the 90s, check out the beauty tips in Seventeen Magazine). Maybe get a different haircut or start a new workout routine/diet. But not our girl Devnee. Nope. She's lazy and looking for a Quick Fix. As a senior citizen, she'd the sort to fall victim to phone/internet scams. And by then she'll be so old that beauty won't matter anymore because she'll be all wrinkly and stuff. Totally NOT HOT. Good thing she's got a vampire living in her creepy old house. And not just any vamp either. This one grants wishes!! And speaking of identity crisis...methinks this vampire is having one himself. Perhaps he fancies himself a genie of sorts? 

If only every teen girl had a Friend Like That. All that's missing is the song and dance routine. In fact, this would have made things soooo much better. Except the Vampire would be voiced by Christopher Walken rather than Robin Williams (R.I.P)

Of course shallow and stupid wishes come with a price. Duh! Devnee does, indeed, wake up gorgeous the morning after. And weirdly, no one questions it. Not her family, not her new classmates. Well, Mom is getting suspicious.... Devnee soon learns that in order to gain her good looks, the beauty was taken away from her classmate, Popular Girl &amp; Queen Bee Aryssa. Honestly, what did she expect? There's only a certain amount of uber hotness in the universe. It had to come from somewhere. And Aryssa is not doing so good, btw. Because in taking away her beauty, he also sucked away her soul.

But even after discovering the side effects of her wish, do you think Devnee stops? NOPE!!! Almost immediately, she is not satisfied with simply having Good Looks. Soon she wants Brains to go along with it (Braaaaaaaaains) and taps the smarts of another classmate. Now if she truly had intelligence, she would realize what she's doing is just not kosher and freaking STOP already. But maybe this was BOOK Smarts and not Common Sense. There's a big (HUGE) difference there, you know. 

Honestly, I kind of hate Devnee right now. I get that she's super insecure, but that's still no excuse for being a soul stealer. 

Now one would think that Karma would catch up with this girl eventually and deliver her a cosmic bitchsmack, but, honestly, the ending is sort of a cop out. Almost too late, Devnee starts to feel kind of bad about everything and returns the "gifts" to their rightful owners. And she becomes plain-Jane Devnee again and is happy being herself. She also refuses to listen to the vampire anymore. 

Overall... An oddly Lifetime Movie of the Week ending for a YA Horror book. Thank goodness there's a threequel.