Rating: 1/5

Spoilers and tl;dr. 2 stars 'cause of some shockingly depraved scenes.

Marna Traver was a Kentucky lass raised in the Ohio Valley &amp; the surrounding regions upon the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains. Like her deceased mother, Marna is protected by stronghold Hertha; an impoverished Englishwoman turned American opportunist seeking an honest days work and a capable man to call husband. 

The gripes that don't matter &amp; lolzy pickin' nits... nothing pisses me off more than being uninspired!

We learn early on that her husband Emery is a rotten bastard whose guts that should have been jigged up for good fishing bait in the early Spring, when bass are peaking &amp; fat for the fry. As Marna's own mother was too beauteous to be left without camouflage least Emery barter his daughter's flesh for a jar of 'shine, Marna experiences the say day-in and day-out apprehension that Emery will eventually catch her without soot and matted hair and view the legendary beauty that would not spare her own mother his full tilted monstrosity. This trope hasn't been used overly much I've discovered; usually beauty is disguised through gender roles, but what I find off-putting is that it's 18th century Appalachia; even traveled roads were just DIRT ROADS; even domesticated areas were mudpit squalor; uncharted and dirt-floor ridden, filthy &amp; EVERYONE is dirty. Even if you bathe regularly, you're still dirty. If you walk around your dirt-floor cabin, you're dirty. If you lifted a hoe to toil over the garden, yep; dirty. I don't reckon Hess realized that everyone was dirty? Back in the hills, if a car drives upto your house/trailer/lean-to, if you stand in the door, your dust shadow will be imprinted on the floor behind you. Fucking serious. Until approximately 20 years ago, a great majority of people who lived up the river in my old hometown, didn't even have electricity. People living in school buses &amp; smokehouses and shacks you could throw a pan through the holes in the wall; still marrying in their family tree--and some families quite PROUD of that fact too. We were little feral children in my youth, I cannot imagine what sort of heathens should have been present in this book, but whatever; back to the book. &gt;;P Marna should have still stirred male attention no matter what state of unkempt disaster. In a world without Bath &amp; Body Works &amp; deodorant, people will not maintain perfect hygiene. The fact that Marna was female, would be plenty reason. I've seen girls who had the facial construction of Rocky from the movie Mask &amp; Hills Have Eyes misc. hunkster; hilljack teeth &amp; patchwork tufts of hair to boot, who paired up with the school misfit at a pep rally in high school and what those two got down to up on the top of the indoor bleachers, can never be unseen.... ever. There's a little or a lot of someone for everyone. In the case of Marna being ridiculed for being so filthy, I call a great colossal bullshit. This time, the gender trope could have worked, because our beloved hero Matt's treeline prevented him from discerning her camouflage loveliness.

I know it shouldn't have hung me up so badly, but I was incensed by that trope being carried on for chapters and chapters... it got old quick, and I wanted her to trip-up whilst fishing and half drown in big tragedy rescue style, to point out that they were all SO WRONG. &gt;:|

The technical &amp; the bad sitcom critical analysis...

Another annoyance that brought my attention; Hertha was supposedly English raised and spoke mountain lingo and dialect moreso than anyone else in the entire novel. Her given graces and sophistication therein passed onto Marna, excusing her of any apparent inadequacies. Oftentimes the lingo and overused dialect can weigh down reading comprehension and I get that, but it only enhanced Hertha in mine eyes. She was a common woman, with down-to-earth character who should have enhanced her surrounding characters, but the rest of the characters seemed to be out of place, or stuck in the wrong era -- somewhat blind to the deplorable state of the mountains and rural living... ? Hertha endured years of beatings, rape and vulgarity due to her husband's weaselly ass, but it didn't seem to sap her of energy, nor will to live. She grew her garden, herbs to cure and treat, kept her farm on lockdown, despite Emery's drunken rampages and heehawing.

The greatest, or visible arc of any of the characters was the 15 year old Indian girl, Dove, who was endlessly abused &amp; manhandled by Matt's trapper co., yet with the aid of Hertha, shed some of her baby troubles and potential burrs &amp; eventually took up arms against the lecher who nearly ended her life. The trapper party were a sorry lot as well; these deconstructed whelps used some type of passive, word-of-mouth law establishing Indian women property of men until they deemed otherwise, which is total hilarity, but it would have been great incentive for Matt to redeem himself as more than some no-account drifter. It didn't. When faced with the camp whore's deaths at the hands of another trapper, he just rolled over and slept it off. Giving it up and a girl workin' don't need much interfering, but a trapper with a score of Indian girl's deaths on his hands; which everyone was AWARE OF, you just ROLL over??? Yeah..bring out the wifebeater an' spittoon, honey--I can't contain my FEELZ. o.O However, that trapper received his comeuppance albeit every showdown, including Dove vs. this lecherous douche, was convoluted and all happenstance. OH, I JUST HAPPEN TO BE PICKING BERRIES....AS I WAS WALKING AROUND THE MEADOWS COLLECTING DANDELIONS singing songs about the sound of music and earthy powpows....that conveniently placeholds me in position to a.) rescue a damsel in distress, or b.) witness an intimate moment for Big Misunderstanding plot-developer. 

The villains, baddies and ultimate evilz are very apparent and leave little room to mull over who-dun-it, or machination engineering.

We, as the reader, are told who thinks what, in EVERY head-swap. I guess Hess didn't trust us to use our own judgment and dared us to make any unfair assessments, because it was all written like an outline to a book. She knew who they were, but they just stayed on the shelf; untouched, unused and inanimate. I was so starved for stimulation that during the WTF moments, I actually used it to build on a story with a skeleton crew to work with. This could have been written as an Ode to Johanna Lindsey, but I think JL's brainless twerp of characters actually danced out of the lines instead of preset character dimensions of nothingness. If characters own their types/traits, I don't mind them never exceeding them, but if those traits leave me wanting, poorly constructed and tactless, I generally hope they die off soon. 

The characters are written out as if she's brainstorming &amp; making checklists:
 
* Matt is confused about love, but has a good heart. 
* Matt is mean oftentimes, but he will learn to love.
* Emery is an old bastard who needs ran through with a scythe. Everyone KNOWS it. Will die.

* Trapper Corey is a horny jackass who breeds girls into an early grave. Will die.
* Marna, mountain girl who needs rescuing all of the time, 'cause boohoo, step-daddy's lustful leering turned her into a social leper. 

Hess writes like she thinks we're stupid, or she's stupid, one or the other. I realize that mountainfolk weren't the most educated of the land, but the adventure of their simplicity could have made poor decision making skills &amp; hoedown knee-jerk lifestyles an exciting ride. These characters have internalization in the text, and no spark; we're told what they're doing and feeling, it's blatantly CLEAR, but they're not genuinely experiencing it; the author is wiggling the string to puppeteer them to the end. It was as if everyone in the book was cursed with phantom pain to bring the h/H back together. Magnetized to make it happen. A long way to the bottom. All the baddies died, the good guy wins... let's ride off into the sunset! Weee! NO. Even bad Westerns were more imaginative!

It's really unfortunate the storyline lacked any real depth or resonance; because of the location &amp; freak-out moments of threatening to bite tits off and weeks in bed due to herbal induced abortions &amp; raped-to-death campgirl bodies piling up... she simply couldn't work her magic into the seams of the characters to make them livable, or the heroine to progress further than her cloistered mentality. When Marna's beauty was revealed, she still became captive to her own inability to find herself capable. First, she hadn't grown into herself due to the ugly-girl-syndrome; then, her beauty stagnated her into actively pursuing her own goals due to mistakes she'd made during her low points. She had her fair share of suitors, but all in all, that low self-esteem beat into her a "I can do no better than him," instead of relying on herself for once. The ones who were dealt the worse, survived and prospered...what was Marna's excuse?