Rating: 3/5

In many ways, this is a better novel than most of the others in what Gore Vidal eventually came to call his Narratives of Empire series. From what I understand, he wrote this one first, then later went back to write the “start” of the series to work from Burr forward.

One of the blurbs describes this as “Jamesian,” and that hardly seems fair. There’s nowhere near Jamesian subtlety here. I’ve come to believe that Vidal was actually just a modest talent (as least as a novelist) with a gift for terrific one-liners. This may be him at his best (I still haven’t read Myra Breckenridge, and I may never get to it), but it’s still a fairly low ceiling.

That aside, though, this is a novel that does turn on a variety of interactions. I imagine some of its contemporary effect had to do with its unapologetic glimpses of sexuality – with homosexuality included in a side-eye kind of way – but that hardly seems memorable. Instead (and why do I keep hedging every time I set out to say what’s effective in this?) we get a troubling family situation. Newspaper titan Blaise Sanford has a son and a daughter. Peter is disaffected enough by his father’s position that he starts a vaguely socialist magazine. Enid, happy to make a scene, marries a heartlessly ambitious young war hero (or is he?), Clay Overbury who angles to depose his political mentor James Burden Day so he can take the Senate seat for himself.

When Enid and Clay divorce, Blaise prefers to align himself with his former son-in-law, and – to me at least – the most compelling part of this comes when they scheme to get her committed to a sanitarium to flee Clay up for his political rise.

At that level, this is a clever novel of intrigue and family dynamics. It’s never subtle enough to be fully engaging, but it’s interesting, and you can glimpse real characters in the stereotypes from which they’re born.

As such, I say, it’s a better book than most of the others in the series, but it’s still less effective.

The pleasure in the full series is the sense that Vidal is telling a shadow history of the United States. This doesn’t at all rise to the ambition of Howard Zinn’s A People’s History of the United States, nor does it have the hopeful tint of the revisionist history that repositions African-Americans nor even the sinister edge of white supremacist imaginings.

Instead, the series imagines an almost literal bastard history – literal in the sense that it’s the bastard son of Aaron Burr who founds the dynasty that the novel traces. Its protagonists are all privileged (and white) and always on the periphery of power. They rarely get things all their way, though.

The sum of it, then, is a sense of another way that we might have told the story of the United States, one that doesn’t undermine any of our cherished myths but that does smudge them a little. There’s plenty of sex and ambition, enough to rock the boat but never to threaten submerging it.

As each novel moves forward, often somewhat clumsily, it serves that greater purpose. This one, though, better-designed as it is, doesn’t yet have the awareness of the ambition of the series as a whole. It hints at the Burr connection, but it’s more a curiosity than the inciting fact. These people have lives of their own to live (in perhaps two-and-a-half dimensions), so the history they’re part of isn’t as upfront.

So, that’s my bottom line. This is, I imagine, Vidal at his most talented, but it’s not Vidal’s talent that ultimately interests me. It’s the ambition he developed in his full series of novels, an ambition to show us this country in a slightly darker light than we’re used to seeing it. There’s that dark light here, but the ambition is missing. If you’re going to read Vidal – and I’ll neither urge nor discourage on that front – I’d say to start with Burr and see if you have the stamina to get this far.