Rating: 3/5

I love the watercolor artwork on the cover. Betty Neels is (was) a prolific British author, and many of her paperbacks were reissued in digital e-book format with beautiful watercolor illustrations. All her books are squeaky clean, fairly similar, and evenly paced, for the most part. Neels writes great details about the setting, the food, clothing, etc. Set in contemporary England and the Netherlands, reading her books feels like stepping back to a gentler time.

I read this book years ago, and enjoyed it, but nothing stands out in my mind. However, Claudia is among the relatively few beautiful heroines Neels created. No ordinary mouse here! Having stuck her neck out so far, Neels retreated to her safe zone, for the hero is — you guessed it — a doctor. Betty must have felt safest in writing medical romances, for she had been a nurse until she started writing romances in retirement. 

This is a marriage of convenience story with a splendid white Christmas.

Excerpt, the first time he sees her:
"She picked up her duster, sneezed again, and bent to her task, a tall, slim but shapely girl with a lovely face and shining copper hair, which was piled untidily on top of her head and half covered by another duster, secured by a piece of string. Her shapely person was shrouded in a large print pinny several sizes too big, her face had a dusty smear on one cheek and her nose shone. Nevertheless she looked beautiful, and the man watching her from the half-open door smiled his appreciation before giving a little cough.

Claudia looked over her shoulder at him. There was nothing about him to make her feel uneasy—indeed, he was the epitome of understated elegance, with an air of assurance which was in itself reassuring. He was a big man, very tall and powerfully built, not so very young but with the kind of good looks which could only improve with age. His hair was pepper and salt, cut short. He might be in his late thirties. Claudia wondered who he was.

'Have you come to see Great-Uncle William or my mother? You came in through the wrong door—but of course you weren't to know that.' She smiled at him kindly, not wishing him to feel awkward.

He showed no signs of discomfort. 'Colonel Ramsay.' His commanding nose twisted at the dust. 'Should you not open a window? The dust…'