Rating: 4/5

A brief and very clever novella that occupies that interesting space between fact and fiction. Andrew Motion is better known as a poet, poet laureate and writer of biographies (especially Keats and Larkin; both on my tbr list), rather than a novelist. But this foray into the novel form is interesting and is set in the mid to late 1840s. Motion draws on his knowledge of English Romantic poetry to weave an interesting tale about the afterlife of poets by posing a conundrum and musing out loud in a “what if?” sort of way.
The two main protagonists of the novella are two doctors. Dr William Tabor is a physician in London who studies the conditions of the rural poor and their diseases and lifestyle. In his studies he comes across the work of Dr John Cake, a physician living in rural obscurity in Essex. Tabor was a minor poet in the Wordsworth style in his youth. He travels to Essex to meet with Dr Cake and discuss his work only to discover he is dying of consumption. Cake is in his late 40s at the time (born 1795). They only meet twice and the bulk of the novel is the record of those two meetings. They discuss poetry in depth and the afterlife of poets; Motion suggest as they grow older they lose something of their power and initially uses Wordsworth as an example. It is well written and as you would expect very poetic. The descriptions of the Essex countryside are straight out of Constable with the blurred edges of Turner and are luscious and brilliant. 
At some point in the proceedings the reader realises what Motion is suggesting and the sheer outrageousness of it is breathtaking. The clues are there. At Dr Cake’s funeral Tabor notices that the nameplate on the coffin is blank. Who was Dr Cake? It’s almost like through the keyhole; who lives in a house like this? There is the study, its furnishings and the books in it, the bird in the cage, the garden and flowers, the housekeeper (especially the housekeeper) and then there is the conversation between the two men. The clues are there and laid out at the end. The descriptions of how the disease takes hold are very effective and work well in the context of the conversation about the nature of poetry. 
The pace is gentle, there is a touch of gothic about it and it is well written. There are flaws and a few bumpy bits of phrasing; but its well worth the effort and the clues along the way are great fun and should take you back to the originals. If you like a bit of mystery and speculation, but don’t want a traditional detective novel, this may be for you. It’s clever and inventive and great fun.