Rating: 2/5

This book is the last of the second trilogy of Gray DEATH Legion books. 

Wait, it was a trilogy?

Yeah, that is sort of the problem.

The chickens come home to Glengarry as the moves taken by the Legion (or their members) in the previous two books must be accounted for. They did the principled thing, but things at least nominally in opposition to their employer, the Federated Commonwealth. And after a war where Mrs. DEATH has to take up the lead, Carlyle must stand trial. 

The two things that I like the most about the author's writing, in comparison to the rest of the stable at any rate, is that he is much more interested in the science fiction elements, and he writes combat like war as opposed to jousting or gladiatorial contests (or unmitigated badassery).

Planets are not all just Earth, and the ways in which they are different matter. Combat is brutal and unpredictable, the protagonists make mistakes, and luck and morale rather than pluck and armaments, decide things. But for having these memorable fights, the emotional scenes are weighty, principally structured around the trial and Grayson DEATH Carlyle's struggle to find purpose after a major injury, and how that reverberates and affects everyone around him. It is top notch stuff, and evidences an understanding of narrative and what people care about that can get missed out on other military science fiction.

But there is just not a load-bearing antagonist. The bad guy, an  accomplished FedCom general who is out to break off his own new house out of the newly formed Lyran Alliance,  is only okay. He was secretly  the antagonist of the previous two books, but what was meant to be a surprise does not work for three reasons. First, while it is a pleasant breeze to have more of an Affably Evil opponent, whose general defining characteristic is competence, it becomes clear why you have scenery chewers. They stir the blood. Here, I kept thinking 'this guy?' 

Second, he has been the  man pulling the strings in each of the prior books to engender a situation where he gets what he wants, with a scheme that makes sense, there is no tease to the reveal. We have not met him before, his existence has not been foreshadowed, and when the protagonist go on about the clues that keyed them in to his plan, there is no readerly ah-ha. They barely classify as clues. 

Third, the falling action is a cliff. The heightened emotions and struggle just stops and becomes a summary conclusion. This is far before the actual conclusion. Easily the worst part is the reveal that none of it mattered. There are times when not everyone is in on the plan, and that causes strife, but once that miscommunication is over, the whole question of everything is over. It has all been a Katrina plot all along, and a pretty mediocre one at that. The only real actor who does something is someone we do not know (and I assume is foreshadoing for a future book, or meant as a clue from a prior one) and they do it with little in the way of stakes. 

This is one of those books where it feels like Executive Meddling took over. Like the author had a great trilogy arc and either was not allowed to enact it, so put it all in one book, or otherwise most of the pipe got taken out of the other books. 

Still fun, but this shows how having no connecting material is as bad as having only time wasting.