Rating: 4/5

Are you happy with life but really wish you could despair for humanity and grapple with unending loss that makes a desolation of human existence? Read this book.

If you asked me to sum up the moral of the story, I would glibly reply "mo' babies mo' problems" and seriously this short novel offers a painful iteration of what any specialist in international women's rights knows. Although the language definitely rings of an author who spent way more time reading English literature than planting rice in a village in India, what she does successfully do is portray the ebbs and flows of poverty and the unending loop of achieving just enough to sustain oneself, only to lose it through a larger family, acts of God, colonialism, and other massive economic forces that purport the greater good while trampling across the lives of the most vulnerable. The futile and hopeless journey is enough to send the reader hunting for those last few pills of Prozac that might still be hiding in the bathroom cabinet.

The character of Kenny, who portrays the white savior in this narrative, is so weirdly constructed that I don't think I have anything to say about him, other than every page with him on it is terrible and I cringed with every line he spoke. I'm not sure that's what Markandaya intended, but I'm honestly not sure what she intended through his narrative, so have little to offer.

Other than that unfortunate character, every other person on the pages is real, is tragic, is beautiful, is flawed and joyful. That is part of the visceral experience of this book; you truly believe each one of these people lives and breathes and is suffering through the events found herein. I even found the portrayal of Kunthi, although harsh through the eyes of the narrator, overall rather sympathetic. At all times there is an underlying understanding embedded within the text that everyone is doing what they must, that starvation clouds morality, that one is only as good as their ability to survive. Despite an otherwise stilted tone and high language that rings false in the mouth of an illiterate rice farmer, the beauty of the writing lies in its willingness to show the characters as they are...or as they would be if all the circumstances were true. Which, I am sad to say, I have every reason to believe they are. This is less fiction than an amalgam of factual narratives. It is not for the faint of heart to read, but rather for those ready to encounter the rawness of poverty of the cycles of despair it brings.