Rating: 3/5

When I was ten, I stood in my aunt and uncle's yard in Dallas one night and watched Sputnik 1 make a transit across the constellated dome of the "fixed" stars. Awed by the science that made it possible to put a manmade object into Earth orbit, I had no idea at the time of either the political ramifications of this accomplishment or of the effect that that small sphere crossing the sky would have on my subsequent life. The space race had officially begun. Politicians in this country lamented the lack of education in the sciences that had put America behind the Soviet Union in the race that would lead to a manned landing on the Moon.

My curriculum in school changed to include more science and more math. Participation in science fairs became compulsory. The walls of my room were decorated with posters of the solar system, and model rockets occupied my desk and bookshelves. More drawn by nature to the humanities, I found myself as a senior in high school struggling with a slide rule in a rigorous physics class. A small metal sphere with a very limited life in orbit had changed my educational experience, and although I made a course correction in college, it was only in the summer before I left for graduate school that I felt truly free of the "Sputnik effect." That was the summer that Armstrong made "one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind."

Pelevin's novel, his first, recounts the experience of a boy in the Soviet Union growing up at the same time as I did and seeing the space race from the other side of the Iron Curtain. Hardly a straightforward Bildungsroman, Omon Ra has all of the quirkiness one would expect of a work by Pelevin. It is a damning criticism of the Soviet Union's Potemkin village approach both to Cold War competition and to domestic control of its population and an equally damning assessment of the disregard of the state for the individual. At the same time, Pelevin captures the inspiration of space exploration that crosses national borders and the inclination of citizens to be proud of their country even when surrounded by evidence of its egregious failings.

yes, it was true, perhaps the burrows in which our lives were spent really were dark and dirty, and perhaps we ourselves were well suited to these burrows, but in the blue sky above our heads, up among the thinly scattered stars, there were special, artificial points of gleaming light, creeping unhurriedly through the constellations, points created here in the land of Soviets, among the vomit, empty bottles, and stench of tobacco smoke, points built here out of steel, semiconductors, and electricity, and now flying through space. And every one of us, even the blue-faced alcoholic we had passed on the way here, huddling like a toad in a snowdrift, even Mitiok’s brother, and of course Mitiok and I— we all had our own little embassy up there in the cold pure blueness. I ran outside and stood there for ages, swallowing my tears as I stared up at the bluish-yellow, improbably near orb of the moon in the transparent winter sky.

It is a short novel, but it is well written, packed with surprises, larded with black humor and social criticism. It forms a perfect launch pad for journeys we all need to take into the past, into the future, and into ourselves.