It was the second time I'd read this book, but because it is so fascinating, with so much to absorb—people, places, ships!—I could easily give it a third go. Cook was obviously a man of exceptional intelligence and courage, and his three voyages of discovery were epic. An account of any one of them would easily fill a whole book. Then there were his early navy years, fighting the French, surveying Newfoundland and participating in the capture of Quebec. It's hard to imagine now, living in the third millenium with Google Earth at our fingertips, an age when the world was unknown, when ships literally sailed off the map and saw things they'd never heard of, like icebergs. Cook went places no European ship had been before, visited countless islands, made countless charts and met many different peoples. He was mostly known for his humanity and tolerance to the native people he encountered, and good treatment of his sailors. But his out of character erratic and irrational behaviour on his final voyage, which ended fatally in the Sandwich Islands, has been accounted for by sickness brought on by parasitic infection. 

I read a large chunk of this book while on a sea voyage myself, aboard a ship (well, boat perhaps) going from Shikinejima in the Izu Islands, to Tokyo. I like to think that perhaps reading these accounts of the high seas and storms Cook and his crew endured, helped inure my stomach to the rough Pacific swells, for while I sat on the deck reading this book, and fancying myself a sailor in another life, many were down below riding it out in their bunks.

Apparently a book of short stories recently released by Rodney Hall has one about the death of Captain Cook. Both the theme and the title of the book is Silence, and sure enough, when I came to the chapter in this book about the aftermath of Cook's death it begins: "From the brief awesome silence that followed the death of Cook, and the shock it caused, there developed a faint sigh of fear and lamentation over Kaawaloa, and from the ships, and the boats heading towards them, a kind of hush of disbelief." For many of the sailors, it was like losing a father.

There are too many fascinating nuggets of information to write down here. Ask me about them if you're interested, next time we meet!

UPDATE: This week in Port Adelaide I had the opportunity to look through a replica of Endeavour, the ship that Cook captained on his first voyage. How small it seemed at first sight, but what a compact sturdy bundle it is on closer inspection. Hard to imagine it carried 94 people, plus two greyhounds belonging to Joseph Banks. Below decks you have to walk about doubled over, and watch your head. The only place it's possible to stand straight is in the Great Cabin where the captain and gentlemen slept. Fortunately for them since Cook and Banks were both over 6 foot. I was especially thrilled to touch a piece of ballast taken from the original Endeavour, and a wooden nail also from the original, that was taken into space and back on NASA's Endeavour.