Rating: 5/5

Through the centuries, Latin America has been despoiled of gold and silver, nitrates and rubber, copper and oil: its memory has also been usurped. From the outset it has been condemned to amnesia by those who have prevented it from being.
yes, from simply being

Eduardo Galeano (1940-2015)

Galeano explains, in his Preface, what he wishes to do.I am not a historian. I am a writer who would like to contribute to the rescue of the kidnapped memory of all America, but above all of Latin America, that despised and beloved land: I would like to talk to her, share her secrets, ask her of what difficult clays she was born, from what acts of love and violation she comes.

I don't know to what literary form this voice of voices belongs. Memory of Fire is not an anthology, clearly not; but I don't know if it is a novel or essay or epic poem or testament or chronicle or … Deciding robs me of no sleep…

I did not want to write an objective work – neither wanted to nor could. There is nothing neutral about this historical narration. Unable to distance myself, I take sides. I confess it and am not sorry. However, each fragment of this huge mosaic is based on a solid documentary foundation. What is told here has happened, although I tell it in my style and manner.

That's really all the review this magnificent and moving book requires.

However, to attempt satiation for those who need more…

basics

Galeano's Memory of Fire trilogy is comprised of short (typically some part of a couple pages) narratives, usually written in the present tense. That tense has been chosen to bring these memories of the past more vividly into our consciousness. He wishes to make that past present to us, to keep it alive, "to allow it to happen again, as soon as the reader reads it."

This first book, Genesis, has two parts. The first, shorter part is called First Voices. These short pieces present the creation myths, the languages, the beliefs, of the first inhabitants of the Americas.The Hummingbird
At dawn he greets the sun. Night falls and he's still at work. He goes buzzing from branch to branch, from flower to flower, quick and necessary like life itself. At times he's doubtful and pauses suspended in the air; at times he flies backward as no one else can. At times he's a little drunk from all the honey he has sucked. As he flies, he emits flashes of color.

He brings messages from the gods, becomes a bolt of lightning to carry out their vengeance, blows prophecies in the ears of the soothsayers. When a Guarani child dies, he rescues its soul, which lies in the calyx of a flower, and takes it in his long needle beak to the Land Without Evil. He has known the way there since the beginning of time.

He led the long pilgrimage of the Toltecs to the sacred city of Tula before bringing the warmth of the sun to the Aztecs.

As captain of the Chontals, he glides over the camps of the enemy, assesses their strength, dive-bombs them, and kills their chief in his sleep. As the sun of the Kekchis, he flies to the moon, takes her by surprise in her chamber, and makes love to her.

His body is the size of an almond. He is born from an egg no bigger than a bean, in a nest that fits inside a nut. He sleeps with a little leaf as covering.

Each narrative indicates the source(s) at the bottom with a number, referring to the 227 Sources listed at the back. The Hummingbird (spoiler above) has three sources.
40. Cadogan, Leon. La literatura de los guaranies. Mexico City: Joaquin Mortiz, 1965.
206. ---. Pensamiento y religion en el Mexico antiguo. Mexico City: FCE, 1957.
210. Tibon, Gutierre. Historia del nombre y de la fundacion de Mexico. Mexico City: FCE, 1975.
Of course many were not published in Mexico City – but almost all are titled in Spanish.

The longer part of the book (over 80%) is titled Old New World.

These pieces are introduced with a year and place, then a title, then the narrative.

The first:

1492: The Ocean Sea
The Sun Route to the Indies

The last:

1700: Madrid
Penumbra of Autumn

the narratives

What are they about? There are four historical eras treated in the narratives. From 1492-1518, the era of discovery and exploration (24 narratives, 17 pages); from 1519-1531, the era of the conquest of Mexico (the Aztec empire; 32/26); from 1532-1572, the long, arduous, destructive, and immensely profitable enterprise of conquering the native peoples of the high Andes in Peru and Bolivia (the Inca empire; 85/62); finally, the century and a quarter following, in which the Spanish and other European countries fortified their domination over the original cultures of the New World (~165/136).

Essentially, what Galeano would probably refer to (from the book's title) as the Genesis of colonialism.

There are many types of topics treated. 

People first of all, some famous, some once well-known but now forgotten, a few utterly obscure - conquisadores, missionaries, rulers, administrators, warriors, resistors, converts, rebels - many of them (on the European hand) brutal or grasping, or both brutal and grasping - but some outraged at the cruelty and the taking. On the first Americans hand, some also cruel, others learned, some naïve and trusting, some sly and knowing. European, native, and mixed decent all represented.

We read of Columbus, Balboa, Charles V, Cortes, Moctezuma, Ponce de León, Pizarro, Philip II, Drake, Raleigh, Pocahontas, Charles II, Morgan – even Durer, Leonardo, Cervantes, Shakespeare. We also read of Opechancanough, an uncle of Pocahontas; of Guáman Poma de Ayala, a nobleman of the indigenous people of South America; of Martín de Porres, a lay brother of the Dominican Order, beatified in 1837, canonized in 1962, the patron saint of mixed-race people; of Carlos de Siguenza y Góngora, a polymath, one of the first great intellectuals born in New Spain, a criollo patriot who exalted New Spain over Old; 
and of Juana Inéz de la Cruz, self-taught scholar and student of scientific thought - philosopher, composer, poet of the Baroque school, and Hieronymite nun of New Spain, known in her lifetime as "The Tenth Muse", "The Phoenix of America", or the "Mexican Phoenix".

Places also – Jamestown, Plymouth, Barbados; Jamaica, Albuquerque (where the natives drove out the Spaniards and ruled their own lands again for a decade, until the Spanish settled things); Trinidad, Santa Fe, Puerto Rico, Cuzco, Guatemala, Machu Picchu; Florida, Mexico City rising on the ruins of Tenochtitlan; Nicaragua, Quito, Veracruz. Places like Palmares, in northeastern Brazil, the impregnable area where run-away slaves created a dozen quilombos in the hinterland, which resisted conquest by expeditions of mercenaries seeking slaves for decades.

And places like Potosi, flying 13,000 feet up into the mighty Andes, lying at the foot of the Cerro de Potosí — the Cerro Rico — the mountain made of silver, which supplied the silver treasure which enriched Old Spain for a hundred years. The silver mined by slave labor, mostly Indian but later even slaves imported from Africa when the native populations had become so decimated that the mining slaves could not be replaced fast enough, many dying of mercury poisoning. The silver taken by llama and mule train to the Pacific coast, shipped north to Panama City, carried by mules again across the isthmus to Nombre de Dios or Portobelo, whence sailed to Spain on the Spanish treasure galleons. The silver rape.

The colonialists. First among these are the Spaniards. The index contains entries for other colonialist countries: the Dutch; the English; the French; the Portuguese. There is no entry for the Spaniards. It would look silly. There is however an entry for the Inquisition, which operated in New Spain as well as Old. The Catholic Church, which exerted enormous power in these centuries in Old Spain, also reigned in New Spain. Many the of people told of are church men. Most (by my recollection) ruled over the native and mixed-race peoples with an iron hand, though some, exploring morality from a personal perspective, argued and wrote in opposition to the prevailing view of these peoples as under the sway of barbarity, idolatry, the Devil. 

Here are some of Galeano's tales, edited simply to highlight what specially struck me. (Galeano really needs no editing.) Any three of four pages will yield at least one nugget. Easier than finding the gold sought by the Old World.

Consider the English.

1672: London
The White Man's Burden

The duke of York, brother of the king of England, founded the Company of Royal Adventurers nine years ago. English planters in the Antilles bought their slaves from Dutch slavers; but the Crown could not permit the purchase of such valuable articles from foreigners. The new enterprise, set up for trade with Africa, had prestigious shareholders. King Charles II, three dukes, eight earls, seven lords, a countess, and twenty-seven knights. In homage to the duke of York the captains burned the letters DY with hot irons onto the breasts of the three thousand slaves they carried yearly to Barbados and Jamaica.

Now the enterprise is to be called the Royal Africa Company …

Behind the ships, sharks make the trip to the islands, awaiting the bodies that go overboard. Many die because there is not enough water and the strongest drink what little there is, or because of dysentery or small pox …

They lie in rows, crushed against each other, their noses touching the deck above. Their wrists are handcuffed, the fetters wear their ankles raw. When portholes have to be closed in rough seas or rain, the small amount of air rises to fever heat, but with porthole open the hold stinks of hatred, fermented hatred, fouler than the foulest stench of slaughterhouse, and the floor is always slippery with blood, vomit, and shit.

The sailors, who sleep on deck, listen at night to the endless moans from below and at dawn to the yells of those who dreamed they were in their own country.

The profits and advantages of slavery enjoyed by all.

1682: Accra
All Europe is Selling Human Flesh

Not far from the English and Danish forts, a pistol shot away, rises the Prussian trading post. A new flag flies on these coasts, over the tree-trunk roofs of the slave depots and on the masts of ships that sail with full cargoes.

With their Africa Company the Germans have joined in the juiciest business of the period. The Portuguese hunt and sell blacks through their Company of Guinea. The Royal Africa Company operates for the English Crown. The French flag waves from ships of the Company of Senegal. Holland's Company of the West Indies is doing nicely. Denmark's enterprise specializing in the slave traffic is also called the Company if the West Indies; and the Company of the South Seas lines the pockets of the Swedes.

Spain has no slave business. But a century ago, in Seville, the Chamber of Commerce sent the king a documented report explaining that slaves were the most lucrative of all merchandise going to America; and so they continue to be. For the right to sell slaves in the Spanish colonies, foreign concerns pay fortunes into the royal coffers. With these funds have been built, among other things, the Alcázars of Madrid and Toledo. The Negro Committee meets in the main hall of the Council of the Indies.

An oracle, showing the way to the future.

1499: Granada
Who Are Spaniards?

The mosques remain open in Granada, seven years after the surrender of this last redoubt of the Moors in Spain. The advance of the cross behind the victory of the sword is slow. Archbishop Cisneros decides that Christ cannot wait. 

… Thousands and thousands of Spaniards of Jewish culture have been condemned to exile. The Moors will likewise get the choice between baptism and exile; and for false converts burn the fires of the Inquisition. The unity of Spain, this Spain that has discovered America, will not result from the sum of its parts.

By Archbishop Cisneros's order the Muslim sages of Granada troop off to prison. Lofty flames devour Islamic books – religion and poetry, philosophy and science – the only copies guarding the words of a culture that has irrigated these lands and flourished in them.

From on high, the carved palaces of the Alhambra are mute witnesses of the enslavement, while its fountains continue giving water to the gardens.

Triumph and tragedy, barely distinguished.Heavily edited.

1522: Seville
The Longest Voyage Ever Made

No one thought they were still alive, but last night they arrived. They dropped anchor and fired all their guns… Shaking and in rags, they entered Seville carrying lighted torches. The crowd opened up, amazed, for this procession of scarecrows headed by Juan Sebastián de Elcano. They stumbled ahead, leaning on each other for support… They chanted as they went.

They had left three years ago … They have seen seas and lands without map or name: six times they have crossed the zone where the world boils, without ever getting burned. To the south they have encountered blue snow and in the sky, four stars forming a cross… On one very remote island, they report, live little people half a meter tall, with ears that reach down to their feet…

The survivors say that in the South of the South, where the land opens up and the oceans embrace, the Indians light huge bonfires night and day to keep from dying of cold… When they got to the Moluccas, one sailor traded the Indians a playing card, the king of diamonds, for six fowls, but couldn't even take a bite of them, so swollen were his gums.

They have seen Magellan weep – tears in the eyes of the tough Portuguese navigator when the ships entered the ocean never before crossed by a European… Magellan is now carrion, a trophy in the hands of Filipino natives who shot a poisoned arrow into his leg.

Of the 237 sailors and soldiers who left Seville three years ago, 18 have returned. They arrived in one creaky ship with a worm-eaten keel that leaks on all four sides.

The survivors. These men dead of hunger who have just sailed around the world for the first time.

two for the road

The race to Quito

1533: Riobamba

Half a year before, the ships anchored in Puerto Viejo. Inspired by promises of a virgin kingdom, Pedro de Alvarado had sailed from Guatemala. With him went five hundred Spaniards and two thousand Indian and Negro slaves…

In the coastal villages they found gold, silver, and emeralds. Loaded with quick fortunes, they set off for the mountains. They faced jungles, swamps, fevers that kill in a day or leave one mad, terrifying rains of volcanic ash. In the Andean foothills, snowstorms and winds that cut like knives broke the bodies of the slaves, who had never known cold, and many Spaniards left their bones in the mountains. Soldiers dismounting to tighten their horses' girths remained permanently frozen. The booty was thrown to the bottom pf ravines …

More dead than alive, with muscles iced and blood frozen, the toughest ones managed to reach the plateau. Finally today they have hit the royal highway of the Incas, the one that leads to Quito, to paradise. No sooner do they arrive than they find in the mud fresh hoofprints. Captain Benalcázar has beaten them to it.

Another Pizarro.

1542: Quito
El Dorado

For a long time Gonzalo Pizarro's men have been trekking deep into the jungle, in search of the gold-skinned prince and the groves of cinnamon. They have found snakes and bats, armies of mosquitos, swamps and rains that never stop. Night after night lightning flashed the way for this caravan of naked men huddled together in panic.

Skin and bones and sores, they are arriving this afternoon at the outskirts of Quito. Each one recites his name in order to be recognized. Of the expedition's four thousand Indian slaves, none has returned.

Captain Gonzalo Pizarro kneels and kisses the ground. Last night he dreamed of a dragon that jumped on him, tore him apart, and ate his heart. This keeps him from blinking, now, when they tell him the news:

"Your brother Francisco has been assassinated in Lima."

  The colonialists find the New World a remote and difficult outpost for the "civilization" of the Old. All exists in the extreme: distance extreme, time extreme, rewards of wealth and power extreme (but only for a few), the price paid for adventure and quest extreme; the iron rule of the Church and officials (over those not wanting it) extreme; the slavery, the misery, the jungles, the mountains, the climate, the food – all extreme, each in its own way. They have participated in "The Conquest of Paradise", and some have lived to tell of it for a few years. Now they, like the original Americans, the former dwellers, have faded into the mists of time. Galleano brings them all to the present, so we may remember them.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Previous review: The Ghost Road
Next review: Women &amp; Power: A Manifesto
Older review: The Hobbit

Previous library review: The Really Big One public service review
Next library review: che on my mind Margaret Randall