Rating: 4/5

This book is a scholarly study of fashion, manners, mores, and dancing in nineteenth-century America. As society developed a middle class, with more leisure time than previously enjoyed by all but the few wealthy people, those people wanted to learn the refinements of a genteel life. Unlike in England and Francee, America had no landed aristocracy, with traditions and guidance from the cradle for.countless generations. With more or fewer resources and time, and more or less education, either formal or family and self-taught, these nouveau-riches turned to books teaching etiquette, housekeeping, entertaining, dress, fashion, management of servants, dancing, and all other aspects of "the good life", which books grew in popularity during the course of the century. 

Many of the etiquette books originated in England, and were copied, edited, re-compiled from multiple sources, and re-published with timely updates by American publishers. In From the Ballroom to Hell", Ms. Aldrich examines many of these books, shows how they copied wholesale from each other, and traces how behavior and fashion changed and evolved. In an extensive chapter on dress fashion, she explains how some women's clothing style restricted movements of arms or legs, so that dance movements were necessarily restricted or free with the changing fashions. 

Aldrich takes the title of her book from an 1892 book by a professional dancing master, who still held to the idea, by then mostly outmoded, that some ballroom dances, notably the waltz, were morally objectionable due to the close personal contact between the dancers. Her book contains fascinating and amusing quotes from many of her sources, as to the role of women in society, and at home, and equally amusing advice to young men Anent their behavior. 

The sections on the specific dance instructions are of particular interest to me as a teacher of Scottish country dance. Advice ranges from firm strictures against attempting to dance without extensive study with a dancing master to learn the intricacies of steps and figures, to rather laughable assurances the the steps, described minutely if not informatively, are so simple that you can teach yourself from the manual in your hand and be ready to step confidently onto the dance floor at a public ball or private party. 

The book is a marvelous view into polite society of the late Georgian and Victorian ages. It also includes an extensive, well-annotated bibliography, in which Aldrich references many of the books she quotes in her study, and points out the common antecedent books shared by so many of them.