Rating: 4/5

Penelope Lively's memoir, Oleander, Jacaranda: A Childhood Perceived, was a beautiful book that has an interesting provenance. This lovely paperback book was inscribed "LWL from Dodo and Catie, 5 Oct 96." Because this book is now out of print, Diane Barnes found this beautiful paperback copy and passed it on to Elyse Walters who then sent it to me. Wow, this is our Goodreads community at its best. So in the interest of passing it on, this beautiful paperback is available to anyone who would like to read it. Penelope Lively is the author of numerous fictional novels such Moon Tiger, Judgment Day and Pack of Cards. British writer Lively has written many children's books as well.

This was a glimpse into the early childhood years of a young English girl growing up in Egypt. It is monumental in that it is the perception of her childhood as it pertains to her interest in books as well as her awareness of the drumbeats of war. It is such an innocent time that Penelope Lively describes that are not only documented in the narrative of this book but in the beautiful black and white photos that tell their own story. Of course my favorite is a young Penolope Lively reading a book at a very young age having taught herself to read. 

  "Every child has to cope with the confusing codes of its own society--beginning with the family and working outwards. Every child is confronted with the puzzle of class distinctions. My particular challenge was that I was growing up in the accordance of the teachings of one culture but surrounded by all the signals of another. Egypt was my home. . . but I realized that in some perverse way I was not truly a part of it."

"My Cairo of then is a landscape that is highly selective, entirely personal, and only tenuously connected to either the reality of the time or the city that has overtaken both today. Indeed there is almost nothing left of it now."

But what I found most interesting was all of the narrative regarding Penelope Lively's views on childhood education and her views on literature, specifically children's literature. And these quotes will illustrate this point:

  "I believe that the experience of childhood reading is as irretrievable as any other area of childhood experience. It is extinguished by the subsequent experience of reading with detachment and objectivity, with critical judgment. That ability to fuse with the narrative and the characters is gone. It is an ability that seems now both miraculous and enviable."

"Children do indeed start out as literary innocents, but the innocence is fragile. Corruption--so to speak--sets in with exposure to structured language of any kind. Prose, poetry, Fairy stories, mythology. Fiction, comics, Arabella Buckley."

"Children must learn to read and to write. The exciting thing about the writing of younger children is the way in which so many manage to incorporate influences while retaining a freshness and idiosyncrasy. That individual vision survives for a while."

This book is a teasure as it gives us a glimpse into a time in Egypt just before World War II. The images of Cairo and its environs were just so lovely. And we saw a small child growing up, and because of her command of the language, Penelope Lively was able to draw us into her unique perspective of this beautiful part of the world and the march of history.