Rating: 3/5

There are parts of this book that I would recommend and feel would be very helpful. And there are parts of this book that I think would be destructive. 

I don't appreciate many things in the Epilogue - revealing the secret. I think the spouse always has a right to know if another spouse is being unfaithful.

I think she has many good suggestions on how to talk about the affair. I like what she has to say about saying goodbye to the affair-partner in no uncertain terms - cutting off all contact.

I like what she says how multiple betrayals can make it harder to heal. 

I think one of my favorite chapters was Restoring Trust. I like what she has to say on asking for low cost behavior changes and high cost behavior changes. I love her Trust-Enhancing Chart and think any couple could benefit from a chart like that. 

While I think that the chapter on learning about the affair had helpful parts - it's always good to see where people are dissatisfied in their marriage and strengthen those areas, I feel like the author didn't do a very good job reinforcing the idea that while both partners are responsible for building a good marriage together nothing justifies having an affair and not having an affair is the individual responsibility of each person.

I like how the author debunks the "man shortage" myth, citing statistics showing that 72% of women and 78% of men get remarried.

I like how she explores mindsets that lead many to justify cheating. 

I found it interesting as she explored how men and women typically deal with their spouse having an affair.

I loved what she had to say as she explored the impact the psychological impact the affair can have on the faithful partner. 

I don't like how the author seems to portray that pornography in a marriage can be good. I feel that pornography is always destructive to a marriage and destructive to society. 

There is a chapter on sex that is pretty graphic and has many things that I disagree with. Some might decide to skip that chapter. 

If you like pairing books with aromatherapy as much as I do, may I recommend doTERRA's Forgive blend. It's the perfect blend to help you process forgiveness of yourself and others.

**Talking points - This book will bring up plenty of talking points. My only suggestions are to be as kind as possible in your discussions. To stop the discussions if they start getting flooded and come back to them when you are more calm. All marriage have many things that need discussing. Keeping those discussions as edifying as possible is always a goal.