Rating: 3/5

Copernicus, who argued against a geocentric worldview, wanted to keep his book and information private, out the hands of masses and only give it to those initiated. However, his colleagues believed otherwise, and would ridicule him for keeping it secret. His belief was according to the ancient scriptures and Masonic worldview, but everyone else were already on a different movement. Why this clash? He wanted to keep the foundations unspoiled, while colleagues were on a different beat, that of, seemingly, appeasing crowds. I would tend to agree more with Copernicus, until the extent that one’s life may be in danger of being cut short and so they would need to give some information out earlier than planned, if anything. In those days Latin was the official academic language, which not everyone could read, and usually reading was a privilege of those who weren’t peasants. I think that says a lot and brings certain perspectives into context. However, again, I think all information has been known for some time, and the world is only a stage with pieces being moved. Aristotle and Ptolemy’s models relied on epicycles, but it was Copernicus who uncovered Aristarchus’s Ancient Greek heliocentric models. They were however mostly ignored until Galileo used them, which is when the Holy Roman Empire began to take them serious and ban them, placing the books on a Prohibited List and punishing proponents. It wasn’t until later they were accepted.

While this is stuff we learn in elementary school, some of the details are only in books or able to be obtained by word of mouth.

To step away from the concept of “things I learned,” specifically from this book, is that Johannes Kepler took a study under Tycho Brahe. 
From this book, most people don’t know, we learn that another Aristotle-Socrates-and-Plato like partnership occurred with Copernicus and Rheticus. However, trust didn’t run deep by the time Copernicus’ book was published. His motivation may have been to just give Copernicus a better public image. 
He was hesitant to publish his book. And it was based on a Ptolemaic model, which expanded the Aristotelian one. He may have not been entirely serious about the model besides it being an effort to advance the science, however futile.
Einstein and Bohr also formed one such group in the 1920’s, as this tradition was continued with such conferences as the Solvay.
Let me clarify further my stepping away from the “things I learned from reading this book” concept: I studied astronomy in college, at both university and community college, so some of the information in this book is known. I rely on m, mostly, two college textbooks from the courses and other supplemental material such as, for physics, Hawkings’s standard A Brief History of Time and A Briefer History of Time books, which I sadly gave away and don’t have anymore.
It’s also reiterated here that homo and bisexuals a like were useful in the teaching of the sciences usually through a professorship. Thus while Copernicus had his faults, he was useful to the system by being willing to teach. This implies a negative view of gender roles, as if the masculine side of society finds no use in academia as some find sports a waste of time.