Rating: 5/5

I'm pretty well delighted by this book. Fair warning, though: Sherman spent much of his adult life writing reports and it shows. This is almost a thousand pages (plus appendices) of mostly this happened, then this happened, then this other thing happened, all clearly and accessibly set out, without framing or commentary of any kind--if you want detailed information about how the Civil War was fought (or any of the other things he did up until he wrote the memoir), this is a great resource. Otherwise, you'll be tempted to skim.

But don't skim! Because he drops stories, descriptions, and personal details in without warning (as in, you'll miss them if skimming), and these are gems. Heading into the mouth of a river in Florida in a little boat with thousands of birds roosting in the mangrove trees and the water full of fish, which he could see because of the phosphorescence. Watching a group of Union boats make the run past Vicksburg at night to set up the assault on the city--some of the boats were spotted and attacked, and so the scene was lit up by fires on the shores and by all sorts of flying ordinance and by one unlucky boat drifting down the current all aflame. Sitting with his family in a hospital watching his son die. His frequent attempts to be friendly to Southerners during the war--he saw no conflict between waging brutal war on the one hand and being kind, courtly, and generous to individuals on the other, and it seems to have always puzzled him that other people did see a conflict. He didn't know why his overtures were rejected. An affectionate and very fond description of Grant being socially awkward (apparently that happened a lot). A personal letter he sent to Grant (as opposed to the military reports to Grant that he also quotes from) that might make you wish you could be Grant for a little while, just so you could have a friend like that.

The clarity and vividness of these moments remind me very much of Hemingway, to the point that I would not at all be surprised to learn that Hemingway had read Sherman's memoirs and learned from them. In fact, I'd be surprised to learn that he didn't. 

Someone familiar with Sherman's history from other sources will notice that he leaves some things out. He admits in the introduction that there are "omissions but no errors," and he's entitled to omit things--he has a right to his privacy, and he wrote long before confessional memoir and public over-sharing became popular anyway. And of course there are things he leaves out apparently because he doesn't consider them relevant, because he considers that some other author has already covered them or will do so, or because he's sure the reader already knows. This book is not simply a record of the things he did, it is also itself a thing he did--it's kinda fun to see the choices he made to include this but not that, and thus to get hints of his thought process as a memoirist.

No, Sherman was not "a prophet of modern warfare" as it says in the summary on the jacket. Prophets predict the future; he helped create it. His name is among the most recognizable anywhere, and for good reason. And yet his legacy, as popularly known, is largely wrong. He was simply not the scowling fury he has been made out to be. The popular understanding of the March to the Sea is particularly wrong, not simply in terms of how it is judged or what meaning is assigned to it, but factually wrong--it was not a scorched earth campaign, nor was it philosophically innovative. It was technically innovative, being longer, larger, and more successful than anything anybody else could pull off. 

Discovering what actually happened, allowing Sherman (who was well aware of the mythologization process happening around him) to set the record straight, is another excellent reason to read this book. 

There are parts that are difficult to read. Sherman was a man of his time, and he seems not to have ever questioned his time, though many of his contemporaries did. He drops brief, casual, anti-Semitic comments into his narrative without any political self-consciousness. He speaks well of Black people in general and several Black persons individually, but expresses no outrage over their mistreatment, and has a disturbing habit of discussing them in the same breath as horses and mules (in describing the status of his army at a particular point in time, he might summarize the number and condition of his soldiers and then add that the horses, mules, and negroes were all healthy and well-fed). He was an unapologetic colonialist, believing that "Indians and buffalo" were being swept aside by "destiny," and he was proud of his participation--his leadership--in that process. He was never cruel or malicious or self-serving. He engaged in remarkably little BS. He seems to have literally not understood hatred. Throughout his long and remarkable career, he attempted a humane, limited, and strictly practical form of destruction, a means to an end: the integrity and growth of the United States of America. But whether the ends were always just, or whether there might be acts a desired end could not justify, seems not to have been his concern.

Anyone who wants to render simple judgment on him, against or for, will find the truth of him uncooperative. Another reason to read his book and let him speak for himself.

I like W.T. Sherman. I like him as a human being. I do not hold him above criticism, even severe criticism, but I want that criticism to be just, firmly rooted in the truth, not biased by Confederate propaganda, proud Union hyperbole, or the judgments of a modern cultural context he did not have.

I read his memoirs because I had read another book that convinced me (to my surprise, as I had until then thought of him as the scowling fury, the avatar of violence) that he was a kindred spirit of mine and, given a chance, would have been my friend. I stand by that assessment and, so far as it is possible to offer friendship to the honored dead, I will be his.