Rating: 5/5

This novel illustrates yet again the cinematic quality of Winston Graham’s writing. The vivid descriptions, the turmoil and troubles of the characters, how their surroundings and their circumstances colour their lives and perceptions – for me, it was truly like watching a movie. Although I have not yet watched any of the specials that have been filmed based on these novels, I can only imagine how easy the film-makers’ task must have been thanks to Mr. Graham’s visual writing. The most difficult part would be trying to figure out what to leave out while the story is condensed from novel to film.

This part of the saga begins with Ross Poldark in serious trouble because at least one of the ships that floundered on his shoreline at the end of the last novel belonged to the Warleggans. There are deep and long-standing resentments between the Warleggans and the Poldarks, just as there are also deep and long-standing attractions. Will Ross’ pride find him a permanent berth in prison after his trial in the Courts? Demelza stands by him and takes steps of her own in attempts to seek his release and freedom. However, the Warleggans have even more determination – and resources – seeking to keep him confined and/or transported.

I found it interesting as this novel progressed how the rifts between a couple are deepened by their own fears. As conflicts continue between them, so a chasm opens between Ross and Demelza that appears impossible to bridge. Both make assumptions and do not communicate these for fear that their assumptions will then become facts – and neither is prepared to deal with the burden of having their worst fears realized.

Meantime, the village continues to suffer as its prosperity declines. Ross and some of his friends can see the possibility of an end, and they take small steps to turn things around. In the process and out of dire necessity, Ross and his cousin Francis are reconciled as they team up to advance their own copper mining venture.

Ross and Demelza have a baby son and name him Jeremy. Although this great event does draw them closer, it also acts as a further spur to Ross’ efforts to generate the financial security he desires for his family. As often happens in real life, Ross finds it difficult to divide his energies between home and the wider world of commerce and both he and Demelza struggle to find a balance that will enable them to thrive as a family.

This novel is well-written and the story completely engaging, and it shares one main result with the first two: I can hardly wait for Part Four next month.