Rating: 5/5

Thirty years ago, I read this book after seeing a repeat of the movie on late night television. I loved the book at the time, and decided a revisit was in order to see if my fond memories of it held up. They did indeed. The Manchurian Candidate is a nifty little thriller that will appeal to those liking a taut political thriller as well as those who are conspiracy lovers. 

Made into a movie twice (once with Frank Sinatra in the 1960s, and then remade with Denzel Washington decades later), the story concerns Raymond Shaw, US Medal of Honor recipient, and his captain during the Korean Conflict, Bennett Marco. 

During the war, Shaw’s platoon was captured by the enemy, and all were ‘brainwashed’ by the Chinese and Russians who were working in concert to create the perfect killing machine. The action then switches to present day, eight years after Raymond has returned home. Key figures in Raymond’s life are his bombastic stepfather and his mother, and their diabolical machinations as they weave themselves through the political power structure of American politics. 

Raymond’s Mother is one of the most evil female characters you will come across in fiction, oozing corruption and venality. She is not above using her son’s status as a war hero for political gain and control. She makes Lady MacBeth look like Mother Theresa. 

Meanwhile, Raymond’s former captain (Marco) is having disturbing dreams in which Raymond coolly and unemotionally strangles and shoots several of his platoon members during the brainwashing sessions with the Chinese and Russian captors - sessions in which Raymond and his fellow soldiers were on display, but thinking they were attending a meeting of a ladies garden club! As a result, Marco begins to unravel as he is unable to get respite from the terrible dreams he is experiencing. Finally, he hunts Raymond down to determine whether he is also experiencing similar dreams. Are these nightmares from Marco’s feverish brain - or something more? Marco is determined to find out - before something horrible happens. 

This book is deliciously fun to read. Five stars - I highly recommend it.