Rating: 2/5

Here we go again.

STREET WITHOUT JOY is considered a classic, and Bernard Fall a sage on the subject of French military involvement in Vietnam. Of course, when, in the 1950s and 1960s, the books about the Vietnam conflict could hardly fill a single shelf, his might have been the best – which is also questionable. Now, though, if we take into account the amount of new scholarship published, it is surprising that Fall is still seen as an authority on the subject.

As an eyewitness of the fighting during the First Indochina War, he does a great job describing the battles with the gore, the tension, and the suffering. He is also versed in military strategy, and he explains the tactics and the mistakes of both the French and the Viet Minh quite graspably. Generally, the French, with their conventional armed forces, sought to engage in direct combat, while Giap's men tried to avoid large-scale battles as much as possible and instead get the French troops lost in the jungle. So far so good. STREET WITHOUT JOY would have been a good military history if Fall had focused on the military side of the war. His goal was, in his own words, to become "the foremost military writer of my generation," after all. Unlike the majority of the French and Americans, he understood that the Vietnam conflict was a revolutionary war, and American efforts to battle ideology with technology would end up in vain. He was perceptive.

At the same time, however, Fall is amazingly short-sighted when it comes to policy-making. He criticizes the American government for abandoning the French in 1954. As someone who claims to have a profound understanding of Vietnam and its struggle for independence, Fall should have known better. Even if the Eisenhower administration had bombed the Viet Minh into submission, the universally despised French colonialists still would not have managed to maintain control over the country. What the Vietnamese were truly fighting for was freedom from almost century-long colonial oppression. A US intervention in 1954 would have been exactly the strategy Fall fervently criticizes: trying to crush an ideology with technological superiority.

Fall also refused to recognize that Ho Chi Minh and his men were actually nationalists. Although he gives an impression of being a fan of Ho, he must have had only a superficial understanding of the man and his cause, considering him a pawn of Moscow. Ho Chi Minh was a Communist, but he was first and foremost a nationalist ready to prioritize his country's interests over any ideology. This is evident in the specifics of Vietnamese Communism, which was harsh in some aspects, but nevertheless sought to adapt to the needs of Vietnam and its people. Therefore, Fall's portrait of Ho is not well-rounded.

Most disconcerting, when it comes to the Diem regime, Bernard Fall is in David Halberstam's school of thought. He sees in Ngo Dinh Diem only a cruel reactionary who stubbornly refused to enact the economic and political reforms, which according to Fall were necessary, just because he could. This is a narrow and misleading view of South Vietnam's Prime Minister. 

Most reforms American advisers suggested to Diem were aimed at the liberalization of South Vietnam and the transformation of the ARVN into a conventional army like the American one. They believed that making South Vietnam liberal would make it more attractive for the people. But it was not about attractiveness anymore. The Communist guerrillas were harassing the rural population incessantly, forcing them to convert to Communism to survive.

Diem understood that the country needed stability and a strong security apparatus before everything else, and the American-suggested reforms were inconsistent with these goals. By the same token, the ARVN needed to be transformed into a specialized force that could wade through the jungle and fight a guerrilla war. Generally, it had to be a complete opposite of the US Army. The overthrow and assassination of Diem was a huge mistake, which aggravated the already not sunny situation. Like many others, though, Fall short-sightedly clung to the idea that all South Vietnam's problems were the Ngo family's blame. 

Fall was killed in 1967, which alas deprived him of the possibility to see and analyze events in retrospect. STREET WITHOUT JOY lacks historical perspective, which makes it an even less reliable source. It can be treated as one of the better firsthand accounts of the events in Vietnam, but not as an objective, insightful study. For anyone interested in the military aspect of the Franco-Vietnamese and American-Vietnamese conflicts, this book will prove to be an entertaining read. Otherwise, I do not recommend it.