Rating: 5/5

What a wonderful way to end a series. This was my favorite book of the three. Poignant, faith-filled, historically detailed, romantic touch, realistically written, a reader couldn't ask for more. After losing his farm and being chases out by the whites, Two Stars rejoins the Army as a scout and his wife, Genevieve LaCroix Dane, accompanies him as her uncle, Elliot Leighton, is sent out on a mission of peace by the US government. Not all the tribes they come into contact with are peaceful and unexpected events occur.

Of the three, I felt this book had the strongest faith thread. Both Gen and Two Stars must learn if they can truly live the faith they believe no matter what happens to them. Young Aaron must discover the course for his life and determine if he can be both an Army Soldier and a missionary for God. Capt Robert Willits must uncover the truth about the faith he has ridiculed his entire life. 

I definitely was sorry to see this series end, but felt I learned a lot about the time period of Western expansion and the horrors done on both sides of the Indian-White problem. Would highly recommend this series to readers who like historical fiction taking place during Western expansion in the United States.

FAVORITE QUOTES: (This book had a lot of great gems.)
"And the existence of hypocrites who misuse religion for themselves does not mean there isn't a God in heaven who loves his children and sent His Son to die for them.....Never confuse professing Christians with Christ....The former will disappoint you every time. Christ never will."

"...sin puts a gap between the sinner and God. And since we're all sinners, we're all separated by that gap. The Cross is what closes the gap. Jesus did away with sin by taking it on Himself at the cross. Once we make it personal, it's as if our own sins were with Him when He died. So our sins are all forgiven and the gap is closed. There's a bridge we can ride across. And when we get to the other side, there's no gap anymore between us and God, because Jesus took the sin that was keeping us separated."

"All these bad things that happen, they aren't God. They're sin in the heart of man. And God doesn't want it any more than we do. But unless a man knows Him, He sins and sins and sins again."

"my faith in God isn't some ticket out of trouble. It helps me through and in the trouble. God doesn't fix everything for His children so they don't have difficulty. Actually.....what God does is something better than that. He promises to go through it with us.....If you know the God of the universe is right beside you, than you can pretty much take anything the world can throw at you."