Rating: 3/5

Whilst the first half of the book starts off strongly, introducing each of the six young people to whom the narrator has some link, the second half of the book becomes more about place; especially history and description of place. I found it annoying that the last half of the book completely dropped the bundle when it came to characterisation. In the first six chapters, you have these long, beautifully drawn characters, each with their own inner turmoil which they 'drift' out of mainstream society and into travelling to solve. In the rest of the chapters, however, the characters become one-dimensional, and the reader is pulled along by the 60-something narrator and his opinions of young people and the lifestyle they're creating. The ending felt rushed, too, as if Michener was trying to tie together too many threads left flapping in the wind.

In other ways, this book is a window into a time of major cultural shift in the Western world, where the largely conservative status quo was being tested and challenged by youth. It's interesting to ponder some of the visions of the future which the book puts forward, and that a great many of them have not come to pass- African Americans have not wholeheartedly embraced Islam, for example. Also, the attitude to people about the Vietnam War - seen as a huge mistake nowadays- in the book seemed to suggest that people would generally accept that it was a war that the US had to fight. 

Of all the ideas in the book, I found the narrator's dogged faith in war (along with that of his bizarre friend, Holt) repugnant. In fact, I found the character of Holt sleazy and unsavoury and his sudden pairing with 18 year old Britta both forced and farcical. Likewise, Cato's behaviour at the end of the novel seemed like some kind of stereotype and cultural comment on white and black society in the US never being able to co-exist. The way Michener also disposed of Yigal was lazy: he made up his mind about his identity and was shipped off to the airport in a paragraph. 

One final criticism: the never ending and totally ignorant portrayal of Australia as a nation of cattle farmers. Australia is one to the most urbanised nations on Earth. Almost 90% of people live in cities. Very few of us are cattle farmers. Enough with the stereotypes..