Rating: 2/5

UPDATED: Dear folks who have noted or are considering noting the lack of capital letters in this review from 2007: I went through an "I'm not using capitals" phase. Because that phase was ten years ago, it is now over.

Feel entirely free to consider me sufficiently chastened/pwned as to obviate the need for further comment about the issue on this (again) ten-year-old review. Please also feel free to not read the damn review if this deeply upsets you, because I. do. not. care. enough to go back and put the capitals in.

i don't know why i keep reading books about self-obsessed middle-aged men. it's not that i have nothing in common with these characters (lord knows i have my share of self-obsession, why else would i be typing out a review that i'm pretty sure no one will ever read). it's that they seem to take their self-obsession as a badge of honor--it makes them interesting or worth-while. i'm actually conflating daniel martin and john fowles, but the novel invites that sort of confusion, so i don't care. all i know is that i finished reading this book with the feeling that if i ever actually met john fowles, i would dislike him intensely.

formally, this book is less "tricky" than the french lieutenant's woman. you could say it's more subtle, but since i like that other book so much more, i'm not willing to say that. it's more that daniel martin is interested in the connection between author and character in a different way than flw. that book highlighted the novel-ness of the novel--the unreality of the characters and yet their tendency to claim a reality strong enough to elude the direction and penetration of author and reader alike. this one is, as i mentioned before, interested in what happens when the author "writes from life". i actually don't know anything about john fowles, and i could be completely wrong here, but it's hard not to see daniel martin as a stand-in for him. the hints in the text (daniel martin plans to write a novel about himself, we are led to believe that the novel is that novel) make the relationship between writer and written a bit of a rabbit-hole. if i liked the book more, i might examine it more closely.

finally, there was one little narrative tick that annoyed me about this book. people are always giving higly significant little glances, dressing in a way that somehow sends a message, or speaking sentences that manage to contain paragraphs of meaning. one of the characters will cough, and that will mean, at least to daniel, "i approve of what you're doing, but i feel that i must show my disapproval because of the company we find ourselves in and because i don't think this course of action is particularly beneficial for your psyche. however, i want you to read my approval coded into this disapproval, so that you will understand that i understand that we are beyond such petty machinations. also, i'd really like tuna tartare for dinner." maybe it's just me, but when i cough it doesn't mean anything more profound that "jeez, i could use a lozenge."