Rating: 3/5

I had devoured some of the top McNally's series that made an indelible impression on me in my younger years. As a survivor in the stressful corporate world, I yearned to go back to that world of Palm Beach in Florida before technology took over our lives. Where a certain private investigator worked for his father conducting discreet inquiries for the rich and the famous. A world in which I had to often expand my vocabulary to appreciate the author's skill at detailing the mundane with so much vivre and style that I could not help but look at my meals as a drab affair later. When Archy McNally went for his daily evening swim in the sea, I felt rejuvenated and when he jotted his observations at bed time I felt I had done the needful. 

I wanted to relive those moments of pure joy and entertainment by gaining into my possession all the McNally's ever written. However, I had to hunt for long - apparently these novels stopped going into print a while ago. I was therefore elated when I found an entire collection (second-hand) in a wonderful book store I stumbled upon in central Bangalore. A real treasure trove, the store had all those books, series and comics that were a regular affair in the 80s and 90s and then vanished from the large book store chains in our current era.

McNally's Dilemma was written by Vincent Lardo after the death of Sanders (it's fine print below, so you may miss that). The book does not match up to Sanders' writing style, however it isn't bad. It's like heading to your favorite vacation destination with the same company, however with them being not as interesting as usual. As I was desperate to read another McNally I managed to enjoy the book. While the sass, wit and descriptions of food, drink and attire are mostly amusing, the mystery wasn't mysterious. It was fairly evident in the beginning who the murderer was. Yet, it was a fun read with the regular characters and Florida's wealthy being mocked through scandals and crime. 

Our main protagonist Archie has his quirks and humor. I admire his commitment to fine food and attention to dressing up in style. He may come across as a philanderer, but he values honesty and without losing his professionalism he does not compromise on searching for the truth even when there was no need for him to do that in this story. Respect! 

 There are better McNally's out there, but I got my fix with this one too :)