Rating: 3/5

Now, this is my favorite maritime historical novel. It has just dislodged Kon-Tiki by Thor Heyerdhal and Over the Edge of the World: Magellan's Terrifying Circumnavigation of the Globe by Laurence Bergreen. The reason: the detailed and vivid writing of Patrick O'Brian (1914-2000). How could a trained pilot write a 20-novel Aubrey-Maturin (yes, this is 411-page book is just the first) about naval warfare during Napoleonic Wars (1803-1815) with such details and jargons as if he was from the era? Read this book and be amazed by the details of the sea battles like the sinking of enemy ships, the killing of the ship crews, the splattering of blood and brains on the cabins. They are just amazing as those will give you the feeling that you were there witnessing those gory scenes.

Wait. Before you think that this novel is gory and about senseless killings, those scenes are just few. At least for this first book of the series. Overall, this is about the unlikely friendship between two men: the fat and voracious eater English Naval Captain Jack Aubrey and the Irish-Catalan physician-on-board Stephen Maturin. I said unlikely because their personalities are totally opposite each other like sun and moon. Jack is outgoing while Stephen is reserved. Jack is aggressive and rah-rah while Stephen is reflective and cautious. However, there is one trait they share: their love of music. And if you have the sea, music and edge-of-your-seat battles, you have my full attention as a reader.

Granted. There are just too many navy jargons that I did not care looking up in my Lexicon dictionary or Google up. I just brushed them aside. That helped. There were actually nights that this put me to sleep. But I guess those details make this a different reading experience. When boredom happens while I am reading a book and I want to continue, I normally look for its movie adaptation. However, 2003 Russell Crowe-starrer Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World did not help. The plot, although the battle scenes were similar to what happened in the book, is almost unrecognizable. Jack Aubrey in the book is fat while Crowe is a gladiator-type of slim. Well, of course we do not want fat guys in a kick-ass sea adventure movie ha ha.

Master and Commander. The term was explained by Stephen as redundant or misnomer. The Master reports to the Commander. In fact, this is only one person: Jack Aubrey. This is just an example of the many blah blahs in the book narratives that put me to I was able to catch. There are other interesting characters like Lieutenant Dillon who has crossed paths with Stephen before, and whose discontent at his new captain's lust for prize money begins to simmer when lack stops to secure a captured vessel rather than chasing another foe. Some of Jack's dilemmas are comical - what to do with a goat-buggering sailor and hos to assuage his crew's supernatural fear of the resident sin eater. Others are practical - how to drill his men to achieve a decent rate of fire with the cannon. In battle the warfare of his brig (the Sophie) and all the men aboard hinge on his decisions, which is where O'Brian's flabbergasting depth of knowledge is revealed. Seamen's customs and language, every detail of the Sophie's construction and the historical setting in which Jack's men sail are delivered as convincingly as if O'Brian has lived in the early 1800.

O'Brian has left a legacy with his 20-novel Aubrey-Maturin series. Oh well, 19 more to go.