Rating: 4/5

I've read a couple of negative reviews and, despite my higher rating, I have to agree with most of the criticism... But if this isn't such an enjoyable read! It's pop-corn entertainment! I haven't really had a mind for reading lately, and this was the perfect book to get me back into the right mindset. I couldn't wait to get back to it every time I had to stop.

The writing style of the author is really fluid and easy, even though it's at times a bit too naive. I've lost count of how many times the author used a flashback and then ended it with "The voice/The sound brought the character back to reality". But again, it's overall so readable. He manages to make medical notions sound so entertaining.

Speaking of the mystery/thrieller part of the story... EH. It doesn't really work. I get why this book is sold as a thriller, but I think it does a disservice to the story. I'd say it's more a family drama. The focus is on Cassi, Thomas and their relathionship. That part was so interesting. It's basically a character study. I liked seeing how both characters reacted to a simple interaction in completely different ways. They were both so well written. They felt so real.

Like I said, the mystery was really underwelming. 
I'll preface this by saying that the back cover in the copy I have already spoiled the big plot twist, but I still think the revelation could have been delivered better.
Like, there are so many details the author doesn't use to their full potential. (I seriously thought he was going to do something more with the fact that most of the victims were homosexual men).
It doesn't even help the fact that the characters don't even know there's a serial killer. They just think those patients are dying of natural causes. The protagonist only starts to REALLY investigate what's going on towards the last 50 pages. 

I still managed to enjoy the story because I liked what was going on besides the murders, but I can understand why some other people didn't.
Now, I'm even more excited to check out this author's other books. If I liked this one, I hope I'll going to love even more the ones that are praised.

P.S. For the people who read this, who is Rodney Stoddard? The book ends with a character thinking of calling him, but I just don't remember who he is. 
I have to agree with a reviewer that said that Cook introduced too many characters in the story. I think it made sense in the economy of the story, but it was still a bit difficult to keep track of everyone. Especially since some of them don't get mentioned again for pages and pages.