Rating: 4/5

Teetering between a 3 and a 4 rating on this book. I found this book through an Amazon Discussion for Books that make you cry like a baby. It was a tough story that did have some emotional moments, but the deep love between Alex and Laura was so pure that it made me believe that their love will go on until the end of time. Lots of times I really like a book, feel good about the HEA, but forget about it very quickly. This ending was so fulfilling and the H&amp;h were so deserving that it will just stick with me, but the book could have been shortened 100 pages and been just as good.Alex was Laura's and she knew it from when she was a child. I loved the flashbacks and stories both Alex and Laura had from when she was a demanding little girl and he would give her attention and affection. Then Alex leaves for war when she is 14 yrs old and returns 4 years later to become Earl of Cardiff (after both his brother and father are killed). He is a completely different man, severely disfigure, not just a scar, but he has lost one eye and use of his hand and is so scarred he has to wear a mask like The Phantom. He hides away and refuses any communication with Laura or the rest of the world. Laura disguises herself as a maid in his home to be close to him and he doesn't recognize her because he has also lost some vision in his other eye. He is amazed that she makes eye contact with him and doesn't feel the pity or disgust most people show when they look at him. Laura doesn't see anything, but the love of her life and I just loved her for it. She finally broke down his walls and I felt the book could have ended there and I would have been happy, but it would have only been 100 pages long (that is how good the love story was) and there was so much more to the story to come.The book was up and down for me, the story line was so promising. At times it was fabulous, basically when they were together and their love was blossoming, as well as the finale was just beautiful (once again when they were together). Unfortunately they were not together for 150 pages. I can see where historical romance readers rate this book very highly, great story line, such lovable characters, and lots of angst, but unfortunately for me the flowery descriptions, although beautiful, had me skimming to get to dialog and the H&amp;h were apart for too long, but it was a very memorable ending and worth the read just for the HEA.