Rating: 2/5

This is one of Shakespeare’s “problem plays”, which is a euphemism for “not that good”. Accordingly, the most positive thing that comes to my mind is that it is at least better than Troilus and Cressida, because it does have a proper story arc and resolution. 

The story is… weird. My edition says that Helena’s quest is a common medieval fairy tale motif: a woman who must win her husband into her bed with her wit. I do not recall ever reading such a fairy tale, but what do I know? As the magpie he is, Shakespeare borrows the story almost point-by-point from “Giletta of Naborna”, a contemporary story by William Painter. 

The story would not be such a problem, if Bertram was not such a jackass extraordinaire. Helena is universally praised for her beauty, brains and moral virtue: every man would be happy to have her, except the one she wants: the spoiled Bertram. He resents her because a.) he is forced to marry her, which is a good reason; and b.) because she is not high born, which is a terrible reason. So, instead of refusing to marry her, he does the absolute worst: they marry and he immediately abandons her, thus tying both into a bind they can’t escape. He does more assholish things, like courting the Florentine lady Diana, who ends up becoming Helena’s helper at the end.

The female characters are the brains in the play, and are all quite admirable - except for the fatal flaw of Helena, that she loves this idiot that does not deserve to sniff her pinky toenail. The two main males are detestable. Apart from Bertram, his follower, Parolles is a major pompous hypocrite and a coward, to whose cringe-worthy self-humiliation almost an entire act is devoted. On top of this, much of the last act depicts Bertram’s humiliation. I am wondering if Shakespeare just wrote this fast to appeal to his audience’s base desires: humiliation was a commonplace punishment at the time (as I just learned from The Time Traveler's Guide to Elizabethan England). 

The language is also not up to par: much of the play is in prose, not verse, and much of the verse rhymeth too much. Most of the dialogue is exposition, with very little character development or witty repartee. The tone of most of the play is dark, the happy resolution happens literally on the last page. I would have liked it more if Bertram had learned to love Helena by getting to know and admire her. As it is, it is very unclear if this play ends well, leaving an unsatisfied feeling.

Overall, not a favorite - there is a reason why this play is not staged too often.