Rating: 4/5

Forgotten Fire by Adam Bagdasarian
This is one of the best books that I have read in a long time, simply because it is so well told and true to life. It is hard to think that the terrible actions in this book really took place, but the triumph of the main character over his circumstances is a hope to us all.
Major Characters:
Vahan Kenderian: A young (twelve years old when the book begins) upper-middle class Armenian boy who is thrust into a world he doesn’t recognize or understand when the Turks who rule the land attempt to destroy all Armenians, and ally with Germany during World War I.
His family: Father, Mother, Grandmother, sisters Armenouhi and Oskina, brothers Sisak, Tavel and Diran, and his Uncle Mumpreh; who all suffer during the holocaust and deal with things as they can.
His boyhood friend Pattoo and his mother: They hide Vahan as long as they are able to, and Mrs. Altoonian secures the protection of a powerful man to help Vahan.
Selim Bey: A powerful Turk, he is known as “the butcher of Armenians” among other things, and protects Vahan because of the friendship he had for Vahan’s father.
Ara Sarkisian: An old man who, because he is old, and a coppersmith, is allowed to live even though he is an Armenian. He helps Vahan to hide, and gets him to an orphanage where he’ll be safe.
Serop: A young, crippled, Armenian boy who lives with Ara Sakisian.
Dr. Tashain and his wife: A friendly family that takes Vahan in. In exchange for some help with chores on his part, they treat Vahan almost as a son.
Reshid, Kiazim, Aziz and Ahmet: Turkish refugees, who, believing that Vahan is deaf and mute, take him into their new lives and teach him the skill of shepherding.
Mustafa: A member of the Turkish refugees who does not think that Vahan is a deaf/mute, and who believes him to be an Armenian.
Shirin: a young, lovely girl about Vahan’s age, and unfortunately Mustafa’s daughter.
Seta: a beautiful girl about Vahan’s age, she lives at the German Consulate (which used to be the Tashian’s home) when Vahan is part of the Dr.’s household.
Key issues: Armenian holocaust, personal strength, overcoming obstacles, growing up, beating the odds, history.
If you like this book, you’ll also like Anne Frank: Diary of a Young Girl.