Rating: 5/5

John le Carré’s A Small Town in Germany was published in 1968, amongst West German domestic political turmoil and incipient terrorism, ongoing tension between East Germany and West Germany, and intra-European maneuvering around the Common Market. It’s a novel set firmly in its era that captured the time well. Reading it now, more than fifty years since its initial publication, lacks the immediacy of reading it when it was initially published, but its psychological, institutional, and political subtlety remain fascinating.
 
A Small Town in Germany is a story of four men: Alan Turner, a brusque British Foreign Office investigator, who masks his essential humanism as hard-bitten realism; Rawley Bradfield, Head of the British Chancery in Bonn, who masks his nihilism as realism; Leo Harting, a low level temporary “dip”, who masks his humanism as unctuous charm and who we never meet first hand; and Karfeld, an aspiring populist leader with wartime secrets and flexible and indeterminate beliefs, who Harting and eventually Turner want to hold accountable for his wartime crime, and who we also never meet first hand. Harting, a young wartime refugee to England, seems a man out of place in English and in German, and in England and in Germany. 

Turner is dispatched from London to the Bonn British embassy to investigate Harting’s sudden disappearance with stolen secret and sensitive files. Turner’s full of scorn for the classism of the British Foreign Office: ”Christ forgive me: who do you represent out here? Yourselves of the poor bloody taxpayer? I’ll tell you who: the Club. Your Club. The bloody Foreign Office. . .” Turner’s disgust with the good old boy culture of the Chancery grows and grows, as he comes to reject the prevailing assumption that Harting’s disappearance results from his supposed leftish politics. Turner reveals himself as the novel proceeds as a far more sympathetic character, as he comes to recognize Turner himself as a more nuanced character and even sees his emotional kinship with him: ”Come on, Leo, we’re of one blood, you and I: underground men, that’s us. I’ll chase you through the sewers, Leo; that’s why I smell so lovely. We’ve got the earth’s dirt on us, you and I. I’ll chase you, you chase me and each of us will chase ourselves.” 

Bradfield, Turner and Harting’s foil, with his upper class and bureaucratic snobbery, initially dismisses Harting to Turner: ”’He is so trivial, he said at last, in a moment of quite uncharacteristic softness. ‘Can’t you understand that? So utterly lightweight.’ It seemed to surprise him still. ‘It’s easy to lose sight of now: the sheer insignificance of him.’” And Turner replies: ”’He never will be again,’ Turner said carelessly. ‘You might as well get used to it.’” And later, Bradfield reveals to Turner his utter nihilism: ”’You know us here now. Crises are academic. Scandals are not. Haven’t you realized that only appearances matter?’ Turner searched frantically about him. ‘It’s not true! You can’t be so tied to the surface of things.’ [And Bradfield replies:] ‘What else is there when the underneath is rotten? Break the surface and we sink. That’s what Harting has done. I am a hypocrite’, he continued simply. ‘I’m a great believer in hypocrisy. It’s the nearest thing we ever get to virtue. It’s a statement of what we ought to be. Like religion, like art, like the law, like marriage. I serve the appearance of things. It is the worst of systems; it is better than the others. That is my profession and that is my philosophy.’”

Bonn, the ironically eponymous small town in Germany, serves as almost a separate and ominous character: ”Bonn was a dark house where someone had died, a house draped in Catholic black and guarded by policemen. Their leather coats glistened in the lamplight. . . Only the posters spoke. From trees and lanterns they fought their futile war, each at the same height as if that were the regulation; they were printed in radiant paint, mounted on hardback, and draped in thin streamers of black bunting, and they rose at him vividly as he hastened past. ‘Send the Foreign Workers Home!’ ‘Rid us of the Whore Bonn!’ ‘Unite Germany First, Europe Second!’ And the largest was set above them, in a tall streamer right across the street: ‘Open the road East, the road West has failed.’”

A Small Town in Germany is the first John le Carré novel that I’ve read in which George Smiley doesn’t appear. Even without the wonderful Smiley, and even without what must have been the contemporary excitement of reading A Small Town in Germany soon after its publication, it remains a wonderful and subtle novel, for which any genre classification is inappropriate. As Richard Boston, then editor of New Statesman wrote in his October 27th 1968 review, "A Small Town in Germany is an exciting, compulsively readable and brilliantly plotted novel. Le Carré has shown once more that he can write this kind of book better than anyone else around -- and he has done so without repeating himself.” Boston’s assessment remains as true now as when he wrote it.

If you decide to read A Small Town in Germany, search for the Penguin Classics edition with the excellent Introduction by Hari Kunzru.