Rating: 5/5

The Truth: 

I have given it five stars and I have included it in my 'favorites' shelf and surely I will add her to the list of my favourite authors. The truth is I have read only this book and even in this book I have not understood many of the passages. Let me explain or at least try to explain.

Simone Weil: The Person:

There was a short biographical sketch at the end of this book. It was really short and yet it was a life story that moved me. She was born in France in 1909 and she died in 1943. She had a short life. She was a student of philosophy and studied along with Simone de Beauvoir. She was attracted to both Marxism and Catholicism. She was blessed with lot of mystical visions (A leftist mystic !). She was attracted to Catholicism and interestingly she never became a Catholic. For becoming a Catholic would mean that she will be excluded from the groups that are in opposition to the Church. She wanted to be a member of the universal humanity. She did not want herself excluded from any group and that would have been her greatest suffering. She took a voluntary annual leave from her teaching job to become an ordinary factory worker and lived in the condition a factory worker lived. She was convinced that to know the struggles of a factory worker one needs to be a factory worker. She gave up extra rations (though it was advised to her by the doctors) and ate what was permissible to the French soldiers in the occupied France during the Second World War. As soon as she heard of a famine in China she could not contain herself - she wept for them.

Her Writings:

The book contains six letters that she wrote to a Catholic priest regarding her reason why she did not want to enter into the Catholic Church and there are three essays and a reflection on the Lord's Prayer. On these I am not sure how to make my review......

It is better that I let Weil speak her mind.

1. Her reason for not entering the Church: "What frightens me is the Church as a social structure.....I feel that it is necessary and ordained that I should be alone, a stranger and an exile in relation to every human circle without exception.....To be lost to view in it is not to form part of it, and my capacity to mix with all of them implies that I belong to none."

In another place she writes: "The love of those things that are outside visible Christianity keeps me outside the Church."

2. On the Way to reach Salvation: "....desire directed toward God is the only power capable of raising the soul. Or rather, it is God alone who comes down and possesses the soul, but desire alone draws God down." 

She advocates that the most important part a soul can do to reach God is to wait with its complete attention turned towards God. She writes: "We do not obtain the most precious gifts by going in search of them but by waiting for them." 

In another place she writes: "The infinity of space and time separates us from God. How are we to seek for him? How are we to go toward him? Even if we were to walk for hundreds of years, we should do no more than go round and round the world.....We are incapable of progressing vertically. We cannot take a step toward the heavens. God crosses the universe and comes to us."

In another place she writes:"One of the principal truths of Christianity, a truth that goes almost unrecognized today, is that looking is what saves us...To long for God and to renounce all the rest, that alone can save us....Seeking leads us astray.......This waiting for goodness and truth is, however, something more intense than any searching."

How such attention is possible? She has an interesting reflection on school education that aids in preparing us in such process. To be fully attentive in dealing with a mathematical sum or to be attentive in dealing with the grammatical nuances in Latin is in fact a preparation for a person to have a complete attention only on one Being in his later stage. She writes: "Every school exercise, thought of in this way, is like a sacrament."

3. Biblical Reflections: There are some Biblical passages that get reflected upon by Simone Weil and they are superb. 

Some examples:"It is true that we have to love our neighbor, but, in the example that Christ gave as an illustration of this commandment, the neighbor is a being of whom nothing is known, lying naked, bleeding, and unconscious on the road. It is a question of completely anonymous, and for that reason, completely universal love."

"Christ did not however prescribe the abolition of penal justice. He allowed stoning to continue. Wherever it is done with justice, it is therefore he who throws the first stone."

Concluding Remarks:

There are also some interesting reflections on Love of Neighbour, Eucharist, School Exercises, Conversion, Atheism, Human Suffering, Friendship, Importance of Religious Practices/Rites, etc.....