Rating: 4/5

John Irving is one of my favorite novelists, but I haven't read much of his nonfiction. He might not HAVE much available nonfiction, but I always enjoy his forewords and afterwords to his novels. I like novelists with introspection. 

I had passed this slim book by more than once, and even now I don't know why. My journey with John Irving began with The Cider House Rules. The film was coming out in fewer than two weeks, and my friend Tracey and I challenged each other to finish the book before we went out to see it. I had never read a book like Cider House Rules (likely because I'd never read any Dickens), but I immediately fell for the author's way with words, his dialogue, his semicomic situations. I plowed through Cider House ... and then was hugely underwhelmed by the movie.

I was mad about every change, especially the wholesale elimination of Melony (a hugely important character) from the whole thing. I didn't think Michael Caine deserved the award for Best Supporting Actor (I was holding out for Haley Joel Osment in Sixth Sense, Michael Clarke Duncan in The Green Mile, or Tom Cruise in Magnolia). Now, looking back, I may have unfairly maligned the film. Reading My Movie Business, that seems all but assured.

I loved hearing the behind-the-scenes stuff about movies based on Irving's books, even the stuff that kind of makes him seem like a jerk (one insight: Rob Lowe was a hot teen actor; Jodie Foster was not). My biggest wish is that the book didn't end with the wrapping of the film. I wanted to see how Irving reacted to the popularity of it, winning an Oscar, etc. etc. You always try to rate art on what's there rather than what isn't, but this seems like a missed opportunity. (Caveat: there is some fictionalized discussion of this in Until I Find You, but it's not the same). 

All in all, I liked this book a lot, and it's always good to "discover" a work by a writer you love that you haven't yet dug into. Which reminds me, I've never read Setting Free the Bears. Time to jump in to that pre-Garp world!