Rating: 5/5

Mildred Pierce

Probably more famous as a celebrated 1945 movie starring Joan Crawford, James Cain's novel "Mildred Pierce" (1941)is set in the gritty world of Depression-era Los Angeles in the 1930s. Cain is famous for the noir writing of his shorter and earlier novels, "The Postman Always Rings Twice" and "Double Indemnity", which also became classic films. Unlike these books, "Mildred Pierce" does not involve the murder of a husband by his wife and her lover, but it includes and expands upon the themes of sex, greed, and class of these two earlier books. It also portrays a world of pervasive philistinism. Unlike its predecessors, much of the focus of "Mildred Pierce" is on the mother-daughter relationship and upon ingratitude. Although related in the third person (unlike the confessional first-person narratives of Postman and Double Indemnity) in a clipped, hard-boiled tone, the novel is an introspective character study of its heroine.

When the book begins, Mildred and her husband Bert are living in a Glendale, California in a middle-class home that the couple can no longer afford. The marriage is breaking up as a result of Bert's affair with a woman named (Maggie) Mrs. Biederhoff, who appears to have been widowed for about a year. Mildred is left with the job of raising two young daughters, Ray, 7 and Vera, 11, faced with a heavy mortgage, no job, and no skills other that her ability to bake pies. Mildred also has a lovely figure and gorgeous legs. She soon falls into a relationship with Wally, an unscrupulous lawyer and former business associate of her husband. But Mildred has ambitions. At first she proudly spurns domestic work, but she eventually takes a job as a waitress in a hash house, where customers grope her legs but where she determines to learn the business and make something of herself. Mildred uses what she learns at the hash house and her skills as a baker to open her own restaurant and, eventually, a chain of restaurants, which succeed aided by the repeal of Prohibition.

Besides showing Mildred's rise as a woman entrepreneur, Cain shows her sexual relationships with Wally and with a rich idler named Monty who loses his fortune during the Depression. Monty sponges off Mildred, and his interest in her is limited to sex and to her body. Mildred maintains through most of the book an ambiguous relationship with Bert, whom she divorces to secure the property she needs for her restaurant. Of the two daughters, Veda gets most of her mother's attention, for her apparent musical talent and her snobbery. Veda mocks her mother and spurns her love, which Mildred want to gain at all costs. Mid-way in the novel, after a torrid weekend affair between Monty and Mildred, the younger daughter Ray dies from an infection caught at seaside. Her death and funeral are portrayed in detail. Mildred redoubles her efforts with Veda and with Veda's piano lessons.

Among many other things, Cain portrays the harsh competitive side of the world of classical music when Veda learns from a reputed conductor and teacher, Treviso, in no uncertain terms that she has no talent for the piano. Shortly thereafter, however, Veda becomes a famous singer. In an astonishing scene between Treviso and Mildred, Treviso compares Veda to a poisonous coral snake with no thought of anything but herself. He advises Mildred to stay away from her daughter. This is advice that few mothers would take. The relationship between Mildred, Veda, Monty and Bert leads the novel to a crashing climax and ending.

The focus of the novel is on Mildred, but the novel portrays well many secondary characters. Broadly, the characters in Cain's world are driven by lust and money. There is also a strong component of class jealousy. The male characters, including Bert, Wally, Monty, and a young man named Sam, who is the victim of an extortionate scheme of Veda's are weak, lazy characters, ruled by their sex drives. Mildred is a much more complex character than any of the men. For all her faults and her ultimate downfall in the novel, Cain evokes sympathy for her. Some of the other women, including Mildred's friend Ida, from her hash house days, and her neighbor Mrs. Gessler, receive convincing-multi-faceted tough portrayals. Besides showing character, "Mildred Pierce" has a strong sense of place in showing Southern California in the 1930s. The book includes an extraordinary scene of a furious rainstorm which Mildred braves in her attempt to break up with Monty who is siphoning off her money and her ambitions.

"Mildred Pierce" is a dark portrayal of people and place. It succeeds through its unremitting emphasis of sex, greed and human weakness and through its picture of Mildred. Strong but flawed female characters are relatively rare in American literature, particularly of Cain's time. This is a book that deserves to be read and remembered.

Robin Friedman

A review of "Mildred Pierce" written two years after the above.

With its celebrated 1945 movie adaptation and award-winning 2011 HBO miniseries, James M. Cain's 1941 novel, "Mildred Pierce" has become a small American classic. I read and reviewed Cain's novel two years ago and recently took the opportunity to read the work for a book group. I wanted to review and rethink the book after a second reading.

The novel is a genre work written in a hardboiled, terse, and tough style called "noir". The book, which was a bestseller in its day, is something of a potboiler with a melodramatic and sometimes sensationalistic plot. But it would be foolish to let the book drop with that description. Cain resisted attempts to characterize his writing as strictly "noir" and insisted instead that he was writing literature. A great deal of American creative work, in literature, music, and art, attempts to combine a popular accessible culture with something serious. Cain's book can be viewed as part of such an attempt, and I think he largely succeeds.

The novel itself mirrors Cain's attempt to combine the popular and the literary. It has as a major theme the difference between social classes and the attitudes that people in different educational or economic groups frequently display towards each other. In some respects, the book describes what were later to be called "culture wars" in the United States. Thus, most of the book is set in a small suburb of Los Angeles, Glendale, which Cain describes as lower middle class whose residents are of limited economic means with little education and somewhat narrow horizons. In the book, people from Glendale interact with residents of Pasadena, shown as a wealthy community, where some of the residents are deeply involved with, say, classical music, and with wealthier social classes from Los Angeles. The wealthier, educated people in the story look down upon and frequently exploit those from Glendale, while the less advantageously situated characters frequently are filled with envy towards their better-to-do neighbors. Cain develops the social and cultural divisions of his story in Los Angeles beginning in 1931 in the midst of the Depression and the Hoover presidency, and ending in about 1942, after the United States has entered WW II.

"Mildred Pierce" is also unusual because of its main character. It is notable enough that an American man would write a novel with a woman protagonist. This focus is rare in the hard world of noir. From beginning to end, Cain's focus is on the book's title character, Mildred Pierce, and her presence dominates virtually every scene. Cain shows Mildred Pierce's life from the age of about 27 to 38, and he develops her as a person of substantial complexity. Mildred Pierce is strong-willed, determined and ambitious. She was forced to drop out of high school and marry at the age of 17 and has no education or skills with the exception of her outstanding skill at baking. Mildred is the mother of two daughters Veda and Ray, with the latter and younger girl dying early in the story. At the beginning of the book, with the family mired in a near catastrophic economic situation, Mildred jettisons her shiftless, philandering husband, Bert, and is forced to try to survive as a single mother.

Sexuality, and Mildred's appeal to men, play a large role in this noir book, but Mildred is far from a mere sex object. Cain shows his heroine it at least three ways. First, she is a highly ambitious woman determined to be independent, to better herself, and to earn money. Cain shows her ambition, her difficult rise, and her fall. Second, the book explores Mildred's relationship to men and her attitude towards sexuality. For all her independence, Mildred remains throughout something of what the standards of her time would describe as a pushover. More than that, she falls for the wrong kinds of men, beginning with her husband Bert, through a conniving, unscrupulous lawyer, Wally, and through a sponging, once wealthy, and caddish second husband, Monty. The third component of the story shows Mildred's relationship to her daughter Vera. The daughter has Mildred's envy and ambition to move up in the world but magnified immeasurably. Cain shows Mildred sacrificing and working without respite for Vera only to have her daughter turn upon her decisively many times before the book concludes. Cain shows Mildred Pierce as an independent woman, as a lover, and as a mother throughout the novel. In short, he tries to offer a full portrayal of a woman. The reader comes to sympathize with and to understand Mildred Pierce even though the portrayal is not always attractive.

With its portrayal of Mildred Pierce, of social division and social conflict, of Depression era Los Angeles, Cain makes literature of noir. Besides Mildred, Cain develops a number of secondary characters in his novel with considerable skill. The writing and the dialog are brief and to the point, in character, acerbic, and raw. I enjoyed "Mildred Pierce" even more on a second reading than I did on the first and was able to try to expand the way I understood the book. Although Cain's book will have readers who enjoy noir as its primary audience, "Mildred Pierce" has broader themes than noir and deserves recognition as a work of American literature.

Robin Friedman