Rating: 5/5

I was born in 1959 and when this came out originally in 1963, I was 4 years old. I went to school in Atlanta in the 1960's and 1970's. When I was in elementary school- grades 1-7- from fall of 1965 to June of 1972, I was struck by the differences between other women and my mother. For example, every single one of the other moms of the kids in my classes from 1st to 7th grade were housewives. 

While those moms cooked, cleaned, raised kids, gossiped with each other, and volunteered to give class parties, my own mother worked. She and my father owned a bookstore and my mother worked full time. My dad was the only dad picking up his kid at my elementary school which fascinated the other mothers who came to pick up theirs. I had a nanny, a lovely black woman named Ruth who was a second mom to me and was herself a working mom. 

My mother had a copy of this book and I remember talking to her about it when I was around 13. She had me read it and we discussed it, a practice we had enjoyed my whole life. Suddenly I understood why my mother made her career a priority and why she had so much self-respect and always seemed to me to be so much more smarter and sophisticated than the other moms. Betty Friedan had nailed it. The other kids had mothers who were dead inside. Dead. They had no vitality for life, no "I can't wait to get up for the new day" going on. All they could talk about was gossip, kids, cleaning, cooking, and the like. Such boring women had to be bored. How different they were from my mom and I knew that when I grew up, I would be just like my own mom. I had no desire to be one of the Stepford Wives. 

I got to spend time with both parents and by the time I was 10, I was working with them in the bookstore. I learned to shelve books, run the cash register and wait on customers. I learned to do the business checking, inventory and accounting. Both of my parents wanted me to be prepared for a real life and encouraged me to earn the best grades. 

This book goes a long way in explaining why. My mother was born in the 1920's. There was little opportunity for a small town girl to get a good education or start a career so once they were married, my parents moved to the city leaving behind mothers and sisters and sisters in law who were intellectual zombies. 

Here's the most important thing for every female to understand- your hopes, dreams, goals, talents, education, and abilities are every bit as important as any man's including your husband's. You do not exist to sell your body to a man in marriage in exchange for room and board. You are more than a legalized hooker, cook, maid, babysitter, and errand girl. You are no one's doormat. You get one chance at life (there is NO life after death which is an absurd notion) and you have limited time to live it to its fullest. Your kids will not rot or die if you work, get a degree, own a business, and live your own life and not just reflect your dreams through them. Betty Friedan opens the door to the near past, a past a lot of women are trying to relive today. Don't you be one of them! This world needs your dreams, talents, skills, and creativity.