Rating: 3/5

A very early Regency by Marion Chesney. This was her 5th book, according to publication dates.

This one is one of her few ones featuring an older heroine (26), with the same plotline of being downtrodden by her vain vicar of a brother who also verbally abuses her at every opportunity. A legacy from a distant relative soon has her free just when her brother, Henry, has plans to kick her out, and she asks her friend Mattie to come live with her. Mattie is in her 60s and is flaky and dreamy and inappropriate but incredibly funny. Henrietta had met one Beau Reckford at a county ball and fallen instantly for this 29 y/o man. 

What follows is a London season comprised mainly of Henrietta and Beau gradually becoming very good friends, so good on his part that he doesn't seem to regard her as female and discourses with her naturally one night in her bed while he's naked. This scandalous scene only came about because, well Marion Chesney being who she is, has someone trying to make Henrietta believe she is mad, and thus they try to figure out who the culprit is. 

The cast of villains are like so: Henrietta's vain and malicious brother Henry. The beautiful and spoiled Alice Belding who wants Beau at any cost. Mama's boy Mr. Ralston (the original heir of the legacy) and his beatifically malicious mother who will do anything for him. Actually Mr. Ralston and Alice Belding are somewhat the same character but of different genders.

Many things happen against the backdrop of the London season and the tumult of Henrietta's passion for Beau Reckford, including the friendship that springs up between Henrietta and Beau's best friend, Mr. Holmes. This is not to mention the many different eccentricities of Mattie, going from transparent muslins to wigs to dyed hair to assumed French accents. All is fun and light-hearted until Beau, in a flash of intuition, figures out who the villain is and-- he TELLS Henrietta, resulting in a quick marriage and consummation in a distant place so that Henrietta soon has another heir.

Ha-ha. No. That doesn't happen. Beau kidnaps Henrietta at a ball by first trussing up and gagging Mattie, and then he takes the two of them and imprisons them on his estate, whereby leaving Henrietta to suspect him as the culprit. Henrietta and Mattie (by ridiculous luck and comedic planning) escape and run back to their hometown, only to be imprisoned by the real culprit. Beau races to the rescue and -- they kiss and have HEA.

Ha-ha. No. That doesn't happen. Henrietta has a physical breakdown and the physician diagnoses her issue as fear of Beau, at which time she and Mattie take Lady Belding's advice and retreat to a small German village for a year. At which time Lady Belding + Alice soon descend upon them and the culprit also takes it upon himself to reside in a nearby village just at the time Henrietta decides to make her way back to England, but not before writing Beau an impassioned letter of her love. He isn't able to read it, however, before he hears of the threat on her life and rushes after Mr. Holmes to find Henrietta. He gets there seriously just in the nick of time as Henrietta is saved from the culprit by the wood floors of the church tower crumbling under the villain's dastardly feet. He murmurs affectionate nothings and -- they end up together and have HEA.

Ha-ha. No! That still doesn't happen, you silly reader you. He miscontrues (based on Lady Belding's nasty letter) Henrietta's friendship with a young man and leaves them to wedded bliss. Henrietta is crestfallen and soon after goes back to England to befriend a man who looks the same as the one in Germany. Beau confronts them at a ball one evening and then they have it out and make out in the conservatory behind some foggy glass and damp fronds. THE END.

Honestly, it could have done without the last three ending scares. The running away to Germany for a year was a bit much. Still, it was an early effort for Marion Chesney and maybe she was trying to insert as much plot as she could into a book. The writing style is unmistakably hers, but her plot-building definitely improves and tightens as she wrote more.