Rating: 4/5

Sadako is a young girl about to go into Middle Grade, and she is very excited about it. The greatest part about it is, that she will be on the track team, her favorite sport. Together with her bother and parents, the family lives a traditional life. It’s a few years after Hiroshima, and many of their friends and family have died from illness related to radiation. Sadako was two years old when Hiroshima happened and every year, the family goes into the community to celebrate life and gratefulness. 

Everyone knows the sickness…..the disease that many fall ill with and die. It’s whispered, it’s feared, it’s all around. Leukemia. Sadako isn’t feeling well at one of her training sessions, and they seek medical attention. The families worst fear comes true. Sadako has cancer. 

In the hospital, Sadako tries to keep hope and is eager to leave. Counting the days, to get out of there. She begins to fold paper cranes via origami. She has the wish to be healed after she makes 1000 cranes. 

Counting into the hundreds, she gives them away, hangs them, sets them on ledges….but her health keeps declining. 

At last, with just a few cranes left to go, her mother makes her a most special gift, a kimono. She has always wanted one, but they could not afford it. Her families sacrifices to purchase the fabric for this gift of love is almost too much to bear for Sadako. 

With a few cranes short of 1000, Sadako passes away. Her community comes together and children all around begin making paper cranes. 

***

The spirit of community and the love of a family stand out in this novel. Sadako is only one of the victims of Hiroshima and the aftermath. This story is based on the true story of Sadako’s life and there is a memorial set up today. See below. 

This novel isn’t long and can easily be read in a sitting even as a sufficient young reader. It is a gentle servant into the subject matter/topic considering any angst a child might have about it. 

Hiroshima and it’s people the effects as well as Leukemia in itself is tough to read about and understand when young. This version of the story does not discount or mask the truth, but it is written in a way, that it stays neutral enough to approach/ introduce the subject or expose young readers to illnesses that sometimes cannot be healed. The focus here is hope and love. A gentle way to take the next step to further research, remember and perhaps inspire. 

Pics and links on events on my blog. 

More of my reviews here:
https://scarlettreadzandrunz.com/