Rating: 2/5

‘A Gift of Dragons’ contains four shortish stories, each part of Anne McCaffrey's extremely long-running "Dragonriders" series, one of my all-time favourite series. Apparently, a couple of these stories had all been published elsewhere, but since I hadn’t come across any of them before it was a delight to find this little collection (quite by chance, in a sweet little second-hand bookshop in Norfolk, in February, after failing to find any crab to eat) and even more delightful to find them *beautifully* illustrated. Really beautifully, in fact. Is it a coincidence that I’ve now come across two books about dragons with nice illustration in recent months? Probably, yes, but not one I’m going to complain about.

I’m not going to lie: this is one of those books that will really only appeal to people who are already fans of McCaffrey’s work. For me, it was a chance to revisit characters and places that have been part of my life since I was twelve years old, and to explore new facets of a comfortingly familiar world. And I enjoyed them for that. But, if we're being honest, the stories here just aren't good. 
 They're saccharine, and clumsily written, and showcase some of the weirder quirks of McCaffrey's take on gender and class. They’re also incredibly predictable. We know, from the very first page, that the protagonist of “The Smallest Dragonboy” is going to impress a bronze dragon and overcome the boy who's bullying him, just as we know that Aramina is going to escape her pursuers in “The Girl Who Heard Dragons” (although in fairness anyone who’s read ‘Renegades of Pern’ would know that isn’t the end of her story). I didn't hate “Runner of Pern”, although Tenna was basically a poor copy of Menolly from the Harper Hall trilogy, and “Ever The Twain” was painfully mawkish and really quite odd.

For the fan in me, and for the lover of beautiful books in me too, I’m delighted to have been able to add this to my shelves. For anyone else, go read ‘Dragonflight’ or ‘Dragonsong’ or ‘Dragonsdawn’ or, well, really any other book in the series. They're better written, have more interesting characters, and provide more compelling plots.

There’s not a huge amount more to say, but I will add a personal note: the front of this particularly book contains a handwritten inscription, from a man named Kay to a woman named Mary, thanking her “for sharing your love of dragons, for sharing the music”. I've never met, and will never meet, either Mary or Kay, but that sentence captured something about how I've always felt about the Dragonriders of Pern. Maybe McCaffrey’s sentimentalism is rubbing off on me, but it made me smile.