Rating: 3/5

“Better a ship at sea, or an Irish wife, 
than a house in Macedonia.”
Semi-sprawling novelized memoir of Brits circulating through the occupations and evacuations of the world war in Rumania and Greece. 

Author Manning deftly takes the reader along for an unpredictable and dangerous ride through the distant outposts of the Balkans, as Europe swarms with turmoil. Atmosphere and character are well crafted here, with portraits of people that could only exist in that time and place. Manning has a writerly sense of conveying the terroir of a new setting, or an unfamiliar situation. Part of the charm of the story is that the reader is left to contemplate whether the war makes the man, or vice versa .. As morality shifts, somehow identity shifts as well.

Layered underneath the basic narrative is the recognition that nothing about the way Civilization conducts itself-- would really ever be the same again. Convention and tranquility crash to the ground with the onslaught of annexation or invasion on the horizon. The ideas of Border or Frontier may be understood as metaphor here, wherein people re-align and transfer themselves toward something less like vulnerability and more like strength. Possibly. 

And stitched into every page is the recognition that humor and humanity don't leave their critical qualities behind, even as all the characters become refugees :

He often himself hinted that he was engaged in espionage, but everyone knew that was just a little joke ... Spies were shot. Even if he were not actually shot, he would be ordered out of the country. And where could he go? Bad as things were here, Bucharest was the last outpost of European cooking. Levantine dishes upset his stomach. He could not bear the lukewarm food of Greece. 
He sat up, all pleasure gone from the bath, and considered the possibility of safeguarding himself by acting as informer. That would never do, of course ... 

The Balkan Trilogy can get a bit soapy at times, social drama overtaking the ennui before a fall. But Manning wants us to see the panorama of the applied-stress of wartime, where dysfunction, insight or even heroic action-- may be derived from the ghastly impetus of mass violence.