Rating: 2/5

The functional value of this book is on the lower end. It is described as a slightly fictionalized biography of Jesse Livermore, the famed early 20th century stock &amp; commodities speculator. Livermore ultimately ended his life via suicide after a series of stupendous loses due to his speculation, but he is known for some spectacular gains, including the propitious timing of shoring the market before a major fire in San Fransico in 1906, to which he netted $250k (substantially north of $ 6 million in 2021 dollars). This was his first major win, and is what got him on the map among the “professional speculators” of the era. 

	Unintentionally, I found the book entertaining if for nothing more than hearing the narrator read the early 20th century jargon-spoken out loud. Being a fan of old 1920s and 30s radio &amp; novels, listening to the book was definitely the “bee’s knees” (a term that has recently re-emerged among strangely enough). Beside that interesting peculiarity, practically speaking the book is mostly useless for a practitioner or amatuer student of finance. Livermore does describe the trades, and goes into some detail on his logic, but the distance of time is too great to extract much value outside of very general notions. 

	Much of Livermore’s action was derived from information, or getting “good” information, and avoiding “bad” information (mostly referred to as “tips” in his day). Some of the other rules that may be helpful have become folklore among the finance-initiated over the past century, such that hearing them in the book is entirely redundant e.g. letting winners run, admit failure/error and quickly move, don’t fight the trend etc. From Livermore’s own words, he was essentially a chartist/technician. However, his biggest wins were almost all about timing, which cannot be replicated. 

	Towards the end he describes strategies to test the market after buying into a commodity and equity, and observing the reaction from the market. Perhaps a fund manager or hedge-fund trader may have enough capital to observe this phenomena, but 99% of retail/amateur traders will not, so this is effectively useless advice as well. 

	Overall, a bit disappointed with the content of the book, it was fun to listen to as a historical artifact. Conditional recommend if you have nothing else to read/listen to at the time.