Rating: 2/5

William W. Johnstone is best known for numerous western series as well as a brand name for his estate’s fiction factory. But he also wrote in several other genres in the 1980’s and 90’s including the 35 book post-apocalyptic “Ashes” series.

“Out of the Ashes”, the first novel in the series, was released by Zebra in 1983. Ben Raines is a Vietnam veteran and mercenary now turned men’s adventure novelist. When a cadre of Washington politicians and generals decide the world needs to hit the reset button, they trick Russia and China into a nuclear war, which, of course spreads to the rest of the world. The world as we know it is gone but there are many survivors, including about 5,000 US militia that were in hiding waiting for these events to happen. Collectively, they are known as The Rebels and they want Ben Raines as their leader. Ben resists, preferring to tour the US, recording his findings in an attempt to chronicle what he finds for future generations, as well as hook up with women. But his voyage of discovery leads him to commit to leading The Rebels after all. They carve out what amounts to a new nation in the three-state region of Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming. Ultimately, the new United States can’t stand the success of the new Tri-State and launches a full-out, and incredibly violent assault on them.

I suspect that a reader’s enjoyment of this novel will be directly proportional to their political beliefs. Large portions of the book are devoted to pushing right-wing philosophies and, indeed, the Tri-State region is built as a sort of conservative socialist utopia that has no crime, no racism, no income inequality, etc. All liberals are bad guys, property rights are paramount, unions are outlawed, guns solve all problems…you get the idea. I can usually handle this in a novel, no matter what political agendas are being pushed, as long as it’s done logically and consistently. But here it was such a deluge, it really got in the way of the story. But even if all the political diatribes were peeled away, the novel would still suffer from inconsistent pacing, caricatures instead of characters, and a remarkably unbelievable plot. It’s like watching a movie that’s so bad, it’s fun.