Rating: 4/5

It was interesting to learn in the introduction that Henry James suffered with acute constipation his entire life. If ever a physical ailment was psychologically eloquent of its sufferer here it is. This entire novel with its cryptic dovetailing prose is wilfully constipated. At one point a character accuses another of being cryptic. It's one of Henry James' little jokes because the comment in question is no more cryptic than just about every other labyrinthine obfuscating sentence in this novel. The surface is there to mask the interior. Every character participates in this act of collusion. No one in this novel has a bad word to say about each other despite how often they are at inimical loggerheads. Only furniture provides (implied) criticism of the owner. 

In essence it shares an identical plot with the more enjoyable but less subtle Portrait of a Lady. The plot is very simple. Densher is in love with Kate; Kate is in love with Densher but Densher is poor and Kate's aunt has much grander ambitions for her niece. They are compelled to keep their relationship secret. Then arrives an American heiress stricken with a fatal illness. Kate persuades Densher to woo her for her money. Everything in this novel, including emotion, has a price tag, a market value. James though avoids moral judgement. He's a master of avoidance. Conversations are often like some elaborate costumed dance of avoiding the point. Characters make a point of not saying what we want to know. James loves conjuring up that ghost world of the things that remain unsaid. He loves hiding ugliness beneath a veneer of glittering refractions. (Nabokov was to do this more knowingly and artfully in Lolita.) We all deploy deliberately misleading language to hide the things we do we aren't proud of. We all posit virtue as the ultimate motive for an act of perfidy. Usually we think none the less of ourselves for doing so. James seems to thinks no less of Kate and especially Densher for doing so. He was generous in how little he made them pay for their mercantile behaviour. In a novel where everything has a price tag I couldn't help feeling Kate and Densher should have been made to pay more. Which is another way of saying the conclusion was on the lame side. 

The Venice setting with all its possibilities of glittering refractions was disappointing. It was like he had run out of interesting things to say about the city and he never brought it to life the way he did London.