Rating: 2/5

"What goes up must come down
Spinning Wheel got to go 'round
Talkin' 'bout your troubles
It's a cryin' sin
Ride a painted pony
Let the Spinning Wheel spin..."

--Blood, Sweat &amp; Tears, "Spinning Wheel" (1968)

Ed McBain gives us the second Matthew Hope mystery. Despite its title, his version gives very few references to the Brothers Grimm fairy tale. Nor does it come close to those classic "Fractured Fairy Tales" narrated by Edward Everett Horton on TV. Instead, McBain's "Rumpelstiltskin" is a riveting tale involving sex, drugs and rock 'n roll.

Attorney Matthew Hope is now 37 and divorced from his ex-wife Susan after 14 years. Their daughter Joanna is now 13. While Susan has custody, Matthew only sees Joanna every other weekend and during half of her vacations. He wishes for more time with his daughter.

The Hopes' divorce became final the previous June. Yet Matthew refused to date anyone for the first six months after the decree was issued. It's now January and a New Year. Matt finally meets Victoria Miller who's also a divorcee and has a six-year-old daughter Allison Konig.

Vicky Miller was the lead singer of a 1960's hard-rock band dubbed Wheat due to the towheaded (blond) trio of musicians. (Vicky and her daughter both have long black hair.) Despite the band's mediocre talent and their producer at Regal Records not wanting them to perform live, Wheat earned three gold records for each of their albums within three years. However, there was a missed opportunity for a fourth gold record for their song "Frenzy" from their debut album of the same name.

But Vicky quit the band in 1968 in the midst of Wheat's recording their fourth album. She married Regal Records owner Tony Konig and became pregnant shortly after their wedding. It was a miscarriage though Allison Konig was born a few years later. Wheat soon broke up after Vicky's departure, and the trio of musicians went their separate ways.

Now--after the dissolution of Wheat a dozen years earlier--Vicky Miller plans her musical comeback. With Allison now six and a first grader, Vicky feels that the time is now ripe. She sings for three nights at a local Calusa club called the Greenery. But instead of singing songs from Wheat's three albums, Vicky sings songs from the Big Band and swing eras. She tanks big time. Calusa's local music critic Jean Riverton pans her first performance, the Greenery's owner Jim Sherman wants to fire her and Dwayne Miller, Vicky's widowed father, threatens to disinherit her.

Due to spending that weekend with his daughter, Matthew Hope can only attend Vicky's third and final show on Sunday, January 13. (Allison remains at home with her sitter.) Though Matthew tries to reassure Vicky that she'd done well, he despises her evening performance. But upon returning to Vicky's house on Citrus Lane, things go from bad to worse. While Matthew waits outside for Vicky, the sitter tells her about three phone calls that put her on edge. Vicky tries to persuade Matthew to remain at her home until the next morning. But he worries about Allison catching him there, so he finally leaves around three-thirty.

The next morning a Calusa police officer arrives at the law offices of Summerville and Hope. Matthew is brought to the local police station. There he learns that Vicky was found brutally murdered in her home a few hours ago by her maid. Vicky was beaten to death and her daughter Allison was abducted from the house. Though Matthew was the last to see Vicky alive and briefly considered the prime suspect, Detective Morris Bloom clears him of any wrongdoing.

Now Matthew is determined to find Allison and bring Vicky's killer to justice. He feels partly responsible for all that happened. Matthew finds out from Charlene, the sitter who lives across from Vicky, that an unknown man phoned the house three times on Sunday while he and Vicky were at the Greenery. The third time the man told Charlene that he'd be stopping by later to "collect".

Detective Bloom also believes that a man committed the fatal assault on Vicky. When he and Matthew question her father Dwayne and her former husband (and Allison's father) Tony Konig, both men deny anything to do with the murder and kidnapping. And yet both of them are large enough to have done these heinous acts. Melanie Simms, a waitress who worked at the Greenery during Vicky's final shows, tells Matthew that the club's owner Jim Sherman killed Vicky. She accidentally overheard Jim tell Vicky that she'd be "dead" (fired) if her shows tanked. While there's a lot of finger-pointing all around, each "suspect" named seems to have an alibi. Bloom himself gets rankled with Matthew for trying to get involved in this case.

But Matthew soon finds out that Vicky named him as Executor to her estate. She'd written her Last Will and Testament on January fourth around the time she first met him. Matthew also learns that Vicky was supposed to receive a fortune from her father Dwayne on January 22nd when she'd turn thirty-five. Since she died over a week before and depending on who survives her, the money could go to either Allison or Tony Konig 0r even revert back to Dwayne himself. Matthew only wants to have Allison found safely and to bring this murderer and kidnapper to justice as soon as possible. Then maybe Vicky could given a gift and finally be at rest.

Somehow I didn't enjoy reading this so-called "fairy tale" the second time around. I thought that the dialogue was around 40 to 60 pages too long. Ed McBain's previous work "Goldilocks" was "just right"--around 180 pages. But at least McBain made a few references to the Brothers Grimm version of "Rumpelstiltskin". But all in all, it wasn't as good a read as I previously thought. I hope that changes with his next two Matthew Hope novels I want to read.

Rating: **-1/2