Rating: 4/5

Cross-posted from my blog where there's more information on where I got my copy and links and everything.

On the back of my copy of this, the plastic covering stuff has bubbled and made it going in impossible to read. I had no idea going in what this was going to be about.

Holy cow this surprised me. This is a weird little book, but it is so good. It's creepy and the atmosphere is absolutely amazing. I think I put it down maybe once the entire time I was reading it. Hero is about twelve in this, I believe, and does sound somewhat older than she actually is, but it works because of a reason mentioned in the book that I'm not going to spoil, but makes total sense when you get to that point and when you get to that point, you're just like, "Oh, yeah".

Since it is a little over twenty years old, it is a tiny bit dated, but not as much as you'd think. There are references to computers and laptops, and it makes sense for there not to be cell phones since the family is kind of weird and their parents don't even keep a television in the house. Mahy feels ahead of her time with attitudes towards some stuff, at least going by this book. She actually talks about racial profiling at one point in this book. While there might be an argument that the character that scene involves is a touch stereotypical, I don't think it's so heavily so that it becomes negative at any point, and the character is overall very positive and those things themselves are never treated as bad things. If it was a depiction of a character of colour today, I would probably want a little more, but for 1995, I think it's pretty good. I can't see it hurting anyone, and that tips my hand a lot to be like "okay, cool".

The family in this is weird, and imperfect. Hero, and her siblings, all call their parents by their first names, including in the narrative, and that takes a little bit to adjust to, but it really does work for this book. They're very non-traditional, and the book neither bashes that nor says that it's perfect. It basically presents it as another way to live that like all things will have its ups and downs. I so loved the little moments where the author showed that even with problems, they care for each other.

The writing of this reminds me of books even older than it, but in a timeless way. There's just something about the way Mahy builds up the atmosphere and the tension that works so, so well. Honestly, it's shocking that this book is less than two hundred pages and yet manages to do everything so well. The fairly large cast of characters are all unique and defined, the creep factor is incredible, and everything just works so well. Warning for an animal being killed in this that surprised me, just for the record. It isn't hugely graphic, but if you're sensitive to animal death, it could be upsetting.

I'm keeping this, and I highly recommend it. It's mature, creepy, and awesome.