Rating: 3/5

On the plus side, this is the smoothest and fastest of the series so far, and Mr. Goulart's commitment to Groucho patter is thankfully not as persistent as in the first two. We have nice progress in the supporting cast as Frank and Jane are now married and she is quite successful (more than Frank is these days). There is very little of the "uh-oh, will Groucho get killed?" meaningless "suspense," since we have always known Groucho didn't die in the '30s, fortunately for us. The investigation is fairly quick and easy, with none of the last-minute delaying "twists" or "wait, we can't get out!" irritating pseudo-thrilling perils just before the revelation. There is also a brief cameo from the talkative gal we met last time, who you'd hope would become a recurring character, but she is only there for one brief scene and forgotten, which does not bode well for book four.

On the negative side, Mr. Goulart's insistence that we be constantly reminded Golden Age Hollywood was populated mostly by bigoted, mysoginistic, anti-Semites who all cursed and insulted their way through life is in full force again. The rest of the population consisted of self-important, vapid ego-maniacs who cannot tell humor from sincerity, even from Groucho Marx, whom they all know. This is a Christmas story primarily about Nazis hating Jews and the upcoming war (the year is 1938), which our characters both know is coming and don't know is coming, depending on what mood they are in. And Jane, who is still fairly smart and strong and not too much "early Doctor Who companion that is a scientist but also mostly screams at the unknown," for some reason does not want to think about her own happiness, since war and sadness are coming. While that may sound like intelligent empathy on her part, the presentation of the scene is not so humane, mainly just an odd downer right before Christmas presents that they shouldn't talk about being happy since it could stop at any moment.

It's the odd moments like this that perplex: is this gritty realism of the '30s? if so, why is Groucho Marx the lead? is Mr. Goulart trying to demystify Groucho? I think the answer to that last one is "no," but the oddness persists. Perhaps I'm reading too much into a mostly lighthearted and febrile mystery about Nazis and you-know-what on the horizon. As I said, we are in a rhythm now with these characters and the plot doesn't get in the way, so read it and enjoy.