Rating: 4/5

When I first read through the book, I was surprised by how accurately the story conveyed the feelings and mood of 1920’s American jazz culture. Through Rachel Isadora’s detailed illustrations and descriptions of the Zig Zag Jazz club, I could almost hear the jazz music coming from the book, and it drew me in to Ben’s story from the very first page. According to the Scholastic Books website, this book, which won the Caldecott Honor in 1980, is intended for children from preschool age through second or third grade. I definitely believe that this appropriate for that age group, as it contains accurate historical slang and depicts what life might have really been like for a young boy of color living in the cities of the 1920’s. Although this is a picture book, children can learn much about the history of art and music of this period through reading _Ben’s Trumpet_. The illustrations are an imperative element of this book, and the story is only fully understood by closely examining the pictures of Ben, his “trumpet,” and other details. For example, the implied main point of this book is that Ben does not, in fact, have a real trumpet. It is implied from the details of the other characters, such as his mother, little brother, and grandma, who appear worn and somewhat sad or impoverished, that he cannot afford a real trumpet, so he plays a fake one. However, this crucial detail is not revealed explicitly in the text until the middle of the story, so readers must pick up on this detail early on from looking at how Ben holds his hands with an invisible or imaginary trumpet between them. In the illustrations, Isadora stays true to the unique artdeco style of the time period and illustrates the book entirely in black and white by using what appears by the shading to most likely be charcoal, emphasizing features of the streets and the jazz players through her use of shadows, shading, and jagged or curved lines to capture the energy and sharpness of the music. Specifically, one of the notable physical design elements that she incorporates into her illustrations is her use of two page spreads to emphasize what is happening in the story. For example, when Ben is ridiculed by the kids in front of the candy store for playing his “trumpet,” the readers see a two-page spread with Ben playing his trumpet in the far left-hand corner, separated by a large black expansion that crosses the gutter, and the boys on the other side in the far right-hand corner, pointing and laughing. This black space and distance between the children illustrates the polarity of the children’s characters and their feelings, and makes Ben seem isolated and attacked, backed in the corner figuratively, but also literally in the corner of the page of the book. This book would be a great book to use with children and help teach them about history in a way they can see, not just read about. I think children would really connect with the fragmented illustrations and it would help them understand the mood and emotions of this time period, and also the energy that jazz music can bring to a community.