Rating: 4/5

This was a unique venture into fantasy fiction for me, as I believe it would be for most. In its settings and basest aesthetic themes it is Sword &amp; Sorcery, filled with high adventure, barbaric people and their customs. However in execution this is more a treatise on philosophy and social studies. 

The story told in an episodic fashion, introducing each individual character, and slowly intertwining their stories. Each individual story also serves as commentary on societal prejudices, like sexuality, sexism, religion, colonialism, social hierarchy, slavery, labour and trade. It is also filled with symbolism. A recurring theme is mirrors and reflections, which is an apt symbol, as the story itself, though taking place in a fictional world with fictional people, is intended as reflection of our real world modern customs and people. And as interesting as it is to see many of humankind's views twisted and reflected in upon themselves, it is just as interesting to see may of fantasy fiction's tropes and cliches twisted and reflected by Delany just as cleverly.

 The format in which it was written, took some getting used to. As it was quite slow in the beginning and I had expected a rollicking sword swinging adventure, despite knowing beforehand some of the themes. Instead I was treated to an inventive form of storytelling with real depth and meaning. It all leads to an ending with clever connections that leaves the reader smirking and satisfied.

Though the story itself is perhaps not overly riveting at times, the big pay off is in the knowledge and wisdom one gains from reading it. It is unfortunate that perhaps the format of the story, being sword &amp; sorcery and being philosophy, will turn away readers from both fields. As would perhaps the subject matter of said philosophies, and the grotesqueries of said genre of fiction. Because I would recommend this work to fans of both, as long as it is read with an open heart and open mind.

For entertainment value, the book would receive a 3.5, if not for an action packed story then for the way each thread of the story is woven into a beautiful whole. However, the depth and insight and moral philosophical implications of this work rate as high as any from famous freethinkers, and in that aspect it would receive a 4.5. Overall, then, I will give it a well deserved 4/5.