Rating: 5/5

Lately I seem to be reading second reads. This is one of them and I am very glad I visited Turgenev’s most famous novel again. Rereading is like visiting how one’s mind changes.  I first read it before GR days but found that I had poste a 'Non-Review' back in 2011, which I keep below .I have read it now in an electronic format, but I remembered that my first time I used a cheap paperback with small print, but which came with a brilliant introduction by Isaiah Berlin, an introduction that deserved its own volume  One of the Romanes Lectures given in the Sheldonian in Oxford in 1970 “Turgenev and the Liberal Predicament” . When I finished the novel in my gadget, I felt I also wanted to read Berlin’s essay again and prayed to the heavens that I had not discarded the old copy and it was still somewhere in storage.

Eureka, I found it, but I also found that it is included in this other volume on Berlin’s writings, Russian Thinkers by Isaiah Berlin Summary &amp; Study Guide so I can give away my paperback copy.

To go back to Turgenev’s text before I then expand more on Berlin’s opinion. Key to anyone’s reaction to this novel is what one thinks of Bazarov, the nihilist. The title itself (and there is an ongoing argument on whether ДЕТИ should be translated literally as ‘Children’, or in relation to the contents as ‘Sons’) presents the dialectical debate engrained in the plot – the confrontation between traditional and modern Russia. And this is encapsulated in Bazarov, the character who questions the establishment. In my first read Bazarov irritated me. And this is striking given that I was a lot younger then and possibly more open to what any young generation had to propose. In my second read I felt a great deal more empathy for him, although I felt that he was not really up to his standards – this falling in love was just a curse for Bazarov. It brought him in conflict with himself. Sadly, it was not the world or the values that brought him down, but his own inconsistencies. 

Most critics have then argued endlessly about this combative Bazarov. Apparently, Turgenev infuriated everyone: the conservatives, the liberals and the radicals. They all tried to understand what Turgenev had wanted to say with this novel. What was his proposition? Was he with the Fathers or with the Children? Why was he not more critical with the Nihilist and why did the Nihilist not go further? Turgenev’s choices in his life – living in Europe a bourgeois existence and being soft spoken and maintaining his elegance—would place him with the Fathers, but for some readers his Fathers remain somewhat flat characters and his disrupting SON holds a greater fascination.  For example, Alexander Herzen (1812-1870) wrote “The author started by wanting to do something for the fathers, but they turned out to be such nonentities that he ‘became carried away by B’s very extremism; with the result that instead of flogging the son, he whipped the fathers.” .

But what I find in the discussions I have encountered about the confrontation between Bazarov and the older generation seem to take these characters for granted, and with this I mean as if they were real, forgetting that they are the result of Turgenev’s creation. He made them such and what happens to them is also Turgenev’s invention. So, why did Turgenev sabotage his Bazarov by making him fall in love with a woman who would take the upper hand? And then, why did he kill him? Bazarov didn’t just die, Turgenev had him die. 

So, we are back to the enigma of what Turgenev really thought. Did he put him down because he had built a character whose ideas were just too convincing, even for someone who was supposed to be against them? Or did Bazarov deserve to die because his ideas were doomed?

Most interesting this Turgenev. I plan to read more of his works but in the meanwhile, I have begun The Europeans: Three Lives and the Making of a Cosmopolitan Culture

As for Berlin’s essay, for me the most enlightening part was less his discussion on the novel itself (for I found he tended to forget the characters are not real), and more his overall account of what was so very important about Russian literature. It was through literature that political thought developed and was articulated. Literature did not ‘reflect’ politics; it was politics. And in this arena the critic Vissarion Belinsky (1811-1848) held the baton for the full orchestra. 

And Turgenev, who of all the Russian writers kept the furthest away from engaged politics and certainly from preaching ideas, was however deeply bothered about how different social situations had a determining effect on humanity. 

It was Turgenev’s wish to be buried next to his good friend Belinsky. 

********************

Posted in 2011

This is not a review.

But today there have been many exchanges on several of the reviews on this book at GR, and I just found this link to an essay by Henry James on Turgenev, and I did not know where to hang it.

http://www.eldritchpress.org/ist/hjam...