Rating: 3/5

Re Girl Trouble - Sandra Field gets the second slot in the four book Man Talk series.

The H in this is the only POV, which makes for an unusual switch in HPlandia to say the least.

This H used to have a huge teenage thing for the h, her family was rich and he was from the wrong side of the tracks, but willing to work hard. 

From the H's perspective, the h threw herself at him when she was a rebellious 16 yr old and he was 19 or 20, toying with his affections until she got tired of him and then got her rich father to send his goons to beat him up and run him out of town.

Now the H has made good, he is buying into a local business with a father-figure type older partner and he runs into the h at his local gym. We learn that the h did kinda throw herself at the H ten years earlier, but while she did not like the H's attempts to defend her honor when the father accused her of being a tart, she never got her father to have the H beaten and kicked out of town.

That was her bullying nematode father's doing, because he wanted the h married to an abusive, cheater, scam artist that the father was grooming to be his business successor. The h did marry the father's hand-chosen heir apparent and then proceeded to have two daughters and several years in abusive cheating hell.

When the ex husband started hitting her, the h took her kids and left and filed for divorce. But she has damage from the entire thing and her father has disowned her - even after the ex-nematode scammed him too. 

The H and h are still attracted to each other even after all these years and the h is way OTT in her determination to ignore her feelings. There is lots of back and forth and pining, until eventually Treacherous Body Syndrome does everybody in and we have the big Purple Passion Moment.

This leaves the H and h with two young daughters to try and bond together as a family and the five year old daughter, who is the youngest, doesn't want anything to do with the H. She wants her cheating, abusive nematode, indifferent daddy.

The H gets relegated to a convenient pump and dump for the h, until she explains to the little girl that daddy has temper problems and has to go away and stay away. (Tho actually Daddy ran to Texas with a lot of money and his trampy OW.)

The little girl runs away and the H tracks her down to the bus stop. Over donuts and soda, a youngest daughter/H truce is established and the H gets the little girl's blessing to marry her mother.

One awkward H father confrontation and reconciliation later, instigated by the h's long suffering mother, the H is awarded best man to pimp my daughter out to status by the h's father. 

 Since the h and H's lurve club mojo is really excellent, the H proposes and the h accepts and the h's daughters are going to be attendants for the wedding and the happy HEA.

This one was a typical Sandra Field small town and mild family problems kinda book. It wasn't terrible and it wasn't very exciting either. As a Man Talk book tho, it is kind of a let down. 

Where the other authors in this series do a really good job of actually presenting a believable male POV, SF only switches the genders of her typical indifferent H and sorta immature, angsting h. 

So there isn't anything new from the usual SF HP outing. If you just add an i to the end of the H's first name and an n to the end of the h's, you would have the exact same h POV book SF has written most of the time - with the sorta sleazy addition of the male characterization having some lascivious thoughts-cause SF read that men think about sex 295 times a day.

*sigh*

That did not really work in terms of the tagline for this series, the H sounds like the usual SF h and the h comes across as yet another failed SF H. Where this book wins is in the interactions between the H and the little daughters, there was some cute moments and I liked the H rescuing the little runaway at the bus station scene.

If you like SF, this one will work for you. But for those who like to avoid SF HP outings, you will probably have better luck and a better HP voyage elsewhere.