Rating: 4/5

Prelude to Space was written in twenty days in July 1947 and published in 1951. Thus, I suppose it is Clarke’s first or second novel, depending on the definition. In any case, it’s an example of Clarke’s very early work.

Contrary to some comments I’ve read somewhere, Prelude to Space is not a story about the first crewed Moon mission. Instead, it’s a story about preparing for the first crewed Moon mission. The main character is a historian who arrives to Interplanetary, a private(!) company, in order to be able to write a comprehensive history of what it takes to fly men to the Moon. This justifies the occasionally a bit lengthy lectures about space flight and rockets.

Some of Clarke’s predictions presented in this novel were spot on. The first impact of a human spacecraft to the lunar surface did take place in 1959, just as Clarke said. However, Clarke’s lunar mission with a three-man crew (just like Apollo) takes place in 1978, a decade later than it actually happened. Clarke’s astronauts are also using reusable rockets which we didn’t get until Elon Musk changed the business of spaceflight. 

In Clarke’s vision rocket launches require vast unpopulated areas like the Australian desert because his rockets are nuclear powered, and because they are first accelerated using a lengthy horizontal electric rail system. Rocket nerds probably get a kick out of the fact that Clarke imagines the use of ramjet engines in his first rocket stage. Overall, the launch and spaceflight technologies used are a rather complicated mix of different types of solutions, but I have no doubt that Clarke made sure that at least in theory they all worked just fine. What NASA did with the Apollo programme turned out to be a much more straightforward solution.

Characters never were Clarke’s strong point. That’s very true for Prelude to Space too. We don’t learn much about our historian, and just one of the astronauts has some sort of a back story and personality. The only(!) female character in the book is that astronaut’s pregnant wife, so she is mentioned a few times, but I don’t think we ever got to meet her or hear a single sentence from her. 

This is pretty extreme even for Clarke, but then again Prelude to Space should not be considered an ordinary novel: it was written in order to inspire and educate people about rockets and space travel at a time when all the general public knew about rockets was V-1s and V-2s that the Nazis used. As Clarke himself wrote: “…the pioneers of astronautics used fiction in a deliberate attempt to spread their ideas to the general public. … I must confess that I had similar propagandistic ideas in mind when planning this book.”

The paperback edition I read is from 1977. It includes Clarke’s four-page “Post-Apollo Preface”, written in August 1969, i.e., just a couple of weeks after Apollo 11 had safely returned to Earth. It’s a very welcome addition to the book. Also, the cover of this edition is gorgeous and gives a good depiction of the two-stage rocket and the electric rail that Clarke was writing about. It’d be nice to know the name of the artist who made the cover, as he had clearly read the book (unlike, e.g., the artist who made the cover of the first edition).

What I really liked about Prelude to Space was its optimism about space travel and the general inspiring and even uplifting atmosphere. It’s obvious that Clarke really was enthusiastic about his subject. Prelude to Space is not a great story or a great book as such, but I liked it for what it is. Every Clarke fan should naturally read it, but it’s of interest to anyone fascinated about early realistic visions of crewed spaceflight.
 
4.25/5