Rating: 4/5

I'm still not entirely sure what I thought of this book... part of me really liked it, and part of me didn't. I suppose if half stars were allowed, I’d award this 3 and a half, but since there aren’t, I’ll err on the plus side.

First of all, I very much enjoyed Ibboston's style of writing. She definitely has a flare for words and a wonderful way with unique descriptions. She's also able to give one a feeling of a character in just a few phrases, something it seems few authors are able to do. I think this lead to some of my disappointment, however, when after some great initial introductions to characters, there really wasn't follow-up or growth. And, sometimes Ibbotson's wonderful descriptions were redundant and got in the way of the flow.

Also, while this was a fun book about various creatures (both mythical and not) that gravitate to the Island of the Aunts for care, the book was still not entirely what I'd expected. Like "Fablehaven" I hoped that this would be a book about caring for magical creatures, and (like "Fablehaven") while it this was one aspect of the book, it wasn't the focus (though I enjoyed this book much more than I did "Fablehaven").

Some of this book was incredibly predictable, and some of it wasn't at all. Most of my concerns arise from the premise of the book, that the Aunts kidnap the children. Now, I feel Ibbotson tried throughout the book to justify this, and to show that the Aunts were not bad, and that they were actually doing a good thing. And while some of this may be true, I could never get over the fact that they did take three children without their explicit consent. I also wasn't pleased that the one child that did his best to escape was portrayed as mean and that he should have wanted to stay. Unfortunately, the good messages Ibbotson seemed to want to convey were undermined because of these two issues (at least for me).

Also, many of the messages seemed inconsistent (especially a parent's love for his/her child).
And one of the most disconcerting issues came when what we were supposed to think was one of the best characters, was going to leave our other heros to perish because he had failed to acquire correct information (and didn't seek it out either)... hrm.... 

I'm still really not sure which messages Ibbotson wished to convey, but I did enjoy the book and her style. The book created many wonderful visuals, and overall I'd recommend it - just with a few cautions attached.