Rating: 1/5

This review contains multiple spoilers for the whole "Foundation" series

I am surprised to find so little criticism of what to me came across as a train-wreck of a book. Asimov tells us in the preface to the following volume that his publishers tried for thirty years to get him to continue with "Foundation" after the end of the initial trilogy, and he always refused. He should have stuck to his guns.

Asimov says that he started writing the series in 1941, in response to a suggestion from John W. Campbell Jr. At the time, Asimov was 21 and had published a handful of stories. Campbell was ten years older and had already been editor of Astounding Science Fiction for three years. He was one of the most powerful people in the SF world, and the young Asimov must have been in awe of him. I get a strong feeling that the real creative impulse behind the original "Foundation" trilogy was Campbell, and that he contributed the key ideas. I wonder whether Asimov even completely understood them: this would explain both why he was so reluctant to continue, and why the result was so poor. I offer two pieces of evidence, one big and one small.

The big piece of evidence is the role of psychohistory. This is the core of the original series, the thing that ties all the action together. Borrowing from Tolstoy, Marx and the new discipline of quantum mechanics, we're asked to imagine that a true mathematical science of history has been developed which allows accurate prediction of the future. The prediction is statistical in nature; the larger the number of people involved, the more accurate it becomes. The mathematics is ferociously complex, but the genius Hari Seldon has managed to solve the technical problems.

Seldon uses psychohistory to discover that the Galactic Empire, which has existed for over twelve thousand years and seems invincible, is in fact on the verge of collapse. He goes further and finds a way to mitigate the effects of the Empire's downfall, so that a better Empire can arise after only a thousand years. He creates two Foundations to carry out this task. The first, overt, is the seed which will grow into the new Empire. The second, deeply hidden, holds the psychohistorians who supervise the Plan and correct the inevitable errors which develop as it unfolds. But the true magic of the books is that the Plan, on the whole, requires little supervision. It is Seldon's mathematical grasp of history's inevitability that lets him control it by making tiny nudges. It is necessary to the correct functioning of the mathematics that the Second Foundation remains concealed, and this provides much of the drama in the later part of the trilogy. Unfortunately, the plot also requires the introduction of the Mule, a mutant with extrasensory mental powers. To counter him, the Second Foundation are given similar powers.

In the new book, the sixty-year-old Asimov, now working without Campbell, has completely revised the role of psychohistory. Now it is hardly more than a background decoration: the members of the Second Foundation do not appear to be mathematicians except in name, and the extrasensory powers have been developed to the point where they take over the narrative. The Seldon Plan is no longer kept moving by the force of historical inevitability, but by the rather mundane influence of various telepathic supermen. Asimov seems to have forgotten the point of his own series.

That was my big piece of evidence, but somehow I find the small one even more convincing. In the wonderful denouement of Second Foundation, we learn that the mysterious First Speaker, the leader of the Second Foundation, is none other than the comic farmer Preem Palver. As a twelve-year-old, I loved the book's final sentence, where I discovered how cleverly I'd been tricked. Of course, "Preem" means "First" in rustic Trantorian dialect! And "Palver", a word that sounds a bit like "palaver", must mean "Speaker"! Why hadn't I noticed, it had been under my nose the whole time! But in the new book, to my astonishment, I found that Asimov had apparently forgotten a key plot twist in one of his best-known novels. "Preem Palver" is no longer a title: it's the name of the specific First Speaker from Second Foundation, who is referred to multiple times. Worse still, in Forward the Foundation, the prequel written shortly before Asimov's death, we're introduced to a character whose family name is "Palver" and given to understand that they are Preem's ancestor. I was shocked. How was this possible? 

Well, as I've had occasion to discover myself, increasing age does make your memory worse. Maybe Asimov simply forgot, and that's all there was to it. But he was only sixty-one, and that seems pretty young for such a dramatic example of a senior moment. I have trouble believing he forgot. I find it more plausible that he never knew. I think Second Foundation was written in a frantic hurry, the way all those pulp novels were written at the time. Asimov got the ending from Campbell, he scribbled it in without properly understanding the point, and he moved on to something else. And then when he submitted the manuscript of Foundation's Edge, his new editor was embarrassed to tell him what they surely noticed. Or, who knows, maybe they weren't a hardcore Asimov fan and they missed it too.

There's a metafictional novel waiting to be written here.