Rating: 5/5

I can remember when tofu was something exotic and foreign, and people puzzled over whether they liked it and what to do with it. It came in these odd little water-filled containers, or sometimes was in barrels in the produce section. Well, its appearance in America was accompanied by a guidebook - this book, originally published in 1975 and updated a number of times since then. My copy was old and dogeared, having bounced around my family's bookcases for a number of years, but it held together well enough to get through a reading and copy the most promising recipes.

What is wonderful about Shurtleff and Aoyagi's book is that it is much more than just a little introduction to a weird new food. It combines history, travelogue, nonfiction, and cookbook writing into a strong whole that should interest anyone who likes tofu or wants to learn about it. Our eyes are opened to the history of tofu, from its murky roots in ancient China up to today. There are sections devoted to soybeans and issues of food production, and the health benefits of tofu are outlined scientifically. The emphasis though is on eating the stuff and on Japan, which has the most well developed tofu business of any nation. We learn how tofu is made in little shops (and how we could try to make it ourselves), and the many ways it is prepared and served. The authors spend plenty of time on traditional Japanese recipes for presenting this most wholesome of foods, but they never lose sight of who their readers are. There are many suggestions for how to consume tofu in ways that will not overwhelm regular American eaters - you could put it in sandwiches, soups, salads, and dips/dressings. Heck, you can fry it and have it with ketchup if you want to. Tofu is mild and versatile, and can assume many forms and compliment many ingredients.

Reading this did make me want to run out to a tofu shop, like the ones that I saw in Japan. Those are wonderful places to see, and sell fascinating things like a gently sweet, pudding-textured tofu that is a wonderful addition to breakfast. The authors talk about many varieties of tofu product, like okara for example, that, like the tofu shops, are not available in the West. For the most part we are stuck with simple soft, firm, or extra firm tofu in plastic containers. At least those are available now in pretty much every supermarket - so this healthy white stuff has made inroads all across the land. Tofu has an illustrious past but also a bright future, since it provides excellent nutrition for the money, and has a lovely flavor when it is prepared well.