Rating: 1/5

This book absolutely did not live up to its title. The title, Harry Potter and the Bible, implies that Abanes would go through the Harry Potter books and find examples of how the series matches up with or disagrees with what is said in the Bible. For the most part, though, there are hardly any mentions of the Bible. A couple of paragraphs in various chapters have cited the Bible, but mostly it's more about A Stereotypical Christian and the Stereotypical Christian Beliefs held by that person, and how Harry Potter IS GOING TO RUIN OUR WORLD. (Rowling researched magick! Rowling researched Wicca! The characters are witches and wizards! Those are occult and Wiccan ideas! Our children, just by reading these Harry Potter books, are signing up on Wiccan and Occult websites! It's already begun! Our children are Satan-worshipers!) It reads like just a bunch of alarmism and paranoia. I mean, I thought that even at the first pages, but then there was chapter 10: ten pages about a Satan worshiper who murdered his family. ... What else could be the point of this pretty large chunk of the book other than to not-so-subtly imply that the Harry Potter books are going to turn your precious children into parent-murdering Satanists?!? But, oh my God, this event happened *11* years before the first Harry Potter book came out, so please explain to me how that murderer is at ALL related to Harry Potter books, other than just the author's way of trying to alarm and scare the bejeesus out of parents and "good Christians."

There's also a pages-long tangent about feminist neo-pagans... Okay, it's a threat to your Christianity, but what does it have to do with Harry Potter? You may be trying to make the point that feminist neo-paganism is anti-Christian, and also that Harry Potter and it's "occultism" is anti-Christian, but that doesn't mean they should be mentioned together as even remotely connected. Again, you're just being an alarmist about everything you think is threatening "Christianity."

Abanes also seems hypocritical, or completely uncritical to the ideas that would disprove his point. For example, he spends a chapter discussing how Harry Potter is *not* in the same tradition as The Lord of the Rings series or Narnia books. In his explanation of why C.S. Lewis' books are okay, he says, "...the 'Christian theology' [and his use of quote marks is obviously to mock the fact that someone he quoted called the Tolkien and Lewis books Christian theology] in Lewis' fantasy is veiled beneath various characters (e.g., Aslan the Lion)." ... Wait, what? Aslan the lion is a VEILED reference to Christian theology?!? Every book I've ever read about Lewis and the Narnia books basically shout "ASLAN IS JESUS!" So, how is that veiled?!?! Abanes goes on to say that "there is no direct [his emphasis] association that can be made between the books and any contemporary religion. In Harry Potter, however, a direct link to paganism/witchcraft is made via the presentation to readers of current occult beliefs and practices." WHAT?!?! Again, "ASLAN IS JESUS!"! How is that not a direct association with Christianity, which, I believe, is a contemporary religion?? And as far as Harry Potter being a direct link to *paganism* and the occult, that was a point *you* created, sir. Not everyone believes the link; the "ASLAN IS JESUS" link is accepted by almost everyone who has read, studied, or read about the Narnia books. 

If anything, this book should be called Harry Potter and How It's Against What Hard-Core, Easily-Offended Christians Believe. Proportional to the length of the book and the title, there's very little reference to the actual Bible and passages in it; the book just implies what the hard-core Christians are afraid of and how Harry Potter and Rowling are totally leading your children down that exact path. Or it could be called Harry Potter, and the Bible because it's not often about the two things in relation to each other; there are sections about Harry Potter and then there are sections about the Bible, but very little about Harry Potter *and* the Bible.

If there were half-stars, I'd give this 1.5; but since there aren't, I have to go more on the "yuck" side than the "it was okay" side and just give it 1 measly star. I mean, there were *a few* places where Abanes makes interesting points, but mostly it was just "HARRY POTTER IS GOING TO DESTROY YOUR CHILDREN!!"