Rating: 3/5

This is another novel I got from my Bloomsbury reading guides. This time I cannot say I am happy about it. 

Beryl Bainbridge is one of those writers who I’ve heard of repeatedly, but I never read. She was shortlisted for the Booker Prize five times without ever winning, which I can see why, hehe. 
About the plot, I will try to write something. The novel is set in Victorian Liverpool in 1846. George Hardy is an enigmatic surgeon and amateur photographer with secrets he keeps tightly to himself. Bound to him by varying degrees of devotion and dependency are Myrtle, a foundling adopted by his family who worships him uncritically(it beats me why); Pompey Jones, a street boy with sharp instincts and also an opportunist and Dr Potter, his unreliable brother-in-law. A misadventure in a brothel sets their fates intertwining, and the four of them end up following Georgie from the comfortable drawing rooms of Liverpool to the battlefields of the Crimean War. 

The novel is structured as six brief chapters which are meant to be similar to photographic plates, which mirrors the amateur photography theme running through the book. And here is the problem. I came out of it mildly puzzled. There are things here that work. The Crimean War backdrop is presented with grim efficiency, the prose is sharp and good enough. However, I had a problem with the structure. I listened to this on audio, which I suspect made the structural fragmentation harder to navigate than it would have been on page. I'll be honest though, I don't think the format alone was the problem. The shifts between narrators are abrupt to the point of being disorienting, and I found myself repeatedly losing the thread of who was speaking and why I should care. My verdict was that I shouldn’t care. With some other fragmented novels this hasn't been an issue for me, something about the particular rhythm here made the transitions feel more like interruptions than sound stylistic choices.

The characters were the bigger problem. I didn't understand what drove any of them, and not in the interesting, ambiguous way. Myrtle's devotion borders on inexplicable. Dr Potter veers between roles without quite convincing you he's the same person. Georgie himself remains an unknown variable, which might have worked if I had any change to care about the guy, one way or another. 
Three stars for the prose and the setting, the rest was meh