Rating: 4/5

Update
Further musings on MP turned frivolous after reading Anne's very funny and gify review.

After writing Pride and Prejudice and creating Elizabeth Bennet as her heroine, it has to be owned that Jane Austen did a kinda Monty Python with Mansfield Park and Fanny Price, no?

PLUS, she turned Elizabeth to the dark side and this is how Mary Crawford was born. ;)

And this leads me to a total irreverent and irrelevant moral summary of MP á la STAR WARS.

Mary C. wants Edmund (honest &amp; upright &amp; nice, but what a bore!) to come over to the Dark Side. PLUS, Mary has this brother, Henry Crawford (WHAT POTENTIAL! WHAT A WASTE!) who wants all ladies to come to the Dark Side.

PLUS, we have Edmund who does not realise that Mary is on the Dark Side.

PLUS, we have Fanny who knows that everybody (apart from herself and Edmund) are on the Dark side, but is too afraid to tell and also knows that nobody would believe her. PLUS, she almost brings back Henry to the Good Side, even though she doesn't want to. 

------------------------

 Update on re-reading MP in 2017

What is not a surprise: every time I re-read a Jane Austen novel (no matter which one), I discover something new that surprises me. 

Like opening an old treasure chest where you think you are familiar with every item and yet you realise there is always something new turning up. 

So many thoughts on this particular re-read, I might end up writing a proper review eventually ... or not.

My present musing
-Mrs Norris and her Christian name that must not be named! She is either referred to as Miss Ward or as Mrs Norris. (I know this is beacsue she was the eldest daughter among the Miss Wards and I know she does have one, and it's probably Elizabeth of all names!)
- It always struck me, but never more so than now, how obtusely blind and indifferent the Bertram siblings are (yes, Edmund is no exception) towards each other. 
- I did not mind this time that Fanny ends up with Edmund, but it makes me sad how Henry Crawford wastes all the enormous potential that is undoubtedly in him.
- It is a pity Mrs Norris never visited Mrs Price in Portsmouth: she would have put the fear of God into all the household and showed them what's what when it came to housekeeping. :)
- The only 2 things Fanny does actively in the whole course of the book is buying a knife and subscribing to a library. 

Original "review" 4/11/2014
It is high time I had a heart-to-heart with Jane Austen about MP.

Dear Miss Austen (You Sly Thing!*),

Despite the solemnity of the topics in Mansfield Park, I am sure as hell you laughed your head off as you sent me, other readers &amp; critics all on a wild goose chase. 

You amaze me with your audacity and daring in making us believe that we are the only ones who got Fanny Price figured out – as opposed to Edmund, Sir Thomas, Mrs Norris, Henry &amp; Mary Crawford who also all think they figured her out – but you just use us all shamelessly for your cunning purposes. 

You let us, nay, you want us to be seduced by the Crawfords, just like the Bertrams are &amp; you succeed. Every time I read Mansfield Park, I want Fanny to end up with Henry, just like her obnoxious, shallow relations do &amp; I feel cheated when this does not happen. Maybe I don’t have the same avaricious reason for it, but what does that make me? Shallow? Immoral? Mislead? Blinded?

You see? You manage to do all this and more. You are a genius &amp; I love you forever and always, even though I will never like Fanny (but please give me credit for trying). But I do love Mansfield Park and will re-read it again and again.

Yours ever,

Melindam 

*courtesy of Mrs Bennet