Rating: 4/5

Set in the small town of Delano, Georgia, Stuart Woods introduces us to a tale about racial inequality and injustice and the power struggles that entails. He acquaints us with the power of the Chief of Police’s shiny new badge, and how it calls some to honor and serve, while others will become cruel and brutal with the need for domination. The racial divide in the 1920s, when this novel begins, allowed these injustices to flourish. The novel ends in the early 1960s, a time of great social upheaval in America, and in Woods novel, blacks are finding their voices.

While there is a murder mystery that creates the suspense that keeps me turning the pages, there are many stories going on in this novel. This is Stuart Woods debut novel, first published in 1981. He worked on it for eight years, and it shows. Woods has divided his tale into three books or parts that follow a different main character. In Book One, we meet Hugh Holmes, the president of the Bank of Delano. Hugh is a secondary character that we can follow throughout the book. He has the good luck of being in the right place at the right time. Hugh is the very definition of a civic minded person. As chairman of the City Council, he’s behind most of the decisions that get made about the town. He plans ahead, he knows how to network long before the term is conceived, and he’s politically inclined. When Will Henry Lee appears at the bank, Holmes assumes the man has come to ask for an extension on his loan. Instead Will Henry asks for the job as the town’s first Chief of Police. Will Henry let’s go of his failing cotton farm and take up the town’s first and in 1920, it’s only badge. I have a lot of respect for Will Henry. Because he’s a good man, he feels the burden of his responsibilities to the people weighing him down.

I don’t want to give away much about Book Two and Three, but I think Woods is pure genius in the way he sets up the stories. By the time I got to Book Two, I perceived a change in women’s roles. Women are not primary characters in this book, but I was pleased to see one woman stand up to the Ku Klux Klan. She does it with a steely determination, yet there is a little hilarity in this episode as well.

As black people served in WWII, they became more aware of their ill treatment at home. Just as Hillary Jordan shows in her novel, Mudbound, Woods also reveals how black people, home from Europe were more cognizant of while man entitlement and privilege. They had been treated as equals in Europe. In’ Chiefs,’ Marshall Parker, a veteran is ready to set up his own business, a car repair garage. When Parker, a black man, pulls business away from the only white man’s garage in town, it’s like opening a can of worms. Marshall Parker does everything he can to be fair and acquiesces as much as possible. Will it be enough? 

Some of the political intrigues had me googling to see how much of the story was based in history. Billy Lee seems to be based on Carl Sanders, Georgia’s Governor from 1963-1967. They share the same history of becoming B-17 bomber pilots and the same ambitions. Just as Sanders leads the way toward racial desegregation, so does Billy Lee. The maneuverings that Billy Lee has to negotiate on any issue that involves race and still look good to his constituents are intriguing, but also sad, as it is a huge commentary how difficult it was for whites to accept blacks as equals. There are hints in the book, that if Billy Lee is elected as Georgia’s Governor, President JF Kennedy is going to oust Lyndon Johnson as his running mate in the 1964 presidential election, taking on Billy Lee as his running mate. I found this interesting because I had no idea of this poor relationship between JFK and Johnson, which seems to be based in fact.

The ending of the book is a little sideways for me, but don’t let that keep you from reading this extraordinary book, especially for those interested in southern or political history or for those who like a good suspense novel.