Rating: 4/5

Regarding his movie-making philosophy, producer Ross Hunter once said: “You might just as well have a murder take place on an Oriental rug as on someone’s dirty linoleum”. This pretty well sums up the attitude of most of the folks who manufactured style for the masses in an industry built upon a foundation of glorious illusion – the “dream factories” of Hollywood’s golden age. Vito Russo has illustrated how one of its most monumental illusions was the non-existence of homosexuals, but what comes as something of a shock – as revealed in Behind the Screen – is the extent to which gay artists who plied their multifarious trades on every level of the business happily and contentedly contributed to that illusion, perpetuating a synthetic “image” at the seeming expense of gay visibility. Even that most celebrated of queer iconoclasts, James Whale, made films informed not so much by sexual politics as by “a consciousness inspired by (his) idiosyncrasy”.

Ah, but quelle idiosyncrasy! It’s what gave words to Norma Desmond (Charles Brackett’s) and shape to the Yellow Brick Road (Jack Moore’s). It’s what prompted set decorator George James Hopkins to remark: “I would be held back having to think of technicalities instead of giving my imagination free rein.” It’s what makes the great Hollywood films a hell of a lot more fabulous than they might have been (if such a thing is imaginable) without the contribution of homosexuals. Behind the Screen celebrates that contribution and illustrates, through many entertaining, informative, and well-chosen anecdotes and personal recollections, how in the end, gay Hollywood managed to articulate itself on the silver screen without ever really trying to do so. In that respect, Mr. Mann’s is a most triumphant and liberating accomplishment.

Dozens of extraordinary characters are marched through the pages of Behind, some of them so individually fascinating they deserve full-blown biographical treatment. Among these are Anderson Lawler (live-in lover of a youthful Gary Cooper and professional “beard” for many a dateless – and as often as not, lesbian – luminary), and actress Lilyan Tashman, “the biggest dyke Tinseltown had ever seen”, who said of her happy marriage to the equally gay Edmund Lowe – with tongue apparently in cheek – “I pride myself that I interest him more than any other woman”).

The history of homosexuals and their artistic contribution to Hollywood’s classic films is one that has gone largely unexplored. I was tempted to end that last sentence with the words “until now” as that phrase (and all the breathless grandiosity it implies) is employed no less that half a dozen times in the course of this volume. Why the fine author of this impressive tome (as well as the masterful 1998 biography of Billy Haines, Wisecracker) should feel the need to repeatedly blow his own horn while deliberately overlooking the efforts of David Ehrenstein (1998’s excellent Open Secret) and indirectly smearing those of some others (Axel Madsen’s 1995 The Sewing Circle) is quite inexplicable – but don’t let that stop you from purchasing and enjoying this otherwise marvelous book.