Rating: 5/5

After a long journey, Judge Dee arrives at his new base of Lan-fang, a city located on the northwestern borders of the Empire, where many problems are waiting for him. Immediately after his arrival, he has to deal with a local warlord who has seized all administrative power and wants to found his own principality with the help of the Uighur neighbors in Lan-fang.

The magistrate must therefore begin by reestablishing the authority of the imperial government. Then, while being careful that the conspirators do not attempt another coup, he must find out how a retired general could have been assassinated in his closed library and find a missing young girl. But perhaps the most difficult enigma to solve is that of the legacy of the late Governor, who was Judge Dee's idol while he was still a student. The Governor has divided his property between his two sons in a rather strange way: he has bequeathed only one painting to the second son, while the eldest son has inherited everything else. What is the hidden meaning of the painting? One more mystery has been left by the governor: the labyrinth he had built in the outskirts of the city...

Van Gulik wrote the first draft in 1950 in Tokyo, and had it translated into Japanese by a Japanese friend as "Meiro no satsujin." In New Delhi (1952) Van Gulik translated the book into Chinese, and when he was back in Holland the following year, his Dutch publisher W. van Hoeve published the English original - which in its turn attracted the attention of the London publisher Michael Joseph Ltd. who brought out the next volumes of the First Judge Dee series. As the second Judge Dee novel written (after The Chinese Bell Murders) this volume has all the characteristics of the First Series: an introduction that works as a frame, chapter titles in parallel lines, three different cases occurring at the same time, a description of the execution of the criminal at the end, and a large number of characters. Although not as streamlined as books in the Second Series, I quite like the atmosphere of the border town in this novel, and the complex plots. It is a very rich book and in my view one of the best Judge Dee novels.