Rating: 4/5

A fast read. Nice variation on the locked room mystery

his is a fairly good selection in the Judge Dee series.

The judge finds himself in a capital of the Ukiyo (floating world or pleasure district), in particular the aptly named Pleasure Island. Think Las Vegas, with Fewer (!) vice laws. The island is in the midst of the Festival for the Dead and rooms are scarce. No manger for him, the room at the Inn he checks into is the Red Pavilion.
Its most recent inhabitant apparently committed suicide for love of the Island's most desired courtesan, the crowned "Flower Queen". More than this the suite was host to another apparent suicide 30 years before. Within hours it will be home to yet another suspicious death, this time aforesaid Flower Queen. At least three dead in one room - one of them during the Judge's watch. The game is afoot.

(Repeated from my review of The Emperor's Pearl The Emperor's Pearl (Judge Dee Mystery Series)) The author, a diplomat, scholar, musician, artist and mystery novel writer has much to recommend him. Many of his scholarly publications are or were considered definitive studies.
His scholarly works included topics from The Chinese lute, to Chinese sexual practices to Chinese art. He was a linguist and enough of an artist to illustrate his Judge Dee Books.

Judge Dee, was an actual Judge or to quote the sources: Ti Jen-chieh (c. 630-c. 700), magistrate and statesman of the T'ang court. Van Guik came to know of him via a second hand book relating later stories that had grown up around the market place story - teller tales that had collected in the name of Judge Dee.

In most of the Van Gulik mysteries, he will mix in Chinese crime solving traditions (Ghosts and spirit world connections) with the more prosaic western style. This is lacking in this selection. Lacking but not necessarily missed. Also typical in Judge Dee stories is descriptions of life in Japan. Here we are exposed to, but never lectured on, period Japanese attitudes and customs in the world of gambling and courtesans.

It may be a weakness to this story, but the various murders, suicides and complex human dramas are almost secondary to the casual exploration of the "Floating World" that is the setting for The Red Pavilion.

My e copy was a few dollars in cost and was just under 180 pages. Invest this small change and a few hours for a nicely written mystery. The clues are there, although it will help if you have some familiarity with Van Gulick's style. Altogether a satisfying read.