Rating: 5/5

4 ½ stars. I was frequently smiling during this book - which is rare.

There’s mystery wondering if and how they will ever find the psychopath. There’s edge of your seat suspense toward the end. The ending was good for the good guys and bad for the bad guy. This is great for young adults and older. It’s about half the length of a regular novel.

What I found most entertaining were thoughts, dialogue, and actions of three 17-year-old boys. That is why I was smiling so much. One example: when Wayne and Duncan go to the local swimming pool their habit is: as soon as they enter, they cannonball jump into the water at the same time in a way to maximize splashing the sunbathers. When they come up and see angry looks glaring at them, they say “sorry.”

I had a few minor complaints.
The book is told in first person by Duncan. One time the author used second person which threw me. Duncan was talking about golf putting and said “I’m getting pretty good at it in case you’re wondering.” By saying “you’re” it added me to the story which did not belong. I did not like the feeling. I’m watching. I’m not supposed to be having a conversation with him.

Some months before the story begins, a girl Maya drowned. Duncan was nearby and felt guilt or something bad. What happened was not described. I wanted to know more.

The same thing with Duncan’s former girlfriend Kim. I wanted to know why they broke up. Just a little, a sentence or two would do.
			
NARRATOR:
This is a personal preference thing. I don’t enjoy Scott Brick as a narrator. He has an arrogance or too much self confidence that comes through when he reads. I prefer someone like Frank Muller who projects a sense of wonder about what’s going on.

DATA:
Narrative mode: 1st person Duncan. Unabridged audiobook length: 5 hrs and 38 mins. Swearing language: none that I recall. Sexual content: none. Setting: current day Toronto, Canada. Book copyright: 2003. Genre: mystery suspense, young adult mystery suspense.

OTHER BOOKS BY THIS AUTHOR:
I read Bonechiller after this. Gave it 3 stars. Teens would probably like it more than I.