Rating: 4/5

"When we imagine the finest mistress of all - she who is fit for a king - we see a hazy, shimmering image of a woman whose hands caress and mold history. She stands, for the most part, in the shadows of a world where the spotlight shines solely on men bludgeoning history into shape. Now and then we hear the rustling of a silk skirt, or hear her musical laughter, echoing from behind the throne."

Sex with Kings is a book all about the role of the royal mistress, focusing mainly on the 17th, 18th, 19th and 20th centuries. With stories from courts all over Europe, Eleanor Herman paints a vivid picture of the life, job and purpose of the royal mistress (which was made an official court position by the French). Get to know the women who shaped the lives and reigns of kings like Charles II of England, Louis XIV of France, Henri IV of France and Franz Joseph I of Austria, and discover stories of sex, lust, power, jealousy, rivalry and political scheming.

Sex with Kings was a very interesting book, full of meticulously researched stories of royal mistresses, the kings who loved them, the children they had, the insulted queens who often hated them and the courts that teemed with gossip about their relationship with the king and their supposed immorality. Herman did a good job with opening up the reader's understanding of what a mistress was, making it clear that a mistress was way more than just a woman the king shagged when he was bored with his lawful wife: she was a confidante, a friend, a power player, a status symbol, a mother to the king's children and so much more. The most important strength of a mistress was not beauty or sex appeal, as one might assume, but a lively personality, a witty mind and her ability to make the king laugh. He could have any girl or woman he wanted, so to make him devoted to you, the mistresses had to offer him something special, to make themselves a friend the king couldn't survive without. Some of the most famous, long-lasting mistresses didn't even have sex with the king all that much – Louis XV's Madame de Pompadour, for example, was unable to have sex due to medical issues for years but still the king loved her, for she was kind, witty, dead-smart, lively company and knew how to make the king smile. Herman also made me appreciate just how hard these women worked to maintain their roles. Courts were always full of younger, more beautiful girls ready to take on the role of the royal mistress – whether out of their own volition or forced to do it by their ambitious families – and these women often fought tooth-and-nail to hold on to their power. They were never able to relax, knowing that one wrong move might make it all come crashing down: if the king bored of them or was angered by them, he could ditch you for another girl. A story that really showcased the competitive atmosphere of the court was that of the Sun King's longtime lover, madame de Montespan, a fierce, machiavellian schemer who resorted to procuring love potions and spells to keep the king's love.

Honestly, both the role of the mistress and the queen seemed miserable. The queens were walking wombs who often got worse treatment than the mistress – a walking, talking insult to their position and a constant reminder of her husband's infidelity they could do nothing about, for the king's treatment of her often depended on how she treated the other women in his life – and the mistresses had to spend every waking moment playing the role of the perfect court woman, entertaining the king, greeting guests, looking perfect, using the money given to them by the king to beautify themselves and pay for their lavish, court-appropriate lifestyle, and pretending like they didn't need to piss or shit in fear that acknowledging their bowel movements would make the king run away in fear. And when the king tired of them or died, many of them were ran out of court, now openly reviled as whores instead of falsely respected, and spent their remaining days in obscurity, fighting for a position of some sorts, finding new patrons or, if very unlucky, destitute. The chapter on the relationships between queens and mistresses was intriguing. Many, understandably, detested their husband's lovers - a good example of this was Charles II's wife Catherine who loathed his long-time, famous lover Barbara, Lady Castlemaine – but some tolerated them and even found use for them, like Caroline, queen of George II, who was happy to have the rather simple, unthreatening Henrietta in her husband's bed as opposed to a more ambitious, ruthless girl. Some mistresses bullied the queen ruthlessly, taunting them, but some, like Madame de Pompadour, were always respectful. I tended to feel bad for the women of the stories, for many of them ended up in rather shitty situations, and, most of the time, I felt grumpy towards the kings and princes cause they just got to do whatever the hell they wanted with little to no consequences.

Herman also wrote about a POV I had never really stopped to consider when thinking of royal mistresses: their husbands. What was it like to watch the king take your wife for himself? How did the men react? Mistresses were almost always hastily married off to someone if they weren't already with someone, since it was more respectable for a woman to be in this role if she was not unwed. Everyone knew she was betraying her wedding vows and that her hubby was looking the other way, but still it was better if she was officially a married woman. Weird, but I guess it made sense for them. The king often gave his mistresses titles of countess, duchess or something like that for the same reason: it was better and more appropriate if his women were nobility (he also often gave his bastards titles or, in the case of girls, good husbands, making them, though illegitimate, respectable members of high society). It was unsurprising to me that many men just simply accepted it - you could hardly say no to a king, could you? - and happily took the titles, lands and money the king often gave them in return for their wife. Some men thrust their wives at kings - like Anastase Walewski did with his wife, Maria, who eventually did become the mistress of Napoleon Bonaparte until he left her and their son – while some poor bastards did try to defy the king (one even took his wife and ran away with her abroad, which caused an international scandal cause the king, Henry IV of France, simply couldn't let this woman go), often failing. These stories are often seen as love triangles between the king, the queen and the mistress, but truthfully they were pretty much always love quadrangle.

This book is teeming with incredibly interesting women. Madame de Pompadour is someone you cannot help but admire, as she served the king for so long and wielded a genuinely impressive amount of power for a woman. Montespan and du Barry were scheming women straight out of a novel or an HBO series – they might not have seemed pleasant but I had to admire their guts, ambition and their single-minded drive to remain in the king's affections for success meant wealth, titles for their children and all that good stuff. Henri IV's Gabrielle's story turned out to be quite moving. They might have been a genuine love affair. She demanded to be by his side even in times of war, in the war camp, and raised money for him by visiting nobility and asking for donations. Henri even tried to marry her, but, the day before she would've become his queen, she died when her child was born prematurely. Another story that seems straight out of a tragic romance novel. The plain, religious and humble Madame de Maintenon, the nanny and governess of the Sun King's children with Montespan, became the king's secret wife - something I had never heard of! But my favorite of all the colourful women of this book was Charles II's famous low-born lover (she was an actress and an orange-seller with rather shady parents), Nell Gwyn, whose Cinderella-like story has captivated people for centuries. Chapters about her are full of hilarious anecdotes about her witty comments and scandalous behaviour (such as showing her underwear - and perhaps a lot more - to some visitors of the king when someone commented on rumours about her underwear). She is someone who charms the reader with her air of steely confidence, her bawdy jokes and the way she never denied her lowly background, happily calling herself "the protestant whore" and cheerfully, bitingly, reminding her competitors - who were all highborn mistresses - that, at the end of the day, they are all whores. She was such a breath of fresh air in this book, as most women were, if not of high birth than at least middle-class. The idea that this actress and orange-seller became the king's beloved Nelly and also something of a folk heroine among the peasants is just enticing - another story that begs to be told again and again in books, songs, TV and film.

The book ends with a look at the two of the biggest, most recent stories of princes/kings and their mistresses: Edward VIII and Wallis Simpson, and Charles III and Camilla Parker Bowles. These two cases showcase wonderfully how the role of a royal mistress has changed throughout the years: women who once held power, swayed the king, were an accepted member of court and often donned better jewellery and dresses than the queen, are now women who people frown upon and whose relationships with the prince/king are considered scandalous and wrong. Our society has changed so drastically and our understanding of what marriage is means that there is no room for mistresses of old in the world anymore. This change began in the 19th century, after the revolution which claimed the lives of one of the most famous royal mistresses of all, Madame du Barry, who was hated by the people because of her extravagant displays of wealth.

My one gripe about the book is that it could've been better organised. Every chapter is focused on a specific theme - for example, what happened to mistresses after the king's death or what having children for the king meant - and in each chapter, we jump from court to court, often unchronologically, which was not always the easiest structure to follow. As a historian and someone who has studied many notable kings the book focuses on, I was never lost, but I have seen many a reviewer complain about feeling super confused, which is not aided by the fact that many kings have the same names. I mean, you cannot blame someone for confusing Louis XIV, Louis XV and Louis XVI. So with perhaps a bit more structural editing, the book could've been slightly more pleasant to read. 

I would recommend this book for anyone who is interested in the royal mistresses of the past or court life in Europe in general. I will definitely pick up the "sequels" for this book at some point which are titled Sex with Queens and Sex with Presidents.