Rating: 5/5

This concluding volume of the trilogy The Book of Skaith (1977) begins on a surprisingly dark note, considering the upbeat ending of the previous volume, when our heroes set out to fulfill their plans to send an embassy to Pax the galactic capital, acquire the right to emigrate from dying Skaith, and finally unseat the power of the Lord Protectors. But now those plans are dashed, and Stark and Ashton are captives, due to the duplicitous behavior of Penkwar-Che, commander of the small mercenary starships who have become the “reavers” (“plundering foragers”) of the planet. Stark and Aston escape, but without supplies or other resources, and to survive their long journey to the South they—and the followers they recruit along the way—must also become “reavers” of Skaith.

Perhaps the most astonishing achievement of The Book of Skaith(1977) is the detailed, diverse nature of its world-building, and how Brackett’s construction of the customs and character of the many peoples of Skaith is always informed by the nature of their specific climates and terrains. As the mercenary captain Kasimni of Izvand remarks.“The land shapes us. If we were in another place, we would be another people.” And in this final volume, as Old Sun dies and the changes to climate become unmistakable, the peoples of Skaith seek warmer places, abandon old customs, and—as their cultural disintegrates, their characters begin to change too.

The Reavers of Skaith is exciting and surprising, yet its plot seems fated, inevitable. It has moments of pathos and fear, ties up all necessary loose ends, and combines with apparent effortlessness the sharp cultural observations of science fiction with the supernatural pleasures of fantasy. It is an effective ending to a complex and eventful trilogy, and—as it is her last novel—it is also a fitting end to Leigh Brackett’s novel-writing career.

But Brackett was not yet quite finished with her writing. When she died in 1978, at the age of 62, she left behind an unfinished script which was completed by Lawrence Kasdan and two years later became the basis for a movie you have heard of: George Lucas' The Empire Strikes Back.