Rating: 3/5

Home
 for the heroine in this novel, is a grand mansion called Mannerling but that stately old estate doesn't exactly conjure up images of warmth and happy family tidings. On the contrary, Mannerling is an evil house that's almost on par with the one in Stephen King's story 
  Rose Red.
This is the 3rd novel in the series and the heroine is Abigail Beverley. Abigail, like all her relatives ( with the exception of her older sisters who were lucky to find true love in the first 2 novels The Banishment and The Intrigue ), is obsessed with reclaiming Mannerling once more. In The Banishment, Abigail's late father had gambled and lost Mannerling and in the first 2 novels her sisters Isabella and the super bitchy Jessica tried and schemed to marry the new owners of the house before love and good sense led them to their respective heroes. In this 3rd installment in the series, Abigail's identical twin sister Rachel decides that she's going to marry the current owner's son. It's a stupid and dangerous plan because Harry Devers is a lecherous rapist who almost raped her sister Jessica in The Intrigue. But, these Beverley girls do not learn from their older sister's lesson because their unhealthy fixation with Mannerling trumps all common sense and logic. 

In this story Rachel decides, at the last minute, that she's not going to marry Harry Devers. The heroine Abigail takes her place since they're identical. Abigail is also drawn to the hero Lord Burfield but the stupid obsession with Mannerling makes her go ahead with the wedding to Harry Devers. She marries Harry, using Rachel's name but when it's time to consummate the marriage she runs off and hides in the hero's bedroom. The marriage to Harry is declared null and void by the vicar and Abigail becomes betrothed to Lord Burfield; this happens because Harry Dever's parents make such a scene that all the guests think that the heroine has been compromised by the hero. I didn't like the MC's in this novel very much because they both seemed to wait until the very last minute before admitting that they love each other. Lord Burfield also got himself entangled with a grasping spinster called Prudence Makepeace who was obsessed with him. Prudence was so determined to marry the H that she investigated his background, his likes and dislikes and forced herself to read books on the types of hobbies that he liked. That woman was a nutcase because she even tried to drug him with laudanum to prevent him from visiting the heroine. 

Prudence, Harry Devers and the H's widowed aunt all try to sabotage the MC's wedding. There's even a catfight scene where the heroine beats the shit out of Prudence. Lord Burfield also made me hate him a little bit when he got sulky and jealous and decided to flirt with a notorious slutty widow called Lady Trent. That was quite childish on his part. There wasn't any cheating in this story but I could've done without all the additional OTT stupidity of these 2 MC's. This novel was entertaining but while it wasn't as enjoyable as the first installment The Banishment, it was still superior to the second book The Intrigue. There was a lot of drama, schemes, nasty relatives and jealous wannabe other women. The good thing was that the rapist Harry Devers ended up dying when he fell from the rooftop trying to escape the Bow Street runners who had come to arrest him for his kidnapping of the heroine. Prudence Makepeace also got her punishment because her parents are forced to leave England and go hide in Italy after the authorities are made aware of her role in the schemes to kidnap Abigail. Prudence was such a dumbass that she actually wrote a letter which the authorities used as proof of her part in the conspiracy. 

The MC's get their happy ending but the heroine almost ruins things when she gets upset with the H because he can't stand her mother. It took the intervention of a kind stranger to talk some sense into the stupid heroine; the latter then went back and apologized to the H for being a spoilt bitch since she herself is aware of how annoying, pushy and greedy her mother can be. They do reconcile but it wasn't as intensely passionate as I would've have hoped:

 
  ‘We will never, ever quarrel again, Rupert,’ said Abigail passionately as she lay in his arms that night. 

‘No, never,’ he agreed. But of course they did, for they were very much in love.

M.C. Beaton. Deception (Daughters of Mannerling 3) (Kindle Locations 2505-2507). Canvas. Kindle Edition. 

This is the heroine Abigail:

This is the hero, Lord Burfield:

The next novel deals with Abigail's twin sister Rachel but she kinda bored me, so I'll save her story for last and skip on to Belinda's novel. I can't wait to see what the remaining Beverley sisters will be willing to do to try and get Mannerling back in their possession. There are also some hints that Mannerling is becoming an even more evil house with its haunted chandelier that swings wildly even when there is no wind blowing. The mystery about the nice governess Miss Trumbly is also another storyline that I am impatiently awaiting, because there is ample proof that that lady comes from a powerful family and is hiding her identity from her relatives while she works for the Beverleys.