Rating: 3/5

Re For Adults Only - this one has an h that is probably my favorite of all the CL h types - she is independent, smart, a nice person and doesn't fall over at the H's command. The H is the usual CL alpha male who grabs and jabs with equal insouciance. He is also the master of punishing kisses, but CL fans know that is par for the course with her H's.

This h and H meet when he literally forces his way into her apartment while looking for his sister, whom he is convinced was coerced away by the h's supposedly unscrupulous fortune hunting brother. The h realizes this man is not only dangerous but incredibly biased and she is sure her brother wouldn't run off with a girl for her money, he must be really in love.

She finally gets him out of her home and goes down to the family cottage, she finds her brother there and also his new girlfriend who is insisting that they are in love and the gf (H's lil' sis) is the obvious instigator of the marriage suggestion. Meanwhile the sneaky H has hired a private detective to follow the h and has threatened her brother's career if he doesn't give the girl up. He shows up while the h and brother are out and bullies his sister away.

The brother is heartbroken but starts to recover when he gets a new job and doesn't have to face working for the H's companies anymore. He also insists the h take back the ex-girlfriend's expensive gold compact so he doesn't get accused of stealing. The h does and the H and she have more words, he attempts another assault, she slaps him and makes good her escape when his girlfriend's family shows up.

The brother goes to Spain for a vacation while the h is between illustration assignments and goes to redecorate the family cottage. She is happily contemplating her independence and freedom and feeling sorry for her old school friend who married her (the h's) first boyfriend, as he is an utter jerk. All of the sudden the H shows up and asks the h to meet his grandmother for lunch. She finally agrees to go, meets the grandmother, gives the lil sis a good talking to about leading young men on and meets the H's very insulting girlfriend. 

She is attracted physically to the H but she really, really doesn't want to be involved with him and so she tells him off when he shows up again. He talks her into lunch, but then she firmly dismisses him from her life. He is following to argue with her, (as no CL H has EVER heard or understood the word NO,) but she gets a telegram saying her brother has typhoid and she rushes off to Spain. The H is very helpful, lending his company jet and getting her transportation and a room. She arrives in Spain and the brother is on his way to recovery when the H shows up and avows true love and the h still doesn't want to mess up her life with a man but he kisses her and she finally admits she loves him too. 

Whether they marry or not is actually debatable, she acknowledges the attraction, but she was really strong willed and he was really domineering and her artwork was a huge part of her. He says he understands that, but based on past performance, I wasn't buying it and I wasn't sure the h did either. Plus she was on the heels of a big crisis so when she recovers from the scare, I am not sure she would continue the relationship. It only ends with I love you's and a make out session - having broke the seal on sex, she could very well settle for an affair- even if he wants marriage.

That is the fun of this book, you really don't know that it is going to end in marriage - there are several viewpoints of love and it's expressions explored throughout the story, (along with the inevitable eating of melon and Parma ham that is pretty much every CL book in existence,) and I am not sure which one the h decided to go with in the end. 

 There is also the inevitable childhood analysis on affecting adult actions that CL likes to explore and given the h's history and her ideas - maybe marriage wouldn't be the outcome for her. Plus she and the H are very volatile, and I couldn't see her tolerating that long term and she certainly wasn't a doormat.

It is an interesting book by CL, not one of her wrecky angstfests, but it has good dialogue and is a nice read for an afternoon.