Rating: 2/5

Sometimes I wonder if what remains over time is truly the best examples of that period. The dross forgotten and left out and only the pinnacles of achievement passed on to show future generations the greatness of their time. Thinking of this having read Uncle Silas I can only conclude that no it is not the case and it is truly random and unmeritorious. 

Gothic is a phrase that is universally understood, in terms of literature, themes, dress, even feel of a thing. It has lasted the test of time and I cannot believe that this dull, insipid novel would have inspired anything that lasted beyond teatime.

The main protagonist is Maud Ruthyn, a late teen and only child of a fabulously wealthy father Austyn. The section where she is living at home with him is very strange. Austyn is a reclusive oddity who claims to care a great deal for his daughter, after all they only have each other in terms of family, and yet bizarrely takes on a strange governess who seems ill-equipped for the job, is an alcoholic and places Maud in uncomfortable situations with strange men. He refuses to dismiss her even after Maud complains about her ill-treatment at the hands of Madame de la Rougierre and she gets her marching orders only after being found rifling through his study drawers. So far so implausible, but not really gothic. 

The second section sees this ‘caring’ dad place Maud in the care of her uncle Silas after his death until she comes of age and can inherit the huge fortune. Austyn has not seen his brother in decades and Maud has never clapped eyes on him – mostly because he was accused of murder as a young man. But Austyn thinks a better way to prove he never believed his brother’s guilt than just, you know, writing a letter or paying a visit, is to wait until he is dead and send his daughter to live with a homicidal stranger with the caveat that if she dies before she is of age Silas will inherit her fortune. Truly with dads like that you don’t need malignant uncles. 

For most of the rest of the book there is not much suspense or interest. Silas is as odd and distant as Austyn, Madam makes a reappearance and the reader has to wait for the last few pages for anything perilous to happen, and even then its less suspenseful and creepy than sledgehammer in style.

Not a good book, but one thing did interest me. There is a scene in here where Maud is drugged, taken on a trip in a carriage over a few days and winds up kept in a small room which she is told is France but is in fact just a room in Silas’s house. There is a similar scene in The Woman in White and I’m curious to know if this was a thing back then (they were written 4 years apart). Were there stories of men doing this to female family members, did men just think they’d hoodwink their wives into believing they’d taken them on holiday but the hotel did not live up to the brochures promises, or were people just hopelessly poor at knowing their location (no judgment here from someone who could lose their bearings in a loo). Rabbit hole opened.