Rating: 4/5

My whole experience with this book was driven by entirely spontaneous circumstances, and I have to say that I am glad for it. The book is such a flurry--of plotting, of perspectives, of energy and tone--and the story (characterized to me as Nancy Mitford writes Rosemary's Baby, which I think is rather accurate) is both ironic and deadly serious, funny and actually quite frightening. So I probably would not have been successful in finishing this if I had originally sat down with the intention of reading it. Because (for me) there just isn't a really ideal frame of mind in which to read the "naive city woman moves to the country and must unknowingly endure the malefic attentions of her witch neighbor" story. But it is totally worth it. 

This book is (put on your best frat boy voice) crrraaazy. But Weldon is a deliberate and incisive and observant and funny (she's got a cruel sense of humor at times, but nevertheless) and unrelenting storyteller and prose stylist and by my third day reading Puff Ball I had not only been completely sucked in, I knew that I had to just sit down and read the last half of it in one go. 

The novel starts with a London couple finding a cottage and debating whether or not to the give the country life a try. Liffey is a pampered innocent, an adult who despite (or maybe because of) growing up with an uncaring, aggressive mother, prefers to float through life with childlike innocence. Her husband, Richard, is an up-and-coming executive who has generally wanted to provide for his wife--refusing to dip into her inheritance for anything other than small pleasures, for instance--but not actually a man who can really handle responsibility. Liffey and Richard stand in the cottage garden, debating commuting distances, the possibility of raising a child in the country, thatch roofs, and "real" country people. They have sex in the grass behind the house. They are observed in all of this (with field glasses) by the nearest neighbors: Mabs, a bona fide witch, and Tucker, her husband. 

Mabs develops an instant dislike to Liffey, a dislike more akin to hatred, really. For that matter, nearly every character in the novel--from Mabs and Liffey's mother, to Liffey's friends, to Richard's secretary--violently dislikes Liffey and actively wishes her harm. This level of venom is strange because while Liffey can certainly be irritating or ineffectual or spoiled or naive, she really is no worse for these sins than anyone else in the novel. And, while she has her own moral missteps, she is really the only character who is not constantly working to make other people suffer. 

Part of what makes the novel's plotting feel so frenetic, what gives the whole story its sense of urgency and pending dread, is the way in which Weldon swings between perspectives so frequently. In the space of one page, you'll have two or three different voices, all seeing and interpreting the same event, all relaying their own conflicting intentions. It is rather masterful, and stress-inducing, and physically involving in a way that I don't think I've experienced when reading a book before. The first few days I was reading Puff Ball I had to actually stop and take a break after reading a few chapters (which are short, too). It felt overwhelming being inside all those minds. And yet, I didn't want to stop reading. 

When the chorus of voices becomes even more granular, and Liffey's biological processes are described in acute, objective detail, it becomes even more intense. At its core, Puff Ball is a novel about mothers and women, and, most dramatically, about the simultaneous horror and magnificence of the biological mechanisms and flukes involved in a woman becoming pregnant and bringing a child to life. I'm not sure that if you parsed out all the logic and plot twists related to Liffey's eventual pregnancy that you would get a real capital-F Feminist message, but somehow, it is more successful for its ambiguity in this regard. 

If this doesn't read as a resounding endorsement of the novel, I'm not sure it is. But reading this book might legitimately qualify as having been a "dazzling" or "exhilarating" experience for me. I will definitely seek out more Fay Weldon in the future--I've been lead to believe that many of her other novels could qualify as "frothy," which would certainly be a change of pace.