Rating: 4/5

Photos Out of Focus

Roger Fenton's van in the Crimea

Instead of chapters, the late Dame Beryl Bainbridge's historical novel is divided into "Plates," with titles such as "Girl in the Presence of Death, 1846" and "Funeral Procession Shadowed by Beatrice, October 1854." Each of the six sections includes the taking of a posed photograph, either by or including one or more of the characters in the brief novel. As the last four sections take place during or in the run-up to the Crimean War, it is probable that Bainbridge was thinking of the pioneering war photographer Roger Fenton; one of the main characters in the book works as assistant to some famous photographer who is never named. He appears, however, to take the last group photograph, "Smile, Boys, Smile," dated November 1854. You can easily imagine it: a small group of weary soldiers, some seated, some standing, including a civilian and a young woman in military dress. Separately, the motifs occur everywhere in Fenton's photographs, though I cannot find any one example that combines them. All the same, the best explanation I can offer for this strange and rather disjointed novel is that Dame Beryl was starting from such an image (real and imagined) and working backwards to tell its story.

Soldiers in the Crimean War

Bainbridge's title is misleading. The young Liverpool surgeon George Hardy, known by his former housemaid and devoted admirer as "Master Georgie," is indeed the continuing thread linking all six sections, but he is not the most interesting figure in any of them. Instead, his story is told by three alternating narrators. One is Myrtle, the adopted foundling who, in a story rather like Jacqueline Winspear's  Maisie Dobbs, is given an education and goes to the Crimea posing as George's sister. The second is Pompey Jones, a former street urchin and sideshow performer, who takes up photography and goes out as assistant to the great photographer. Both Myrtle and Pompey become, at one time or another, George's lovers. The third narrator is Dr. Potter, George's brother-in-law, a rather stuffy academic ("Myrtle showed no sign of interest, which was a pity because I had a host of relevant facts in my head") whose more conventional point of view nonetheless provides a welcome contrast to the picaresque quality of the other narrators.

Section by section, the brief vignettes offered by Bainbridge are vivid in themselves, but I fail to see how they form a coherent whole, unless to open a window on a time when, exceptionally, both social and gender roles could become remarkably fluid. But when I think how much more cogently Emma Donoghue handles a similar subject, in books like  Slammerkin,  Frog Music, or her short story collection Astray, I have to say that Bainbridge does not quite compare. And yet…

  I engaged with a boy with a pimple at the corner of his mouth. He was clumsy with terror, flicking at me with his bayonet as though warding off bees. He shoulted something in a foreign tongue, and I said I was sorry but I didn't understand. I wanted to spare him, but he caught me a slash on my brow which got me cross and I jabbed him in the throat. He fell away, gurgling his reproach.
Passages like the above (and they are legion) make me realize that my own title is misleading also. It is not that Bainbridge's individual images are blurred—they are replete with unexpected and precisely rendered detail—but that the exhibition that contains them lacks focus as a whole. I found this to be true also of her posthumous novel  The Girl in the Polka Dot Dress, but I put that down to her inability to supervise the final version. However, I now gather that the vignette approach and almost willful refusal to labor a point are characteristic of her work at large. So read this for the detail, read it for its two magnificently self-inventing lower-class narrators, read it for the history—but know that any overall continuity will be up to you to infer.