Rating: 3/5

In James Blish’s The Star Dwellers humankind has achieved interstellar travel through a novel concept called a Haertel field. This field dampens inertia, creating what is known as a Standing Wave that a vessel rides upon through space with no local velocity. It is a bubble in spacetime, a topological conform that “rejects” the entire universe so that you travel independent of it, without moving. In this way, faster than light travel is possible. There are a few other dazzling scientific concepts central to the book, like the Nernst generator, a fusion device that produces a ship’s energy, and a cosmic ray sail that about halfway through the story allows two astronauts to travel through space powered only by cosmic radiation.

Most impressive of all is the alien race motivating much of the story. Humans are now a space-faring race whose sophistication in organization and military and travel are noteworthy. They have discovered many alien races spanning the spectrum of intelligence and advancement. While relatively advanced themselves, humans are not at the top, and are currently being observed by more distant and far older races. 

Whether humans will pass the hundred thousand year tests they are being subjected to and be welcomed into the galactic federation is a question that won’t be answered for some time. While more technologically capable than ever before, Blish uses colorful exposition and dialogue to show ways in which the race still has far to go, and much more to figure out about their place in the universe. Nothing profound is put forward, nothing of grand discovery is attempted, but we have a thoroughly memorable and imaginative story, full of thought and well-placed ideas, a real pleasure to read.

It is with this backdrop that three human ships travel deep into the Coal Sack, a dark region close to the galactic center, and encounter a previously unknown form of life: pure energy. The life forms reside in outer space, living in nebulae, where stars are born. The energy beings attempt to fuse with the ships. One ship is destroyed, another is disabled, and the third sees its fusion core invaded by the being, who otherwise seems harmless. This ship returns to Earth with the “Angel” onboard, and this entity’s power is soon understood. He is referred to as Lucifer, the fallen angel, and communication is made possible through a transceiver and the being’s unfathomable ancient intellect.

Lucifer is studied while he enjoys the enormous amounts of energy he is able to absorb from the fusion core, and in turn he grants an unprecedented level of free energy to humanity.

The disabled ship, however, drifts lost in the Coal Sack, and a small team of men are sent to find it and to hopefully open more diplomatic relations with the Angels.

So begins an imaginative yarn about two cadets and a seasoned scientist-hero who travel to the farthest reaches of humanity’s maps of space to explore the stellar nursery that is the birthplace of what we come to learn is the universe’s oldest race. Their primary mission is to recover their lost ship and possibly rescue survivors. The events of the team’s voyage through space and the level of thought Blish puts into the minutia of their travels lends it an air of believability and realism. He has a way with constructing a scientifically plausible context and explanation for many of the book’s concepts while grounding everything in a setting and plot that make these things matter beyond superficial flavor.

The Angels first came into existence 20 minutes after the Big Bang. They are pure energy and exist among the stars and dust and radiation of the cosmos. They are capable of instantaneous communication with one another across many parsecs. They are immortal and rational and possess their own religion and culture and civilized organization, which, as events play out, we see hints of but never the full picture. With the grandness of the events and pieces of this story it can be easy to lose track of the kinds of questions and problems Blish is digging into. These resonate long after the Cold War and will continue to as long as relations with other nations and people are wrought with tension and confusion and conflicting motives. In Blish’s universe, however, these problems are much more interesting.