Rating: 5/5

GO TRAIL BLAZERS!

(We’re all becoming Trail Blazers fans next season. We’re all going to watch the games and then find some random book to talk about it on.((Hell, more I watch the WNBA, the more I realize its where it’s at)) K? When you get down to it, basketball, like politics, is all about aesthetics.) 

Great book. It was perfect for me. The Blazers are so good, they have the best sports book written about them. This is less a story and more a hundred stories. Portraiture. It’s a group portrait by Frans Hal. That’s what it is. Basketball as a way of viewing America and its brand of capitalism. What happens when millionaires use teams as tax write offs, as well as the brown water deluge of television. Basketball was also the fastest sport to go black and Halberstam does not let up on the inherent racism that went with this. 

Non-secuitor here: In this last season Nikola Mirotic, then a Bull, was punched in the face by his teammate Bobby Portis. He suffered a fracture and missed the first part of the season. When he got better he played well and quick as he could got himself traded to the New Orleans Pelicans (who would go onto decimate my Blazers in the playoffs). This scenario is mirrored almost exactly in the person of Kermit Washington, (Kerm however punched an opponent) Halbertam makes blood &amp; flesh of Washington. How he was vilified. Guilty with no trail. Nobody came to his defense. The same goddamn thing happened with Portis. I didn’t take much notice of it when it happened, but in a small way, I too had pictured this player I’d never seen as a bad basketball man. So I’m thinking, “I was guilty of the same thing. Do I have to read a goddamn book for every situation in life? Might I be able to turn this automatic obedience of snip-sized information into incredulous curiosity?” 

There’s a documentary on the 76-77 season on Youtube I wish I had watched while I was reading this. I fell asleep to it last night, it seems as artistic as it is self-indulgent. Which is fine! https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fmtvc... 

If there’s any Center in the league that can put up those Walton-like numbers, it’s the Bosnian Beast, Jusuf Nurkic. 

Go Blazers!