Rating: 5/5

Jessica Fisher 
Megan Mather 
Sarah Lodwick
ENG 315 – M 4p
September 21, 2010

In the Middle by Nancie Atwell
Book Review

	“Surviving adolescence is no small matter; neither is surviving adolescents. It’s a hard age to be and to teach.” (p 53). Nancie Atwell understands the many challenges young adolescents face as well as the challenges their teachers face. Atwell has been an educator for 37 years, specializing in middle level education. Atwell later founded the Center for Teaching and Learning in Maine, which uses many of the ideals presented in her book, In the Middle in which she describes how to teach middle school writing using a writing workshop approach.

Chapter three focuses on the unique needs of adolescent students and how a writing teacher must cater to those unique needs. Adolescence is a particularly diverse age group to teach because students are constantly changing physically, emotionally, mentally, socially, and psychologically. In addition to these changes, each individual student is changing and growing at their own pace, making a wide range of developmental levels that the educator must consider while teaching. 
Atwell explains that “A workshop approach accommodates adolescents’ needs, invites their independence, and challenges them to grow up” (pg. 71). Middle level educators should focus on aspects of the writing workshop that appeal to the unique needs of middle level students. At this developmental level, socializing, relationships, friendships become one of the most significant factors in their life, and therefore in their writing. Within the writing workshop at the middle level, educators need to incorporate aspects of adolescence that are of great importance, such as social interaction. Therefore, teachers should channel young adolescents’ need to socialize by incorporating conferencing and peer editing into their teaching; this way students are learning while fulfilling their need to talk to friends. 

Atwell focuses on the importance of writing-teacher-as-writer in chapter ten. "When we, as English teachers, demonstrate the uses of writing in our lives, we answer the most important question of all about writing: Why would anyone want to write? We give our students another taste of the complexities and satisfactions of composing a life" (p 369). In her classroom, Atwell would write with her students, showing them her own writing process and mistakes: from brainstorming ideas to the finished product. This is particularly important because students need to see the process directly and not just infer how to be a writer. Many students have never experienced a writing process or workshop; how can we expect them to be writers, if they have never been directly taught how? Examples are great, but experiencing the process is more meaningful. 
Chapter eleven examines memoirs and how students can use these memoirs to “discover and tell our own truths as writers.” (p 372). A memoir is a piece of writing that allows the student to inject their feelings and thoughts about events in their own lives. The memoir lets the reader see into the actual life experience of the writer and is always written in first person narrative. It can be used to replace the commonly used personal-experience narrative and it is a more effective form of writing. Instead of just telling what happened during a life experience, a memoir delves deeper into that experience by reflecting on thoughts, feelings, and the meaning behind the experience. Much of the chapter showcases pieces of Atwell’s students’ writings and covers the various styles of memoir, also showing the various writings of adolescents. 

These three chapters work together to give the reader a good understanding of how and why a writing workshop is a beneficial way to teach writing in the middle level. The first chapter describes the needs and characteristics of young adolescents; the second chapter demonstrates how you can use those characteristics to teach young adolescents in an effective way, specifically when it comes to teaching them how to write through modeling; the third chapter uses the memoir to showcase different examples of how the writing work shop really benefits young adolescents. It does so by teaching the students how to write in a way that meets their needs and showing how writing helps them to discover themselves and the world around them (which is what adolescence is all about).

As future middle level educators, we saw many overlapping practices of what we learned in our middle level cohort classes. Atwell focuses on the needs and characteristics of the adolescent and how it pertains to the writing workshop and the classroom in general. Atwell uses real life examples from her teaching experience, which makes the book relevant to our needs as pre-service teachers. She shares her successes and her failures to help the reader determine what might work in their own classroom. Atwell’s ideas are clearly expressed throughout the book and genuinely enjoyable to read. 

We would recommend this book to any writing teacher, specifically middle level educators. The book covers both the pedagogical practices of the writing classroom and how to teach to the needs of the learner.