Rating: 5/5

This book was the perfect antidote to all my griping about the narrow and occasionally judgmental Orthodox Jewish world in which I live. For all the extremes the community sometimes goes to in order to protect its insularity, the overwhelming majority of kids it produces never experiment with drugs or get into trouble with the law. Boys and girls alike are virgins until their wedding night. But not so in the South Bronx. After reading the painstaking detail of the struggle to grow up there, I’d be amazed that anyone breaks free and joins the middle class.

The book focuses mainly on four people: Jessica, her boyfriend George, her younger brother Cesar, and his girlfriend Coco. Jessica’s story comes first. As a teenager, she made the common mistake of women regardless of socio-economic class. She decided that “love is the most interesting place to go, and beauty is the ticket.” She dressed herself up and began hanging around the neighborhood. The first boy she attracted was Puma, a low level drug dealer. He fathered her first child when she was sixteen.

But relationships are a merry-go-round in this book, so both Puma and Jessica were involved with other people simultaneously. After all, why should Jessica differ from her mother? Of her three siblings, she only shares a father with Cesar. 

Jessica’s life changed when she begins to attract the notice of “Boy George,” the richest and most successful drug dealer in the neighborhood. To become George’s main girl was a status symbol, and Jessica pursued that ambition with determination, usurping several other girls in the process. Soon, like George, she became a local legend.

The story of George’s rise is one of the most interesting parts of the book. He was a disciplined entrepreneur, never partaking of the drugs he dealt. He had numerous underlings, and he knew how to manage them. He also knew when to seize on opportunities to expand his business. It reminded me of the point made in 
  Freakonomics
 - the crack business was structured and organized much the same way as the McDonald’s franchises are. George dealt in heroin, not crack, but I’d imagine the business model is not all that different. 

At its height, George’s business was making half a million dollars a week. That’s $26 million a year – and this was the late 1980’s! If his business had been legal, where would that have placed him on Forbes’ list?

Though George invested some of his profits back into the business, he also spent lavishly on himself and his friends, Jessica and her family included. He bought Jessica clothing and jewelry. He made sure her mother never lacked for food (or cocaine). He took trips to Puerto Rico and Disneyworld. And once a year, he would rent a yacht and throw a party for his staff, customers, and friends.

To return to the McDonald’s parallel, I could not help but think of No Shame in My Game, another book about the inner city poor, set at about the same time as this one, but focusing specifically on fast food workers. The fast food industry probably supplies more legal jobs in the inner city than any other, but no fast food worker will ever earn enough to live like George or his immediate underlings. Heck, most middle class people don’t either. So anyone who’s living in poverty in the inner city and chooses an honest, low wage job over a much more lucrative, albeit dangerous, life of crime deserves tremendous honor. Think of that next time you’re being served in Starbucks.

One day, on a lark, George splurged and took Jessica, Cesar, and Coco to a hotel in the Poconos. Though Cesar and Coco were only fifteen at the time, they went at it in their hotel suite like a couple of honeymooners. But they were small time compared to George and Jessica. Coco was amazed that Jessica would even deign to hang out with her. She was a “girl with all that.” But as it turns out, she and Cesar had a much better relationship than Jessica and George.

Of course, the law eventually caught up with George and Jessica. George is still serving his life sentence; Jessica got ten years. Eventually, Cesar was imprisoned for an unrelated violent crime. And from that point on, Coco is the main focus of the book. If George was the most interesting “character,” Coco is definitely the most likable. She ultimately had five children, two of whom are Cesar’s. Cesar often complained about his lot in his letters from prison, but the book makes clear that Coco has it harder, raising the kids on the outside on her own. Cesar got counseling and GED classes; Coco tried, but barely had time with the kids underfoot. She was hardly the ideal mother (and who is?), but her heart was almost always in the right place. Unlike Jessica, whose kids were raised by her friend Milagros even after her release, Coco always put her kids first. Though she was a welfare mother, Coco is like those fast food workers. She struggled against the odds with meager results, but she just kept going because she’d rather “live right” than wrong.

Other reviewers said this book made them judgmental. I hope I don’t come across that way. What I got out of it was just how difficult it is to break out of poverty. Coco’s and even Jessica’s kids deserve every bit of help society can provide them. How else can we ever hope to close the gaping hole of inequality in this country?