Rating: 5/5

I had no clue what to expect of this novel, and cannot even remember where I encountered it already many months ago. 

FROM THE BLURB
  Have you ever loved a magical book above all others? Have you ever wished the magic were real? Welcome to The Land of Laughs. A novel about how terrifying that would be.

Schoolteacher Thomas Abbey, unsure son of a film star, doesn't know who he is or what he wants--in life, in love, or in his relationship with the strange and intense Saxony Gardner. What he knows is that in his whole life nothing has touched him so deeply as the novels of Marshall France, a reclusive author of fabulous children's tales who died at forty-four.

Now Thomas and Saxony have come to France's hometown, the dreamy Midwestern town of Galen, Missouri, to write France's biography. Warned in advance that France's family may oppose them, they're surprised to find France's daughter warmly welcoming instead. But slowly they begin to see that something fantastic and horrible is happening. The magic of Marshall France has extended far beyond the printed page...leaving them with a terrifying task to undertake.
If I have read the blurb or reviews, I would probably have skipped it, since I am not overly keen on magical realism. Some people define this novel as modern fantasy, but while reading it I kept on thinking about Gabrial Garcia Marquez. An then I thought about Neil Gaiman's works. Sela, in the end this author, who developed his own cult in the end, was indeed hailed by Neil Gaiman as one of 100 best magical realism authors in the world. The book was first released in 1982, but became so popular that it was released again in 2010.

With that said, the story fitted perfectly into the surrealistic world of magic meeting reality in Galen, Missouri.

The story is written in the cultural language of the early Eighties, with all the elements of the times present, such as women as sidekicks for mostly salacious purposes, and the music of the times forming the background noise of the plot ( I actually enjoyed that). Small town America functions perfectly in the scheme of things with little indication of what was to be expected in what seemed to be a perfectly normal smalltown life.

As the story progresses, things change and weirdness creeps into the lives of all the inhabitants. Nobody has any other dogs but bull terriers in town. Everyone seemed to be weirdly happy even in the most inexplicable moments. 

The magical realism allowed for the gobsmacking, surreal ending. 

I don't want to say much about the plot, since it will spoil the surprise for someone who might want to read this book. I found this book strangely mesmerizing. Although it was a bit too creepy for my taste, I still kept on reading until the very end. Gripping, mysterious, compelling, and totally out of my comfort zone. Still I felt connected and invested in this magical experience. From the beginning there were ants running down my spine, and they relentlessly increased in numbers till the last sentence in this very well written book.

It's not for everyone, but I do believe it will be a thrill for the right reader. I won't become one of the groupies, but certainly appreciated the rattling of my comfortable reading cage. It was the perfect choice for this purpose :-)) Just over 240 pages it was a perfect read.