Rating: 5/5

Having read several of Fuentes' novels now, the best I can do to describe them is "big and frustrating", like being leashed to some giant dog that keeps changing its mind on which direction it wants to drag you just when you figure you've finally settled on an actual path. His novels are stuffed to the brim with ideas and scenes and characters to the extent that it ceases to become intoxicating and instead starts to veer toward the land of "utterly overwhelming". If you're willing to ride it out there are some good times buried in the pages but if you're in the wrong mood the brilliant stuff is going to get drowned out by literally everything else.

Part of it, admittedly, could be me. Fuentes' novels helped defined a new tradition of Latin-American writing and as such aren't completely bound to the concepts and structures of stories that we're used to north of the border, so to speak . . . here, stories seem to be more obviously part of an ongoing story where the ideas of beginning, middle and end aren't as important as the telling of the story itself. In essence, we're dipping into a small part of a very large and very wide stream. The stories are also deeply, deeply indebted to (in his case) Mexican history and mythology and so often carry on assuming that all of the references are common knowledge to the reader. And even in an age where we can just talk to some listening device to have it look up terms and historical events that we don't fully understand, its still hard to put that all into context and understand why people might see something as a big deal, or how a certain phrasing can speak volumes as to what Fuentes really means.

In other words, do your due diligence or be prepared to do a lot of catch-up work to keep pace with this book, because it has absolutely no desire to wait for you before skipping merrily to the next concept.

The concept here is probably the most understandable aspect of it. Christopher has been conceived almost exactly nine months before the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus discovering that he's not in China and as such is eligible to be the winner of some kind of contest. However, that turns out to be perhaps the least important part of the novel as the chatty unborn child as he guides us through the next nine months of his gestation in what seems to be a near-future (at the time) version of 1992 Mexico where things aren't going so hot. His parents, Angel and Angeles, are struggling to survive in a country that never fully recovered from the 1985 earthquake and seems wracked by political and social turmoil. But they're just a small portion of a cast that manages to encompass a band they sometimes tag along with, politicians and their families, rich people, a woman with dangerous genitals, religious figures with revolutionary motives and who knows what else. If there's one of Fuentes' novels that absolutely necessitates a cast list then this would be it because with all the jumping around and the pages crammed with characters whose relation to each other and the story at large is sometimes murky, any kind of stabilizing anchor would be welcome.

But without any regard to your feelings or your utter confusion, the story plunges ahead hyperactively as Christopher leaps from scene to scene, establishing characters just enough so that when you encounter them again maybe forty pages later you have a vague recollection of having met them before but aren't exactly sure what they're all about. A lot of it (a great portion, in fact) is satirical and so the people and situations are often inherently ridiculous, giving the whole proceedings at times a loopy unreality, as if its all part of an elaborate absurdity stage production or a joke you haven't totally gotten yet. There's no central plot (beyond Christopher waiting to be born) so at times it just seems like a lot of swirling events waiting for a direction to arrive. Fuentes is good enough so it never feels like total chaos but you're never under the impression that you've got this book under control. In fact, the book seems to tease you just enough so that every time the book seems about to coalesce into a formal plot (a late development where Christopher's parents are separated and His dad becomes obsessed with some rich dude's daughter while the guy's wife makes the moves on him) where you finally think you can grasp what's going on it will suddenly shift back to chapters and sections of people you barely know doing things you don't quite understand.

Which is pretty much the story for the whole book. Moments of cohesion (on the reader's part) followed by moments where you don't have any idea what the heck is going on, especially as the pages fill with characters all talking at each other. The best example I can think of is that parts of it feel like a "Love and Rockets" story gone absolutely bonkers, only without artists on the level of the Hernandez Brothers to differentiate all the people and wring some sort of sense out of it. The good news is that this approach won't seem that strange if you've read almost any other Fuentes novel but even compared to behemoths like "Terra Nostra" its just so rapid fire and slippery that the overall effect becomes exhausting even when you have a rare twenty page stretch where the novel starts to settle into something conventional.

Still, as wearying as it can be its never less than interesting and when Fuentes decides to focus more on Christopher's parents, even touching in parts. Christopher's mixed feelings about being born and potentially losing all the knowledge and memories he has now are palpable and the idea of the book existing for the unborn child to convey what he's experiencing to the reader because he's afraid he's going to lose it all via His path through the birth canal is expressed with the right mix of a wink and actual emotion. Fuentes the writer may be conceiving this all in good fun but Christopher is convinced there's a real kind of death of His personality ahead for him and it unnerves him. The last section of the book, as the birth surges on us, comes with a wash of intensity that you wish Fuentes had been able to pull out before that point, with a sense of poetry and rhythm that nearly puts the rest of the book to shame. Maybe he was kind of savagely kidding throughout most of the book, but when he suddenly decides to be serious the results are devastating.

In the end I may not be the person this book is meant for, or conversely, I could be exactly the person this is meant for. Anyone, like me, who has limited understanding of the history of Mexican politics (one thing to understand is that the ruling party, the PRI, was in power uninterrupted from 1929-2000 before the more conservative PAN party captured the presidency) is going to be lost in a lot of places here, and deservedly so. Books don't need to hold your hand to explain everything to you and a novel steeped so much in its time and culture doesn't need to make compromises to meet you halfway. Instead, what it can is leave the door open for you to come in and see what its about, the good and the bad, and give you a reason to learn. Not every book can inspire you to try, but His work spurs me to at least make the attempt. I don't know if I'll ever have a chance to reread Fuentes' books again in my life but the fact that my frustrations only want to make me broaden my own knowledge in preparation for that hypothetical reread one day speaks to how rich His writing His and how much the books trace, not taunt, any gaps in understanding you might possess and give you a reason to figure out a better way in, knowing you'll be welcomed when you are finally ready to come back and try again.