Rating: 5/5

I truly enjoyed reading this book. Kohn makes a well drafted argument for why the one-size-fits-all, traditional approach of schooling does not produce learning, but does produce quantifiable ranking. And, for even those students that do 'well' in school, they show low retention, and most devastating, a lack of motivation to continue learning. 

The book is broken down into two parts: 1 - Tougher Standards Versus Better Education and 2 - For the Love of Learning. He essentially shows the negative effects of standardized testing because of the overemphasizing of achievement, which may sound odd, but it isn't. Children feel the pressure to compete and do well on tests that have become a large part of their school year. It's a misguided concentration on 'how well' kids are doing in school versus 'what they are learning' in school. The test makers boil things down to the 'wave tops', I guess you could say, and essentially look for memorized facts of superficial intelligence. Deep learning is pushed to the way side by teachers because their job may be in jeopardy because of test scores. This undercuts what learning should be. 

Essentially, the type of education (real learning) he is campaigning for won't happen on the large scale because the culture of our nation is about competition. Be the best. Get into the top schools, get top scores on your SATs. He gives ample evidence why this type of approach is damaging to children and young adults. 

Of the two types of test, I think it was about 29 states that use norm referencing testing, which is more pernicious because it ranks students against one another. So, it doesn't really tell you whether you've learned something (regardless of it's level of superficiality) it just tells you how you did compared to everyone else in your class. So, if 20 people take the State's test that has 100 questions and no one gets more than 10 wrong (90%), that student that got 10 wrong is still told they are at the bottom of the barrel, when in reality they retained 90% of what was taught to them - regardless of what we might think of the content of the test - at least we know the student in the bottom of the barrel retained it. But the results are delivered to sort or rank the students against one another. Sadly, students look to others as competition versus potential collaborators (and let's face it, adults collaborate at work). So, is the competition even something worth engendering? 

He goes on to break down the negative impact of emphasizing achievement into five quantifiable categories: Interest, Reaction to Failure, Avoidance of Challenge, and Quality of Learning. Ok, so that's four, not five. Social education studies have found that students are less likely to be interested in school when the goal is to achieve high standards - measuring them is almost a sure fire way to kill their intrinsic desire to figure something out or learn something new. They are also scared of failing so they don't challenge themselves; in addition, research supports the tragic outcome that children who are led to emphasize grades and high tests scores value reading less. And the biggest problem with our testing culture: "Paradoxically, (these) students who have put success out of their minds are likely to be successful. They process information more deeply, review things they didn't understand the first time, make connections between what they're doing now and what they learned earlier, and use more strategies to make sense of ideas they are encountering. All of this has been demonstrated empirically." Yet, we test. 

Here's the rub. The fix isn't easy, in fact, it's nearly impossible. We, as a culture, are entrenched in the idea that the expert at the front of the class should do all the talking, thinking and delivery of information - even when studies show that children/students who talk, collaborate and are engaged in learning retain more information long term. We are convinced the product is more important than the process and so we rank. Everything. Students, schools, districts, states, universities. We can't see the forest beyond the trees. 

The progressive style of education is broader. It allows for a democratic process and children aren't see as just future adults. The process is harder. The students go over less content (especially in the earlier years) but they thoroughly go through what they are studying. Teachers allow for open discussions and use every opportunity to incorporate real knowledge in the lessons - like a 2nd grade teacher that allowed the class to decorate their room. On day one, it was blank, and she told them to decorate it. They collaborated, discussed, disagreed, comprised and then set to the task they used fractions, area, perimeter, and much more to cut out paper for portions of the wall, etc etc. How can that NOT be learning? How can that be tested? 

The author stresses the need to move away from testing because of the above mentioned negative outcomes related to boiling down our school system to a competitive, sort-for-all that leaves the poor students searching for some intrinsic reason to like school and to be engaged in real learning. 

The writing style is easy to read. He does not come across as a hater of schools, but carefully outlines the reasons they must evolve from what they are to a less rigid, test oriented, laboratory of students. 

I highly recommend.