Rating: 4/5

Horrible Histories, Ruthless Romans by Terry Deary
This series of books describes itself as ‘History with the nasty bits left in’ and in many way that’s exactly what they are. This book in particular looks at the Roman Empire; it covers a very broad spectrum of what it was like to live as part of the Roman Empire from Roman theatre, to the deeds of some of Rome’s most infamous Emperors. Yes this book does have a tendency to focus on some of the more gory aspects of history (which may account for the series ‘s popularity with children) but it is also brimming with really useful and interesting knowledge about the Roman Empire (which probably explains the series’ popularity with parents and teachers). Who wouldn’t want to know the name of the Roman goddess of door hinges? (it’s Cordea if you were wondering.)

This is an excellent and very engaging book. Once I started it, I kept finding myself going back to read more. It’s broken up into bite size chapters so it’s quite easy to look up something that might be useful, plus it is full of amusing Illustrations by Martin Brown that help certain important and interesting facts. This book has a very clever way of dealing with some of the more disgusting parts of history, it makes them funny. I would recommend this book for pupils working at Key stage 2, as the level of humour is aimed at children around the age of seven to eleven (although there is a certain amount of toilet humour that could bring a smile to any adults face) . The illustrations also add to the humour of the book. This is a series of books that simultaneously manages to show both the serious and funny side of History. Obviously this book will be really good when teaching about Romans in History lessons. Sections of it can be used to help teach about specific areas of Roman life. Of course the one drawback is that there is a lot of Roman history which probably explains why Horrible Histories has two books on the subject (Rotten Romans), so a teacher may have to reference to get all the information they need.