Rating: 5/5

You and No Other is the Crown Jewel in Cynthia Wright’s illustrious writing career. As a Romance Novel it fulfills all the requirements A Hero to die for, a stubborn Heroine. Great secondary characters (If one can call France’s most charismatic King a secondary character), forces willing to keep the couple apart, Court Intrigue, Family Dynamics and oh yeah a glorious setting. Re Reading this book almost 30 years after it was written did not diminish the sheer wonder of the story.

Thomas Mardouet, seigneur de St. Briac has it all. He is gorgeous, well established and a life long friend of the King of France. Secure enough to actually turn down positions at court. He is the hero every girl dreams of and many women secretly yearn for. Charming and charismatic he launches himself into the reader’s heart and never leaves. Thomas was happy with life, his family and friends.. when a chance meeting with a local wood nymph changes everything.

Aimee de Fleurance, oldest daughter to what seems to be a typical family of that era.. needing to broker a marriage for their oldest child that ensures financial security for the family and allows her to live the life she is supposed to live. Aimee, is not willing to settle for life as the wife of a man older than her father and rather decrepit and disgusting as well. Grasping at an opportunity to good to be true she rushes headlong into life at court. Except she is supposed to be her sister, whom the king has designs upon. Not the wood nymph who unknowingly insulted him.

So begins what I love to refer to as a comedy of characters. This book is by no means a comedy or a joke but it is humorous to watch the incredibly respectable Thomas get involved in one scheme of Aimee’s after another. From Aimee’s scheme to escape her family which lands her directly in Thomas’ path to Thomas’ desire to help a friend.. one unique adventure after another. These two are just plain fun!!

One of the reasons why this story spoke to me so strongly was the way they overcame their obstacles. And believe me they were fraught with obstacles, Aimee, escaping her family, hiding from the king.. Thomas, falling for Aimee and not having a clue, in a way, to him at least he was betraying a friend. Villains, politics and more. Each obstacle was overcome with a touch of elegance, a touch of slapstick and all round commitment to the characters. They weren’t put into positions that were false, you could see Aimee pulling one of her schemes and I could almost hear Thomas saying in a mock Cuban accent “Lucy you have some splainin to do”.. It’s not that it was overkill it was just fun. And Thomas, believe me he was just as bad.. his grand plan was the most bizarre and fun and yes erotic of all.

And over all the fun the story told a love story, one of respect and admiration, love and lust.. things we all want in our lives. A generous man who loves us..

There is of course something just so romantic about the setting of this book, from the French Court, which to me just yells romance to a castle in the French Countryside.. The setting was created for love. I can see my family history being replayed in this story.. But then that’s the French in me.. I see possibilities..

The thing is this book almost defines “pure romance”. The characters most definitely drive the story. To me that is what a romance book is about. There can be subplots and secondary characters but the story is told around the hero and the heroine. There are many many books today that are what I call plot driven. In some ways they are similar but there are those who prefer them because they don’t understand the true beauty of a book about people falling in love.. and this book, shares that with us wonderfully.

If you want to read more about Thomas and Aimee you can see them for a little bit in Of One Heart. I am so glad I revisited this charming couple, I find I already miss them. I know it won’t be another 30plus years before I read them again. 

Shauni

*grins* I don't usually rate my reviews.. but this book gets 10 swoons (on a scale of 1-5 of course) but seriously, this book is completely swoonworthy, have your swoon pillows ready

*** If you are interested reading about Cynthia's adventures through France as she fell in love with Francois I be sure and check out her website.. 

http://cynthia-wright.com/ 

You can also find her on Facebook and twitter..

http://www.facebook.com/cynthiawright...

@Cynthiawright1