Rating: 3/5

Mr. Lane, early attorney for Lee Oswald, hired by Oswald's mother, wrote this detailed investigative report critiquing the U.S. government's Warren Commission findings about the shocking assassination of JFK on November 22, 1963 in Dallas. This book came out in June 1966, disputing the commission's report which was first printed in September, 1964, with a 26 volume addenda printed 2 months later.

More information has come to light since Lane's seminal work. Having been published just a couple of years after the event, the conclusions in this book were concocted too early to give at most a "probable" conclusion based on available evidence. He documents the slipshod investigation of the assassination by the Warren Commission, that spawned a cottage industry of independent investigations of the murder.

Overall, the author paints a picture of law enforcement that feels like a Keystone Kops episode, just incapable of conducting a thorough investigation. Lane often castigates the FBI and commission for not asking what seems to be obvious follow-up questions. However, I think the "obvious" follow-up questions are only obvious to those who have the benefit of 20-20 hindsight. This doesn't excuse the shoddy investigation, of course [One such statement by an eyewitness who identified Oswald in a police lineup: "You could have picked him out without identifying by just listening to him'" (p. 164)]. It appears the investigation was steered towards a predetermined outcome with facts that didn't align with the predetermined outcome set aside as irrelevant facts.

If ever the final definitive answers become available, the collective shock of America after the assassination cannot be overstated; not even 9/11 comes close. America lost it's naive innocence that fateful day. My 6th grade teacher was interrupted by a sobbing Principal who made sure we could stay abreast of the pure unthinkable evil that we lived through that weekend. School dismissed early; heading to Sunday School by car later that weekend, I heard over the radio about the murder of Oswald, and the remainder of that dismal weekend I was glued to the TV until the burial of our young president in the gloaming at Arlington National Cemetery.
 
I would suggest that, in addition to this book, one read "The Devil's Chessboard" by Talbot. In my humble opinion, this heinous set of events was orchestrated by one of the members of the commission, former CIA director Allen Dulles; his fingerprints are all over the investigation. Also, I recommend William Manchester's "Death of a President."