Rating: 5/5

The Godmakers is an ambitious, thought-provoking, bold and well written novel. The opening chapter might seem a bit confusing if you aren't familiar with Herbert's style of writing, but once the story continues it takes you right into the midst of things happening in a future Universe. Our redheaded protagonist Lewis Orne lives in a postwar Universe (where everyone is terrified of great Rim wars happening again). Orne works for R&amp;R, an organization that studies and rediscovers planets and societies. Quickly into the novel, the hero is transferred into A-I, an organization that prevents wars. But there is this thing of- the more we oppose something, the stronger it comes.....

 This science fiction work could perhaps be described as a theological dystopia. The Godmakers might be read as a series of short stories set in the same Universe. This novel was developed from four short stories and every chapter has a somewhat closed feeling to it. However, the novel seemed well balanced and plotted to me. It was absolutely fascinating to read about many concepts (the strong matriarchal society that controls the politics, the genetic planning that can create superhuman powers, the multi planet society that is complex to maintain) that got further development in Herbert's Dune series. Even in this novel these themes are sufficiently well developed to make the reading seem mind-blowing at times. Moreover, it is amazing how well Herbert managed to develop these concepts in such a short novel. As I said, it is certainly an ambitious science fiction novel, one that merges religious and philosophical themes with technological and scientific progress. 

Asking questions is important, but it has to be the right kind of question. “When a wise man does not understand, he says: "I do not understand." The fool and the uncultured are ashamed of their ignorance. They remain silent when a question could bring them wisdom.” Herbert certainly asks a lot of question in this one. Does he give us definite answers? That is on any reader to decide.

I wonder what somebody who hasn't read Dune would make of The Godmakers? Would it feel too overwhelming or confusing? Was my enjoyment in The Godmakers a reflection of the fact that I adored the Dune series? Are there any possible flaws in this novel that I didn't catch? Do you I really care and should I? I enjoyed reading The Godmakers so much that I cannot honestly find a flaw in it. Perhaps I shouldn't overthink it.