Rating: 4/5

This biography answered many questions but also raised some too. Martin Luther King, Jr is famous of the thing he was exceptionally good at: he's speech, I have a dream. I think Frady really nails it when he paints a picture of King merely as a very good speaker and thinker, less as an man of action. Although I really wasn't a fan of Frady's tone as a writer, but as I kept on reading, I kinda grew used to it. I think the main reason of my dislike was because his tone is quite an old fashioned-sounding. But, yeah, you'll get used to it. Frady's not a bad writer. 

I liked how this biography also points out how King was just a human being. It's more inspirational to read about people who have flaws, fears, who make mistakes, but who still are competent to do what they find is right, fight for the better world. I think this is the thing that really divides people. If you don't want to read how MLK,Jr made mistakes and wasn't really monogamous, sometimes drank a lot, maybe you should look for some other book. But for the person who looks for something inspirational, this is a good book to read. The story of MLK, Jr teaches us how important it is to live your life fullest, think of others and be brave. You can overcome your fears. King had this anxiety, all the time; he was sure he's going to die soon. He was monitored By the FBI and Hoover really didn't like him. Still he got stuff done. A lot. He got over his fears because he felt that he had to do something for other people. That is inspirational. 

I wish Frady would have done some research what kind of person King was to those nearest him. It may be difficult or impossible, but still. It would have been interesting. There are some sentences in the biography that hint that King may have suffered of depression too, but hey, who wouldn't on that time and that kind of surroundings. Being an african american wasn't easy back then and now I really get all the anger some people have towards the white middle class. Imagine, if these days you would be arrested because you didn't give up your seat or would be not let in to a restaurant because of your skin color. 

The end includes some discussion of the death of King being good for his image. That is what I really don't agree with because we cannot never know what would have happened if King had lived longer. He didn't have it easy anyway in any step in his road to one of most significant human rights activists of his time. I think justifying his murder is some of big flaws in this biography. 

Still, I think that Frady has done good work with descriping Kings life. Agree? Disagree? Tell me what you think :)