Rating: 5/5

OVERVIEW AND ENDORSEMENT OF THIS FORM OF HERBAL MEDICINE

Georges-Maurice Halpern is an American physician and author, who has taught at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University; from 2004-2011, he was a member of the directorate of the State Key Laboratory in Modern Chinese Medicine and Molecular Pharmacology in Shenzhen, China.

He wrote in the Introduction to this 1998 book, “most Americans think of ginkgo as nothing more than a beautiful ornamental tree. Have we been missing out on important knowledge that could make our lives happier and healthier? I believe we have. That belief made me decide that it was time for Americans to discover the health benefits of Ginkgo Biloba extract. So I decided to write this book to make the facts and history of this great herb known… The modern Western world discovered the remarkable potential of Chinese medicine in the early 1970s when, after a quarter-century of isolation, Chinese officials invited tourists to visit this mysterious, fabled land… but Westerns made no greater discovery than Chinese medicine.” (Pg. 1)

He explains, “Plants used in Chinese medicine are the basis for many common drugs in the West… Now another herb, which has the potential to help in the treatment of an even wider range of ailments, is becoming known in the West. It is Ginkgo biloba.” (Pg. 3)

He notes, “While the Chinese revere ginkgo, Europeans have come to rely upon it. Ginkgo biloba extract is among the most commonly prescribed drugs in France and Germany, where it is used to fight many of the common symptoms of aging. Ginkgo biloba is registered as a drug in those countries for the treatment of organic brain disorders… In Germany, ginkgo is also licensed for the treatment of ‘cerebral insufficiency.’ … The extract has also been approved as a supplemental treatment for certain kinds of hearing loss and for leg cramps and numbness due to poor circulation.” (Pg. 7)

He continues, “The key to ginkgo’s benefits is its ability to improve circulation go every area of the body, including the brain… [It] helps to keep the blood vessels supple and elastic, and thus helps to keep the blood vessels supply and elastic, and thus helps prevent heart and circulatory problems. Research indicates that it is effective in the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease and strokes…. The improved blood flow that ginkgo fosters also helps heal disorders with a circulatory basis, ranging from ringing in the ears to numbness in the toes.” (Pg. 7)

He acknowledges, “In many cases, Ginkgo biloba has not proven more effective than drugs in the treatment of similar conditions. However, because ginkgo has no serious side effects and no problems have been observed arising from interactions with other medications that a patient may be taking, this herbal product may be preferable to strong drugs in those cases.” (Pg. 9)

He points out, “Many people do not know that common medicines have a basis in herbs. For example: *Aspirin is derived from the bark of willow trees. *Some cough crops are based on horehound and other members of the mint family. *Lemon is found in many over-the-counter remedies because its pulp lowers blood cholesterol, not just because it tastes good. *Many ache-easing products are based on camphor---an evergreen tree in the laurel family---and on eucalyptus---an evergreen tree in the myrtle family.” (Pg. 35)

He continues, “Biomedicine is the primary health-care method for only 10 to 30 percent of the world’s people, even today. The rest rely on herbal medicine or some kind of folk medicine that they can afford and that they consider effective for them. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that 80 percent of the world’s population… currently use herbal medicine as their primary method of health care.” (Pg. 35-36)

He asserts, “Is ginkgo better at relieving these problems than other substances available on the market? Yes. It compares favorably with most drugs available because it has minimal side effects. Its advantage over other substances comes from the fact that it works on the call membranes at different levels. It prevents degeneration of the cells and inflammation that directly or indirectly release free radicals and toxins.” (Pg. 53)

He argues, “Ginkgo extract is basically free of side effects. In more than forty-four research trials … many of which took place over a relatively long term, no serious problems were reported. There were some reports of mild gastrointestinal disorders, headaches, and allergic skin reactions, but those were rare. Fewer than one percent of those studied had mild stomach upsets or occasional headaches… There were no drug interactions, even though ginkgo was used in patients who were often taking other drugs. No serious negative reactions have been reported in patients taking as much as 600 milligrams in one dose. Further, ginkgo appears to pose no danger to pregnant women or nursing mothers. There appears to be low risk in taking ginkgo over long periods of time.” (Pg. 148)

He concludes, “All evidence points to the conclusion that Ginkgo biloba extract will one day be as well accepted as vitamin E, but I hope readers of this book won’t wait for that. I hope you will consider taking Ginkgo biloba now as a preventative medicine to fight the breakdown of skin and retina cells caused by ultraviolet rays, and to boost your mental performance. No significant side effects have ever been reported, even in megadoses, so take it for three to six months and keep a little notebook to record how you feel. Particularly at the end of thirty-six weeks, I think you will see a difference, and, in years to come, I think you will be happy that you learned about Ginkgo biloba extract.” (Pg. 159)

This book will be of keen interest to those studying Ginkgo biloba.