Rating: 2/5

As a kid who'd sneak off to the horror section of the local video rental place growing up, I was riveted by the cover of Jason Goes to Hell: The Final Friday. Jason's mask was rendered in shiny chrome with a demon-snake twined through its holes, all against a solid backdrop of bright orange flames. You could see it from 20 feet away. When I finally got to watch the movie, it was, of course, terrible, and I felt betrayed by the cover for convincing me otherwise. 

Reading Slob was a similiar experience. I kept seeing this book mentioned -- Harlan Ellison blurbed it-- but it was relatively rare and so I never actually got my hands on it. (Stephen King also blurbed it, but I have since realized SK will do that for virtually anything you put in front of him, which is a nice writerly gesture of solidarity but erodes some of his credibility as a reviewer.)

I have to agree with the negative reviews here. My first experience with the "splatterpunk" genre Miller loosely belongs to was Clive Barker's collected Books of Blood, which are by and large riveting. Making Rex Miller the next author I checked out after that was a huge mistake: Barker is simply on another plane compared to Miller as a conceptualist and writer. I'm not a huge gorehound but I will always stump for the best of Books of Blood because Barker is able to weld his explicit descriptions of violence to the melange of revulsion, dread, shock, and imagination that all good horror orbits around. (Looking forward to reading Kathe Koja next!)

People are correct in pointing out Miller's ticlike repetition of phrases: I don't think there's a single mention of Chaingang's fingers that doesn't compare them to cigars or more specifically "steel cigars;" his legs are routinely referred to as "tree trunks," and his rucksack is always described as something "neither you nor I could lift." The author's hyperverbosity has been discussed in other reviews, and it does give Slob some runaway-freight-train momentum that bolsters what is basically a very boilerplate "detective hunts serial killer" novel. Chaingang turns out to have a completely by-the-numbers abusive childhood, for example, and seemingly by trying to overrwrite his way out of various cliches of his own construction, Miller's torrents of copy often just wash over you and end up obscuring helpful details. 

To wit: The book's pre-prologue is titled "The Precognate" -- Miller's shorthand for a mysterious semipsychic sense the titular character has -- and informs us that his mind is a "killing zone of horror where Jaws and The Exorcist meet." (Sadly this never manifests in a demonically-possessed shark.)

The book's actual prologue then introduces him as Chaingang, and within 10 pages there's entire chapter simply referring to him as Death. For the rest of the book Miller alternates between his proper name, Daniel Bunkowski, and Chaingang. Charitably, one could assume that this is an attempt to portray the fractured state of mind of a character implausibly described as both nearly mentally disabled and an off-the-charts genius, but it's not even limited to him. Other characters have both their legal names and "street names" identified, and near the book's end, closing a chapter of Chaingang's ambush of NVA soldiers in Vietnam, one of the soldiers is suddenly referred to as "the snake man" twice, having not been identified by that at any point prior.

Miller's love affair with his antagonist comes at the expense of pacing. The book's final 40 pages, include an 11-page flashback to one of Chaingang's Vietnam ambushes -- including the minutiae of how he wires different explosives and then takes them all apart and re-wires them because of a tiny detail in their setup -- and six pages resolving an utterly inconsequential subplot in which a gang of bikers attempt to bring down Chaingang, with predictably one-sided results. (The biker gang is quite funny for the ludicrous way Miller renders their dialogue: One gem of a line is "Who's fuckin' this goddamn chicken, anyway, goddamnit, you want to run this motherfucker?")

Compared to all of that, the book's final confrontation between Slob's utterly flat protagonist Jack Eichord and Chaingang is settled and done in the final eight pages, though Eichord and Chaingang only interact for three of them. For all of his genius, it turns out that Chaingang is quite easily manipulated by something mentioned exactly once&gt; before in the book (and not in any of his flashbacks) that I'm not even sure Eichord would have had any way of knowing about. But the fact that Chaingang has a trick ankle is mentioned much more frequently, I suppose to humanize what is for all intents and purposes a superhuman being.

Some positives: There's actually more fleshing-out of Eichord's love interest (not a spoiler to say a survivor of one of Chaingang's acts) and her child and their relationship with Jack than I was expecting, though, hilariously, much of it boils down to how horny the two adults are for each other from the jump. Treading lightly with spoilers here, some of Chaingang's past is revealed to have a semi-novel shadowy-government aspect to it, which is kind of a neat twist (and certainly explains how a nearly 500-pound raving psychopath ended serving in the Armed Forces without, presumably, having gone through basic training). But aside from some phone calls Jack makes, the details are don't amount to much.

This one's probably for genre completists and no one else -- funnily enough, the same thing I'd say about Jason Goes to Hell.