Rating: 4/5

I'm a book savorer. Like, when I like a book, and I like the writing, I like to read it slow, in morsels. And even though this is ostensibly a book of criticism, which is ostensibly "secondary" literature, there is much to savor here. And so easy to do so, as the film reviews are only a couple pages at most, and the essays don't meander much past 12 pages. 

So I read this book over the course of a little more than 2 years, and loved it all. The real difference between Lane's criticism and other contemporary purveyors of such goods is that Lane's tone exudes pleasure in both the act of writing and the act of viewing/ reading/ whatever. And if the object being experienced by Lane doesn't offer enough pleasure, or doesn't contain enough humor or bite or intelligence or sensuality, his writing about its lack of those things will. 

His power of perception mixes with his ability to feel and he has the rare talent to turn his sensitivity to both acts into communicable thoughts. 

And what's even more rare and marvelous is that his sentences take on a true life of their own. If you know people who genuinely doubt that critics can be artists, Lane should be exhibit 1 to the contrary. Here is what he writes about Showgirls:

"The movie's big discovery is lap-dancing , an erotic pastime that it presents as something of a revelation but which it looked to me as if it had been going on , more or less unchanged for the last 3000 years. To lap-dance, you undress, sit your client down, order him to stay still and fully clothed, then hover over him, making a motion that you have perfected by watching Mister Softee ice cream dispensers..."You fuck em without fucking em" as James delicately puts it. If Verhoeven were really bold, he would have used that line on the poster. Showgirls is not about sex at all; it is about the business of sex, which is a different matter."

And his review continues from there. The greatness of his writing is that he establishes himself as someone whose perspective you trust, because he doesn't come across like a brat or an elitist and defender of hoi polloi: he comes across as someone who likes to read and watch movies and have sex and live and eat etc. And that attitude is important, because it is so rare in the world of criticism. And it makes Lane's insights that much more palpable, earnest and thoughtful. Here's a couple I'm not going to tie to the movie or writer or whatever they refer to, so you can see range and put into context when/ if you read the work:

Self-pity is just vanity with a poker face, and it kills any writer long before suicide gets there.

Yes, my character is larger than life, but that is your fault for finding life too small.

He prefers to slob around, doing good in the way that other people get drunk.

I began to sense that somewhere, wrapped up inside his generosity and eagerness, is a tiny sliver of boredom. it is not inertia; it is the boredom of Wilde and Huysmans, the boredom of the man who is cleverer than the people around him, who has to keep his mind fresh with a flux of ever more startling sensations, and who knows that what he does with his life is at once thrilling and void.

The wittiest shot in the film comes after a brawl around a fountain, when the characters depart and a little dog patters and splashes into view. The composition is born of comic instinct - that is, of the need to hang back and wait for life to resume its normal service once the abstract tumult has passed on. Comedy, like happiness, is a long shot. 

Evil, like sugar, is best left unrefined.

The imminent prospect of losing one's life is, among other things, a matchless education in the art of treating it lightly.

He saw evil in the prospect of labor without pleasure

It is in seasons of peace, of course, that perplexity comes into full bloom.

The great love of a life may be a long falling out of love.

Vagueness is the enemy of nonsense.

The book is over 700 pages, and it only collects things published before 2002. We are long overdue for another collection of his writings, but this one reanimates all the pleasures of living and thinking and fucking and loving, so it'll do for now.