Rating: 4/5

Rollo May had a hell of a life... really interesting fellow. 

I expected some cheesy, 70s self-help channeling Dr. Phil— the paperback I have looks like the kind of thing you would find in Mr. Rosso’s guidance counsel office. But I was pleasantly surprised. 

It was enjoyable and thought-provoking. Beginning with clear and effective definitions of ‘courage’ and ‘creative,’ Rollo May launches into a treatise on what it means to be an artist/creative (in all eras and ages, which is maybe problematic to assume...), and why it does take courage to confront the unknown of the future in the form of the individual (and collective) unconscious. This sounds crazy in theory, but he does a really good job, I think, of breaking down the ways in which our encounters with the objective world play a critical part in our unconscious cycles (sleep, dreams, daydreams), which in turn inform the objective world that we interact with. 

I particularly enjoyed May’s articulation of this longstanding idea that the artist is an artist simply because they are aware of the tension between the seemingly limitless potential of their imagination and the limits of form/structure. I personally feel like I am constantly struggling to establish a form that works with the circumstances of what it is I am trying to create (substance-wise)— whether it is a choreographed sequence of dance moves or a collection of stories— I struggle with commitment to any type of form/structure; I like chaos and disorder and am constantly my own biggest threat to the demolition of my own creations. 

Abiding by limitations is itself a difficult process; striking a balance between surrender to the limitations and understanding of the possibilities that exist within them is something else entirely.

I would still take everything he says with a grain of salt since it’s an old-ish book and just kind of outdated with certain ideas... Ultimately, it’s a great, fun read; you will have “aha” moments and audible gasps if you’ve ever considered yourself a creative individual, in whatever capacity.