Rating: 5/5

After hearing a reference to this book, now out of print, I went to great lengths to find it and it was worth every minute. Meloy is a nonfiction environmental writer and here she journals a summer when she and her husband, a park ranger, paddle the Green River in Utah's Desolation Sound, recording viewings of wildlife, the health and preservation of petroglyphs and just recording the beauty and moods of the canyons. It is a bit geology, history, poetry, memoir, humor--often sarcastic, and angst about the building and bitter result of dams...pulled together so beautifully I was bookmarking every page. Yes, this book did deserve its win of the 1995 Western Writers of America Golden Spur Award, and others. I am happy to know of this author, who sadly passed way too young, but several of her books are still available. 

"River rhythms drowned me a week ago, hardly a day into this trip. By now I am engulfed, so beyond the normal experience of domesticity, rescue is futile. It has become second nature to stuff our bedrooms into bags each morning and push into the current, to fall over backward in the boat, bodies limp with the heavy scent of cliffrose and rapids, to grunt up a rugged side canyon, shins lacerated by thorn and scrub, merely to see the petroglyph of a man with a wolf's head staring across the air at us. It is routine to drop from some high, remote rim observed time after time from the river then finally visited after years of seduction, to stumble back to camp, pluck rattlesnakes from our ankles, and stand at a cookstove, stirring a simmering pot, toes buried amidst the creamy blossoms of a thousand birdcage primroses."

"Compared to trout or salmon the humpback chub is a weak swimmer. In whitewater, however, it soars like an eagle, using its hump as a hydrofoil in the river's roiling, incessant Jacuzzi. This anatomical feature helps the fish hold its position near the river bottom, where currents are less bruising, without expending much energy. I slipped my hand into the bucket and gently cradled what amounts to a muscle with a tail. The shape of the fish is the shape of the river. Against my palm lay the fish that loves the wilds of the river: Desolation Canyon whitewater made solid."