Rating: 2/5

The final balloon ride was exciting.

I'm taking a step back from the Travis McGee series again but I want to finish the series. I only have two novels to go. All the things I don't like about John D MacDonald's writing and his idea of what a Travis McGee novel should be came flooding back.

The first thing I dislike about MacDonald's McGee stories is his rambling writing. At the end of chapter seven is a good example; you can find a full six paragraphs of what I'm talking about. Just after McGee gets off the phone with Annie (a new character), McGee goes off thinking (MacDonald goes off writing):

..."Annie had been totally now. An immersion. So vital and hungry I had no need to be the man in the wings. I turned on the handy projector in the back of my head and ran through a box of slides, of still shots of her in the underwater green of the towel over the bed lamp, when she was biting into her lip and her eyes were wide and thoughtful, and she was shiny with the mists of effort. Being the neurotic that Meyer believes I am has the advantage of giving me a far narrower focus of pleasure than if I did not truly give a damn."...

So for me, I skim through this crap to get to the dialog or descriptions of what is going on.

The second thing which I dislike are the extremely evil characters in these novels. In this novel MacDonald describes a particularly evil sadistic killer. (There usually is one). Toward the end of the novel, there is a climatic scene that takes place which is exciting (reference my intro). In this action sequence most of the bad guys are done away with except one dude. This guy then goes on a rampage raping, mutilating and killing until McGee is the last man standing.

As the story unfolds, McGee goes way beyond what he was asked to do in the first place. It's like he keeps swatting a hornet's nest. He should have noted the hornets and then called in an exterminator. Instead he goes on swatting!

I've talked about the McGee novel formula in the past. You can see my reviews of previous McGee novels for this, particularly The Long Lavender Look. MacDonald in these later novels is straying from the formula. In particular regarding how much McGee gets injured, how lucrative the job is and how many women he bangs.

McGee is still pining after Gretel who was killed two novels ago. Because he's still in mourning, he's not horny. He does find a new woman in this novel who seems to be a keeper (in other words, she'll probably show up in the next installment).

Here are some quotes from the novel:

"I always figure a tattooed man either got so sloppy drunk he didn’t know what was happening, or he needed to have a tattoo to look at to reassure himself he was manly." Dated but perhaps accurate regardless of gender.

"Their brown leaping bodies and half-formed breasts and hips instilled in me such a wistful lechery" Offensive. McGee is describing some preteens on the beach. 

"The laws of motion state that a body falls at thirty-two feet per second,,," Incorrect. Gravity's effect on an object is an acceleration, not a velocity. It's 32 feet per second squared (or second per second). MacDonald is obviously ignorant of physics. There is a thing known as terminal velocity however.

The title of the novel is not found in the novel. The title refers to the movie "Free Fall".