Rating: 3/5

Right off the bat I have to say that if you have any interest in reading this book it’s because you’re a StarCraft fan in some capacity. This is a book you would have no reason to read otherwise so bear that in mind for this review. This is the 2nd book in the original trilogy of StarCraft books. I was sort of weary of this one because a lot of the online reviews I read were giving 1 to 2 stars, so naturally my expectations were not high. But, being an avid fan of the StarCraft franchise, I felt compelled to give it a read. 

This was by no means the best StarCraft book I’ve read but it was entertaining all the same. I don’t think I’ll be reading it again though. It introduces a unique story in the StarCraft universe sometime between the events of the original game and the Brood War expansion. So far so good. The problem with this book is that it tries to do too much. That is to say I feel as though I read what felt like could have been a separate series worth of plot crammed into one book. 

The action is epic in scale - it’s all out war between the 3 races, planetside and in space. But, as previously stated, it gets condensed and because of this, it often reads like a play by play from an online match of the game - meaning the imagery can be lacking. Other times its great though, like when describing Zerg infested people and creatures. My main gripe though is how flat the characters fall. Like we’re talking very 1-dimensional for some of these characters and others just feel downright pointless. At least a dozen characters are named, a couple being some big names like Kerrigan and General Duke, but only maybe 3 or 4 of them have any sort of development. The Protoss characters in particular feel really uninspired. 

The overarching plot ends up being ludicrously epic in scale, too big to fit in one book let alone one that is under 400 pages. This is where the book ultimately suffers. So many things that could have been explored and could have been developed just drop off anticlimactically including the ending. 

What this book reminds me of are those big budget movie adaptations full of nods to the source material but lack anything deeper than a surface level understanding of that material. 

Despite these drawbacks, it didn’t feel like a chore reading this book. Once things get going, it was easy to just keep the pages turning to see what was going to happen next. I will say the authors (they’re a husband/wife team using a pseudonym) certainly had an admirable level of ambition in the story they wanted to tell and I think it could have been truly awesome if they stretched it out over 2-3 books. I give it a 3 out of 5 just because it was a fun read at the end of the day but it is by no means the best StarCraft book one could read and it doesn’t add anything new or interesting to the franchise.