Rating: 3/5

There were a few notable Maries from France during the twelfth century. Some were poets, some were nobility, some were known for their music, and there is a lot of educated speculation on who, exactly, Marie de France was. Or if she was the author of all of these lays. Was she one of the known Maries? Was she a Marie for whom we have no record? We don’t know anything about the author of these writings except for what she gives us at the beginning of the collection, referring to herself as Marie, promising to relate these tales to us as she learned them. We also know she was French-Norman, probably lived in Britain or Brittany, and was familiar with Breton culture.

These lays are presented as Marie’s Norman versions of Bretonic lays. In their original forms, they were sung to the accompaniment of a harp or a rote. All are adventure stories revolving around love between knights and ladies, complicated by infidelity, monstrous evil, war, jealousy, or rage. They were intended for a courtly audience of nobles. They’re imaginative, fun, and simple, the sort of stories large audiences consume for entertainment. Although simple in form, there’s quality and substance to all of them, a sense of adventure and depictions of the Anglo-Norman world of the Middle Ages. Each embodies a distinct set of characteristics that set them apart from one another.

Marie’s characters are not deep representations of human complexity, like the fashions of contemporary literature. They are familiar, exemplars of the virtues such a medieval audience valued: loyalty, courage, quick to fall in love, driven by passion and fury, eager to right wrongs; or the sort of vices the audience would despise: jealousy, control, maniacal hatred, or treachery. Plots are direct and to the point, though with enough tangents into the worldly details of the medieval lands of the Normans, Flemish, French, and Bretons to convey an authenticity to the well-traveled nobles of the court. 

Some of these lays are tales we’ve heard before, like Chevrefoil, a very short version of the Tristan and Isolde legend, trimmed down to a couple pages. Others, tales of the supernatural, like the knight Bisclavret who prowls the night as a werewolf, whose secret is leaked by his wife to her lover. His cursed existence as a werewolf does not turn out to be exactly the plight we would imagine, as he is taken in by a king, and eventually granted the chance for revenge against the two who betrayed him. 

This animalistic shape shifting also appears in the lay Yonec, about a hawk that flies into an imprisoned maiden’s chamber and transforms into a knight. Her wrathful husband’s jealousy drives him to a murderous plot that will be avenged by the knight’s son. Other visits to and from the supernatural appear, like in the lay of Guigemar, which sees a wounded knight carried off to a distant, mysterious land by an immaculately decorated ship, where he falls in love with the wife of a mad lord. Guigemar’s wound cannot heal without the love of a faithful woman, because he is cursed by an animal who speaks to him shortly after he has mortally wounded it in a hunt. I’m reminded of Japanese folklore where similar things often happen — an animal is hurt or mistreated, and it speaks to its human abuser, cursing it or setting it upon some grave adventure as atonement for its crime.

Another lay, Milun, about a knight who impregnates a lady who is forced to give up her son to her sister in Northumbria, exhibits a motif I have seen before in medieval folklore, of a warrior father who unknowingly meets his son in battle. This happens in the Middle High German epic Hildebranslied and the later Junger Hildebrandslied. We also see this in the Irish myth of Cu Chulain, who unknowingly fights his son after his son has been raised to despise the father he’s never met. In Milun, the story has a happy ending, and the battle is merely a joust, with the father proudly embracing and kissing his son who has so heroically unhorsed him.

The lay of Lanval is the only Arthurian story here besides the Tristan tale. The knight Lanval, of Arthur’s court, meets and falls in love with a magical queen who is visible only to him. Their love must be kept a secret. He is later approached by Arthur’s wife Guinevere, who makes advances on him and is refused, leading her to angrily accuse him of her own crime and of dishonoring her. Lanval must defend himself against such accusations, and in doing so almost ruins his amorous affair with the mysterious queen. 

There are a handful of standout lays here, and all are good. A few are too short to be impressive, but they all have a subtle, folkloric charm. Though most have happy endings, or grim endings heralding justice, like Equitan, there are a few, like Les Deus Amanz or Chaitivel, that embrace tragedy and reveal a surprising depth of emotion, ornamented in medieval interpretation. Most of these lays represent early forms of stories and themes that would be reused over the next centuries by writers from Chaucer and Shakespeare to the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen, as well as many writers of folklore and fantasy. 

The longer lays tend to be more captivating, with more creatively put together drama, a more dynamic kind of story development, and better insight into medieval ideas. Although these lays have been translated into prose, one gets a sense of the traditions and style that dominated the work almost 900 years ago. The economic composition would have served the court musician well, and probably made it easier for audiences to remember and appreciate the stories. Despite all the lays having a common theme, this is only a high level similarity that provides a big enough landscape of variations and unique ideas to allow a great diversity of amusing, delightful, sometimes exciting stories.