Rating: 3/5

Start with the good: The artwork on this book is beautiful. The colors are garish, but there's something appealing about the over-the-top lushness and density. The first full page rendering of the Silver Surfer is particularly nice. Of course the cosmic backdrops are far too cluttered to be even remotely realistic portrayals of actual interstellar space, or even stellar space, and the meteor storm is hilariously packed with rocks rolling all over each other. But it's a fucking comic book based on the idea of a powerful being that uses a surfboard in space, leaving open the question of what exactly does his board push against anyway, so either you ride along with the premise or not. For some reason I can't articulate, I do.

Unfortunately the story is a bit weak. Mrrungo-Mu is a ridiculous villain matching the dumb name. Do we really need another entity that is on the scale of Galactus? I know it's part of the story, but I didn't think it worked very well. In an attempt to rescue Mrrungo-Mu from being a completely one dimensional character, Tnneya offers the incredibly lame defense of "he did it to save his people" thereby becoming one of the worst examples of loyalty beyond all reason and defending her abuser all because of "love". A pretty poor message.

The straw-man portrayal of the SETI scientist, very clearly based on Carl Sagan, was utterly unbelievable when becoming enthused about first contact with extra-terrestrial life because this occurs in the Marvel Universe in which there are already known aliens on Earth. Including the title character for fuck sake. This was an unfortunate attempt to comment on real world debates about the wisdom of Voyager, etc. in a comic book world where such concerns would be wildly different, and is a failure to stay true to the established rules of this fictional universe.

So overall, a seriously flawed work, but still, I came out of it having enjoyed the journey. I think somewhere in the back of my mind I have an idealized version of Silver Surfer the overrides the problems of the stories. Now I want to go listen to some Joe Satriani.