Rating: 4/5

Oh well, Shakespeare! What do you expect me to make of this, Sir? Me, being a Kate, but not starved, tortured, and humiliated into obedience, submission, complete surrender? 

How shall I read this play, that made me literally feel a knot in my stomach, that filled me with nausea, anger, and sadness? My first reaction was to think: 

“Thank you, Sir, that’s enough. I’ll have none of this anymore, you may be my literary hero, but this is TOO MUCH!”

Then all those other authors came to mind, those brilliant authors who wrote about misogyny, colonisation and taming of human minds, and I reconsidered. If I read Shakespeare’s taming of Kate as a moral play, I have to reject it with disgust, regardless of what the customs of the time were. But as a parable on how to break a spirit, it is quite unsurpassed in its cruelty and effectiveness, and as such, it holds a truth that still, unfortunately, is quite unchallenged in many parts of society.

At the beginning of the play, Kate is a “wild-cat”, a falcon that cherishes her own way of living and thinking and speaking, and fears no man. She doesn’t know the treacherous power of the falconer, who uses her talents to tame her, as Petrucchio himself puts it: “My falcon now is sharp”. Chinua Achebe, in the title for his classic novel Things Fall Apart, chose a a line from a poem by Yeats to allude to the same kind of relationship between European colonisers and free African men, with a similar end result of complete breakdown of the falcon’s way of life after being forced to surrender to the game of the falconer:

Turning and turning in the widening gyre
The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,
The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere
The ceremony of innocence is drowned;
The best lack all conviction, while the worst
Are full of passionate intensity.

Survival of the cruellest and most ruthless players, the rule seems to be. It is extremely painful to follow Kate’s path from an educated, strong-willed, thinking young woman to a brainwashed “puppet”, similar to the alternative Nora in Ibsen’s rewritten ending of A Doll's House: forced to surrender.

“Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
And speak I will; I am no child, no babe:
Your betters have endured me say my mind;
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart;
Or else my heart, concealing it, will break:
And rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.”

Wouldn’t those have been wonderful last words for a strong heroine, standing her ground? Better than what came after her ordeal, in any case, a sermon held in front of her husband, who celebrates and cashes in money after betting that he can prove that he has broken his wife’s spirit completely, spoken as an appeal to the other men and women in the play as well. Kate now is claiming women should love the masters that force their will upon them:

“Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
Even such a woman oweth to her husband…”

She adopts this attitude, of missionary female submission, after going through an episode where Petrucchio makes her claim that the sun is the moon or whatever else he calls it. This brainwashing method calls to mind the horrible torture in Orwell’s 1984, where citizens are pushed to the point of accepting whatever falsehood Big Brother chooses to sell as truth of the day. If Big Brother says 2+2=5, then that is true. Period. Neither Orwell nor Shakespeare leave it at that, though. The taming is not complete until Winston whispers in the end: “I love Big Brother”, and that is precisely what Kate does as well. Having been pushed over the edge, she accepts, and embraces, her prison and loves her jailer. The Spanish Inquisition worked with similar methods.

So, what do I make of this piece? I hate it. And I admire Shakespeare for putting abuse of power on stage so clearly. For his female characters are strong falcons, they are intelligent and free in their own chosen life style. But they break under cruel torture and horribly unjust social conditions, just like any human being does. Achebe’s Okonkwo is a proud man, but he breaks under the superior weapons of the European usurpers. Winston is a rebel, but Big Brother has better tools of control.

I will close the review with an echo of Kate’s words when she was still a bird outside the cage, free to use her words to speak her mind. As long as those words are not erased from the play, but hold their position in the history of Kate, she will never completely surrender:

“Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
And speak I will; I am no child, no babe:
You betters have endured me say my mind;
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart;
Or else my heart, concealing it, will break:
And rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.”

And Nora, keep running from A Doll's House!