Rating: 4/5

This is the tragic story of singer-poet Kieu (of the part of her life she lived from very late teens to around mid-30s), who suddenly has to marry to save her family from debt punishment, but is thus tricked into working in a brothel, just the first of her many misfortunes. Over the course of this surprisingly feminist and fast-paced story she survives on her way with words and her talents, becoming a queen, wife, nun, slave, victim and avenger... will she find her place in the world, and a way to return to the people she loves?

It's an old story: good luck and good looks
don't always mix.
Tragedy is circular and infinite.
The plain never believe it,
but good-lookig people meet with hard times too.

(Penguin Classics' introduction is spoilery, so you might want to read it later.)

The author wrote this story from an earlier version, as told by a Chinese author in a more mediocre book; he wrote it secretly as an act of private rebellion, and this book was released soon after his death in 1820, becoming an instant success, still widely read and loved today. The Vietnamese have found it very relatably in its quiet melancholy, and silent mourning of a Chinese dynasty passing, similar to the passing of the Le dynasty, which must've been one reason why Nguyen chose to write his version on it. You can still bring it up in Vietnam, if you want to have something good to talk about, and it might give you a look into the spirit of Vietnam and its people.

At the start is a note on naming system (of the book title, translation of the nouns, poem divisions - it was first written without breaks). There is also two maps (the five journeys of the story, Vietnam in the Tay Son era). After the story is one of the earliest, short pre-book accounts of the Cuiqiao story, and some good notes.

Alone with her thoughts in the black night,
Kieu stares into the long road ahead.
She is a floating petal on a swollen stream.
She is a broken fern in a swift current
and she weeps because she knows that fate is cruel.

I found the story truly fresh and modern-feeling, just as the introduction promised. The poem could also be read, chanted, or sung aloud. Some parts of the story are truly historical (Kieu existed, though not as someone who could move around freely since feet were being bound already by Ming dynasty, but in Vietnam it never really happened; the betrayal of the pirate happened - but piracy happened because of lack of proper trade between China and the rest of the world).
The elements of the story: the sense of loss which is deep within the story from the start as Kieu already expects something will happen; the sense that destiny can't be changed much, underlying north-south balance being kept in the background; betrayals (and she's not the only one); filial loyalty no matter how separated; being constanly moving around, sometimes (very) homesick; and I guess faith, the supernatural as part of life.

Mist swirls across the sand, towards a wooded hill.
Cocks crow from moonlit huts; she presses
fresh shoeprints onto a dew-soaked bridge.
Through the dawn and the sharp wind, the lone girl walks.

The imagery of the poem is very rich; sometimes the scene gets breaks of just observation of the scene, the nature, the scents etc. around where the story currently is. Water element is often around, in the nature, the weather, the tears running down Kieu's face... She feels, and sometimes is, helpless, but she's ready to take opportunities and make decisions when it comes along.

It was so great when I realised how fast-moving the story was, how easily it pulled you in again when you took a break from reading. It really leaves you with feels, and might make you think of life matters and nature within your own life. And I felt that it would feel just so fresh and good when I will reread it in the future, enjoying it again. Melacholic and refreshing and making you reflect, think deep things.