Rating: 3/5

Though not quite as gut-wrenching as the previous book, this shines light on other ways poverty affects families, namely what trying to get an education is like in low-income schools. I haven't read too many books set in this kind of school system that weren't also written at a lower reading level, unless they were focusing on an Issue like drugs or teen pregnancy. A smart girl succeeding in spite of her circumstances, capitalizing on every limited opportunity put her way, is refreshing. 

And of course, it's wholly enjoyable to see more of LaVaughn's life. Since she's no longer babysitting regularly, some of the focus turns to her interest in A Boy (boring, though for once I was actually kind of pleased when he turned out Secretly Gay, so I didn't have to sit through some dumb Is The Enormously Negative Risk : Reward Ratio Of Teenage Sex Worth Potentially Derailing My Plans plot), as well as the widening gulf between her and her two best friends, who've been sucked into an overzealous church youth group and started evangelizing and blathering on about how the Earth is only 5000 years old and there were dinosaurs on the Ark. 

I really think Virginia Euwer Wolff is the only author who can successfully write novels in verse. Normally this format feels like a wall between me and true enjoyment of the story -- at best, I like the plot in SPITE of it -- but the minute I start reading these books, the lines glide across my mind, warm and accessible, like I'm listening to a story from a friend. A couple of them really stand out in particular as far as visualizing the setting:

In their house there was only poor food,
flaky sugar cereal and mac &amp; cheese in boxes.
They don't have much choice at the City Food Pantry
where they get free food once a week.
=====
Then comes a bang and the streetlight went out.
Somebody out there with a gun again. I jump every time.
Like always, my mom is in my room
before the sirens start.
She checks if I'm OK, she puts her arms around me.
It is so scary if I let myself think about it.
So I think about getting out of here instead.