Rating: 5/5

I thought this was a very revealing and insightful look into an important historical moment, and of course the various contradictions at play which gave shape to the sociopolitical landscape. I think it's probably natural to get an idea of being self-critical with yourself to reach a higher point of one's own self while going through the book, but on this note it's important to consider something Allyn pointed out: that these gestures are going to be rather limited without an accompanying objective situation of change and transformation as well. We can't get to the "root of our thinking" and radically alter it while living the same life with all of our old habits and routines. And this is a basic point to Marxism - we need an advanced theory to guide our action as best as possible, but without action, theory is impotent. We need to be vigilant and honest and critical in our thoughts towards ourselves and others, but to simply try to keep this up in the realm of thought and language without a corresponding effort to actually change what we're doing and how we're living, it's impossible to change oneself in any significant manner. 

This is also a good read to get an understanding of how terribly we treat our prisoners in the US. First, we target certain people - most explicitly poor people belonging to oppressed nationalities - in extremely fraudulent and disgustingly inhumane ways. We go out of our way to lock up black youth on drug charges (including trumped up charges) while we also try to find every possible reason to excuse a police officer who murders somebody (and again, predominantly black somebodies.) And prison life in 2016 USA is worse than in 1952 China. We don't care for reform, we care for disappearance. The Ricketts were convicted of espionage. Espionage! During a war-time situation! In the midst of a huge ideological battle engulfing the world between communism and capitalism! They were spies! After Adele's release, she was examined by doctors who were trying to find signs of torture. There were none, of course, but if anyone today is concerned about political prisoners and torture, they might want to start at Gitmo. 

Not that it's not clear enough just by looking around today, but this work is another in a long line of works which make the American hypocrisy all the more apparent. We use human rights language to cast our political enemies in an inhumane light, meanwhile torturing and bombing our way through foreign policy. We can get away with this because of America's ideological hegemony, solidified over time through building a liberal edifice atop the concrete of brutal suppression. So to this day we'll talk of our concern for the Korean people and print our wildest daydreams about what happens in North Korea, despite the fact that American military intervention is what splintered the country and massacred tons of people in the first place. We'll talk of world peace being at stake every time North Korea tests a bomb - should everyone else leave the bombs to us and trust that America will make the best decisions for everyone? Should nobody be prepared to defend themselves? Does anyone actually think Korea has a longer history of invasion and human rights abuses than the US - the only country to actually drop atomic bombs on anybody? We're blinded by our objective surroundings and the environment we're raised in. By what we're taught is normal, right, wrong, free, etc. 

The only way out is to transform ourselves to transform the world. The most important lesson to draw from this book is the absolute necessity of criticism/self-criticism in conjunction with practical development. Because revolution is far from dead. But if it goes, humanity goes with it.