Rating: 4/5

I recently finished Full tilt and found it a nice book .As I considered myself a moderate nature trekker by doing some trekking routes inside the country and abroad and submitting our highest peak " damavand" and few other mountains. I am from  Iran or persia .

I really admire Mrs Murphy and I saw her very stubborn, powerful minded  by doing such a big cycling adventure several decades ago,  in a time which I am sure very few people dire to do in the countries in her route. She is of course fearless in writing her book and expressing opinion. 

 The book itself was nice  and influential but i was unable to make a connection between my mind and the writer's characteristics. This is normal and I mentioned it as a cross cultural thing. Raised As an oriental man  I saw some of her way of thinking very ungrateful towards people and nations in her route . She was accepted as a guest in almost all the journey without paying for hotel or even maintainice of her bike.but mentioning and remembering unfavourables from the same persons who helped her was nauseous. For example, a caravan   who helped her in babusar pass considered low IQ men because of lacking a true way of thinking to cross the horses over a glacier or when orangzip in Pakistan,  her  royal and rich host invited her to a photography exhibition, she couldn't let her not writing her opinion about the ugliness and cheap quality of that free offer!

But about  my  country,  iran and our nation the  book  and Mrs Murphy were totally biased i think.  Relating most of the bads and disgustings to Persians,  especially Persians before the revolution was invidious while she was not engaged with the people fully same as Afghanistan and didn't sleep in Iranian homes except a few nights and spent most of the time in gendarmeries. Disappearing a little amount of money was not robbery in Harat for sure but missing out a pocket of cigarette was for sure a robbery in persia! Breaking her ribs was normal in an afghan bus and it may be occurred in irland but trying to rob her bike by 3 poor peasants in persia was considered a true violence.

I never think that persian are low dignity, moronic, all begger and low quality people.  They try to connect themselves with their history,  literature and special mysticism of their own which is largely as same as Afghanistan's. they try to use poem and proverb in their speaking and thinking of them as  fool to make  a conversation without knowing a language is not true. I don't think there is very much differences between Persians, Afghans and keshmiri people which are depicted largely different in this book. I am sure there is so many deficiencies in our society and social behaviour and it is largely due to dilapidated educational system installed specially after revolution but it is not true that we are low quality, none hospitable and begger and so on.

Furthermore,  the writer's path in iran was not included all the country.  We have a very big and profound culture and persia is very incongruous. 

Finally I think some bad incidents which occurred for Mrs Murphy  in iran , at the top of them in ardabil and around, left a very  deep and painful mental impact  on her that is reflected in the pages. Mrs Murphy in the book was magnificent but largely " Afghanitic" and deeply  " Anti- Persian ".i wish her intellectual mind has changed over the years and thinks and researchs about persia again.

I really wished to write these lines for herself but I didn't find trustable means of contact directed to her . Hope she see my comment someday