Rating: 4/5

Setting and Suspense

It should be no surprise that the author who had conjured up Manderley should be marvelous in her use of physical settings. "Don't Look Now," the title story, is the perfect embodiment of the sinister side of Venice, as those who recall the Nicholas Roeg movie will recall. And remarkably precise, down to street names and minor alleys; contrast Ian McEwan who, when he surely imitated it in The Comfort of Strangers, did not specify his Venicelike city. "The Way of the Cross" is even more closely tied to the topography of Jerusalem. "Not After Midnight" is inextricably set at a small holiday hotel on the coast of Crete, the only setting unfamiliar to me. And the atmosphere of "A Borderline Case" and "The Breakthrough," the other two stories, is enriched immensely by their settings at a lonely lake in Ireland and the windswept marshes of East Anglia respectively.

It should be no surprise either that the author of 
  Rebecca
 was a dab hand at suspense. And in two of the stories, she adds a paranormal element which twists the screw an extra couple of turns. I have to say that Roeg did more in his movie than du Maurier in her rather briefer story, but she was the one who first saw the terrifying possibility of taking an English couple, already disoriented from a recent bereavement, adding two elderly Scottish sisters with second sight, and bringing them to nightfall by a deserted canal. "The Breakthough" teeters on the edge of science fiction, Frankenstein by way of John Wyndham. It is suspenseful too, but its horror lies more in the disturbing moral questions it raises than in anything physical.

Most of these stories date from the later sixties. If there is anything old-fashioned about du Maurier's writing, it would be in her delivery systems; her plot mechanics seem to date back to an earlier period of popular fiction. The group of eight cruise passengers from an English village who take a side excursion to Jerusalem in "The Way of the Cross" might almost be characters from an Agatha Christie mystery; it starts as broad social comedy, and you are just waiting for Hercule Poirot to show up. Yet du Maurier manages to give each of them some significant epiphany that goes deeper than anything Christie attempted. And her treatment of sexual matters, which Christie would have kept under wraps if she had acknowledged them at all, is that much more explicit, though never gross.

Sex plays a part too in "A Borderline Case." After her father dies, nineteen-year-old Jinnie decides to look up a long-estranged colleague of his in Ireland, with no knowledge of what she will find. Jinnie clearly is straight out of the mold of plucky girl heroines of mid-century romance (the same trope that Kate Atkinson tapped into in 
  Life After Life
). You have to cut her quite a lot of slack as she gets in over her head in a potentially dangerous situation. But then suddenly you realize that she is a child of the sexual revolution and not girls' adventure stories of the forties at all. Where du Maurier goes with this is somewhere that Agatha Christie (and probably not Kate Atkinson either) would never, ever have touched.