Rating: 3/5

This book contains very practical, useful information for anyone seriously attempting to breastfeed. It is written as a reference book, for the mother to look up information as questions or problems arise. It is not meant to be read cover to cover, but I did anyway even though much of the text is redundant. I checked this book out of the library and read it to see if it was worth purchasing. My conclusion is that it is worth purchasing as a reference source. The book contains a lot of advice about building up your supply, pumping, supplementing with formula, and feeding multiples. 

However, it saddens me to say that the author's bias and agenda showed through. I really wish people could discuss topics such as this without politicizing or preaching about the subject matter. I wish the author stuck strictly to breastfeeding, but she also used this book as an opportunity to express her personal opinions on other topics, such as bed sharing. While I agree that breastfeeding is the preferable choice when it comes to the health and well-being of the infant, I do not agree that formula is a poor substitute. Formula has saved many lives, and it's value should not be discounted. Also, I do not agree with the implication throughout this and other books that breast feeding is the only way to truly and completely bond with your infant. Any and all interaction with your infant can be a bonding experience for both of you, regardless of whether he suckles at your breast or from a bottle. There are many women, more than most breastfeeding advocates care to admit, that are not able to produce enough milk to feed their infant. I do appreciate that this book gives practical guidelines to supplementing breastmilk with formula, but the author doesn't seem to accept the fact that for many this is not a short term situation. The author references vague statistics about breastfed infants being healthier than formula fed babies, having less developmental issues, etc. However, it is worth noting that many of these studies are not conclusive. They were survey style studies. The results are simply not as conclusive as those of studies of controlled groups. There were many variables in addition to to method of feeding that are not taken into account. It is irresponsible, in my opinion, to claim that formula fed babies are sick more often or are slower developmentally. There is no concrete evidence that that is the case. 

If you are able to put aside the agenda and bias of the author, this book can be a very useful tool to new mothers or mothers who had previously attempted and failed to successfully breastfeed their infant.