Rating: 4/5

Debt of Honor is a lengthy 990 page book written by Tom Clancy and published by Berkley Books. Its title refers to the debt of honour Mr. Yamata owed his family after they died escaping US capture in World War 2. I thoroughly enjoyed this book and give it a rating of 3.7/4.0 stars. 
This novel would appeal to an audience of above average to high reading and literacy abilities, and to people who don’t mind pushing through almost 1000 pages. If you match the mentioned criteria, and you enjoy action/military novels, then I recommend this book for you!
Tom Clancy put his fantastic storytelling experience to work, and made this fantastic novel to add to his list of top-selling ones. He is the author of many other best-selling books such as The Hunt for Red October and The Sum of All Fears. The former was even praised by then-president Ronald Reagan, who called the book “the best yarn”. The books Clancy has written were praised by many for their technical accuracy, leading to Clancy meeting high-ranking US military officers. His books were also made into movies, and have had an entire video game series based on them.
Debt of Honor is a fantastic book. It is very detailed when it comes to the workings of government, military and machine operations. There is a lot of dialogue in this book, and a good bit of it is humorous. I really enjoy how descriptive Clancy is when talking about absolutely everything. While reading, I always had a clear idea of everything that was going on. I absolutely loved how the book was structured, an incredibly slow buildup of tension up towards the climax. I adored how the different stories eventually melded into one large one that made sense, and the separate stories kept my curiosity, as I was constantly wondering how they would fit together.
However, as much as I enjoyed Clancy’s descriptiveness and story length, I feel that there were a couple of long parts that seemed to stretch the story, without adding much to it. I feel that is the reason some people may dislike this book; at times it seems to drag, in a way. It is the only reason the book is not 4/4.
Overall, Debt of Honor is a great read. Clancy used all of his storytelling experience to create another very descriptive and accurate book. The only downside is that the novel can drag on at times. If you persevere past the stretched points, you will enjoy the novel!