Rating: 2/5

Wow this is one of those cases where I wish the hero weren't celibate, and unfortunately it seems he has been celibate for years!
Never have I witnessed such a bad person as this heroine here.
She meets the hero because he's dating his younger sister (16) and as soon as he meets her he stops dating her sister and dates her.
They have a love affair and he asks her to move with him, but she sees him in a compromising situation with her sister and the sister confirms he seduced her and they had sex.
The lil slut was also dating his younger brother while the hero and the heroine dated.
The heroine is appalled, especially when, after some weeks, her sister is pregnant.
She dumps the hero that doesn't make much fuss, and this was his second big mistake (the first was to date the heroine's slutty sister, even if he didn't do anything with her apparently)
The heroine pretends to be her sister so she can have her son, and the hero forces her to marry him as soon as he finds out she had his son.
Much misunderstanding here, because of course, as you all may guess without me having to spoil it, the child is his brother's.
But nobody knows it, beside SS.
The heroine keeps rejecting him, even if he tries in every way to understand her rejection and to ask her to take him back.
He thinks she's hurt because she had to have their child without him (that was her choice though)
The poor man can see his son only once a year, a month during summer.
She hates the sight of him.
SS made her promise she will never have anything to do with him.
When the child is severely ill, the hero is back, and he decides he will have a real marriage with the heroine and be a father to their son.
-Ok, I understand that the heroine believed the child to be the hero's since the boy looked like him, but why she complied with her ss histerical requests I just don't know.
-She could have told him what she had seen and what ss told her, it would have been only a matter of one single conversation.
-She tried to protect ss because the idiot teenager tried to kill herself (I wish she succeeded) and was scared she could try again, but she kept her son as if he was hers, so I don't know what else she could have done.
-Even in the end, when ss confesses that she lied, the heroine isn't so mad and angry as she should.
-It was so sad to see a honorable man as the hero continuously pushed away by that nasty heroine with every awful word she could find, and it was so angsty when he told her that he never had anyone who loved him and cared for him, and that all he wanted was to have a family of his own. Even if the heroine believed him guilty to seduce her ss she should have told him he had a child.
Her ss' misery was completely her own fault, not the hero's and not the heroine's.
-The hero eventually forgives her, even after she tells him how she deceived him, and for once I wish he pushed her away or maybe admitted being unfaithful during all those years they have been married and she rejected him repeatedly. She would have deserved it. But nope, he was too honest and too in love with that bigot frigid woman that he couldn't have ow. Sharon Kendrick, Robyn Donalds and Lynne Graham would surely have made him stray a lot, and this time it wouldn't have bothered me.
His only fault was to date for a little time the heroine's stupid sister, that of course told him she was much older than her 16.
For once, I stand on the hero's side.
Evil ss was never punished and disappeared in thin air. Meh.
Two stars because I'm feeling generous.