Rating: 3/5

The Basics: This is a true recipe book---no gimmicks or flashy photos since that would take away valuable room from the 400+ recipes included. In addition, cooking tips and tricks and recommendations are liberal throughout and the introduction spells out the goal: to make cooking accessible to families and bring them back around the table with minimal fuss. Popular for his cooking show on PBS during the early 1980s, Smith provides a broad variety of recipe ideas, many of which were featured on his show.

The early sections are divided as one would expect from a cookbook: an introduction, a few recipes in expected sections like Poultry, Appetizers, Salads, etc. But there is a tremendous amount of other sections, from eggs dishes to southern style barbecue. There is even a section for International Cuisine, in which recipes from China, France, Greece, and Africa are featured. The index is organized by ingredient and/or type so that should one wish to make something with onions (for example), a quick look-up will provide recipe pages and suggestions for this ingredient. There are also other reference pages, including a glossary of herbs and their uses, cooking terminology, and how to treat and store garlic.

The Photos: Whether a consequence of the time it was published (1984) or the fact that it was keeping to its "frugal"ness, there are no photos at all in this book. There are occasional illustrations, pen and ink, most of which appear to be old fashioned woodcuts of thematic images rather than helpful to the recipe at hand.

The Audition: I decided to toss myself a little bit of a gauntlet with this one and chose a recipe for an ingredient that I don't particularly care for: sweet potatoes. I was curious to see if preparing them in some manner myself rather than sampling them as they were served to me (the only way I've ever tried them and I haven't liked them yet) might alter my feelings any. Plus, the recipe was provided in the Africa section and it used cardamom as an ingredient, which I had just that week purchased from the store. It seemed like it was meant to be.

The recipe itself was pretty simple: simmer cubed sweet potatoes in a bath of coconut milk mixed with ground cardamom and brown sugar until tender. Cutting the sweet potatoes into cubes proved to be challenging though; those suckers are tough! I served them with some Mesquite grilled steak and steamed broccoli and I actually kind of liked them! Well...didn't hate them might be more apt, but still--I consider this a vast improvement. I would not be opposed to making this recipe again once in a while, and my roommate who really likes sweet potatoes enjoyed having the leftovers (with some extra brown sugar) for breakfast the next day.

Overall: This book was clearly written and intended to be a go-to kitchen book, an every day kind of resource. There are many recipes that rely on other basic core recipes also included in the book (many of the soups, for example, build upon a basic chicken stock recipe so that stock is included as an ingredient of the soup). If I were inclined to use this as an everyday or multiple times a week book, this wouldn't be so bad, but as a "one-off feel like doing a new recipe" exploration, I found it a little frustrating to find something substantial (i.e. not a sauce or something) that didn't require some other recipe as part of the ingredient list. The book is also quite dated, so I found myself amused when being advised to check an Oriental or fancy foods market for coconut milk. I wonder if I should let Safeway know that they are a fancy foods market now. These and the lack of photos make the book unappealing to me as an occasional cook. 

However, I can remember watching The Frugal Gourmet with my dad when I was a kid. It was one of his favorite shows and the fact that I found this on the shelf of a used bookstore that he used to take us to in the town he used to live in...well, it's too much of a nostalgia item to let go of, even if all I keep it for is the one sweet potato recipe I don't hate.