Rating: 5/5

This edition of Mansfield Park comes with a great introduction and notes, containing interesting information about the publication of this novel and historical context.

I have been a huge Jane Austen fan ever since I first saw P&amp;P and shortly thereafter read the novel, leading to me falling in love with the dignified wit and sass this author has had. It can't have been easy in her time, which makes me appreciate her dry humour and social criticism even more.

A fair warning to you all: I cannot review this book properly without giving away its content, so there will be unhidden spoilers!

We start off this book with the wedding of three sisters. One (Lady Bertram) marries rich Sir Thomas, one (Mrs. Norris) marries a clergyman, and one (Mrs. Price) marries a Royal Marine. 
The latter marriage unfortunately leads to poverty due to an injury / honourable discharge with a meagre pension of the husband. Into this family Fanny is born as the eldest of 9 children. 
One day her mother decides to give 10-year-old Fanny Price to her aunt to live and be tutored at Mansfield Park (Lady Bertram's estate) until she gets married. Unfortunately, the aunt isn't exactly very interested in any children (not even her own) and the rest of the family don't treat Fanny too well either (especially Mrs. Norris, her other aunt, on whom Sir Thomas relies heavily because of his wife's apathy). Except for when Fanny is denied proper heating, leading to sickness, it's the perfect example of polite mobbing. This was actually more maddening than if they had hit her constantly.
The only person Fanny can lean on is her cousin Edmund (second son of the Bertrams). The others are ... well, Tom is either drunk or gambling and the girls are spoilt snobs that I just wanted to hit continuously. It doesn't help that the oldest girl, Maria, gets showered with compliments and affection from Mrs. Norris while Fanny is always reminded of how poor she is and that she should just be grateful to be allowed to live at Mansfield Park although she is a burden.
Anyway, 6 years later, Sir Thomas leaves to go deal with some "trouble" at his plantation in Antigua and it is this plantation that is Jane Austen's strongest political criticism I have ever seen. Many say it was "just" a way to get Sir Thomas away for a while so the other events could unfold, but Jane Austen could have come up with something less tricky than Antigua. No, this witty author knew exactly what she was doing. Because yes, back then Antigua was a British colony and slavery was still very common. Which means that a big part of the Bertram fortune (if not all) comes from slavery of all things. 
We see how bad it is when Sir Thomas takes his oldest son along to make him "grow up" but the experience shatters poor Tom and makes his drinking problem only much worse.
While Sir Thomas and Tom are away, match-making for the oldest Bertram daughter (the aforementioned brat Maria) is taking place. Also, the Crawfords (brother and sister) arrive and what can only be described as a romantic mess ensues. The Crawfords are often described as "worldly". Well, I have some other choice words for them. 
Tom comes back from Antigua earlier than his father and together with his friend Yates and the Crawfords, a play is rehearesed that is, let's say, of dubious moral character for the time. However, everyone but Fanny participates. In fact, Fanny seems to be the only one not blinded by pretentiousness. When Sir Thomas comes back to find the whole house engaging in flirtation under the pretense of rehearsing for the play, he is very upset but at least finally sees that Fanny is a good young woman and not just some burden.
A lot of other stuff happens, like Maria getting married to a man she doesn't love in order to be well off as is expected of her and Henry Crawford goes after Fanny (first because he wants to play a game, then because her rejection intrigues him). Fanny however refuses him, much to Sir Thomas' anger who thinks she is ungrateful (you know, because the poor girl should be so flattered to get a proposal from someone as well off as Henry Crawford). In order to teach Fanny some humility, he therefore sends her home to her parents and what a desolate place that is! 
The contrast between peaceful Mansfield Park and the dirty, desolate Portsmouth could not be extremer and illustrates another powerful political criticism of the author: while at Mansfield Park, everyone can pretend life is good, but in reality there are other places that are off much worse, and not everything about the Regency era smells like roses.
We also get the theme of adultery through Henry Crawford and Maria. Maria's husband files for divorce after the affair is made public and she is not only shunned in society but the family sends her off to "live in another country" (to keep the scandal as far away from them as possible) while Henry Crawford (who could have saved the situation by marrying Maria but refused) gets away unscathed. 
In this climate Fanny returns to Mansfield Park where Tom has fallen ill (all the drinking had to have some negative effect at some point), the younger daughter Julia has eloped with Tom's friend Yates because she feared her father's anger (she knew about the affair but kept quiet), and Mary Crawford actually says to Edmund that Tom dying would be a great opportunity for him (she and Edmund were romantically involved but she always wanted him to be more ambitious; she also defends her brother's affair, only lamenting that it was discovered and she actually blames Fanny for the whole thing)!
Thus, everyone finally realizes that even a person that comes from money can be rotten. Edmund is shattered but upon reflection sees how important Fanny is to him and proposes to her. Tom gets better, is a changed man, and Yates turns out to be a good husband. Fanny finally takes her place as the moral compass of the Bertram family.

So this novel is one big exploration of morals. 
We have Sir Thomas who wants his house in order, commands respect and values morals but makes money off slavery and sends his own daughter away to distance himself from scandal.
We have Tom who can't deal with the ugliness of real life. 
We have Maria who just wants to be loved and therefore does the completely wrong thing. 
We have Edmund who knows better but is blinded. 
We have Mrs. Norris who goes on and on about class and money, not realizing that "the burden" actually is the only good person at Mansfield Park. 
We have the Crawfords with their materialism and their arrogant view that, because of their social status, they are allowed whatever they want. 
We have Yates, who stayed by Tom's side and later takes great care of Julia. 
And, finally, we have Fanny herself who starts out completely blue-eyed, then gets more and more disillusioned, but always keeps her heart in the right place.

This book never made it into my top 3 of Jane Austen's body of work but maybe it should. I mean it's the only one in which Jane Austen went this far with her criticism - not only of society for its treatment of women, but also of politics! 

I didn't like Fanny too much as a character because she was far too passive for my taste and the whole pining for Edmund was annoying but because of the typically beautiful writing style, wit and dry humour in certain situations I didn't mind.
Also, what's up with Edmund?! I mean, I'm buying into his infatuation with Mary Crawford but after finally realizing what a bad woman she is, he swears to never get over her only to propose to Fanny 5 minutes later?! Marriage was different back then, sure, but we're supposed to believe that it's LOVE between Fanny and Edmund and I just don't see it.

So yeah, lots of thoughts after re-reading this book and I can wholeheartedly recommend it to anyone who wants an intelligent classic with a brilliant writing style and lots of important themes.