I read this book in the bus on the way to the gym, and on the way back. Reading it was like a mental warm up, before we even get to the physical – “get your blood flowing.” Overall, this book reoriented my mindset about training, answering questions which I have wondered but never bothered to research, or giving new insights after which you can never look at an exercise the same again.
 
This review will list some of the memorable tips that helped me.
(1)	You should be done with your workouts within an hour and a half, 90 minutes. If you are unable to do this, that means you have been resting for too long. I rest for too long, like 2 minutes, what I now have to do is lower the weight and shorten the rest time to 45 seconds between sets. Previously, I convinced myself that it was okay to rest for long with my false aspiration of powerlifting. The most important now is the pump, to get the blood flowing. 
(2)	No distractions in the gym. Leave everything behind – have a full session of pure Concentration, like you’re trying to be in the realm of Platonic forms. Then, you must have the purity of form. If the form and technique is right, the weight and strength will follow. 
(3)	Mind should control the muscles. Arnold mentioned that by thinking about it, you should be able to send blood to certain muscles. This is a stage I still have to reach. Another tip was for breathing, you should exhale when you are facing resistance. For example, exhale when you’re pushing the bar off your chest during Bench Press.
(4)	Even though I look lean under a shirt or a hoodie, I realized I’m fat. “If it jiggles, it’s fat.” The ideal is that veins should show, so that there is a minimal separation between muscle and skin. I’m at a point where I can’t even assess my physique due to the overbearing amount of fat covering it. I have a lot of work to do. I must train calves, forearms, and neck. Arnold gave me the reassurance that they’re supposed to be tough muscles to grow. If you’re not willing to put in the work, just give up already lol. 
(5)	The best time to train is early morning, because that’s when you have full energy, plus you don’t have to stress about it for the rest of the day. Otherwise, you can procrastinate and could be full of excuses if you train near the evening.
(6)	The importance of stretching. I previously thought bodybuilders were opposed to that, and Arnold addressed the problem of muscles becoming so stiff they’re not functional anymore. Swimming, he recommended, is good as a post-workout.
(7)	Eat cashews between meals to control hunger. You have to be hungry for training, and control your hunger for food.
(8)	“Almost anything difficult, any challenge, takes time, patience and hard work.” Kill the idea of a short-cut, and an easy way out. Sooner, the better.
(9)	He stresses greatly the importance of a training partner – to push you when you’re feeling down. Who makes a good candidate for me?