Rating: 3/5

Lady Althea Beauchamp has always been the dutiful daughter her parents wanted and now, in her first Season, she finds her wishes at odds with her parents'. Her parents, of course, wish her to find a husband who with the perfect bloodlines, society connections and political connections. Althea wants nothing more than to return to the country and manage an estate. Her distaste for young gentlemen of the ton has earned her the nickname "Ice Princess." Althea is lonely and unhappy until she locks eyes with the cynical misogynist Gareth de Vere, Marquess of Harwood. Gareth dislikes Society functions and well-bred women. He is bullied by his scheming mother to attend her every wish and hates it. Gareth and Althea discover a shared passion for cards and in each other, a clever mind and excellent card partners. They discover they have more in common than just cards and become friends. Soon Althea is playing the card game of her life in order to accomplish her dreams and become the person she's always wanted to be. What she didn't count on was a certain handsome Bachelor Marquess intruding into her private world and her lack of power to resist him. Althea and Gareth are intelligent and have interesting back stories which allow them to share a common bond, which I really liked. As much as I liked the characters though, I found this story rather long and slow. There are detailed descriptions of card playing and estate management that really weren't necessary to move the plot along. I really liked Althea and hoped for her happiness almost as much as she wished for it. I wasn't crazy about the Marquess. He acts like a love-sick schoolboy turned crazy stalker! I also disliked that the Marquess frequents the boudoir of a certain opera dancer, even after meeting Althea. I found myself hoping that Althea would make a different choice than she did. Overall, this is a slightly above average Regency but I wouldn't give it more than 3 out of 5 stars or place it on my keeper shelf. It's a good one to get from your local library.