Rating: 2/5

I have so many thoughts on this, have been boring my friends with rants about it for days. Am going to use this review as a way to take note of my thoughts for my own interest. I feel overall a lot of missed potential with this anthology. Is it fair for me to feel this about an anthology from the 80s? Maybe. 

Key thoughts: 
1. Near exclusive focus on oppression and isolation rather than culture: There is a LOT to be said about interesting characteristics of Jewish dykeness, such as how Jewish womanhood interacts with lesbian spiritually and culturally. There is a wealth of cultural material that is interesting relating to the intersection of Judaism and dykness compounded by the variety of ways there are to be either. Instead of exploring much of this, the writers, time and time again, talk nearly exclusively about the isolation they feel expereincing homophobia in Jewish spaces and antisemitism in lesbian spaces. More on the antisemitism in a bit, but overall I found myself tired of this narrative. They mentioned Jewish dyke spaces yet so rarely acually described what such spaces looked like—why in the world would you not actually explore it? I found the lack of exploration of Jewish lesbian cultural production a huge missed opportunity. I don’t mind hearing about the intersected oppression and find that useful to explore but it cannot be the entirety of it.

2. The antisemitism in question: the types of antisemitism complained about in the lesbian feminist spaces discussed in this book would usually fall into three categories: first, non violent but still legit and concerning furthering of stereotypes and conspiracy theories. Fair to be concerned about being branded money hungry and controlling jews. Second: omission of Jewish oppression. While all oppressions must be dealt with in order to resolve any, I don’t find it necessary to discuss every form of oppression when talking about every other, and I don’t think it is antisemitic to not mention Jews every single time. By their logic, I would find it more harmful that indigenous Americans’ oppression was not mentioned more than around twice given that most of this writing is set in American colonized land. Sure, it’s good to acknowledge antisemitism in ones activism but occasional omissions from workshops at feminist conferences does not seem inherently antisemitic to me. Third, of course, so many of the writers would talk of antizionism as antisemitism. They found the presence of antizionist rhetoric in lesbian feminist spaces to be antisemitic, and would bitch about not fitting in because of it. I mostly only find the first type of antisemitism described in these lesbian feminist spaces to be valid complaints against the spaces.

3. The Zionism: if one were to accept the discussion mentioned above on “omission” as a form of antisemitism, than the complete omission of antizionist Jewish dyke perspectives in this anthology is even more irritating. You cannot include even one Jewish lesbian that identifies as an antizionist? Every single writer to discussed Palestine was a two state solutioner. Call me crazy for doubting that every Jewish dyke in the 80s felt this way. I’m not even mad that Zionist perspectives were included as this is an anthology of Jewish lesbian art and thought and some Jewish lesbians are and were zionists (as much of a contradiction I feel that to be) but it’s not monolithic and weird to not expand on that despite the 60 pages on Israel?!!!

Positives of the book: discussions of Jewish motherhood in relation to lesbianism, stories of mothers coming out after already having children because of it. Jewish lesbian siblings to straight siblings. A singular short story. An Adrienne Rich essay. A series of photographs of the Jewish dykes in question. Brief (too brief) discussions on yiddishkayt. Getting to read stories of lesbian holocaust survivors and descendants of survivors more immediate than me, finding connection there.