Rating: 5/5

“In the beginning, whether dressed as conservatively as possible or wearing drag, any gay person was queer in a collectively queer movement. But, through the years, the radical sexual politics of that early movement became more
and more tempered, and the kinds of gay people considered important or central to the movement began to shift. Nowadays, all gay people are not seen as the same, and we are not all considered equal threats to the body politic of the nation. Some gay people are perceived to be
"normal homosexuals," while some of us continue to represent a dangerous otherness, an ongoing threat of queer menace and deviance. In the last twenty-five years of struggle, we have moved from gay liberation as a freedom struggle- a struggle for sexual, economic, and social justice- to a movement for gay legal rights. This struggle now parodies and duplicates a heterosexual middle-class/upper-class agenda based on re-creating the rights of heterosexuals for gay people, with all the implicit and explicit pieces of class and race prejudice that go with it. The freedom struggle of our movement, once committed
to sexual liberation, has become, instead, a movement for gay nuclear family rights and for serial monogamy. It represents the entire movement as a sort of tame civil rights challenge: one of judicial battles in the courts and referenda in the towns, cities, and states. The gains have
been significant. But, looking at the bigger picture, we have gone from a movement that was full of sensibility and humor, powerful difference and sexual contrast, a world of camp and butch and femme, of leather communities, drag queens and kings, flamboyant girls and effeminate gay boys, a movement full of our sexual cultures and creative,
erotic dreams, to a movement that chooses only those representatives who may sit politely in the president's office, gender-appropriate gay representatives who work for gay inclusion and try very hard to show everyone else that ‘we are just like them.’”