Rating: 1/5

This review is of “Golden Fires”, book #2 in the “California” series by Elizabeth Fritch.

The book begins in the gold-mining town of Columbia, California, in 1857. It is here that Marshall Clint Rawlings, the hero of the book, has come to from Chicago try to instill law and order. Among the first people he meets is Samantha Coulter, the heroine of the book. Sam owns the town laundry as well as several other businesses, one of which runs the city’s water supply, which will become important later in the book. The first encounter between Sam and Clint is not a particularly nice one, nor many of the others to follow. 

As the book goes on, we meet other characters; Jack Driscoll, Sam’s fiancee’, who works for Jonas Kimball, Sam’s business arch-rival (there’s a story there); Lucas Coulter, Sam’s younger brother, who has secrets he’s keeping from everyone; Jenny Tidwell, daughter of the town “preacher”.

Sam breaks up with Jack, Clint and Jenny become lovers, Jonas shows his evil side (and a bigoted, racist one, a trait he sadly shares with many other characters, including Sam. During the course of the book, there are many racial slurs directed at African-Americans, Chinese, Indians and Mexicans, i.e., the non-white citizens of California).

By the end of the book, Sam and Clint are lovers, planning to marry; Jack is in jail for sabotaging a water project that Sam invested in (in the process of doing so, he kills 14 people and seriously injures Lucas, who has to have his right leg amputated); Jonas is trying to destroy both Jack-who has dirt on Jonas that he doesn’t want to see the light of day-and Sam-and Jenny tries to get revenge on Sam for what she sees as Sam taking Clint away from her. That revenge, however, affects everyone in the town of Columbia. I won’t reveal what happens, but it’s major.

Upside: Well, I finished it. I try to finish every book I buy, especially if I paid money for it. The free ones: maybe not so much.

Downside: Where to begin? There is ZERO character development in the book; all of the characters are pretty one-dimensional.There is NO chemistry whatsoever between Sam and Clint. Storylines, such as one involving Lucas, are hinted at and never followed up on. Ms. Fritch never really made me care about any of the characters, so when bad things happened to them, I felt nothing but apathy, which is not a good thing. (I feel this way about all of Ms. Fritch’s work). Finally, there are the racial slurs. While this happens in a lot of historical books that I read, it usually comes from the supporting characters. When it comes from a lead character-Sam in “Golden Fires”-that immediately turns me away from the book.

Sex: A few love scenes-all of which involve Sam-first with Jack, and later with Clint. The scenes are so banal as not to be love scenes at all.

Violence: In addition to the sabotage Jack does which kills 14 and maims Lucas for life (which is not graphic), there are more graphically violent scenes. In one, Jonas kills a notorious bandit by beheading him. Then, there is the violence at the end of the book, which is very graphic.

Bottom Line: I believe I’ve said before that Ms. Fritch’s books are a great cure for insomnia. “Golden Fires” certainly is!