Rating: 4/5

Real Rating: 3.5* of five

The sparkle of Dame Agatha's writing and the verve of her plotting in her absolute peak years, the 1930s, is a sheer joy to read. Poirot and Hastings, on their way to Cornwall's fleshpots, meet Miss Nick Buckley. She is a lovely local landowner, a bit short of the ready (to borrow Sir Plum's locution for Bertie Wooster) but possessed of a glorious ramshackle seaside house. She inveigles Poirot and Hastings into her world to help her deal with mysterious attempts on her life. Since she has no money, no prospects of getting any, and a mortgaged house, who's trying to kill her and why?

The plot hinges on a shared family name, a unique coincidence that could not be foreseen, and a cold and calculating soul looking out for Number One. Nothing is quite as simple as the surface suggests; the threads of the subplots do gum up the works a bit; but in the end, there is a happy resolution and ma'at is maintained. No one profits from their crimes. No one suffers injustice. There is a single example of the Old Boy's Network in action, and that wasn't quite so nice. But it's the chain of coincidence that bugs me the most. It's clearly intentional, and I suppose you could argue that the coincidences are seized upon by the ruthless killer as a further example of astute quick thinking in service of one's own survival. Maybe a bit like The Usual Suspects with Our Kind of People.

Still. Not quite the top drawer, Dame Agatha.

Agatha Christie's Poirot: Peril at End House

Rating: 3* of five

Pretty faithful to the novel; it was the first full-novel adaptation, so permaybehaps they didn't feel they had earned the right to divagate too far from home base. A couple characters are tidied away in service of television pacing. It is an improvement, and in one case...Miss Buckley's childhood pal Freddie Rice's character...takes her from an object of pity to a tacky broad with the fate of one. There are no huge holes left by the pruning *except* the one that, having read the library's Kindle book just before rewatching the show, I noticed for the first time. It's really not huge, but it absolutely drove me as mad as the armhole of my sweater losing its serging and rubbing my armpit. No way to get fully comfy after that. Nick Buckley sits with Poirot and Hastings on their hotel's terrace; she bats away a wasp from her face, complaining of how brazen the beasts are; Poirot finds, after she's left, that her forgotten hat has a hole in the brim whereupon he finds a bullet that was shot at her.

BY WHOM?!?

Never addressed again. In the book, it's Freddie's awful husbeast who does the shooting at Miss Buckley but he's been handwaved away! Boo hiss careless writers!

Still, it took me reading then watching back-to-back to catch it, so maybe it wasn't that bad.

Yes it was. The half-star stays gone.