Rating: 5/5

Bumped up to 5⭐️ on Goodreads because I rated the stories, in order, 4.25⭐️, 4⭐️, 4.25⭐️ and 4.5⭐️ so I feel the rating should be rounded up not down. 

Overall 4.25⭐️4🌶️. I’m writing this review as I finish each book within the anthology. I don’t usually read anthologies because it involves very short stories which means, for me, that there isn’t ample time to create a detail-rich story. Normally there isn’t enough time in an anthology book for any of that to happen, except this book broke the norm for me starting with the very first book. 

Dark Hunger by Christine Feehan: 4.25⭐️3.5🌶️. This was the first book. 108 pages. Loved it! It broke all of my assumptions about anthology stories. The characters were developed and the world building was on point for immersing my senses. The different “creatures” in this story were complex and made me want to learn more. This story did exactly what it was supposed to do in that I absolutely want to read more Dark series books. There were detailed sex scenes that were dirty as well as traditionally romantic. It was a refreshing change. 

Awaiting Moonrise by Maggie Shayne: 4⭐️2.5🌶️. 2nd book; 85 pages. Quick read but still had enough action and plot that the story was interesting and kept me reading. The twisty twist was a not surprising but even so it was a good story. The sex was barely there but was present. 

The Night Owl by Emma Holly: 3rd book; 79 pages. 4.25⭐️4🌶️. Really good short story. I really liked the plucky FMC as she was relatable, funny and direct. The storyline about the creature in this story was really good and I wished it was a longer story so I could see it evolve some. The sex scenes were petty detailed and hot. Enjoyed!

Seduction’s Gift by Angela Knight: 4th book; 98 pages. 4.5⭐️4.5🌶️. All of the short stories were really good but this last one was the best! A King Arthur &amp; the Knights of the Roundtable retelling with a vampire/magi spin. I liked the character development, world building, magic Mageverse and blood-sucking connection. It was a very well done short story and is part of her Mageverse standalone series which I will be checking out.