Rating: 5/5

Donna Jo is so mind-blowingly awesome sometimes. The Magic Circle, Zel, and Sirena are some of my favorite books ever, and I really like some of her other books. I love the way she tells stories, and the stories she tells. I read the Magic Circle as a kid,and I remember being super intrigued by it and thinking it was a little scary; I just finished re-reading it as an adult and I loved it even more! I was able to grasp some of the deeper concepts that went over my head as a kid, as it is with most childhood re-reading. The characters/story also had enough depth to be captivating for adults.What a cool and creative way to re-tell Hansel and Gretel. One part that really stuck out to me was how earlier in the book she mentioned that she saw Bala as a starling in her next life, then as the book goes on she says she “ hears a flutter and looks towards it” and sees Bala standing there; like hinting at Bala making the sound of wings rustling, like a bird. I love the way that she subtly alluded to Bala having more starling like characteristics as the story went on, like the spirit of her future self was starting to show through. What an entitled b***h Bala was. The whole book had an eerie tone that I found spooky ( in a good way) even as an adult. The book cover is super cool and interesting. She was so lonely :( and she wanted them to love her so much. I was glad that Gretel put the amethyst in her hand, definitely a touching moment, it reminded me of in the Winter of Our Discontent by John Steinbeck when his daughter puts the family talisman in his pocket because she knows he’s intends to kill him self. I had a lot of sympathy for her throughout the story but I thought she was kindof dumb for having worked as a sorceress successfully for nine years, in addition to studying that whole time, and then had no clue that she could get caught in the way that she did. Like as soon as she saw the ring it was like “whoa, something shiny!” *sorceress knowledge flies out the window*.