Rating: 2/5

Tongues of the Moon is a rather short novel, and while the concepts were likely interesting for 1964, the story is bogged down by a very passive narrative voice, boring characters, and too much explanation of (now out-dated and rather laughable) tech. 

In truth, there isn't a lot to say about this novel that wouldn't be a spoiler. We don't get to know much about any of the characters and as such it's hard to care about the death of the world on such a massive scale. Broward hardly expresses any emotion about the loss of his planet, so why are we expected to? The geo-politics is the most interesting thing about the novel really, and by that I mean Farmer's concept of how the world turned out post-1970. 

And while there is the most basic of attempts to include women in STEM, women are treated as side characters for the most part. Aside from one woman who does one thing, women are considered in the novel for their reproductive potential more than anything else and characterized as “overly emotional”. This annoyed but didn't surprise me. 

The tech in the novel is the best part because it’s so very 1960s: laser beams and nuclear devastation. The nuclear weapons in this case are called “cobalt bombs”.

The “tongues” in the title refer to “a flexible beam of straightened-out photons” which is apparently the “ultimate development of the laser” (it’s not a 1960s novel without lasers). There are other less interesting weapons using pseudo-scientific terms like “gravitomagnetic drives” and some kind of stun gun that is casually explained away as it being “new”. 

Apparently it takes 1.5 hours to get from the moon to earth using little ships but when Broward receives a technical readout, the computer prints it out on a piece of paper. I’m assuming dot matrix, which is so incredibly quaint. 

As is usual in these novels, my favourite old technology has a little cameo. Microfiche: the technology everyone in the 50-70s seemed to think would pervade into the new Millenium. I love it. 

It's a short little read that has some interesting aspects but overall quite forgettable. Except for the weirdest title ever.