Rating: 4/5

William Tecumseh Sherman, notably described by one biographer as being “like Attila the Hun, but less cuddly,” is one of the most fascinating and important characters in American history. Reviled by Tea Partiers as a war criminal and remembered by everyone who didn’t vote for George Wallace as the man who was to American slavery what Sir Arthur Harris was to the Holocaust, Sherman was in fact a complex and highly intelligent man whose memoirs are worth reading on several levels.

Sherman’s Memoirs, being the first-person testimony of one of the major players in the American Civil War, are themselves a valuable primary document. Sherman, having been a college professor as one of his myriad prewar careers, seems to have realized this, and included within it hundreds of pages of personal correspondence, most of it with other prominent generals and politicians and covering events as disparate as the California gold rush and the burning of Atlanta. One consequence of this is that, if the reader has studied American history in any depth at all, Sherman’s Memoirs – where they describe his actual campaigns – initially come off as derivative and boring. Only after some reflection does one realize that this is because nearly all histories of the war are taken more or less directly from this book, and that its lack of new information is rather a testament to its completeness.

Far more interesting, both on an historical and on a literary level, is the look that this rare honest autobiography gives at Sherman’s mental state and attitude towards the war as it progresses. Sherman apparently wrote this book by referring to his contemporary diaries, rather than his memory ten or more years after the fact and, whether he meant it to or not, this shows in the way that his attitude towards the war, the political situation and the people of the South changes as his narrative goes on. Initially an apolitical and somewhat timid man; a professional military manager whose short time in the Army had been spent administering the occupation of gold-rich California and accepting the abject surrender of various starving Indians; Sherman undergoes a number of transformative experiences over the course of the war that gradually render him morally harder, more ruthless, vengeful, and more than a little shell shocked and fed up with the insanity of war that laid waste to his peaceful family life, and with those who had brought the war to his country. When describing his early campaigns in Kentucky and Tennessee, Sherman includes documents emphasizing how much he cared about (in retrospect relatively minor) property damage caused by a small number of his Soldiers, and graciously offering to help bring the perpetrators to justice in the name of good order and discipline. By the last third of the book, Sherman is pasting in letters to local dignitaries in which he literally and very explicitly threatens to execute every single white person in Alabama, so help him, and to confiscate their land and give it to whatever Yankees can stand the climate. Less thirst for blood than utter moral exhaustion at seeing so much blood shed, and frustration at his enemies’ refusal to just quit fighting and go home, Sherman’s attitude transformation transcends his specific historical circumstances and could probably apply just as well to men like George Patton and Douglas MacArthur, which is part of what makes this book so relevant and meaningful.

Yet, Sherman’s letters to Nashville Aldermen deploring his Soldiers’ theft of a chicken or whatnot can not be entirely written off as the naïve record of a man who is not yet as hardened as he should be. For this is very much a political memoir, written in the early 1870s, for a national audience that was still very much traumatized by a war that was proportionately as lethal for Americans as he First World War was for Europeans a half-century later. The national mood, as Reconstruction drew to a close, was unquestionably one of reconciliation, which looked to bind North and South in common nationalism by minimizing both the violence and the moral righteousness that had been characteristic of the war years. 
 
While 21st Century readers may view Sherman as an ultraviolent superhero who gave force to the Emancipation Proclamation, freed America from itself, and promised “40 acres and a mule” as part of the most radical land reform ever proposed by anyone short of Norman Thomas, the William Tecumseh Sherman of 1875 still held high office. As Commanding General of the United States Army and close personal friend of then-President Ulysses S. Grant, he had a very significant interest in playing to the national mood of reconciliation and downplaying the havoc wrought on the South during the winter of 1864-5. Thus, Sherman’s description of his March to the Sea gives the impression that he did only the minimum possible damage to the most clearly identified military resources, and writes off several suspicious urban fires that occurred just after his Army arrived as mere accidents that he did his best to avoid, which were probably the work of fleeing rebel soldiers.

Of course, for all of Sherman’s political hedging and post-facto statements of intent, one comes away with the impression that, behind all of the posturing, he knew exactly what he was doing, and trusted that his readers – at least those who were dues-paying members of the Grand Army of the Republic – would understand as much by reading between the lines. To this end, Sherman deployed what is quite possibly the driest sense of humor in the history of North America, Viz: 

“Hearing of certain large Indian mounds near the way, I turned to one side to visit them, stopping a couple of days in 1843 with Colonel Lewis Tumlin, on whose plantation these mounds were. We struck up such an acquaintance that we corresponded for some years, and as I passed his plantation during the war, in 1864, I inquired for him, but he was not at home.”

Yes, Sherman – who, it must be noted, was literally in the process of burning everything too heavy to steal in Colonel Tumlin’s home state -- was purely and simply disappointed that his old friend wasn’t available for a visit. 

Sherman’s narrative is peppered with these, most notably the humorous description of one of his Soldiers wandering out of a looted house carrying as much swag as he could physically transport on his person, to include a ham impaled on his bayonet, and reminding Sherman of his orders to “forage liberally on the march.” Sherman notes that he reproached the man, but strangely never mentions returning the property to its rightful owners. In all likelihood, he knew full well that the American Soldier, given authorization to steal by his chain of command, will in the blink of an eye and with tremendous initiative and aggression make off with anything and everything not securely bolted to bedrock, and seems to have implicitly trusted that his readers – the ones to whom his honesty mattered – would understand the literary wink and nudge. 

Overall the picture of Sherman that one gains from his memoirs is just that – a man who, despite his lack of involvement in politics or prewar interest in the main questions of the conflict, was extremely intelligent and understood very clearly what was going on in a way that most of his contemporaries did not. Combined with a very readable and modern writing style that has nothing in common with the notoriously long-winded novelists of his era, that makes this a book worth reading – even for those who wouldn’t crack the bindings of Shelby Foote’s life’s work.