Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars rounded up to 3 for GR.

Well after all this time in finally getting a copy for a decent price, I have read Magic Fire by Christopher Pike.

Where do I begin?

I guess first of all the incident of someone setting a fire that blazes out of control in Pacific Palisades is one foreboding thing to read in 2025. Given Pike's enjoyment of all things unexplainable and mystical in his books, this is actually creepy. Also, I purchased the book before the fires started so don't think I am that sick of an individual.

Second would be well...what the heck did I just read?

Starts out like a normal Pike book about a high school senior named Mark Charm who has the hots for the new girl at his school, Jessa Welling. She's in the school play and while not a knockout, she just has him all jacked up on asking her for a date.

They talk in her dressing room after the last performance of the play, and it goes about as smooth as it can with a guy filled with hormones. Despite the mutual flirtations, Mark doesn't ask her out and decides to handle stress the way he always does.

He goes and sets a house being built on fire.

Mark justifies this as the man who hired the Mexican workers to build it is a total ass, but it isn't just because he is a pyromaniac. Mark's dad died in a fire ten years ago and now his mother, the only family he has left, has cancer and it is in the terminal stage.

This young man has serious issues and none of them are helped by a teenage libido and a teasing young lady pushing all the right buttons. The next day, Jessa is asking Mark to try some sort of psychotropic drug called MAZE with her. He gets sick, trips out enough to think they might have had sex and then wakes in the morning to find Jessa bailed.

The one time Mark didn't check on his mother by going to visit or call turns out to be the last shred holding together his sanity. While Mark was with Jessa, his mother died.

Bitter and filled with shame, Mark decides it may be best to just let everything around him burn...

Sounds dark and interesting but then we learn that all of the trippy stuff Mark experienced that seemed like something out of 1950's sci-fi movies about aliens is...also true?

What?

I continued reading out of sheer curiosity and confusion to come to an ending that just...left me even more puzzled.

Try to imagine you were reading Firestarter by Stephen King but found that bits and pieces of The Tommyknockers were weaved into the mix. It is the best way I can describe it so what I'm saying is Magic Fire isn't bad, but you would really have to be a die-hard Pike fan to read this one if you have not.