Rating: 4/5

I've read maybe a handful of Janet Dailey's Americana HPs from the 70s and 80s. Often her heroes give me a seriously disturbing vibe (Fiesta San Antonio being the worst). This one, which is set in Connecticut, is another where the H makes me kind of worried. He has reasons for his ice king demeanor. But I could not find him attractive or likeable. I just didn't like how he was written, I guess. This was a little hard to make myself acknowledge because he does in my opinion (I know many may not agree) prove to be honorable and he has moral integrity. YMMV though. 

So the story is that h goes to work for the H as his personal assistant. She's a no-nonsense, ambitious, level-headed woman. Like the H, she maybe runs a little cool although we see throughout the story that she interacts with people well enough. She's got family obligations, mainly financial assistance to her mother. Apart from this, she seems quite self-sufficient but also lonely, since no friends are in evidence and apart from a phone call or two with her mother, we don't see her interact much with her family. The H is in much the same situation, although as we find out later in the story, he is surrounded by people, most of whom are there to keep his wife in check. 

Which leads us to the H's background. He too is no-nonsense and also quite brusque, and is also cold (not surface cool like the h) and seemingly unfeeling. He and the h work together for a time before each starts to develop feelings for the other. They are similar people who find each other terrifically attractive. But the H can't let it go too far. He's married to a wife who suffers from alcoholism and while not explicitly stated, probably also a few other psychiatric illnesses. She has a habit of getting drunk, wandering off despite the many family retainers kept to keep her corraled, finding her husband and showering him with verbal abuse and pathos. There is a great scene late in the book that really rings true. The live-in psychiatric nurse tells the H that his wife must be committed to receive appropriate care since the home is not a controlled environment and no matter what restrictions are put in place, the wife is going to find the alcohol, hurt herself or hurt someone else.

Everything comes to a head when the story moves to the H's country house for the duration of the Thanksgiving to Christmas holiday season. There is a heated pool where they swim in a snowstorm (I totally want to do that!!). There is Christmas tree decorating. And the H is very clear with the h why he can't abandon his wife. She is very ill and she can't take care of herself. 

However, after a sexy night swim, watching the h interact with his friends during a holiday party like the sane and intelligent woman she is, and the aforementioned "tell it like it is" tirade from the nurse, the H decides to divorce his wife so he can honor his love for the h properly. The catch is that he will never stop taking care of his soon-to-be ex-wife since she has no one else. 

I know that extenuating circumstances aside, the issue of adultery is a no-go for most people. This book tries to describe why this most difficult of situations could arise without attaching too much blame to anyone and a decision could be reached. The premise here is that the H feels an unbreakable commitment to the wife because of her illness (and the son they lost) and until he meets the h, he never has a reason strong enough to walk away.