Rating: 5/5

Absolutely the silliest work of genius I have ever read. 800-odd pages, and every one of them delightful, preposterous, romantic, hilarious, stupid, lovely. The most villainous villains a merry heart could possibly imagine. Nonsense of the finest vintage. 

I don’t think I quite understood Dickens until now. I had only read his (relatively) short novels—Hard Times, Great Expectations—books, long as they are, that can be read like modern novels. But Dickens was not working in the idiom of the modern novel, and had I tried to read this “normally,” rather than sticking to a chapter a day over a few months, I would have lost patience long ago. As popular serialized entertainment, Dickens’ novels, I now see, have as much in common with television as with modern literature. People like to complain that Dickens was paid by the word and it shows, which sure—but that is as silly an observation as to say that TV producers are paid by the episode. People want their favorite shows to be renewed for another season, because watching your favorite show isn’t a chore, it’s a pleasure, and ofttimes the greatest pleasure of all comes in exactly the episodes that run most tangential to the plot. Because the story is just an excuse, really, a series of opportunities for characters we’ve grown to love to amuse us with their antics, impress us with their strength, fill us with the lovely heartbreak of their triumphs and defeats. My favorite part of Nicholas Nickleby, when Nicholas joins the theater company, advances the plot not a whit. As if a Christmas tree is there to hold up the roof, or chocolate-covered marshmallows for nutrition!

It’s chokingly sentimental—but God in Heaven, we need this sentiment, here in 2024. We need to be reminded, to remember, to believe that generosity and kindness are the only halfway certain path to happiness in this cruel and arbitrary world, and that the apparent rewards of avarice, miserliness, cruelty, selfishness, however rich they may appear, are hollow and worthless in the end. And if it’s true that A Christmas Carol makes the same point in 100 pages, and with ghosts to boot, well, I for one would have been quite happy to read on if A Christmas Carol had gone on 700 pages more, too.

In Dickens, ugly souls have ugly faces, and the kind are also the beautiful. Take a look around—it’s not wishful thinking at all. Just turn on cable for a few minutes and see how ugly the hateful are. Then, take a look around your own table this Thanksgiving, and see how beautiful are the people you love.