Rating: 2/5

While this book definitely hits the classic cyberpunk vibe, that's about the only positive thing I can say about it. Vibe: 4/5, Worldbuilding: 3.5/5, Characters: 1.5/5, Plot: 1/5

"Metrophage" is extremely fast-paced and choppy. Lots of things are tossed out, but nothing gets any substantial development.

Reminds me a lot of "Arachne" by Lisa Mason that I read recently (written a few years later but same classic cyberpunk vibe) - similar to that book, "Metrophage" is an endless stream of exposition and infodump with tons of details about the world that are fun to read but ultimately don't matter in the slightest because the plot and characters are paper thin. 

"Metrophage" feels like a mess - everything in world is a mix of at least 4 different cultures - white america, mexican, japanese, arab - so all the dialogue constantly goes in and out of different languages and cultural references, architecture is a confusing mess of all of the above architectural styles, etc. I feel this is very representative of the book as a whole. While guys like William Gibson are able to skillfully coalesce these kinds of global influences into an immersive world, "Metrophage" on the other hand simply feels like a hodgepodge of different ideas and interests the author had that were not combined in a cohesive or interesting way. On top of that, everything feels very generic and the author's literary influences are too obvious. Absolutely nothing about this books stands out among all the other cyberpunk stuff of that era.

The characters are extremely generic and flat and the story is almost nonexistent. Jonny is the only one who gets any development and it's pretty mundane. He could be a fine cyberpunk protagonist as the ingredients are there (he's hard, street smart, morally gray, addicted to drugs, but not evil), but it's never conveyed that he is anything other than a standard hustler and he doesn't evolve in any notable way. Despite this, the entire plot of the book is Jonny being bounced back and forth between the elite gang leaders who run everything in LA and need him for... some reason or other, all while trying to double cross and backstab each other. Why they all insist on needing Jonny is completely unclear as he doesn't do much other than steal drugs and get himself caught by whichever side is the opposition at that moment. Rinse and repeat. 

But hey, Jonny must be really cool 'cause he's in a threesome with two girlfriends for some reason, neither of which get any development. Hell, one one doesn't actually show up until 65% of the way in. But I guess you can't go wrong with having multiple scenes where the main guy wakes up after being brutally injured only to exchange two lines of dialogue and then immediately have sex.

I gave up around 70% after a series of poorly written and nearly incoherent action sequences. 

I also have to deduct points for the author's repeated abuse of moving the plot forward by having the main character get knocked out only to magically wake up at the next point on the plot outline (where, of course, everyone is completely ready to help him at any cost to themselves), no matter how illogical it is.

While it's clear that the author has skill, the execution of this book is amateur. I'd be curious to read his later work though, as his world building and attention to detail show a lot of promise.