Rating: 3/5

A worthy sequel to Damia, Damia's Children actually has a little bit of a weird structure to it in many ways that both makes sense and sort of interrupts the flow of the story more than I'd like. First part is easy: we meet Damia, Afra and their many many kids- including Laria, the oldest- who, at 16 is set to go do some training and teaching on the Mrdini Homeworld of Clarf- before eventually taking over as Tower Prime on that world.

While the Alliance between Mrdini and Humans looks to track down the Hiver homeworld and all the other Hiver spheres to attempt to curb their colonial practices, Thian is seconded to a naval squadron as Prime. (He's second oldest behind Laria.) He helps discover live Hiver larvae on an abandoned sphere, but is attacked by a disaffected crewmember and inhibited Talent who considers him to sympathetic to the Hivers. He survives- and, unable to safely continue with the human ships due to militant sentiment goes with the Mrdini ship to confirm the location of the Hiver homeworld, which they figured out was destroyed by a supernova. (Hence, all the Hiver activity: they're trying to find a new homeworld.) 

Then, there's a time jump of a year. That feels random, but makes a certain amount of sense. Rojer (kiddo number three, also a Prime) and his father Afra go out to the fleet to bring back a captured Hiver sphere and they do so, but then Rojer- despite being slightly younger than Thian gets sent out to maintain a watching brief on Hiver occupied worlds.

Zara (kiddo number four), turns out to be a problem child. Can't really do Tower Prime stuff, but might work out better as a healer- but she is affected on an empathic level by the captured Hiver queen they bring back-- and eventually sneaks over to the Moon Base and figures out that the Queen is freezing to death and saves her life. Everyone relizes then that Zara is def going to be better as a healer than a Tower Prime.

Overall: the structure is both a little strange and makes sense- fairly decent sections of the book focus on each of 'Damia's Children' and while ONCE AGAIN, I'd like to see more of all the characters- there are two more books in the series, so you're not left totally short changed.