Rating: 4/5

President Biden recognizes Armenian genocide:

https://apnews.com/article/joe-biden-...

Books have a unique way of stopping time in a particular moment and saying: Let’s not forget this. -Dave Eggers

Last night I finished this book about the Armenian genocide in the early twentieth century, now all but forgotten in the wake of other international genocides that are more recent and more written about. I knew about it, but didn't know details, and still don't in any broad sense, as this book is not about the political and social conditions in which these horrors happened. It's a tale much like many genocide tales, memoirs and novels and graphic novels, as it's the story of a survivor of the genocide, Vahan, the 12-year-old son of a powerful lawyer, one of the most influential families in Turkey at the time. 

A child of privilege, bright but spoiled, Vahan has breakfast one morning and soon after loses his fine home and family and life as he knew it. The point of the tale is Egger's point: Let's not forget this. But what is the best way to remember? How many horrific details do we need to know? At what point do we simply stop listening? What degree of hope do we need in such a tale, maybe especially a tale told for an audience of young people? When does that hopefulness undermine the sense of horror?

In this tale we don't get many stats, until the very end, through a summary of "news reports": 3/4 of the Armenian population in Turkey was murdered, a million, perhaps nearly two million, killed; 80,000 Armenians were slaughtered in Dorgor, Arabia alone. In that same region, 7,000 children under 10 died of starvation. Unimaginable stories, not unlike ones we hear about the Holocaust, Rwanda, Cambodia's "killing fields". Unspeakable crimes spoken, and in imaginative tales, where characters "come alive" and graphic details are juxtaposed with almost unbelievable stories of kindness, feats of daring, escape. Part of the canon of genocide, including Deogratias, Tree Girl, Night, and so so many others. 

Bagdasarian, an Armenian-American living in NYC, had this story fall in his lap, as detailed tapes recorded by his great uncle, an unlikely 12-year-old survivor, came into his possession. He knew he had to tell the story, keep the memory of his ancestors and his people alive. He had details and a rough sketch, so his only option was to "fill in" the story with descriptions of the region, the families, based in part on family and archival research. 

What do we know before we read? That this is a first person "account" novel, and that the kid survives, and that most other Armenians don't. The tale is told in an undramatic, unsensational fashion, almost flatly at times, which for me enhanced the horror somehow: "Seven days after she had given birth she was dead." When describing various horrors, very few adjectives or adverbs, not many similes. Blunt, direct, tight-lipped. This seems right to me. And at the same time, if you are thinking a more capable writer would have swept us into a frenzy of grief of despair, we need screaming, we see also that Bagdasarian can also write lovely and heart-achingly beautiful prose about dreams of his lost mother, and later as he visits a cemetery he writes: "I felt at home among these graves, as though I were standing in the center of my own heart, within the gated perimeter of a longing that would never age, never end, never grow wise." We get a good feeling for Vahan's need to distance himself from the horror he (or anyone) could scarcely comprehend, his need to imagine himself out of situations. What do you do? He (I'll call this a spoiler) lost almost all his family, he witnessed unspeakable atrocities. It's a very, very good book; hard to read at times, but skillful, moving, memorable, as Bagdasarian would hope.

The quote that Bagdasarian uses to frame his novel is related to Egger's quote, actually. "Who does now remember the Armenians?" which is what Adolf Hitler said in 1939 in support of the argument that the world would soon forget the extermination of a people. Remember that! Especially as we continue to watch with anguish and protest in anguish other genocides!