Rating: 4/5

I finished this book with a smile on my lips and a deep heartfelt sigh. And I realized that very few books make me feel happy and contented after I’ve finished. Michelle Reid really delivered a winner with this one.

Dominic and Madeline’s biggest antagonists were their own stubbornness and pride. They took their love for each other for granted. Their friends and family didn’t help either. In trying to be supportive, they pushed Don and Maddie too hard resulting in too much pressure on them. They weren’t given a chance to let their relationship grow naturally, resulting in a disaster that ruined the friendship between the families. 

Maddie and Dom knew each other for their entire lives. She was his sister’s best friend. Their families were friends. She was a mischievous wild child and he was ten years older and a lot more mature. 

Their friendship turned into more before her eighteenth birthday. She and Dominic started dating and with the wholehearted consent and joy of both families. 

The families and friends became a little too involved and put too much pressure on them. The boiling point came when after weeks of heavy petting with no release, Maddie tried to seduce Dom. He reacted badly and she did a stupid, childish thing that caused a huge rift. That rift lead to a public humiliation for both and was the cause of Maddie moving to Boston to live with her mother for four years. 

Now, four years later, Maddie’s stepsister is getting married. She has returned to England for the wedding. But she is not the same open, loving wild child she was. She’s sophisticated and reserved. 

She has also learned that her family and Dom’s family no longer speak with each other. They have been feuding for the past four years. She and Dom decide to meet to see what can be done to end the feud. They each realize that they are still in love with the other. 

I adored everything about this book. The secondary and tertiary characters were just as interesting and wonderful as the primary ones. 

The author’s writing was so descriptive and vivid that it put the reader right into the story. The conflict wasn’t another man or woman, it was the H and h finding their way to each other. 

The resolution was everything I didn’t know wanted it to be. I LOVED the way she tied it all up. That sigh that I finished the book with was deeply felt. It was utter satisfaction, as though I had in some way, helped to bring it all about. 

This one is a keeper that I will read again and again.