Rating: 4/5

Many of the black players, drafted involuntarily to this distant and alien timberland, populated as it was primarily by white people, came to love it. They loved Oregon because of its natural beauty, because life was easier here, because the people were so pleasant, because it was an easy place to raise children and because they remained well known long after they played their last game. Several years later they were still Blazers, and still a mark for autograph hunters. They stayed on after their careers were done, heroes of the past, beneficiaries of the civic madness. Those who were black and stayed on knew there was something of a trade-off. They were the favorite sons of a white city...sometimes, Herm Gilliam thought, there was a price to pay for that cultural isolation: Jai, his four-year-old son, for example, thought that because his father often revisited Atlanta, where he had once played and where most of his friends were black, all the black people in the world lived in Atlanta and all the white people in the world lived in Portland. So there was a certain ambivalence...but there was something else they loved about Portland, and that was the sheer physical beauty of the place. Many of them had never seen anything like it before- the mountains, the forests, the rivers- they had heard of land like this but it always seemed to be something that would belong to white people. Here they had a share of it.

Some have called David Halberstam's The Breaks of the Game (1981) the best book ever written about basketball. I know that a number of my friends here on Goodreads will probably shrug their shoulders politely at that assertion- and honestly, if you don't like basketball even a little, this probably isn't a book for you. After all, chances are that you couldn't talk me into reading even the greatest book ever written about, say, cricket or golf. I'm also not in any position to judge this book as the greatest of its kind, having only ever read one other book on basketball (Sacred Hoops by Phil Jackson- not very good), though it's hard to imagine anything out there being significantly better. Halberstam was a serious journalist who among other accomplishments reported perceptively on Vietnam, and even obsessive basketball fan Bill Simmons, in his introduction here, sounds vaguely puzzled as to why Halberstam decided to write about sports. In any case, Halberstam is a much more restrained and sober journalistic presence in his own writing than, say, Thompson or Mailer were, but The Breaks of the Game nevertheless reads like one of the nonfiction novels his contemporaries were known for; using a series of anecdotes and character portraits, Halberstam tells the story, as the description here reads, of "one grim season (1979-1980) in the life of the Bill Walton-led Portland Trail Blazers"- except that's not quite correct. Walton- the idiosyncratic, red-headed, Grateful Dead-listening, vegetarian 6'11'' center, who alienated some fans and gained others with his outspoken politics, answering his phone with the words "impeach the president" until becoming, as he put it, "a born-again capitalist"- did lead Portland to the championship, but that was in the summer of '77. The Blazers then started the '77-'78 season with the nearly historically-good record of 50-10, playing a team-oriented style that relied heavily on passing and ball movement, until Walton's foot started bothering him. He attempted to come back in the playoffs with the use of painkilling injections, and ended up breaking his foot. He blamed Portland's training staff, demanded a trade, and by the '79-80 season, he was playing for San Diego. 

But thankfully there is a lot more to this book than Walton (who didn't necessarily strike me as the most sympathetic figure). It's full of memorable characters like Maurice Lucas ("Luke"), a power forward who grew up in a dangerous part of Pittsburgh, for whom "there was always a thin sharp edge to things." Walton's departure probably left Lucas as the most talented player on the team- he was also the most outspoken, contrarian, influential and underpaid, a mixture that didn't augur well for team unity. 

He was very political, a strong and independent man sprung from circumstances that could also create great insecurity. There was about him a constant sense of challenge; everything was a struggle, and everything was a potential confrontation...the edge was always there, Luke was always testing. He was at once an intensely proud black man, justifiably angry about the injustice around him, and a superb and subtle con artist, a man who had in effect invented himself and his persona- Luke the Intimidator.

Lucas eventually got his trade and his money, but he never again played on a great team. We also meet Lionel Hollins, Lucas's closest friend on the team, who hates cold weather so much that he has it written into his contract that he can void any trade to a cold-weather city (the Blazers try to trade him to Chicago during the season, and Hollins nixes it). Hollins is soft-spoken, but sympathizes with his friend Lucas, and believes that the Portland media deifies the Blazers' monomaniacal coach, Jack Ramsay (when asked how he was going to stand all the rain in Portland, Ramsay responded, "in the basketball season, I don't have time for the weather"). Another Blazer, Kermit Washington, grew up in the DC area and essentially willed himself to become a professional basketball player, putting in grueling hours and weeks and months with a coach who took him on pro bono. When we meet him, he's trying to deal with the notoriety of having, with one punch, nearly killed a player named Rudy Tomjanovich during a game. Halberstam is equally good with figures on the fringes, such as the TV exec Roone Arledge, who takes what he learned from marketing basketball and applies it to "real" news, maybe in some small part setting the stage for the attention-monopolizing dystopia we live in today. 

...he now had the perfect story with which to drive up ABC's ratings. Iranian students had in early November taken sixty-five American citizens hostage at the Tehran embassy. It was, he knew immediately, a great television story, intensely human with grave international implications, and best of all, with great pictures. As a man whose roots were in sports, where the instinct was to do things live and exploit them, rather than in the soberer world of news, he sensed the potential and was determined to make ABC the station to which hostage buffs would automatically turn. 

Halberstam uses these personal stories to explore race, class, drugs, fame, and the organization of labor. He was lucky or maybe savvy enough to capture a transitional moment in basketball- when it was turned by TV, seemingly overnight, from a sport primarily enjoyed live, by a small number of passionate fans, to a mass entertainment with millions of dollars at stake. But also a sport that, unlike baseball or football, had no real place in national myth; a predominately black sport, being marketed to predominately white fans. 

It's a book about nostalgia, as well. And as we follow the Blazers through their dispiriting season, through early practices, unfamiliar hotel rooms and late-night odysseys for postgame meals in alien cities, and as losses, injuries and contract disputes pile up, we see how the memory of that one championship season, in which all the pieces of the team came together to create something kind of beautiful, becomes harder to let go of. Athletes tend to have shorter careers than most of us, but these days I can at least look at Lebron James, who's my age, see that he's still playing, and remind myself that I'm not old (I'm planning the beginning of my midlife crisis for the day he retires). But in the era in which Halberstam was writing, it really sounds like most NBA players were done by their early 30s. And so this is also a story about how fleeting one's prime can be, whether in athletics or in any other walk of life. How do we keep going when we suspect that the best is behind us?

Oh, there's also a great Jack Nicholson anecdote that some kind soul has typed out here.