Rating: 4/5

This is an excellent book, but it was a bit of a slow starter for me. It was published in 1973 in direct response to another book, 'Concerning Dissent and Civil Disobedience' by Abe Fortas. I have no knowledge of this book and after reading Zinn's response I have no desire to, but my ignorance about its details meant I was pretty lost on what got Zinn so riled up. I mean, I can figure out the broad strokes from context, but I went in thinking it was going to be a general treatise on law and order and not a specific riposte.

The book also deals with at least three separate issues, which were all very much boiling at the time of writing: civil rights, anti-Vietnam protests, and poverty in general. It's pretty damn depressing that you could swap those out for Black Lives Matter, War on Terror, and Occupy Wall Street without changing much else about the book. (I bet Zinn would have really liked Extinction Rebellion.) The reason he weaves them all in is because activists for all three causes employed various levels of civil disobedience that Fortas was trying to suggest was a Big No, because The Law. What it comes down to is that breaking bad laws is not actually a crime. I guess we all tend to forget that legislature, like 'the economy', is something we as a bunch of humans made entirely up.

Some quotes for my memory bank:

"In speech, absolute toleration is a social good. In action, the existence of values other than free speech demands we choose right over wrong, and respond accordingly. Free speech gives the citizenry the informational base from which they can then make social choices in action. To limit free speech is to limit our capacity to make such choices."

"Are not nations, operating in this tumultuous world, comparable to gangs inside the nation - seeking to enforce law and order in their own limited sphere, without considering law and order in their relations with others? When nations ignore international agreements at will, are they not contributing to gang warfare in the world?"

"What he does say is that such selective conscientious objection 'would destroy the state's ability to defend itself or perform the obligations it has assumed, or to prevent the spread of attempts to conquer other nations of the world by outside-inspired and aided subversion'. But what if those very issues are in question? What if the individual denies that any of those consequences would follow? Something seems to have happened to the old claim that what distinguishes the democracy from the totalitarian state is its belief in the rights of the individual over the rights of the state."

"The instruments are dispensable. The ends are not."