Rating: 5/5

If it weren’t for bad luck Mr. Everts wouldn’t have had any luck at all. But I suppose considering he actually survived his thirty seven days lost in Yellowstone, that’s not quite true. It’s only knowing what he endured to get there, I make that assertion. 

When Everts was found thirty-seven days after becoming separated from his party—by four men sent out to look for him—they weren’t quite sure they were looking at a human being at all. They thought Everts was insane. He could barely speak and was muttering to himself. His feet were naked, his clothes torn to shreds and one foot worn to the bone. Portions of his body were seared and black [and] his fingers were like charred wood ... He could not have weighed more than 40 to 50 pounds and one arm was paralyzed. Most serious was the total upsetting of his digestive processes caused by his forced diet of fibrous thistle roots. This was relieved (if you can call it that) by a pint of bear oil! Well it worked anyway.

Thirteen years ago when our family first visited Yellowstone we bought and read Lost in Yellowstone while we driving around the park. It was an eye-opener to realize how much of the park visitors today don’t see and how much of a wilderness it was back in September 1870 when Everts became lost.

Truman Everts’s story of survival is epic! It has been recounted by various authors but never as dramatically as in Everts’s own account that was published in the November, 1871 issue of Scribner’s Monthly magazine. This book is that account, with many additional footnotes and supplemental information from others involved in his rescue as well as the initial party. I don't usually raise my ratings upon rereading a book, but in this case, I found Evert’s story to be even better than I remembered, so I added another star.

An absolute must read for anyone who loves nature, survival stories, our national parks or adventure of any sort!

&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;

June 15, 2001: We bought and read this driving around Yellowstone Park. In September 1870, Truman Evert's was separated from his party of early explorers to the park. This book relates his month long adventures wandering the park with little food, equipment, or special cold-weather clothing. It reads a little like a Ripley's Believe It Or Not. The mystery is how he survived. No one else has been lost in Yellowstone as long as he was and lived to tell the tale. A frustrating but good read!