Rating: 5/5

I zoomed through this book! It's an easy read, but highly enjoyable and engaging.

The book is narrated by both the author and through the voice of the main character, Stacey MacAindra. She's a 1960s housewife with 4 kids, living in the suburbs of Vancouver. Her husband, Mac, is a salesman - at first for an essential oils company, and then later for a bogus vitamin company called Richalife. Stacey is a bit bored with being a mother, with being left alone all the time with her kids, with her uncommunicative husband and his phony vitamin pills and ridiculous God-like boss, with hips that are too big. 

It was so refreshing to read a "slice of life" book that was candid, hilarious, truthful, and simple. So many of Laurence's observations from the 1960s voiced through Stacey are equally applicable today.

I highly recommend this book!

Amazingly, I found a review of "The Fire-Dwellers" from the 60s tucked away in the back of my copy. The review is by Philip Sykes and it is pretty spot-on:

"Margaret Laurence's new woman -- a woman of our time, bitchy and brave as she finds her compromise with life.

Mrs. Stacey MacAindra of Bluejay Crescent, Vancouver, is an entirely contemporary woman, one of the first in Canadian fiction. Mrs. Stacey MacAindra is the heroine of Margaret Laurence's novel "The Fire-Dwellers".

We celebrate Margaret Laurence for her women. Her earlier Canadian novels were built around unforgettable women - Hagar in "The Stone Angel" and Rachel in "A Jest of God", which was filmed by Paul Newman as "Rachel Rachel."

Stacey MacAindra shares their roots in the enclosed life of the Manitoba town of Manawaka; she is in fact the older sister of Rachel Cameron, the yearning schoolmarm in "A Jest of God". Unlike Rachel, Stacey left the small town before it could scar her and joined the suburban middle class. She is a salesman's wife with four kids and a mortgage, entrapped not by a hypochondriac mother but by the four walls of the family room, disturbed not by Main Street gossips but by the violence on TV. Her concerns are as contemporary as those of any pert, heavy-hipped matron pushing a cart to the Muzak in your supermarket.

The most contemporary thing is the interior candor, the self-awareness. Rachel Cameron phantasized lovers in a lonely bed: the unblushing Stacey MacAindra addresses herself in a bitchy and self-mocking monologue, earthy and colloquial.

This interior voice, which invests Stacey MacAindra with charm and her story with unity, is an irreverent third party in her conversations. While she mouths politeness  it  curses, debunks, jibes. It comments on her crises, as when she rows with her husband about their mutual infidelities:

What about the girl, Mac? Thor's secretary. That's different, I suppose. It's okay for you to touch her.
Yes it  is  different, if you really want to know. It's not what you're obviously thinking.
I bet. I just bet.
---- We go on this way and the needle jabs become razor strokes and the razor strokes become hunting knives and the knives become swords and how do we stop?

Knives become swords . . . As Stacey MacAindra slops gin, struggles to reach her changing children, commits adultery, her unspoken voice remarks the small capacity of individuals to communicate with and know one another. It marks the silences between husband and wife, father and son. The wounding silences.

The trouble with stating so universal a problem is that you can never hope to resolve it, and "The Fire-Dwellers" never does. It is an inconclusive story. Stacey and her family lurch through a series of emotional storms and find some kind of surcease: "Temporarily they are all more or less okay."

If the story is flawed, the portraiture is splendid. Stacey MacAindra's husband, children and neighbours are less characters than the imperfectly focussed material of her perceptions. The one significant development is the psychic maturing of a woman as she rounds 40, moving from restless seeking to a stoic's compromise: "From now on, the dancing goes on only in the head."

It is the authentic portrait of a woman of our time."

Some favourite quotes:

"Very far away, in a galaxy countless light-years from this planet, a scorpion-tailed flower-faced film buff sits watching a nothing-shaped undulating screen. He decides he's seen enough. He switches off the pictures which humans always believed were themselves, and the imaginary planet known as Earth vanishes." (p.80)

"Along with the Superware, families are shown on each page. Kids beam peacefully and undisturbedly. Mothers with young untired faces glow contentedly. Fathers with young untired faces smile proudly and successfully. Grandmothers with young untired faces gaze graciously and untroubledly." (p.89)

"Today I saw a girl walking up the street towards me, a plain girl unfashionably dressed, and from a distance I thought it was myself coming back to meet me with a wiser chance. But it wasn't." (p. 89)

"But how is it I can feel as well that I'm spending my life in one unbroken series of trivialities?...It would be nice to have something of my own, that's all. I can't go anywhere myself. Only as Mac's wife, or the kids' mother. And yet I'm getting now so that I actually prefer to have either Mac or one of the kids along. Even to the hairdresser, I'd rather take Jen. It's easier to face the world with one of them along. Then I know who I'm supposed to be." (p. 95)

"Perhaps it isn't that the masks have been put on, one for each year like the circles that tell the age of a tree. Perhaps they've been gradually peeled off, and what's there underneath is the face that's always been there for me, the unspeaking eyes, the mouth for whom words were too difficult." (p.170)

"He believes you have to work very hard in this life, just to keep your head above water, or to escape whatever it is that's waiting to crush you like a grape. And even then you may lose at any moment...I'm not sorry he hasn't got anywhere. Where is there to get, that you would all that much want to be?" (p.199)

"You want to ask them if they know any longer what the poles mean, or if its a language which has got lost and now there isn't anything to replace it except silence and sometimes the howling of men who've been separated from themselves for so long that it's only a dim memory, a kind of violent mourning, only a reason to stay as drunk as they can for as long as they can. You don't ask anybody anything. You haven't suffered enough. You don't know what they know. You don't have the right to pry. So you look, and then you go away." (p.227)

"It's like church - you think maybe if you go, the faith will be given, but it isn't. It has to be there already in you, I guess. Or maybe you have to persevere." (p.277)

"EVER-OPEN EYE STREETS IN CITIES NOT SO FAR AWAY ARE BURNING BURNING IN RAGE AND SORROW SET ABLAZE BY THE CHILDREN OF SAMSON AGONISTES VOICE: RIOTS ARE SAID TO BE WELL UNDER CONTROL IN ---- I see it and then I don't see it. It becomes pictures. And you wonder about the day when you open your door and find they've been filming those pictures in your street." (p.305)