Rating: 4/5

First published in 1992, Greg Dening’s study of the eighteenth century mutiny aboard the naval vessel The Bounty is much more than the simple history of the mutiny itself. In no way does it try to glamourise the event as it explores, with staggering detail, the causes of the mutiny, and the social and cultural history of the eighteenth century.

Few written records are available of the actual events, either because of the large-scale illiteracy among the crew, or because of the lack of pen, paper and ink when castaway. There is also an element of self-justification or exculpation in any records or depositions by the mutineers who survived the trial, or their accusers. ‘Bad Language’ goes on to describe the transformation of the mutiny into a matter of legend, and thence into romantic fiction.

From recruiting, provisioning and designing the Bounty for scientific exploration and the gathering of botanical specimens, to the hardships on board, to the anthropological and cultural beliefs of the Polynesian and Pacific Ocean islanders, ‘Bad Language’ reconstructs the tensions, the lusts and passions, but most of all, the power politics of the mutineers. The very qualities that once made Fletcher Christian the chief mutineer aboard the Bounty, now render him unfit for leadership. 

Given the historical weight of the incident, the murders, the public trials and hangings, the author has presented the nearly five hundred pages as entertainment, instead of a heavy accumulation of detail upon detail. In itself, this is an irony, given that the earliest presentations of the Bounty story were presented as theatre in the eighteenth century itself, with lavish illustrations and posters describing the savages and the brave mutineers as a prelude to the stage reenactment. 

Of course, the exotic locations where the Bounty had to stop for fresh water, food and repairs lacked nothing in their differentness to western culture, and added to the element of fiction. Tahiti also saw the gradual dehumanisation of the Bounty’s crew into savage survivors. In contrast, two other mutinies which took place at around the same time, in Spithead and Nore, though they both had greater implications for the Admiralty, the Navy, naval recruitment and labour conditions, were less spectacular in the public imagination.

Power and sacrifice - sacrifice having different connotations for islanders and mutineers - are the two main supports of the book. Anthropology, passion and biography (as much as possible with men who might have given assumed names on joining), are the others. Pitcairn Island, on which Fletcher Christian landed with his small band of mutineers, along with native men and women from Tahiti, might have been an Eden, the Utopia that poets and philosophers have dreamt of, except for the passions that govern men. And women, too, in this case.

The book closes with an utterly brilliant study of the five films that were released since the invention of moving pictures. While some of the actors (Charles Laughton, Marlon Brando, Clark Table and Errol Flynn) fixed the mind of the public forever on the persons they represented, the films themselves distorted fact and manipulated history to destroy all semblance to life and reality in the eighteenth century.