Rating: 3/5

Haldeman is a classic sci fi author, most famous for The Forever War. I have no idea why this book was on my TBR list and that one wasn't, but there must have been something that intrigued me about it a decade ago when I decided to read it.

This felt like Haldeman read The Sun Also Rises and thought that bull fighting was a good start, but what about if the hero punched a polar bear too?

Our hero Carl lives in some far future time where the key languages of the Confederación of planets is pan-Swahili and Spanish. Why? Because the author said so, that's why! The world building is slim, and mostly exists so that Carl can punch things and have manly adventures.

Carl is on scholarship to Starschool. After finishing the book, I'm still not sure what Starschool is or how Carl got in. It feels like a multi-year study abroad program. The students go to different planets and...explore I guess? When Carl's Starschool class arrives on Earth, they discover an Extraweight Alien Tax. Most people are under 75 kg (165 lb), but Carl is a giant from the harsh planet Springer. At 2.5 m tall (8 feet, 2.5 inches) and 163 kg (359 lbs) his tax is 16,800 pesas. The Dean of his program says that the school has it covered, don't worry about it. But Carl decides he MUST pay the school back. So instead of engaging in the actual program that he is supposedly attending, Carl engages in televised fights with increasingly absurd animals.

For a student, Carl is wildly incurious about the animals he is going up against. I know that Internet searches do not exist in this retrofuture world (because the Internet was not really a thing back in 1983), but surely there would be some form of encyclopedia? Carl never even tries to look up the animal. He hears he can get paid money to fight one, he agrees to fight, someone tells him how dangerous it is, he declares that he is from Springer and if he can tame a wild lizard he can defeat any animal, rinse and repeat. His gross lack of experience never stops him from winning. 

Even being over 8 feet, his winning streak is absurd. Near the end, he is defeating a POLAR BEAR. 1,000 lb beasts who are used to hitting other polar bears. I don't think an 8 foot tall beanpole could honestly win in a fair (or in this case, unfair) fight. 359 lbs, at Carl's height, is not very much. Andre the Giant was 7 feet, 4 inches, and 520 lbs (a foot shorter and about 150 lbs heavier). Shaquille O'Neall was 7 feet, 4 inches and about 325 pounds (a foot shorter and only 39 lbs lighter). And "the World's Tallest Teenager" Olivier Rioux is 7 feet, 9 inches (nearly Carl's height) and reportedly 305 lbs. Olivier is pretty skinny - now imagine 5 more inches and only 50 lbs heavier! Honestly, it feels like Haldeman is part of the 6% of Americans who believe they could beat a grizzly in an unarmed fight. 

I think Haldeman is also just bad with the metric system, since most Earthlings are only 40 kilos (88 lbs!). That's about the size of the average 10-year-old. At least in the US, the Red Cross doesn't let you donate blood if you're under 100 lbs. 

At one point Carl thinks "Maybe I did have rocks for brains." Yes, yes he really does. By the end the Dean is BEGGING him to stop getting into cage matches and even gets all the students to sign a letter saying none of them are mad at him that his Weight Tax took some of their class souvenir money. And yet he keeps fighting! 

Anyway, after Carl goes around punching creatures, he and Starschool go off to the planet Hell, where they engage in basic training. And then they go off to the most interesting section, the planet Construct which is a planet constructed to hold various environments that different aliens choose to live in. There's a light mystery when the Dean goes missing and Carl and his friends have to track the Dean down.

This is a pure action novel, with worldbuilding that exists to get Carl from one adventure to the next and with characters with no interiority. I finished the book knowing as little about Carl as when I began. He exists to be cool under pressure, larger and tougher than everyone else, and not dwell on it when his hubris and pride gets someone killed.