I think this is the edition I have, although I have one with a dustcover. The dustcover has protected the book proper, though it's taken a beating itself.

This book is sadly in need of an index. For example, I wanted to check when Chas Addams began publishing his cartoons in the New Yorker--but in order to find it, I had to read straight through. I knew roughly when it was--but I still couldn't flip through to the right point. I just had to wait 'til I got to it.

If you're in any doubt that this was a book written about a dead man, you'll be sure within the first few pages. You'll also be made aware that the book is written by a blind man pretty quickly. I'd read other parts of Thurber's work, but this is the first one in which he discusses his vision problems on a longitudinal basis.

I've read many of the issues that are discussed in this book. Or rather, I've gone through them, mostly searching for what are called 'drawings' (this includes not only captioned cartoons, but also covers, and those little line drawings at the tops and foots of pages), and for the squibs at the foot of columns. Much of the things Thurber refers to I have seen. What I did not know was the behind-the-scenes work that created the magazine. As Thurber points out, a lot of the copy was not attributed. 

I'd heard of people like Ross, Woolcott, E B White, etc. I knew about Arno, and Chas Addams, and some others. But I didn't know much about what went on behind the scenes. Some of it, I'm not sure I want to know.

Ross comes across as a true eccentric. He also hired eccentrics. The product was often excellent, but it resulted in some odd effects. One thing that comes across is that the staff of the New Yorker were nothing at all like a family. It's not just that writers were mostly freelance. It's also that the people on staff were often not introduced to each other. One wonders how many people wandered in, wrote stuff, submitted it anonymously, and got it passed, without anybody being the wiser.

Having finished the book, I lament even more the lack of an index. There are references to many things that I was glad to get some background on. But I almost certainly won't remember where in the book the stories were discussed. An index would be much preferable to having to flip through and try to find a particular incident. This reduces the utility of the book for reference purposes.