Rating: 4/5

He’s Overstayed His Welcome
13 February 2020 - Edithburg

	It clearly seems as if Marvin has overstayed his welcome because the entire book is about the author pleading for him to leave. Just as in typical Dr Seuss fashion, we have wonderful rhymes, and some rather interesting methods of travelling, such as the Zika Bike (which I believe has nothing to do with the virus of the same name). Yeah, it really seems as if Marvin has certainly overstayed his welcome.

	Mind you, I can certainly appreciate where the author is coming from because, well, I have been in Marvin’s position, namely that after a very long engagement party I ended up at the hotel room and, well, I was pretty wasted and it was probably time for me to leave, but for some reason, I hadn’t realised that this was the case, much to the host’s disgust. Then again, up until that time I have never been in a fancy hotel, nor seen a fancy hotel room, so yeah, I wanted to check it out.

	Things have changed quite a lot since those days when I partied hard and would wake up in the morning completely smashed with a hangover that I simply could not get over. Mind you, I’m not entirely sure why Marvin was visiting the author, or how long he had been there, but I have to admit that I can also sympathise with the author. You see, these days I do tend to really appreciate my alone time, and as such having people over can be a bit stressful, which is why I basically don’t let anybody know where I live.

	Yeah, I did know a person that really didn’t understand the concept of personal space. In fact, he was one of those people whom would get upset if you didn’t answer the phone when he rang you (and he would ring you at least twice a day). At first I wanted to be friendly, considering that a number of ‘Christian’ friends of mine would only befriend him (and others like him) when they were at church, which meant that if they weren’t at church they didn’t want to know them. I sort of understand why now, but that is the catch – because none of these so called friends of mine were willing to associate with him outside of church meant that only, well, me, ended up associating with him. Then again, after a while, I did come to understand their position, though of course if we all worked together then no doubt it would have been better for all involved.

	Anyway, this is a pretty cool book, and it is certainly an easy read, with Dr Suess’ characteristic poetic voice. Yeah, while it is a kid’s book, the fact that the poetry is so cool really does raise it above many of the other books that I have read.