Rating: 4/5

Sydney the year 1807

Dare Penrod arrived in Sydney from England as a settler in 1792 at the age of fifteen accompanied by his parents and younger brother. 
He looked and acted as if he had been born and raised in Australia. 
He was now a thirty year old very handsome and dynamic man, very popular with the ladies. 

Dare's father was granted by the government 5,000 acres of land shortly after their arrival. 
The land lay on the Parramatta River near the newly constructed town of Parramatta. 
( This is exciting to me! I shop at Parramatta Westfield! It's like this story is unfolding in my neighbourhood, only 200 years ago! )
They grew wheat and corn and had a lot of sheep. 
Many transported convicts were working on the Penrod land.

The book started with Dare and his father trying to choose a female convict to work in their house. 
The newly arrived convicts were kept at the New South Wales Corps.
Dare said "You have not much to choose from, father. Felons, thieves, whores, the lot of them look half-starved as well as infested with vermin and God knows what disease".

There was a girl that the Lieutenant was abusing. Dare turned his attention to the pitiful lass struggling in Lieutenant's grip. Much of her features were obscured by mud and filth but he could see that she was young. Her clothes were no better than rags and she may as well have been barefoot for all the good her worn shoes did her. She was too slender but what there was of her was not displeasing. 
Something about her disturbed him and he didn't like the feeling. Why should one glance from a hardened criminal and probably a whore, so completely unnerrve him?

His father chose her and Dare strongly objected " Father, the girl killed once, and is likely to do so again. Do you want that kind of woman in your household? According to the Lieutenant we wont be safe in our beds ".
"Look at her, Dare, Casey doesn't look as if she could hurt a fly. If she killed she must have had good reason ".
"Bring her home father, and she'll corrupt all our workers with her whoring ways "
"I am not a whore!" Casey objected "l killed a man, but it was an accident. I never meant for him to die ".
The father insisted in spite of Dare's protestations. 

Dare and Casey got off on the wrong foot but once Casey was at their house to work out her seven year indentured sentence and he saw her all cleaned up wearing proper clothes, he thought that she was the most beautiful woman. He also thought that his widowed father and younger brother were vulnerable to her wiles.
He decided to feign interest in her so she might leave his father and brother alone. 
Thus began their romance!

Dare soon discovered that Casey was a virgin not a whore, and there was a great passion between them. Casey loved him but she thought that for him it was only lust and there were a number of women who wanted him, including ex lovers. 
There was a "snake" at the house that was plotting the heroine's downfall, there's danger, abduction, adventure, horrific events, tragedy, one of the main characters married another, the other one ran away, there's a year's long separation, one thought that the other one was dead, a whole lot of situations and obstacles that they had to face and overcome. 
If anyone is interested in this book please read Chrisangel's and Nessa's reviews. They are much better than mine!