Rating: 5/5

I must say that Cloud Dancer captured my heart from the very beginning. Taken back to a time of native territory wars, you are thrown into the lifestyle of the pueblo Indian tribes, and the terrible suffering they went through as the Spanish soldiers took over their land. 

When Cloud Dancer, a Kere Indian, first meets White Hawk, an Apache warrior, she is completely drawn to him and his strange ways. Not a fan of the typical “woman’s work” of her people, she burns with the passion of becoming a warrior woman. 

White Hawk is taken with her, as he works to teach the Kere learn the ways of war. They soon find themselves in love, but the Spaniards are coming, and they have no time to see what their new feelings mean. When the Spaniards come, Cloud Dancer is forced to witness the slaughter of her people, only to fall in the battle. Saved by a Spanish soldier, who had abandoned his people, he fleas the battle and carries the badly wounded Cloud Dancer to safety.

Through the struggle of being separated from her people and the hatred she holds in her heart for the Spanish, Cloud Dancer is forced to travel with this soldier. She battles with the want to harm any of the Spanish, but as she is on the brink of death, she is forced to let him care for her. She learns his language and he learns hers as they journey together out of the soldiers reach. Without giving too much away, her journey is a hard one that has her having to seek a tribe that will take her in, all the while dealing with the loss of her people and her love, White Hawk.

A true page turner, Cloud Dancer will have you emotionally entranced from beginning, all the way till the end. Any who seek stories filled with action, love, friendship, and wants to be transported into a long ago era, will absolutely love Bechko’s novel. Her talent for description, strong plot, and characterization will have you finding a place in your heart for each and every one of her characters. Read this novel and let it take you into a truly exciting and heart wrenching tale. I am excited to read any and all work from Bechko, as she is proved to be an author with a true talent for the written word!