Rating: 3/5

To readers of my generation, Larkin will likely forever be known as the author of that one poem entitled “This be the verse.” 

Doesn’t ring a bell?

It probably will if I tell you the opening verse reads: “They fuck you up, your mum and dad.” 

While I love both my parents (and my kids), I too recognise that it is a very powerful poem indeed (if you are tempted to google it, you will undoubtedly note the superb metaphor in the penultimate sentence.)

That said, it is too bad that Larkin’s entire reputation as a misanthropic, bitter poet is based on that single, short poem.

As I discovered in the past weeks and months, his collected poems contain quite a few other gems with a very different tonality. I’ll leave you with one melancholy example for now and may come back with more later:

“Maiden Name

Marrying left your maiden name disused.
Its five light sounds no longer mean your face,
Your voice, and all your variants of grace;
For since you were so thankfully confused
By law with someone else, you cannot be
Semantically the same as that young beauty:
It was of her that these two words were used.

Now it's a phrase applicable to no one,
Lying just where you left it,scattered through
Old lists, old programmes, a school prize or two
Packets of letters tied with tartan ribbon -
Then is it scentless, weightless, strengthless, wholly
Untruthful? Try whispering it slowly.
No, it means you. Or, since you're past and gone,

It means what we feel now about you then:
How beautiful you were, and near, and young,
So vivid, you might still be there among
Those first few days, unfingermarked again.
So your old name shelters our faithfulness,
Instead of losing shape and meaning less
With your depreciating luggage laden.” 

Edit June 2024:

As promised, here is one more absolutely brilliant example, a seemingly simple poem about the two main sources of happiness: solitude and company:

“Reasons For Attendance

The trumpet's voice, loud and authoritative,
Draws me a moment to the lighted glass
To watch the dancers - all under twenty-five -
Solemnly on the beat of happiness.

- Or so I fancy, sensing the smoke and sweat,
The wonderful feel of girls. Why be out there ?
But then, why be in there? Sex, yes, but what
Is sex ? Surely to think the lion's share
Of happiness is found by couples - sheer

Inaccuracy, as far as I'm concerned.
What calls me is that lifted, rough-tongued bell
(Art, if you like) whose individual sound
Insists I too am individual.
It speaks; I hear; others may hear as well,

But not for me, nor I for them; and so
With happiness. Therefor I stay outside,
Believing this, and they maul to and fro,
Believing that; and both are satisfied,
If no one has misjudged himself. Or lied.” 

Edit August 2024:

I am adding a third now that struck me a moment ago while perusing this collection again:

“The Mower

The mower stalled, twice; kneeling, I found 
A hedgehog jammed up against the blades, 
Killed. It had been in the long grass.

I had seen it before, and even fed it, once. 
Now I had mauled its unobtrusive world 
Unmendably. Burial was no help:

Next morning I got up and it did not.
The first day after a death, the new absence 
Is always the same; we should be careful

Of each other, we should be kind 
While there is still time”.