Rating: 4/5

This is a very interesting diary, written during the years 1943 and 1944 by Iris Cutting, a British woman who married Marchese Antonio Origo and lived with him in Southern Tuscany. The couple has a daughter, Benedetta, born 1940, and another baby, Donata, born in 1943. Sadly, their son, Gianni had died in 1933, before the war, aged only seven. The couple lived in a large, isolated house, surrounded by fifty seven farms; of which theirs was the central one. 

Iris writes the diary and she states that she resisted the urge to edit it. This helps the immediacy, although much of the book is so full of rumour, false news and confusion that you do feel how difficult it was for those in the Val D’Orcia to really know what was going on. The diary opens with the arrival of refugee children and, news of political upheaval. It is obvious to Iris that the war is lost and that it is just a matter of time before the Allies arrive. Before this happens, though, there is the arrival of English POW’s and this could be difficult for the locals to accept with bombs falling in Italy. Still, cordial relations are soon established and the prisoners welcomed. This is one of the most heart warming parts of the diary – the fact that, despite all the hardships, the local people open their hearts, and homes, to everyone who passes through. An elderly woman is asked whether she has seen an escaped American by soldiers searching for him. No, she replies, and when Iris tells her how dangerous this could have been, she tells her that she has an escaped English prisoner of war in her house, not an American one…

We read of the fall of Mussolini, Italy becoming a battlefield and the locals either ‘half-hearted participants or passive spectators,’ who just want the war to finish. Certainly, German martial law, which arrives before the Allies, is not welcomed and it is obvious that Italians generally feel betrayed by the Germans. As we get to the end of 1943 Jewish refugees join those traipsing through the Italian countryside, with Jews being rounded up in the cities. Throughout this book there are endless guests – some welcome, others less so – partisans, deserters, German soldiers and British ones. Some, like the British, stay for a while and become part of the fabric of the local society – helping on the farms, and in the local houses. Others need food, medical help or supplies before trudging on. The locals are determined to help those who need it and there is no complaining about the demands made on people who are struggling to feed themselves, let alone others. This is a moving read about a less documented part of the war and I am glad I read it.