Rating: 5/5

This was a problematic read. LeBlanc has done an outstanding job of documenting life in the Bronx for its young, Puerto Rican, poor inhabitants. She writes without judgement, she writes objectively and avoids sensationalising any of what she observes. It is apparent that this is a labour of love – she spent 11 years with the people in this book and much of what happens in this book she was present for. We come to know the members of the family intimately and the feeling is very much like watching a nature documentary where you are watching a zebra being tracked by a lion and you know how it will end and you wonder why the crew just let it happen, why no one stepped in and saved him. 
The book opens with Jessica who at 16 is attracting male attention and making the most of it. By the time she is 18 she is a mother of three and dating a big time drug dealer who by turns buys her fur coats, keeps her prisoner and beats her half to death with a piece of 2 X 4. She and Boy George (not the New Romantic singer) are sent to prison and the focus switches to her brother’s girlfriend Coco.
Coco and Caesar start having a lot of sex at 14 and so it is unsurprising that Coco ends up pregnant. By the age of 25 Coco has 5 children from 4 men and Jessica at 28 has 5 by three men. And this is where I find the book problematic. Coco is a very sympathetic character. Relentlessly optimistic, she genuinely loves her children, desires to better her circumstances (although she lacks the staying power to see any efforts she makes through) and has a refreshing honesty. Reading it you feel that these are people doing their best in a set of circumstances that most people cannot begin to comprehend. 
Yet I struggled with the cognitive dissonance between the words and the actions. We see the women (girls when the book opens) complain about their mothers putting men first, all of them have been molested or raped as children by men their mothers have brought into the home and yet men and sex are the driving force in their lives. Both Coco and Jessica’s oldest daughters are molested as children and yet both women dress their girls sexy, find it adorable when as infants they quote the adults saying, “I’m getting mines”. Jessica encourages her 14 year old to flirt and in possibly the most shocking incident (in what is a relentlessly shocking book) Coco asks her 10 year old niece to photograph her in lingerie, squatting with a dummy in her mouth and spreadeagled against a wall to send to her boyfriend in jail. With some level of perspicacity Coco realises the niece may be of an age to understand the intention of the pictures and so gets her 5 year old to finish taking them. Add to this Coco’s claims that she wants her girls to make a career for themselves but often keeping them off school or up all night to keep her company and you have to question how much is just words. Unsurprisingly, by the end of the book Jessica’s 16 year old is pregnant.
The book does a good job of showing the underclass of the US: those who live in unfit housing, who receive poor quality education, whose family life consists of a series of homes with increasingly distant familial ties, where prison is a member of the family. It is hard not to feel some sympathy yet it is also the depiction of generational child neglect, of the abuse and over-sexualisation of young girls of mothers who do their best to ensure their daughters tread the same path as they have.
It is a book that highlights a plethora of problems but a dearth of solutions.