Rating: 5/5

I read this over a period of time, partly because I found it challenging to read at first before I realized what it was, which is a representation of Lorraine Hansberry through her letters, notes, speeches, plays, and other unpublished works. It helps us see a brilliant woman fighting for equal rights of Blacks and warning of the ultimate destruction of our entire nation if equality cannot be reached. It is such a prescient view. Over half a century later, not only are we still unable to claim equality, but trying to remedy that only strengthens the threats to our democracy and deepens the fissures in our political structures.

This book isn't, though, a creation solely by Hansberry herself, though it represents her work in a new form. It is, as noted in the Forward by its compiler/editor Robert Nemiroff--her former husband and executor of her estate--"an adaption, a portrait rendered through the perspective of another's eyes." He calls it a "biography and autobiography, part fact, part fiction, an act of creation and recreation." It isn't clear if Hansberry herself had already compiled any part of this reflection, but it is clear that it is Nemiroff who worked with her material to condense, compile, arrange, and present it in this form, and aided in its other presentations. 

In the Afterword, Nemiroff calls this a play. Two years after Hansberry's death, a group of actors read her work in a radio presentation of 7.5 hours based on what Nemiroff presented them with--that appears to be the genesis of the book reviewed here. He was then approached to create a play and, says Nemiroff, "it was at this point that the idea for the present volume began to take shape." The book and script were being written simultaneously, so while this particular volume does not include the stage directions, it is, in fact, the basis for the play that was presented by Harry Belafonte and others in 1969 and then ran off-Broadway for 12 months and has continued to be staged since. 

I found in Hansberry's words the portrait of a woman who seemed both down-to-earth and heroic; besieged by her own fears and also willing to bravely represent a world that our culture refused to accept as worth hearing, seeing, and understanding. The phrase, "to be young, gifted, and black" was from her words in a speech to the United Negro Fund writing competition in 1964. There and throughout, it is interesting to hear the echoes between her words and those of her friend, James Baldwin, who writes the Introduction to this work. In her book, Hansberry refers to Baldwin, including his essay that was published in The New Yorker (and later published as the book "The Fire Next Time") in which he, too, notes that it is at our collective peril that we fail to acknowledge the potential in all our citizens. Both could foresee the world today, and both tried to warn us how we need to change our world in order to reap benefits to all of us--something we have yet to accomplish.