[image error]
Remember when you were on the brink of adolescences? When you came across a book that you thought might hold the key to some secrets you were to embarassed to ask others, or that intuitively knew would have information that you hadn't even considered before? Form me and many, many, many woman my age it was "Are You There God It's Me Margaret".
Well, I try to not to pull the sympathy strings too often for the fact that I am a single mom. I, of course, feel tremendous guilt about it but I don't feel crazy stressed about the responsibility of being their sole influence. 
BUT! but, but, but! I do have some anxiety over the fact that my son is growing up in a very female oriented household. And I wonder, a lot now that he is almost 10 - WHEN DO I HAVE "THE TALK"?!?! I don't want to freak him out with it too soon but I don't want to be the parent that is describing the birds and the bees while their kid is rolling their eyes in boredom due to all the "street creds" he/she's already gained.
Occasionally a topic will come up that reveals to me, maybe it's time. For example the fact that he thinks Viagra is a pill that makes a man's penis soft and mushy. Or when he makes "doing it" jokes that clearly indicate he is fuzzy at best on the details. Then there are other times when I think, maybe not yet. Like the fact that even though he has "crushes" on girls he gets grossed out by the notion of kissing and his greatest flirting technique appears to be arm-pit farting the jingle bells.
So for now...I wait. I wait, I watch and I kid myself into thinking I will recognize that exact perfect moment when I have the exact perfect words to say the exact right amount. HA!
In the meantime I thank my lucky stars for the moments when my son still feels comfortable to tell me which girls he has a crush on, why he likes them, how he interacts. He still tells me about his insecurities and he says "don't tell dad" because for know I am the one he can tell the truth too. And I relish that because I expect it will change.
So the other day when he came home and mentioned that he had checked this book out and shared how he had had to hid the cover the entire time he read it so as not to get teased by his class-mates and/or recognized by his teacher, I wanted to grad the whole world and hug it. I melted a little at the selfish part of parenting,the part that lets you re-live moments of your own childhood and remember feelings that have long passed with clarity and fondness and I did what I frequently do which was to laugh with him about the experience and kiss his un-ruly mass of hair and tell him I love him so freaking much I could barf!!!!