Rating: 5/5

I have hundreds of science fiction and fantasy anthologies on my bookshelves, and I usually read them — particularly the reprint anthologies — a bit at a time. I pick them up, read a few stories, then move on to another. But from time to time I decide to read one straight through. I did this with Gardner Dozois’ Modern Classics of Science Fiction. 

Gardner Dozois was one of the field’s greatest editors, right up there with the likes of John W. Campbell and Horace Gold. His long stint as editor of Issac Asimov’s SF Magazine made it the best in the field, his Best of the Year series was the must-have best-of each year, and he also produced several original anthologies and quite a few reprint anthologies (some co-edited with Jack Dann and others with George Martin). 

Since the 1940s and 1950s had been covered so extensively in other anthologies, he decided that “modern” in this case would begin in the late fifties, though he then broke his own rule to include a couple of earlier stories that he thought essential. Thus the book covers 1955 to 1989. He also decided to leave out stories that have been anthologized a lot, and, for space reasons, to limit himself to one novella (Gene Wolfe’s superb “The Fifth Head of Cerberus”). And finally, he said that many of his choices were based on how the stories impacted hm personally. 

While I’d read more than half of these stories before, it was a pleasure to reread them, and it was also a pleasure to read those I was encountering for the first time. There are too many to name all of them, so I’ll just name a few of my very favorites: 

“Aristotle and the Gun” by L. Sprague de Camp. This is a well thought out and engaging time travel creating a new future story, by one of the best at crafting that type of story. 

“The Moon Moth” by Jack Vance. One of Vance’s best works, it’s set on a planet where people are always masked. Vance was one of the best at creating very different, but very well thought out societies and telling entertaining stories set in those societies. 

“Mother Hutton’s Little Kittens” by Cordwainer Smith. What can I say: I’m a huge Cordwainer Smith fan, and this short story by him is one of his most memorable. 

“The Fifth Head of Cerberus” by Gene Wolfe. This novella by Wolfe remains one of his best works. I’ve read it a number of times, and it continues to impress me each time I read it. 

“The Barrow” by Ursula K. Le Guin. A Le Guin story I had not read before! 

“Particle Theory” by Edward Bryant. Bryant was a great short story writer who seems almost forgotten, but his story certainly shows why he deserves more attention. 

“The Ugly Chickens” by Howard Waldrop. And speaking of great short story writers, Waldrop also belongs n that group. This is his famous, and one of his very best, short stories. 

“Chance” by Connie Willis. In his introduction to the story, Gardner noted that this story should have been included in any best of the year fiction anthologies, not just in SF ones, that it’s that good. And he’s right. 

There are also good stories by Michael Swanwick, Edgar Pangborn (a story later incorporated into Davy), James Tiptree, Jr., R. A. Lafferty, Roger Zelazny, Jack Dann, John Kessel, and others. It’s a really impressive list. 

In this introduction, Gardner notes that since his choices were personal, he’s sure that many readers would feel “why this story by X and not this other one” and “why isn’t a story by this author included.” I did feel that way. For example, while the Bruce Sterling story that was included, “Dory Bangs,” is certainly a fine story, I would have picked one of the Shaper/Mechanist stories. He lists a number of authors he’d liked to have included, and I agree that I would have liked to have seem stories by, among others, James Patrick Kelly, Fred Pohl, Kate Wilhelm, and Robert Silverberg. He doesn’t list Larry Niven, but a number of Niven’s stories from that period were important. And while he says he didn’t include any Harlan Ellison’s works since the key ones had been anthologized many times before, his works were so important in the 1960s and 1970s, I think the anthology would have been even better had it included one. 

Overall, though, a great anthology. I also own his Modern Classics of Fantsy, and I’ll read that sometime soon.