Rating: 4/5

Character is Fate…

This is my third novel by Thomas Hardy. I am familiar with the way Hardy’s realism shines in his writing and his pastoral prose that emphasizes the countryside of the settings he creates. Hardy uses the city of Dorchester, a place he was very familiar with, as the model for his fictional Casterbridge. In this novel, the town is caught between the agricultural age of England and the modern industrialized country. The conflict between the traditions of the past and the innovations of the future are evident in the ways our two main characters, Michael Henchard and Daniel Farfrae, transact their business.

One of the most dramatic opening chapters that I have read in quite some time involves a marital dispute. Michael Henchard and his wife and daughter arrive at a country fair in which his goal is to get drunk and wallow in his downtrodden situation. In a moment of hostility toward his wife, Henchard impulsively sells his family to a sailor for 5 guineas. The next morning, he is regretful when he finds her wedding ring lying on the ground and he realizes that it was real. He looks for her but is unable to find them. 

For 20 years, Henchard allows the incident of the past to overshadow his life and he really wants to make it right. He has also made a name for himself in the town of Casterbridge where he has prospered with a wheat business and has also become the mayor. Susan and daughter, Elizabeth-Jane decide to find her long lost relative after her sailor “husband” Newsom has been lost at sea. The women arrive in Casterbridge looking for Henchard. Meanwhile, the secrets abound and the twists and turns build and build in a truly Hardyish manner. If you are familiar with his stories, you know that tragedy will ensue at some point and that the characters will most likely go through a reckoning of sorts for behaviors and instances that cause hardship or struggles. Fate is considered and unseen forces and superstitions are alleged as the cause of the conflicts. Or could it really be the flaws in the character himself?

But the momentum of his character knew no patience.

This novel is complete with rivalries, love and marriage, jealousies, downfalls and rises, confessions, deaths, lying, secrets, revelations, reunions and disgraces. You will journey along with Henchard as he struggles with his impulsivity and his desire to be an honorable man. He is so human and such a one that is his own worst enemy that it’s difficult not to feel pity for him. 

The movements of his mind seemed to tend to the thought that some power was working against him.