Rating: 3/5

Read for school

Gives you a nice repertoire for analysing the structure of different kinds of cinema, from the very beginning with the Lumière's train, up through the silent era and beyond, including experimental films, animated films, and documentaries. What bothers me most about the book, is that it's a textbook that happens to be about a subject I like. As a result, it's a bit bland in its descriptions, especially if you know some basic things about the art before you delve in. 

Bordwell/Thompson usually go in depth about _one_ film every chapter, and use it as an example of the chapter's subject. It's worth noting that if I hadn't seen the film (like Hitchcock's 'The Birds', which was used as one point of analysis), it was practically useless, even with the in-depth plot recap and pictures to follow along. And it's understandable, the mediums beauty lies in the medium, which cannot be re-imagined in book-form. Therefore, I think the authors should have removed some of the padding catering to analysis of the films and just outright state that they expect you to have seen the film to able to follow along, it would have made the pacing of the book that much better. I just ended up skimming through the boring parts anyway, but I don't like it, because I become fearful that I miss something important.

My favourite things about the book, was that it was open for different interpretations of film – there wasn't a right or a wrong way. What they did, was to help you along the way by explaining the general tools films use in regards to convey a narrative in a way the audience finds natural, and pulls in examples of directors who deliberately does the opposite. It is clear that the authors holds an enormous library of film history within their minds, which makes you pick up several good film suggestions, as well as you are likely to read about some of your favourites. I'm a bit disappointed they dedicated so much time to golden-era Hollywood films, as I'm not generally a fan of them myself, but it's understandable as they laid the foundations for most of the narrative feature films you see to this day.

As a textbook, it is useful, but if I were to read about film in my spare time, I think I would have searched for something a bit more unique and opinionated personally.