Rating: 5/5

This is the best book I've ever read on the subject of 'forgiveness'. It is written with wit, biblical wisdom, practicality and compassion. It first disabuses you of all the caricatures of what forgiveness is - excusing, tolerating, condoning, etc. Then, as usual, Smedes comes at the subject with his typical hard-nosed treatment. In forgiving someone, the sin has to be grappled with for what it is - wrong, unfair, evil and hurtful. One should not simply gloss over and get over it but take it into account, experience deeply the horrendous evil that it is and call it to curse. It is in confronting sin as it is and coming to grips with the the deep hurts that it brings, that one could ever go on to slowly let go of the associated onslaught of anger and resentment. It is a long journey for most and one might have to forgive the same sin by the same person over and over again. One comes to know that forgiveness is beginning to bear fruit when one begins to see the adversary with new ('magic') eyes and the event of the hurt with a new perspective that sets one's heart free to love. While the goal of forgiveness includes the healing of the aggrieved, it also opens up the real possibility of reconciliation. But Smedes wisely cautions that reconciliation takes two parties and on this side of eternity, forgiveness needs not hang on reconciliation for its completion. This is as realistic as one can get.

In recent years, Smedes has been criticised (unfairly IMHO) for operating too much under the therapeutic mode and falling short of the reconciliation aimed at by the biblical ideals by such books as 'Embodying Forgiveness' by Gregory Jones. While the latter is a fine book to be read profitably in its own right, its critique of Smedes is in my reading wide off the mark. Smedes was charged as advocating a kind of forgiveness that is aimed primarily at healing the individual's hurts and ignoring the larger issues of sins, culpability, repentance and reconciliation. I think given Smedes' more modest aim in focusing on the discipline and experience of forgiveness in this book, he has simply been criticised for not writing beyond the scope of what he intends to focus on.I think this book should simply be taken on its own merits. One has to read it to see that Smedes writes not only with academic precision but also hard-won compassion culled from the tough work of forgiving your debtors in this broken world. It is an immensely liberating and life-transforming work!