Rating: 5/5

I do not rate too many books as 5***** but this is one of them. From the first few chapters, I was mesmerized by the stories of Chriatian scotland being spun by a sennachie(Scottish story teller) and also the other sotry intertwined within about a young American girl who travels to visit Scotland and visit a cousin before she gets married. The book is divided into four sections, book one, (6th cent) beginning with the early Christian saints, St.Ninian, St. Mungo(Kentigern) and St. Columba who helped Christianize early Scotland. The majority of this section is about St. Columba, and his story is fascinating as it details his move from Ireland at the behest of the Lord to Christianize pagan Scotland. His deep faith and love which develops for his adopted lang is beautifully told in this section which documents several of his miracles as well as his conversion of a very stubborn pagan king, Brude, in Alba, and how his druid priest also becomes a Christian.
In between each section it goes back to Mary, her cousin Brad, and Brad's friend gareth, as they travel through Scotland and hear the stories from Ahmish, a sennachie who accompanies them. Book two( 9th Cent.) tells of the Viking invasions and is devoted to kennith Mac Alpin, who is one of the early kings in Scotland. He united the Picts and Scots and began the joining together which would eventually become a country.
Book three tells of the Conquer of England by William in 1066, and how the royal family flees to Scotland to escape him. Margaret, who is to become Queen, marries Malcolm III. She is a very saintly woman who works with the poor and convinces her husband to help with her work. He loves her, and while he balks at first, he soon becomes her champion andworks with her to help the poor in the land. Margaret becomes the first saint of Scotland in the Roman church. It ends with their son, David becoming king.
Book 4 tells of William Wallace(of Braveheart fame)and his struggle to kepp Scotland as a country and rid it of the English who seek to conquer her. It tells of his battles, and his final execution in the Tower in London. It also tells of the cruelty of English King Edward to scotland and his efforts to destroy any scottish nationalism. Robert the bruch becomes king, and it is he who begins the work of uniting clans in Scotland to combine under one banner, the Saltire, and one country, Scotland. After several defeats, he finally routs the English at Bannickburn, and signs the Declaration of Arbroath in 1320 with England.
Interwoven in each book in a minor love story, which is very enjoyable and gives a matter of peace amongst all of the battles. I love the ending, the final part of Mary's trip to Scotland, but will not spoil it for anyone.
For anyone who loves Historical novels, Christian Historical Novels, and Scotland. VERY highly recommended.