Rating: 3/5

I have really enjoyed the books I've read by Melinda McRae. She's a good writer, and creates engaging characters, with depth and nuance. Her stories also go beyond the usual regency tropes, and have interesting and inventive plots. And her books have an authentic period feel.

Katherine, the heroine here, is a widow who lives on the edge of poverty with her young son. She's a beautiful woman with striking red hair. She's had to fend off a lot of men who are interested in getting her between the sheets. She rents a cottage from Knowlton, the hero. He's a very wealthy earl, who's also a first class rake. He's slept his way through London, with scores of bored society matrons, opera dancers, and cyprians. He makes no apologies for his lifestyle, and has no intention of ever marrying. He says throughout the book that he doesn't believe in love and has no heart.

Knowlton sees Katherine when he's down on his estate, and feels instant lust for the lush beauty. He becomes desperate to bed her. Meanwhile, we're shown that he's actually a kind person. He befriends Katherine's young son, and grows fond of the boy. He's an excellent landlord, treats his tenants exceedingly well, and they all adore him.

Katherine was a well-developed, multi-layered character. She really was a respectable widow, and that was important to her for the sake of her pride, and her standing in her small rural community. She still feels an attraction to Knowlton, and finds him difficult to resist, but she does. She's fully fleshed out, we learn her backstory, and her motivations and actions make sense. She was a wonderful character.

Here's the problem for me...Knowlton. He becomes increasingly obsessed with Katherine, and his behavior becomes increasingly obnoxious throughout the book. For example, he embarrasses her in public at a dinner party with his attentions, in an age when he knows that a respectable woman's reputation is everything. He keeps trying to slake his lust for Katherine with other women. He keeps flaunting these women (many who were cyprians and not received in polite society) at society events and locations, and especially before Katherine. His behavior - which got worse and worse - remained incomprehensible. There was no back story whatsoever for Knowlton. It wasn't enough to say he would never marry and had no heart. There was never any reason given. It isn't enough that he's falling in love with Katherine and doesn't understand his own feelings. He acts like a jerk for most of the book, but with no backstory, he becomes and remains totally unsympathetic.

It was also difficult to understand why Katherine was in love with him. Given the fact that he's as promiscuous as a rabbit, it was impossible to believe the HEA. This is not a man who will be faithful in the long haul.