Rating: 1/5

I really wanted to enjoy this book.

You ever do that? Pick up a book and assume it begins with 3 stars, hoping to move skyward.

I was looking forward to the crisp narrative of Colonial Realism, something like a Ben Franklin writing about mercantilism.

My college roommate loved the Leatherstocking Tales, and I was rewarded following his recommendations before, so I put them on the shelf to read 20 years later.

317 pages.

I looked at my mom over Thanksgiving with such an expression that she asked “what?” I told her halfway through the book, ‘it sucks.’

But I finish books, goshdarn. Even 1-star books. And in those last pages I captured my favorite sentence in the book:

”Here and there a bird was heard fluttering among the branches of the beeches, and occasionally a squirrel dropped a nut, drawing the startled looks of the party for a moment to the place; but the instant the casual interruption ceased, the passing air was heard murmuring above their heads, along that verdant and undulating surface of forest which spread itself unbroken, unless by stream or lake, over such a vast region of country.” (p. 305)

So at least there’s that.

Or my second most favorite sentence:

”The party was, however, scarcely uncovered before a volley from a dozen rifles was heard in their rear; and a Delaware, leaping high into the air like a wounded deer, fell at his whole length perfectly dead.” (p. 308)

I didn’t understand who the characters were throughout the entire book. There was no description to sink your teeth into. Maybe I should have started with the first of five Leatherstocking Tales instead of book 4. But I don’t think it would have mattered.

Some Indian tribes helped the French; others helped the English; they all fought each other. 2 young women were captured, and a chase materialized. There.

J. Fenimore Cooper is lauded as our first great American novelist. In that spirit, we are taught in middle school to revere his writing. Which is a mistake. He was merely the first to popularize Indian-speak, paleface.

I’m not the only one. Look how Mark Twain excoriates and rips apart Cooper’s writing here. Mr Twain, that’s exactly how I feel about it.

Cloying romanticism.

Unnecessary qualifiers.

Blind alleys. Sentences that could be removed—should be removed—to make a better flow.

I like Henry James and Wilkie Collins and Theodore Drieser. They have long sentences too, but no dead wood.

I also like that very few of my friends have read this book so that I can 1) not be called-to-the-carpet and 2) hopefully save you from this novel.

Just know when he lived, what he wrote, and spend more time reading the Federalist Papers.

I’m in a bad mood. Probably because of this book. The review stands, take it or leave it.