Rating: 5/5

El Bronx remembered, is a book filled with several short stories, all having to do with people who live in a neighborhood in the south Bronx which is none as el Bronx (in the book) during the time period of 1946-1956. The main characters would probably be the kids in the three different stories, because they come up the most, and their names are Hannibal, Joey, Ramona, Casilda, and Mary. In all of the stories the characters are struggling with multiple problems causing chaos in their lives. The stories in the book are: A Very Special Pet which is about a family that’s poor, who just moved from Puerto Rico, and they a chicken as a pet so the mother tries to kill it for dinner but she can’t once the children see. A New Window Display is about a group of kids that always meet in front of a funeral home window and they read the newest tributes to that person, who died, and then their friend died and they refused to go near there but one day they saw the tribute and they decided to stay and read them. Tell The Truth is about a daughter who is questioned for her mother’s drug dealing when her mother is in jail. Shoes For Hector is about a senior in high school who has no money for shoes and is forced to wear his uncle’s orange pointy shoes, with his navy blue suit. “Once Upon A Time” is about three young girls who discover a dead gang leader, to a Puerto Rican gang while playing in a building. Mr. Mendelsohn is about an old Jewish man who goes to a Hispanic family’s apartment every day until they move. The Wrong Lunch Line is about two friends who are torn apart because of their religion and race. A Lesson In Fortune Telling is about the same kids in A New Window Display but this time one of them likes a girl who every one says is a fortune teller, but is really a fraud. Uncle Claudio is about an uncle who hates the Bronx so decides to go back to Puerto Rico. Princess is about a dog that gets poisoned by a bad can of beans that a store owner tried to sell to a family. Herman and Alice is about a fifteen year old girl who is pregnant and she starts dating a forty year old man. The last story is Love With Aleluya and it is about the same kids in the other story a lesson in fortune telling but this time they like this girl who is very religious. 
Even though this book took place during the forties and fifties, it can still happen to this day. I thought that this book was a really good book because the author wrote such interesting stories that were linked in the littlest ways such as the uncle’s, daughter’s, friend went to the same school as the kids in the other story, or that they shopped at the same store.