Rating: 3/5

For some people - their happiest moments are marrying their childhood sweetheart or holding their new born baby. For me, it was that Friday morning delivery of a new mattress (memory foam - what dreams are made of). No more aching back, no more broken springs - I truly believed that in life - I finally made it! 
Of course it was nothing but a dream - that same evening, arriving home from an afternoon shift - I came home to what can only be described as a massacre. The mattress had been a victim of premeditated murder - and only a few feet away dry humping a rug was the assassin.

See, dogs are hard work. They don't tell you that when you buy them. It's not all ‘walkies’ and ‘playing fetch’ , sure that takes up a few hours of the day - but for the rest of the time it's trying to kick them out of the shower cubicle and trying to convince them that the outdoors would be an ideal place to poop and not in my slippers. 
But truth be told, even after all the fights and arguments we had, all the times I had to wrestle him off grandma - I would do anything to spend another day with him. 🐕 

And because of that - I knew this novel was going to be difficult for me. I read this primarily because it was recommended to me by an aunt who was convinced it's ‘the saddest thing ever written’. I don't know if I would quite go that far - but it is undeniably triggering. But I do feel I have to judge this read as objectively as I possibly can.

It's written well and it's effective in the sense that it does what it's set out to do - highlight the importance of bonds between human and animal - and also the importance of growing up to make hard choices. In that sense, it's a great piece of classic literature.
On the flip side - on a personal level, I just don't enjoy reading about losing animals. To the author's credit, it's not written in a way that's overly sentimental, but, nevertheless it's still difficult to read.

I also have to acknowledge, it's dialogue is pretty dated. That will not convince me to rate it any lower because I understand it was written in a different time. I am however surprised to learn many people read this in school no wonder those little brats look depressed
It has been labelled a classic - and who am I to argue otherwise. Just for my personal taste - it's not for me, although I respect the everlasting legacy it's left behind.

P.S. - although my dog has long passed away - I do now own a cat 😺. Due to this read I wanted to show him more affection, make the most of the time I have with him, so I've let him relax at the foot of my bed (still on a damn spring mattress). Not really the bonding I hoped for. Just licking his own butt while staring at me - quite frankly it's making me uncomfortable