Rating: 2/5

Lin Carter has respect for and admiration of the classic fantasy writers. In many ways, his World of the Green Star series is an homage to that era covering such giants as R. E. Howard and E. R. Borroughs. 

Thus, it may seem a bit old fashioned and stilted to current readers.

"but for the moment let me remark that one of their most remarkable scientific attainments was in the preservation of food. They had known a technique for instantly preserving food and it was upon these supplies of perfectly preserved nutriment that my master and I subsisted. Each apartment in the Scarlet Pylon contained a certain niche in one wall, protected by a panel. When this panel was opened, a switch caused a variety of foods encased in transparent cubes to revolve past the eye of the beholder in a recess. Roast meats and stews and all manner of vegetables and fruits, pastries and deserts, and a considerable variety of unfamiliar beverages, were on display in this manner, all in a condition of perfect preservation. Having chosen the repast you desired, pressure on a certain switch caused the transparent cube containing the food of your choice to be detached from the continuous sequence of stacked cubes. The cubes themselves were easily unsealed and when this was done the food or drink you had chosen was before you—steaming hot or cool and frosted, ready to be devoured. The supplies of these preserved foods set aside by the Ancients, as I soon came to think of them, seemed virtually infinite in variety and number."

Our “hero” is quite infirm on Earth but he has discovered a way for his essence to travel from Earth to the Green Star where, with some determination he can inhabit a dying body and begin a whole new life. In the first book he becomes the muscular protector of a princess. (Yes, it is a remarkable coincidence but the dominant species on this Green Star planet are humans physiologically exactly like us.) 

This time, he finds his way to another part of the planet carpeted in trees “as large as mountains.” He is taken to a lost city where technology from a previous race is being sought*. 
Here are some selections of Carter’s descriptions of this fantastic world. "Yet here on the world of the Green Star there had dwelt a people capable of tapping the energy-lattice frozen in solid crystal, able to navigate the atmosphere of their planet in magnetic sleds, and to imprison lightning in wands of artificial manufacture."

"The energy-impregnated crystals whereof the buildings of Sotaspra were constructed more than a million years ago (he told me) fed the mechanisms of the city with an inexhaustible flow of power. But the builders of the city had, in the course of ages, lost all control over the energy crystals, which went wild, their radiations breeding monstrous hybrid creatures which in time destroyed the city and slew the Ancients themselves."

"As it threshed madly about, shedding green, saplike gore, I perceived other such vegetable horrors slithering toward it from the further aisles of the fungi grove. In an instant they had coiled about their injured fellow, insinuating their bristling rootlets into its open wound, and clung to it, feeding like vegetable vampires."

"It was darker here than on the floor above, and the floor underfoot was carpeted with slimy mosses. Huge fungoid structures rose about me as I crept cautiously down the ramp—bloated and unhealthy fungi of enormous size, glazed with putrescent moisture, splotched with huge discolorations."

What I cannot rationalize is that Carter does not give us a finished book, nor did he intend to. He adopts the guise of a researcher looking over the posthumous chronicles of our protagonist.
"For the unfortunate reader, thus left hanging, as it were, I believe I can offer some slight amelioration of his uncomfortable position. While I have yet to penetrate very deeply into the unpublished portions of the narrative which is in longhand, by the way, and has to be laboriously and slowly rendered into typescript—and while I myself do not as yet know how the story ends..."

Obviously now, waiting isn’t a real issue since the subsequent books are all published. If you want, you can read them. For me, while the story was interesting, I found little to compel me to move on the other novels in this series. 3.5* for the part of this story in this book, but 2.5* for the hoax perpetrated on readers who expected at least some resolution of the plot.

Spoiler……….read no further

* His impatience grows as he really wants to search for the princess who was captured when his previous character met an untimely end defending her. (Book 1)