Rating: 4/5

EDITED BECAUSE MARY JUST POINTED OUT THE AUDIO IS ABRIDGED. I am extremely disappointed rn, and need to get my hands on a hard copy ASAP.

I read this on a bit of a whim, after being inspired by some excerpts from a different Sutcliff novel that Aerelin posted in her insta stories. She recommended I start with this one. (AND YES, I know Aerelin's name is actually Mary when I stop for two seconds and think about it, but Instagram is apparently taking over my brain. Sorry.) 

I was a little hesitant going in, because what if I didn't like it? There are some series (*cough* A Series of Unfortunate Events *cough*) that friends (*cough* Molly *cough*) have recommended and, to all appearances, I should like, but that I haven't really enjoyed as expected (so far, anyway. I haven't completely given up hope). When that happens, I feel guilty, because OBVIOUSLY the problem is with me, not with my friends or the books. So, I almost left this one to languish a little longer on my ever-growing to-read list. But then I thought, "Nope. I'm going to try this one now." I added "Read a book by Rosemary Sutcliff" to my current book bingo board, checked out the audiobook, and dug in.

Y'all. I finished this jewel in ONE. DAY. Do you know how long it's been since I finished a book in a day? Well, that's okay because I don't, either. 

It's beautifully written, and I sort of wish I'd known about it when I was the target reading age- I would have LOVED losing myself in Britain during the time of the Roman occupation. Even now, I get little shivers of delight as I think about it.

But it's not just a great setting- it's quality material. The characters are enjoyable people who are actually interested in making smart decisions. (All too rare in middle-grade fiction, tbh). And the themes! In this book is adventure and responsibility, bravery and true friendship. It's the type of book we would have been able to read at our lovely literature -based homeschool co-op, because the boys would have enjoyed it too. That was always the concern that was uppermost in our mothers' minds, since we girls would literally read anything and the boys were not nearly as enthusiastic. 😂 (Molly, let's make a note of this book for when we revive that co-op with our own kids, K? K.)

I'm trying to think of one word to describe this novel, and I am failing. The word that comes to mind is "sweet." It's the wrong word, to be sure. There is nothing sweet about war and danger and strongly opinionated women who carry themselves like queens (which is how I shall refer to people with good posture henceforth fyi) and characters who greet each other saying "Well met!" Okay, well, maybe that last one is sweet, but the rest of them are not. They are sad and terrifying and fierce. But nevertheless, sweet is the best adjective I have at this point. I will let you know if I think of another.

Thanks Aerelin-Mary! 😜 I really enjoyed this one! Looking forward to reading the rest.