Rating: 3/5

This is the next book in Candace's Book Club and I wanted to read it before the discussions. 

Candace explained it as Freud changing his theory about childhood sexual abuse because he was covering for his colleagues. Jeffrey Moussaieff Masson stresses that the reasons are speculation. His book is more clinical and historical rather than outright declaring the reasons. He's just asking questions and getting ostracized for it. What we do know is that Freud did cave in and changed his theory because of isolation and pressure from his colleagues and friends. 

It was difficult to read, not just because it does get clinical but because it's disturbing. Masson points to cases of sexual abuse and some get detailed. I could not read it for long periods of time. 

Obviously having access to the Freud archives and the unpublished letters means the book is well researched. Masson organized it into a streamlined historical look at the truth. He also included Freud's 1896, The Aetiology of Hysteria. Which oh my goodness, was it the translation or Freud's writing that's so wordy? Is German wordy? That took me so long to read. 

It is clear that Freud is a coward because he didn't stand up for the victims, instead he gaslit them. I don't want to get into the details, but so many messed up things happened. Look up Emma Eckstein. 

Anyway, I'll be interested to see what the book club says about this book because I went in expecting one thing and came out feeling it was something else. It doesn't declare anything, it's all speculation. Maybe Candace went down some rabbit holes and will have more information about Freud and his abysmal friends. 

3.5 out of 5 Studies.

Quotes:
Page 112- Freud was like a dogged detective, on the track of a great crime, communicating his hunches and approximations and at last his final discovery to his best friend, who may have been in fact the criminal. 

Page 137 - [About Sándor Ferenczi]Then came the obituaries by the men who had turned away from him when he was alive.

Page 168 - Freud, many years earlier, should have been angry at himself and his friend Fliess for recommending a dangerous and unnecessary operation.