Rating: 4/5

I picked this up to read as research for my own detective, Quinton Kirby, aka Quirk, co-star of my first novel The Mandroid Murders as I edited its sequel The Carborundum Conundrum (due out in the Summer from Space Wizard Science Fantasy). I had no intention of changing my character that much. Quirk is rather too (outwardly) effete in comparison to the hard-nosed gumshoes in this collection of four Chandler novellas. Really, I was reading this book to confirm that the feel of my Quirk &amp; Moth stories (of which there are two, about to be three), was right. I am pleased to say that I think it is, although my stories are much more of the here and now in terms of social mores.

But aside from that I found some highly enjoyable tales, very much loaded with cigar-chewing machismo, as one would expect from Chandler and, arguably, most books of this vintage. Chandler paints the noir on thick, of course, because that was the whole idea, and he did have a strong hand in inventing it. For the most part the dames are sharp as the olive in our hero's martini, or bitter as the beer he slugs down between whiskies and cigarettes. In the context of the re-writing of Roald Dahl's works (topical at the time I write this review), I suspect little of Chandler's prose would remain, although these stories are very much not for children, of course.

If anything, a book like this highlights why it is so important to retain literature in the form that it was created, with the author's intentions intact. How else can we learn from the past, and balance the values of one time period against another? Surely contrast is critical, and homogenisation is the enemy of creativity. And while on the subject of contemporary comparison, there is absolutely no way that an AI could have created some of the language, characters and plot points in these stories!

Of the four novellas - Smart-aleck Kill, Pick Up on Noon Street, Nevada Gas, and Spanish Blood - I think the last is my favourite, evocative of the labyrinthine plot of LA Confidential or Chinatown, with its twisted personal relationships at the heart of the action, but that could be said of all the stories here. I will be seeking out more Chandler, all in the interests of research, of course.