Rating: 1/5

JACOBS ASSERTS, ‘I KNOW WHY THE ALIENS ARE HERE’: COMPLETE CONTROL

David Michael Jacobs (born 1942) is an American historian and former Professor of History at Temple University (now retired).

He wrote in the first chapter of this 1998 book, “A careful examination of the UFO abduction phenomenon shows us that contact has, in fact, occurred---but it bears no relationship to these scenarios. There has been no public meeting, no involvement of leadership, no press coverage. There has, as yet, been no assistance, no cooperation, no war, no death, and no apocalypse. The contact has been on the aliens’ terms---and in secret. I never imagined such a scenario in 1966 when I first started to study the UFO phenomenon… My early research concentrated on sightings of UFOs. My working hypothesis was that if careful analysis of the sightings showed that UFOs were extraterrestrial, it would be the most important scientific discovery of all time. On the other hand, if analysis concluded that the objects were simply misidentification of conventional phenomena and the products of overwrought human imagination, the phenomenon would be relegated to the history of popular culture.: (Pg. 12-13)

He continues, “In my most recent research, I have uncovered information that allows UFO researchers to solve the UFO mystery… I have put many pieces of the puzzle together … and I do not like what I see… I am frightened of it. Understanding … has led to a profound apprehension for the future. The abduction phenomenon is far more ominous than I had thought… I know why the aliens are here---and what the human consequences will be if their mission is successful.” (Pg. 20)

He explains, “About 30 percent of the people who contact me decide not to undergo hypnosis at this point…I never know what is going to come out of a hypnosis session, If the subject recalls an abduction event---and there are ‘false alarms,’ when it seems that an abduction might have taken place but it did not---I begin a series of cautious questions… about 25 percent stop at this point---usually they are too frightened to go on. But for those who continue with me, I conduct as many hypnosis sessions with them as I can… I have conducted as many as thirty-three sessions with one individual, although the average ... is six… My style of questioning is not interrogatory. I engage in a give-and-take with the abductee after I am sure that they cannot and will not be led, even inadvertently… Hypnosis is easy. As long as a person wants to be hypnotized, anybody can do it…” (Pg. 31-32)

He acknowledges, “I realized that, in all sincerity and honesty, abductees might sometimes remember things that were not true. I resolved to work out a strict methodology to ensure vigilance about false memories… [when] an abductee reported something I had never heard before, I would wait for confirmation by another abductee… I carefully questioned every inconsistency, gap, or logical leap. I… tried to obtain a second-by-second recounting of each abduction event, with no skips, no gaps, and no omissions.” (Pg. 34)

He admits, “Star Trek has, in essence, become part of the American consciousness. Millions of people have seen these fictional accounts of humans and aliens, just as many people have seen reports of abductions on television or have read books about them. Society has been so imbued with stories about alien abductions that it is difficult for most people to escape them. A ‘pure’ abduction account is increasingly difficult to obtain.” (Pg. 41)

He also notes, “‘Leading’ is a serious problem in abduction research… When inexperienced or naïve hypnotists listen to an abductee’s story, they often do not recognize dissociative fantasies, confabulation and false memories, or alien-instilled memories. The result is that the subject leads the naïve hypnotist into believing an abduction scenarios that did not, in fact, occur.” (Pg. 46)

He observes, “[John] Mack’s and [Edith] Fiore’s dedication to helping abductees is unquestionably appropriate… But their (and other hypnotists’) reluctance to separate fact from fantast leads to a naïve acceptance of accounts that should be treated suspiciously. This shapes their research techniques and leads to validational questioning and mutual confirmation fantasies.” (Pg. 54)

He states, “We now know that the abduction phenomenon as a whole is not for the purpose of research. The evidence suggests that all the alien procedures serve a reproductive agenda. And at the heart of the reproductive agenda is the Breeding Program, in which the aliens collect human sperm and eggs, incubate fetuses in human hosts to produce alien-human hybrids, and cause humans to mentally and physically interact with these hybrids for the purposes of their development.” (Pg. 61) Later, he adds, “The production of a hybrid species appears to be the means to the aliens’ goal. So far, researchers have been unable to uncover any other purpose for the UFO and abduction phenomena, and the Breeding Program. Why are aliens producing hybrids?” (Pg. 128)

He states, “It is their personal relationships with human abductees that allow hybrids to have a semi-independent life beyond the confines of the UFL. Independent hybrid activity [IHA] constitutes an extremely important part of the abduction phenomenon. Indeed, it is at the very heart of the alien agenda… [It] is a logical outcome out the abduction phenomenon and the Breeding Program, and it has profound implications for the future of human-alien interaction. It involves hybrids who can, for short periods of time, ‘pass’ unnoticed in human society, acting independently and free from the presence and control of the grays.” (Pg. 184-185)

But he also says, “What are the reasons for this sadistic IHA behavior? It seems possible that some women are selected for abusive relationships. It is also possible that the malevolent behavior of hybrids toward abductees is necessary. Perhaps they need to generate fear, intimidation, guilt, shame, and humiliation to fulfill the objectives of their agenda… But if the aggressive actions are not necessary procedures, then it is possible that the human genes in the hybrids might be responsible…” (Pg. 206)

He comments, “The belief system of the New Age Positives is exceptionally strong because they know the alien gods exist. After all, they have actually contacted the individual ‘experiencer’… Of course, some New Age abductees have sought assistance from a competent hypnotist, one who is well-versed in the abduction phenomenon. As a result, they remember events that do not seem so positive. Often, the contradiction between belief systems and reality is overwhelming, and the abductee breaks off hypnosis, retreating into his protective New Age cocoon.” (Pg. 219)

He summarizes, “All the evidence seems to suggest that integration into human society is the aliens’ ultimate goal. And all their efforts and activities appear to be geared toward complete control of the humans on Earth… The aliens prepare the abductees for future events. Eventually, the hybrids or the aliens themselves integrate into human society and assume control.” (Pg. 251) He adds, “The new order will be insectlike aliens in control, followed by other aliens, hybrids, abductees, and, finally, nonabductees.” (Pg. 253)

He concludes, “In the end it is possible that it will be of some benefit to us, but if we survive as a species, the price for this charity will be relinquishment of the freedom to dictate our own destiny and, most likely, our personal freedom as well.” (Pg. 257)

This book is much more ‘far out’ than Jacobs’ previous book; it will interest some who are studying the ‘abduction’ phenomena.