Rating: 4/5

"The Black Alley" was the final Mike Hammer novel published before Spillane's death. It is a companion piece to the recently-published collaboration of "King of the Weeds." "Black Alley" begins the story finished in "King of The Weeds." It is Mike Hammer. It is Mickey Spillane. There is not much more that you need to know. Spillane wrote, particularly in his Hammer series, the toughest, sparsest, leanest prose filled with action that anyone has ever written.

 The early Spillane novels were controversial with the critics, but loved by the buying public. If you haven't read Spillane before, you are going to be pleasantly surprised at just how much of a professional writer he was. His books (every sentence in them) are superbly crafted. He was simply a master craftsman with a typewriter in his hand (and, yes, it was a typewriter when he started in the late 40's).

Black Alley has all the usual ingredients of a Hammer novel. Mike Hammer, aging now, slowly recovering from injuries suffered in a mob shootout, is as tough and explosive as ever. Velda, of the pageboy haircut, is as big and beautiful as ever and the love affair between them is the longest running romance in the history of modern fiction. Had Spillane simply wanted to write romance novels, he would have been the best of such writers. No question about it. Pat Chambers is here too. Captain Chambers is Hammer's old war buddy, now an aging Captain of Homicide and, at times, Hammer's conscience.

The overall plot is a bit goofy. The idea that the old dons of the mafia cashed out all their accounts and hid billions of dollars in a secret location in upstate New York to keep the money from the young guns who were set to take over the families is kind of loopy. But, once you accept that plot line (and it is no more goofy than the assortment of villains that Bond faced in his movies with armies of soldiers that no one was ever aware of), you will realize that it is another well-written, pounding, Hammer novel.