Rating: 4/5

“Nuanced” is one of those great homological words. (“Polysyllabic” is the usual example – a word that describes itself.) When multiple blurbs for a book call it nuanced, you can bet it’ll feature more in the way of inner life and less in the way of plot. Of course, this can be good or bad depending on how skilled the writer is, how interesting the drill-downs are, and the extent to which the M.O. might otherwise be hackneyed or boilerplate. It’s like jazz standards. I’m not talking about the ivory tickler at Joe’s Piano Bar in Des Moines – all glissandos and grace notes; I’m thinking more like Jarrett, Peacock and DeJohnette, where nuance is everything. We already know the tune, so our favorite jazzmen can play us the complements instead, merely hinting occasionally at the melody. The indirections alter our balance just enough to enjoy the ride. Often it’s the notes they don’t play that are the most transcendent. (Thanks, Thelonious, for that insight.) Before I get too carried away, I should say what must already be obvious: The Master is nuanced. In a good way. The standards are themes like love, longing, grief and regret. Toibin comes at these in an understated way, with subtlety and refinement to spare.

This is an interesting slice of biographical fiction based on the life of American-English writer Henry James. The action, such as it is, takes place from 1895 to 1899 in England and the continent. There is conflict, as any good book must include, but it’s usually the personal kind. Toibin’s account begins as Henry’s new foray into play writing is given a bad reception. Meanwhile, Oscar Wilde’s new play at a rival theatre was packing them in. For something to do the night his own play opened, Henry witnessed Wilde’s production, where 

“as the curtain rose and the audience began to laugh at lines which he thought crude and clumsy, he felt under siege. He did not laugh once; he thought not a moment was funny, but more importantly, he thought not a moment was true. Every line, every scene was acted out as though silliness were a higher manifestation of truth. No opportunity was missed in portraying witlessness as wit; the obvious and shallow and glib provoked the audience into hearty and hilarious laughter.”

Looks like Henry was quite the earnest highbrow, perhaps concluding that Wilde lacked nuance. Toibin did a good job going back and forth in time to give the context needed to understand the present-day Henry and his complicated relationships with people. One of these relationships was with Oliver Wendell Holmes who he knew from school days at Harvard. Here’s another snippet that reveals more about Henry’s perceptions (and Toibin’s fine writing) as it applies to Holmes and other Americans Henry had known who later became famous.

"When they came to England, they appeared mysterious to him, so confident, so adept at finishing their sentences, so used to being listened to, and yet they seemed to him, compared to men of their kind in England and France, oddly raw and boyish, their brashness a kind of innocence."

Another friend was the writer Constance Fenimore Woolson. She was also an American who lived in Europe. They travelled together, critiqued works of art together including each others, and might have become closer still had they both been the right types. Sadly, as Henry wrote to another friend, “she had always been a woman so little formed for positive happiness that half one’s affection for her was, in its essence, a kind of anxiety.”

Before the book, I knew next to nothing about James aside from the fact that he was prolific and from a famous family. His father was a prominent intellectual, his brother William was a famous philosopher and psychologist, and his sister Alice was a noted diarist. Toibin’s meticulous research provides what I’m sure is the real deal. And there’s plenty to be learned. To give the account even more authenticity, his text includes bits taken from letters by James, his friends and his family. Those familiar with James’s books say that Toibin captured the voice well with his ornate sentences and keen observations. The back cover likened it to Michael Cunningham’s book The Hours. 

Henry was sometimes hard to figure. His reluctance to act often had repercussions that were every bit as consequential as dramatic actions would have been. Several people – a favorite cousin, his sister, his friend Constance – expected him to share more of himself with them, but he was bound to disappoint, often using his work as an excuse. Then there was a failure to act on certain other impulses, which I’ll come to in a moment. His brother William observed another aspect of his nature, fairly or not:

“I believe the English can never be your true subject. And I believe that your style has suffered through the strain of constantly dramatizing social insipidity. I think also that something cold and thin-blooded and oddly priggish has come to the fore in your content.”

Books like this which rely heavily on a sense of period often focus on manners, it seems. This may be especially true where the n-word (nuance) is involved. Isn’t Jane Austen described as being all about manners? With her it was always women seeking men. With this one, it’s man seeking, uh, we’re not really sure, but it’s pretty clearly from a vantage point deep within the closet. The impulses I mentioned earlier, felt but not pursued, fall under this category. You can read as much into this as you want, but to me it was just another part of a man with more going on beneath the surface than above it.

Graced with nuance, the cowardice, the guilt, and the extreme sensitivity that would typically form an unsympathetic figure are combined with more redeeming traits to create an interesting composite. I wasn’t always sure I liked the guy, but he had a lot of facets to consider. The only knock I have against the book is that with all the long descriptions, my mind would sometimes wander. That said, it often wandered in entertaining directions – character parsing and the ineffable way of folks. All in all, it was a solid 4-star experience.