Rating: 4/5

Quick summary: 

Jim Hawkins lives at the Admiral Benbow Inn, with his parents, in an English seaside town. A man named Billy Bones comes to the inn to rent a room and begins conversing with young Jim. During their discussion, Billy warns Jim to be wary of a one-legged man. Billy is confronted by buccaneers who threaten his life, and then Jim discovers a treasure map. Others know about the map too and want to locate it, but Jim is able to hide with it for the time being. Young Jim, along with a crew, head out on a seafaring adventure to find Captain Flint’s treasure before anyone else does. 

My thoughts: 

Treasure island is an exciting adventure novel published in 1883 by Robert Louis Stevenson. The story is about buried treasure, pirates, and mutiny. It’s a coming of age story with iconic characters and an intriguing plot. 

This story is driven heavily by the plot, but the characters are all interesting. My personal favorite was Jim Hawkins, the primary narrator of the story. Jim is an honest character—far from perfect, and he doesn’t hide it. He accepts his mistakes and learns from them. It is young Jim’s perspective that makes this a coming-of-age story and leads to many plot twists. There is substantial character development with Jim and how he begins to better understand himself and the world around him. 

My son’s favorite character was Long John Silver and for good reason. He is the antagonist in the story. Intelligent, courageous and charming—he’s the villain you find yourself siding with throughout the story. Witnessing the skill of these characters and knowing their capabilities was one of my favorite aspects of this story. This book brought us to the controversial question: who is the hero?

This story was amusing for all my kids because they haven’t read many pirate stories. It was a nice change and never boring. They were excited to read it and enjoyed discovering all the parts in the book that Disney took and adapted into Pirates of the Caribbean.

I remember reading this book as a child in our school library. It was likely the first pirate story I’d ever read. As an adult reader, this book still held my interest today. It’s full of action and adventure, and it’s written well. While I didn’t love it, it was still an enjoyable read. I would recommend this book to anyone looking for a good escape read or one who enjoys immersing themselves in adventures—especially seafaring, pirate stories. This illustrated edition along with the audio by Neil Hunt brought this book to life.