The TLDR of this is that 1. I wish I'd read it when it was newer. 2. I kept marking passages with bookdarts. 3. I kept talking about it to my husband and 25 yo son, who are also intrigued. 4. I recommend it, if you can read it as something to think about (as he intended) instead of as if it's a textbook statement with all the answers.
---
Thoughts as I go along first:

People have different points of view, but also surprisingly different strategies for problem solving. And learning from each other is a good thing not only for better communication but for more tools to help us with the big problems of climate change, world peace, etc.

Common sense isn't common because there's less universality to human nature than many assume.

One can make the divider East/West as he justifiably does. And/or one can recognize, as I do, the traits within groups of ppl within the US, for example ppl who identify as moderate are more like the East in that they are after a Middle Way and understand that context &amp; harmony are important, whereas extremists (liberal or conservative both) are more like the West in that ambition is more individuated.

Lots of support for the author's position: anecdotes plus studies plus history...

But not counter-examples, not actual arguments to explain exceptions we might see, other fallacies.... Well, except for little bits, including a Note re' p. 170 that is interesting, &amp; that concludes "I have no idea why."

I found it an engaging, accessible read... but there are a few bits that get a bit too academic (so I just had to keep going past them) and there's some repetition. 

I note that our reading of diverse (esp. children's) literature needs to take these things into account, like the extended family that dotes on little East Asian children is teaching them harmony not spoiling them, and the second-generation Chinese immigrants break their grannies' hearts because they're not just sort of different, but to the core don't understand independence/interdependence.

In some respects it's stuff we've been thinking about for years/forever. In Shield, by Poul Anderson, from 1963, for example, we have a character (probably speaking for the author), say, "Man is not capable of being an autonomous individual.... He needs to be part of a whole culture, with duties as well as privileges." But Nisbett brings the idea front &amp; center, making us think it about it hard enough to see it clearly enough to be able to incorporate into our understanding of human nature &amp; how the world works.... Well, at least those of us who read the book... which I hope is lots of people!

Note that he's not saying every Chinese person thinks only about hierarchy and contextual harmony, and every American is obedient to pure logic of separate ambitions or whatever. But my musings lead me to suggest: I bet if he did interviews of respective subjects he'd discover that more East Asians think it might be cool to live as a member of a bee colony and that more Americans &amp; northern Europeans would get the willies at the thought.

Another thing I'm personally getting out of this is one of the reasons I don't fit in, in a lot of ways, in communities in the US. I am already more Zen than a lot of people who pay to go on yoga retreats. I'm not into dog-eat-dog, or rat-race, or winner vs. loser, or revenge. I am much more into one w/nature, we're all in this together, let's work towards a win-win. (But I admit, I do like formal Aristotelian logic.)
---
Ok done. I found the speech to text function on my PC so Imagonna give you *all* my bookdarts right now:

“There is an adage holding that every Chinese is a Confucianist when he is successful and a Taoist when he is a failure.”

“Algebra did not become deductive until Descartes. Our educational system retains the memory trace of their separation by teaching algebra and geometry as separate subjects.”

“Japanese schoolchildren are taught how to practice self-criticism both in order to improve their relations with others and to become more skilled in solving problems.“

“It should be noted that for the studies described in this section, and for all studies conducted by our research teams in which some participants were tested in English and some in another language, we used the method of “back translation” to ensure comparability.”

A visiting Japanese student attended a football game and was surprised when fans stood up out of their seats. “The American students indifference to the people behind him seemed unfathomably rude to him.” 

“Surveys show that Asians feel themselves to be in less control than their western counterparts. and rather than attempting to control situations they are likely to try to adjust to them.”

Which of these two things goes with the cow? Chicken or grass? Ask yourself, then see comment below. 

“Chinese remain far more committed to reasonableness than to reason.”

I want to find a book of Chinese proverbs, quotations, and or fables of the Aesop variety. Because Nisbett did and found differences between East and West.

An example of Eastern thought is the perspective that it's possible for one to posit 'A is right and B is not wrong either' even when those of us steeped in Aristotlean logic see A and B as contradictory. “This stance is captured by the Zen Buddhist dictum that 'The opposite of a great two is also true.'” 

“The dialectical approach would favor finding some truth in both in a search for the Middle Way.”

“One can be a Confucion, a Buddhist, and a Christian in Korea and Japan (and in China prior to the revolution).”

“Robert Abelson Has written a lovely book describing statistics essentially as rhetoric. I believe the metaphors are deep and correct.” Statistics As Principled Argument, I assume.
---
I will look for more recent works by the author, and check the GR Listopias to try to find other more recent &amp; related books.