Rating: 3/5

As is the case with most short story collections, there were stories I really enjoyed and others I didn’t like as well. I’m going to share my thoughts on each story.

Miss Lavinia’s Call - I liked Miss Lavinia from the first. The story was very short as far as time goes, and I wanted to see what happened next with Lavinia and Donny. I did like how sweet Lavinia was to the others.

Something Quite Forgotten - I really liked this story. Not only is it Christmasy, but it has the real story of Christmas and the influence of just one or two people. So sweet and lovely. I’d like to read this again some Christmas time.

A Government Position - I didn’t even remember this story without looking back at it. It was fine.

Star of Wonder - This was another Christmas story I enjoyed. Not much in the way of Christian message, but good and sweet.

The Ransomers - This story was sweet and touching. I did feel that I wanted to know more about the boys, and felt it a bit odd that the horse’s feelings were shown as though he was one of the characters. It was rather sad at the beginning.

The Esselstynes - How could I help but remember this story? It was GLH’s first “published” story. She was 12 when she wrote it and you can tell it was written by a child. But it did have a good message that showed how much her aunt’s stories were influencing her at the time.

Safety First - Another one that I can’t remember without looking at it. It was okay. 

Quiet Hands - Couldn’t recall this story without looking back. I didn’t really care for it as it a fictionalized telling of Mary, Martha, and Lazarus from the Bible.

A Journey of Discovery - Cute, but again, nothing really made me remember it.

A King to Rule - This story left me with so many questions and I’m not sure if the man and his wife were really Christians or just name only ones. I didn’t really care for it.

The Call - I teared up! I don’t do that very often in books, but this one just grabbed me. So good and challenging and encouraging.

Majority’s Hearth - This was hard to read because almost every character was a black person and they all talked with a typical accent that took more effort to read and thus made the story drag for me.

A Fair Foreclosure I don’t think any of these characters were Christians. There wasn’t any mention really of praying when trouble came. But I did have to smile over the men’s conversation about two different topics.

The Forgotten Friend - A good story with a good message.