Rating: 3/5

I'm writing this review of Neal Stephenson's The Confusion after finishing it and the final book in his The Baroque Cycle. So you can be sure that this review is going to be full of the sort of specifics and vivid details that make book reviews interesting. And you can be sure that, if I didn't think the entire concept took away from the art of reading and writing, that last sentence would have an upside down exclamation mark at the end of it, opensarcasm.com style.

My main problem with The Confusion, as with the entire cycle, is the sheer amount of detail. It seems strange that I, as a lover of the nineteenth century novel, should ever voice this complaint. But there it is. There were some fantastic moments in The Confusion, full of action, suspense, and surprise, but I felt like, to get to them, I had to read through chapters and chapters of descriptions--nautical details, explanations of economic theory, or complete prose maps of cities from the arches of famous monuments to the consistency of the gravel streets to the filth of the underground sewers--that slowed my reading to a halting and tedious speed that could only be compared to the speed of a frail woman wading through tar in a heavy velvet ball gown. (It can only be compared to that: no other metaphor will do.) I feel as if I can't really fault Stephenson for this. If I forced my mind to focus, his descriptions or explanations were lively, controlled, and often witty, but my mind wanted to leave the tar-wading woman behind and get to the action.

Though Stephenson's cast grew to include new and engaging characters like Moseh, the clever man with the plan, Dappa, the articulate linguist, and Jeronimo, the hot-headed warrior, and continued to develop characters from Quicksilver like the schemer Eliza and the sergeant Bob, Jack, the king of the vagabonds, dominated my interest in this installment of the cycle. Like the pirate that shares his name in the multimillion dollar motion picture franchise, Jack is a sort of chaotic neutral character with inimitable style that is constantly forced to choose between what is honorable and what the imp of perverse in his mind is selfishly egging him on to do. Though the reader knows Jack well and can likely predict which side he is going to choose, Jack is by no means predictable. He is far too cunning and wild to be predictable. Readers may know what he is going to choose, but never how he will choose it, and Jack's style makes him all about the "how".

My strongest commendation for The Confusion is likely that, as soon as I finished it, I was more than eager to start the The System of the World.

"For every human being who is born into this universe is like a child who has been given a key to an infinite Library, written in cyphers that are more or less obscure, arranged by a scheme--of which we can at first know nothing, other than that there does appear to be some scheme--pervaded by a vapor, a spirit, a fragrance that reminds us that it was the work of our Father. Which does us no good whatever, other than to remind us, when we despair, that there is an underlying logic about it, that was understood once and can be again."

"People could only make sense of complicated matters through stories."