The story of a color is, of course, the story of how humans perceive that color and, comparatively, other colors. It was fascinating to read about the lack of mention in early records of the color we know as blue. The color blue seemed to arise out of a growing human perception of color, of the color wheel, and of the development of dyeing techniques.
Superstitions, and belief systems played an important part in establishing a color hierarchy in fashion in the 13th century, when this book begins it's history. The influence of religion and politics continues with some effect to this day.
The story of dye discoveries, using woad in the earliest years of blue colorizing and then indigo as a brighter, more resilient dye, and also, who had access to the colorants is, again, a story of humanity and civilization. In the late 19th and early 20th century, while France was insistant on having blue uniforms for it's soldiers, England controlled most of the supply of indigo. The French government compromised and gave their troops blue coats but bright red trousers. The heavy human losses in French military campaigns into World War 1 have been blamed on their soldiers' visibility in the field.
This study of blue diverges weirdly into several pages on the history of the French flag (and a couple of it's competitors). (Blue, may I remind you, comprises only a third of the French flag.) True, the author is French, but as much time could have been spent on the British, the US, the Czech, the Russian, or any other tricolored flag.
I picked up this book because blue is my favorite color. The book concludes that blue is about half the world's favorite color, so I, or you, if you share this characteristic, shouldn’t feel so special.
I found the final sentences oddly philosophical, if not judgemental. After a discourse on how the color blue evolved in human perception from a warm color to a cold color, and how that change might have occurred with the growing use of blue to signify bodies of water on maps, rather than the green used in the earliest maps, the author concludes: "In the collective imagination and daily life, however, it took quite a while for water to become blue, and for blue to become cold. Cold like our contemporary Western societies, for which blue is at once the emblem, symbol, and favorite color."