Rating: 3/5

Judged merely as a book—in eloquence and excitement—this autobiography is fairly mediocre. It begins strong, recounting Washington’s childhood days in slavery, his struggles to educate himself, and the plucky determination which saw him through the founding of the Tuskegee Institute. But by the end, the book devolves into a kind of extended advertisement for Washington’s school and his work, which hardly makes for compelling reading.
		
But this autobiography is far more than a bit of light reading. It is an important document in American history, encapsulating the perspective of a persistently controversial black intellectual. Washington comes across as dauntless, upright, and most of all optimistic. And his approach to black advancement is an extension of this rosy attitude. He believes that, fundamentally, poor blacks, rural whites, and rich northerners all share common interests, and thus all stand to benefit by working together. Thus, his approach entirely shies away from conflict and confrontation, and instead focuses on carving out a space for southern blacks to work and live in peace within the wider society. 
		
The most common criticism of Washington is that he was an accommodationist—making a kind of devil’s bargain with white supremacy—but this seems too harsh a judgment to me. Washington was working in the Black Belt of Alabama, a place where lynchings were common and open defiance dangerous. In such circumstances, to build such a durable institute of higher learning for the black community, as Tuskegee has proven to be, is an accomplishment of no small merit. Nevertheless, even though Washington’s vision of black self-advancement is appealing, it does sidestep the question: Is it right to ask a disenfranchised people to work their way out of a poverty they were forced into?
		
Looking back from the present day, it is difficult to see Washington’s belief that bigotry will naturally disappear as anything but naïve. Yet if excessive optimism and excessive pessimism are both vices, I think that the former is undoubtedly to be preferred.