Rating: 2/5

As research for a novel I'm writing, I'm reading detective fiction and stealing everything with street value. My story takes place in L.A. of the early '90s, but I'm flying all over the map with a diversity of authors and time periods. Next up is my introduction to the fiction of Paula L. Woods with her 1999 debut Inner City Blues, which introduces LAPD detective Charlotte Justice in the first in a series of four. I have a few pet reasons I'll discuss for not giving up on a novel that's both too much and not enough, but by 25%, I'd gotten off the bus, skimming to the end.

The story is the first-person account of Charlotte Justice, thirteen-year LAPD veteran who as a detective in South Bureau Homicide has investigated more murders in five years than most detectives do in a career. We're introduced to her in April 1992 in uniform as the biggest American civil insurrection of the century engulfs L.A.. Justice and a crew of cops are on a bus en route to a strip mall in South L.A. when they spot a black man in hospital scrubs appearing to break into a car. The bus pulls over and Justice intervenes to stop some of her peers from instigating another Rodney King beating. She dislocates her shoulder in the process.

Justice and her partner remove the doctor from the scene and go to his hospital to treat her injury. Justice's brother, an ex-cop who became an attorney to fight the LAPD, meets her there and they're reunited with a childhood friend, a hospital administrator who has Justice swooning with his GQ centerfold style. News soon reaches them that a dead body has been found near the scene where they found the doctor acting suspiciously with the doctor's wallet on him. The dead body is none other than the fugitive suspected in murdering Justice's husband and daughter years ago.

I'll start with the good. Woods employs chapter titles, which few authors do and I always appreciate. Charlotte Justice? Get the fuck outta here with that family name, but okay, I was ready to go with the flow from the verve of Woods' first paragraph:

Twelve years, eleven months, and fifteen days into living out my Top Cop fantasies--Christie Love with a better hairdo--my Nubian brothers down on Florence and Normandie had to go and pitch a serious bitch and mess up my cha-cha. Since May of '79, I had survived my years with the LAPD with little more than a few bruises, a shoulder prone to dislocation, and a couple of badly torn fingernails.

Not great, but there's a lot of ingredients in that gumbo. The opening scene is immersive, as Woods, who clearly knows L.A.-its geography, racial history and its police force--places the reader in the L.A. Riots. 

As the novel introduces a crime and needed to show Charlotte Justice becoming obsessed with solving it, the book fails in three areas. If three engines fail on a 747, the plane can stay in the air and land. But if you're headed to Pismo Beach and make three wrong turns with no course correction, you end up in the Mojave Desert, 350 miles from where anyone wants to be. That's Inner City Blues. 350 miles from where I wanted to be. 

The first wrong turn comes with the number of characters. There are way, way, way, way too many. There's Charlotte Justice. There's her partner. We have a racist, sexist co-worker. We have a suspect-type character. We have Justice's brother. We have her childhood heartthrob. We have a nosy neighbor. We have her lieutenant. There's a co-worker making unwanted sexual advances toward Justice. There's her dog. There's her deceased husband and daughter. There's the man who shot them. There are other LAPD detectives ...

My understanding is that Woods generated her novel by first writing about the Justice family, the family of a black female cop. But "writing" and "story" aren't the same thing. What story there is here is out of focus, like someone recording video at a party and whipping the camera around from person to person to person. 

The next wrong turn is the mystery. Our victim is the killer of Justice's husband and kid. In other words, the most compelling character in the book is killed off page. Witnessing your family gunned down would be horrifying. That seems like a much more powerful opening than a novel that begins by focusing on the geography and history of L.A. I feel for one, feel much less for the other. Focusing on this violent act and how it impacted Charlotte Justice, how it set her off on her journey, that's a better story. Woods came up with it, had it, then lost it and her novel unravels as a result. 

Another problem I had with Inner City Blues is Charlotte Justice. Raised in a Buppie household--where status, education and the example you set is everything--Charlotte is also surrounded by those expectations as a grown woman. Family is all over the place. This makes for a very proper main character who doesn't curse, drink, smoke, gamble, have promiscuous sex, issue strong opinions, eat ice cream out of the bucket or do anything that would make her interesting. True, Hercule Poirot doesn't curse like a trucker and Miss Marple doesn't smoke weed. What Agatha Christie does is confront them with a compelling mystery.

We have the centerpiece of many mysteries--a murder victim--but Justice isn't really investigating his death due to the fact that he killed her family and there exists a conflict of interest. We have a detective, but with her arm in a sling with a dislocated shoulder, she's limited in what she can do physically. Justice talks to people and goes a few places, but nothing much seems to happen to her. She's an uncompelling character talking to vast numbers of uninteresting people about an event or events that didn't mean much to me.