Rating: 1/5

Update, May 2021 Where I live has the most exclusive and best-tasting salt in the world. All over the Caribbean are salt ponds fringed with mangroves. Once every ten years or so there will be a major storm which will fill the ponds with water, and then there will be a drought of at least four months, which will evaporate it completely leaving huge salt crystals, untainted by any pollution at all, since there is no industry for thousands of miles. This salt is the saltiest salt you've ever tasted, and one pond is distinguishable from the next. These crystals are a little whiter, a little yellower, bigger, or smaller, you can taste the difference, and they are no more like table salt than French champagne is to Prosecco. 

2019 was the last year for this. Hurricane Irma had filled the ponds in September 2017, then an early drought in 2019 meant the ponds were drying out. My son used to go and find conchs who would die and take them out to the sea, to deeper water. He collected about 7lb of salt, enough for presents and until the ponds dry out again.
_____________________

I read several chapters of this. It was mind-numbingly boring. Lists, lists, lists of everything that has ever been done with salt. What different countries, cultures and times have done with salt. The word salt in many different languages. That old thing about salary being the precious salt that the Romans paid their military in, right. I was praying for a relief from the tedium of this book. But all I got was the odd not-at-all interesting anecdote. I don't know how the rest of the book progressed but I don't care either. 

This was about as interesting as reading the long list of all the ingredients in a box of Twinkies where you can't pronounce half of them, have never heard of the rest and are only reading it because there isn't anything else to read. (Like you do cereal boxes or the ketchup bottle). That said, the book Twinkie, Deconstructed: My Journey to Discover How the Ingredients Found in Processed Foods Are Grown, Mined (Yes, Mined), and Manipulated Into What America Eats was actually very interesting. If Steve Ettlinger could make that interesting, I don't see why Kurlansky failed so utterly with Salt. 

But he did, at least for me. A lot of Kurlansky's other books sound very appealing, but I'm wary now...