Rating: 3/5

This book ought to have easily won me over as it is a travelogue and about long distance cycling and about France -all of which I love. A review on the cover promises "hilarious self-deprecation", but to be honest, he wasn't self-deprecating enough, and when he was it was in the way a swotty student says insincerely "I'm going to fail" only to achieve an A*. I found his vainglorious, narcissistic boasting grating after a while, and grew to the point that by the end of the book, I had grown an irrational dislike of the author. With almost no prior training, supposedly, he manages to do 16 km at an average speed of 27.7 k.p.h. -all the while dismissing his lack of fitness. To do that on a fully laden bike with no training. As someone who considers 16-20 k.p.h. a pretty decent cycling pace, I found this galling, but then again, I am not into competitive cycling; in a word, the pursuit of high speeds is all about inflated EGO. My early suspicion that the author was a man who needed to massage his own ego as much as his legs, actually far more than that, was confirmed in many glaring and cringeworthy examples, which were echoed also in his pretentious use of language, for example, why use "bidon" when "water bottle" is what they are known as online and in shops, and most of all, by cyclists? (I couldn't help but think that had he used the less high faluting word, he might have avoided the build up of bacteria in his bidons due to sugary drinks.) It was strange that he chose k as his abbreviation for kilometres, for no obvious reason, especially when km is the norm, and it reminded me of parents who give their children's names unique spellings. Apart from these excesses, the writing was good and the command of English was top drawer. 

He seemed to fish for compliments about how great he was in every encounter. He couldn't share the road with another cyclist without being taken over by an inordinate desire to pass them out, especially if they were elderly. Here are some examples I found just nauseating to read. "I withdrew my odometer[his cycling computer to you and me], which I'd unclipped from ZR [his bike!] in order to gloat over."
About a group of club cyclists, "offered the first suggestions that the malaise blighting French cycling may be traced to the neglect of competitive training in favour of poncing about in new-season jerseys..." Personally, cycling should be about poncing about the bike, if that means enjoying cycling at a pace that suits you. 
"It was beginning to look as if I might be becoming rather great."
"...then set off to cover those 15 waterside kilometres for the third time in little over an hour." - rub it in my face why don't you; I'd be happy to do one lap of 15 km in an hour. 
"Our whole cycling relationship had been founded on the unspoken assumption that I was much better than he was." Ego much?
"...and with my average speed down at a risible 22.9..." - risible? I was thinking: Stop fishing for compliments, hold out your net and I will throw you five flatteries and a praise. 
"Feeble Sunday-morning amateurs."
"Despite myself I got up on the pedals and gave him a bit of a show." 
"If I wanted to be taken seriously by my masseur, the hair would have to go." - the Ego would be a far more apt extraction. 
"Feeling smug and splendid and world-famous."p.262 - pass me the bucket.
"they (three teenage girls) even plotted my weary passage through their lives with glum envy." - humility is something, isn't it?
It was such a shame that Moore lived up to the ego-driven stereotype of racing cyclists because the book is humorously written and contains many gems from cycling history. I remember being told smugly by a passing cyclist - a similar obsessive about speed - "you need a smaller pump!" The book had that flavour about it. Why can't people just go and enjoy a cycle without worrying if they are the best? Anyway, without giving too much away it was no surprise that the EGO was finally transfigured, assumed or ascended in the end.