Rating: 5/5

Incredible story....
This book was first published in 1994.....
....then made into a film in 2001.

Thanks to my friend, Iris, for talking with me about this book....
....Iris grew up in Dominican Republic - and through our friendship she has told me her own stories about life, culture, and politics in the Dominican Republic.

This book 
.....introduced to me a new author I had not read ...
only to discover how wonderful of a novelist Julia Alvarez is: a powerful historical fiction/nonfiction storyteller. 
I plan to read more books by Alvarez.
She has a new book out in
April called, “Afterlife”. 

 “The Mirabal sisters didn’t disappear. They grew wings. They inspired novels, movies, plays, and dances. They inspired the United Nations to establish November 25, the day of their murder, as an international day to eliminate all violence against women”. 
The sisters have become known in history as Los Mariposas-“ The Butterflies”

The sisters were among the leading opponents of 
Gen. Rafael Leonidas Trujillo’s dictatorship. 

Minerva, Patria, Maria Teresa, and survivor, Dedé— each told their own story. 
....There were crushes.... marriages, children, divorces...
....There was gunrunning, 
....There was prison torture, 
and 
....There were horrors - frightening devastating under Trujillo’s rule. 

....There was also the day that Trujillo was assassinated by a group of seven men: some were his old buddies. 

By age 10, three sisters entered the La Escuela de 
Imaculada Concepcion. 
It was the beginning of getting a higher education and learning revolutionary ideals.

Through education, the youngest sister Maria Teresa ‘Mate’, oldest sister Minerva and Patria — developed themselves into modern women, no longer slavish, obedient members of the machismo culture. 

There was a forth sister: Dedé.
She was the middle sister ....the most obedient ....
...the sister who survived to tell the story. 

The family suffered retaliation from the military intelligence service (SIM). 
As vengeance for their political activities, Trujillo ordered the three sisters to be killed on Puerto Plata Road...
Their driver, Rufino, was killed also.
The sisters were returning from visiting their husbands in jail. 
They were beaten to death and later the vehicle and bodies were dumped off a cliff in order to make their deaths look like an accident. 

Julia Alvarez heard about—ha...”the accident” when she herself was just a young girl. 
She couldn’t get the Mirabal sisters out of her mind and took frequent trips back to the Dominican republic to seek out as much information she could. 

The sisters were incredibly courageous - they willingly risked their lives doing what few men had done - they fought for justice. Sadly, it resulted in their deaths. 

Alvarez gave us factual details... and her creation of the Mirabals..
It was easy to see how much ‘care’ Julia Alvarez had for the sisters: each with specific personalities and temperaments.

By the end of this book, I felt much admiration for Alvarez. 
With her diligent research -
and a pure heart ..she found a way to keep the sisters spirit alive for me.
I also have a better understanding of the nightmare - the sacrifices - the suffering -and losses they endured. 

 “You must show the nation you are it’s jewels, Immaculada Concepcion girls. Is that perfectly clear?”
Ha.....
 YES...
it’s clear: ( so deeply sad, frightening and painfully heartbreaking to think about the insanity the women faced)...
But yes...
 .... the sisters ‘did’ show us they were “jewels”! 

Thus was a wonderful fiction/nonfiction book — rich with history—page turning storytelling.....
Grateful I read it!

Thanks, Iris!