Rating: 5/5

Wow. This was my introduction to Arthur C. Clarke, and to say that it has piqued my curiosity in the author would be an understatement. More like kindled a fire using fuel that I never new I possessed.

A few notes are in order:

1) This review does not factor in Clarke's re-write, The City and the Stars, at all.

2) This book was written in 1948. This blew me away -- it does not feel dated at all and reads like it could have been written today. Given the massive leaps forward in science since then, this is a remarkable achievement.

Now, onto the review.

Against the Fall of Night centers on Alvin, the youngest member of the city of Diaspar. Diaspar is the last remnant of human civilization on Earth, the lone oasis in a literal world desert. The city has been in an extended period of stagnation, with apparently no significant changes in hundreds of millions of years. This is largely due to the apathy of its citizens, who have lost all curiosity over their seemingly eternal lifespans. Alvin, however, is an exception, and his inquisitive mind pushes him forward, at great risk to the order of Diaspar. 

Clarke's prose is delightful. It is not flowery or discernibly poetic, but it has a grace and vigor that is lacking in science-fiction. Consider the opening sentence:

"Not once in a generation did the voice of the city change as it was changing now."

Or a brief description of the Council of Diaspar's fear:

"He had put his finger on their secret fear, the fear that he had never shared and whose power he could therefore never understand."

Clarke's descriptions are brief straightforward (although this Classics major did appreciate the wonderfully appropriate reference to Odysseus, complete with Homeric epithets), but this merely proves Clarke's skill, since he evokes a sense of wonder and feeling with little recourse to extended similes. When they do occur, they are effectively used, and are often the perceptions of the characters themselves (e.g. the machine room). Clarke's style possesses an elegance and beauty that is manifest even in his earliest work.

In Against the Fall of Night, we encounter questions of direction evolution, urbanity v. nature, intellectual curiosity, life in the universe, exploration, religion and philosophy, isolationism, cultural stagnation, the dangers of science, corporeality and consciousness, the immensity of the universe (spatial and temporal), history and the recording thereof, transitions in human history, and more. The themes of synthesis/the Golden Mean and the importance of human drive predominate, but all the others appear. This all occurs in around 200 pages. What makes Clarke's novella so successful is that none of these themes feels underdeveloped. While some are merely tangential to the primary story arc, they are discussed and contextualized in Clarke's future Earth, and so feel both integral and necessary components to his beautiful whole. The reader is left with a desire to know more about this world, but it is a positive desire: Clarke has so competently built this world that we want to know more about it (the negative alternative being that we want to know more because we know too little to enjoy the story). Clarke leaves much to the imagination, but never too much.

I have read in other reviews that a flaw of the book is the lack of character development. Even more egregious are the claims of nonexistent or inconsistent characterization. The second is simply absurd -- the characters are provided realistic personalities, and at no point was there an out-of-character moment. Alvin, for example, is driven, curious, but also arrogant, rash, and egotistical. Is this not an expected outcome of his singular inquisitiveness in an apathetic city without pain or suffering and thus with no need for forethought? I see no contradiction, no inconsistency.

On the subject of character development, it is true that development is not the point of Against the Fall of Night. But that is not an inherent problem. Do I read Milton in order to ponder issues of technology and human evolution? Do I read a Raymond Carver story in order to be taken on a fantastic voyage? Character development is not a requirement for every work; it is merely one element upon which the author may choose to focus. Furthermore, I would argue that development does occur -- Rorden, the Keeper of the Records of Diaspar, undergoes a remarkable change in outlook as he learns more about the history that is his job to guard, as does Jeserac, Alvin's tutor. While we are not privy to extended internal monologs about every decision, the characters are still people, not flimsy constructs. The fact that Clarke manages even this given the brevity of his story is astounding.

Against the Fall of Night is a remarkable achievement. It is full of wonder and hope. It is written beautiful. It is thought-provoking and visionary. The characters are realistic. It remains relevant. It leaves us wanting more, but it gives us enough. In brief, read it.