Rating: 4/5

COUNTDOWN: Mid-20th Century North American Crime
BOOK 38 (of 250) AWARD: Favorite Book about Books
Books about books are usually disappointing: the book inside the book is most often non-existent so we can't reference it or find it anywhere. And that book is usually one in which some kind of big secret of the universe is revealed and scholars the world over are looking for it. But we never actually find/get to understand that book/that secret, so this sub-genre is usually disappointing to me. But Stout subverts this genre by presenting 1) a random book on a shelf that contains an odd list of names; and 2) a book entitled 'Put Not Your Trust' and 3) a real book from which 'Put Not Your Trust" is a quote. Stout not only reveals the book but readers can research that book. Oh, how Stout delivers on his promise to give us a murder by the book.
HOOK - 4: First of all, the title itself grabbed my attention. The opening line goes: "Something remarkable happened that cold Tuesday in January." I'm not one for being a fan of openings with weather, but by the end of the first page we have a murder to investigate. And books to study.
PACE - 3: If you've read a Wolfe/Stout novel, you know there will be much talk about orchids, food, and beer. These objects seemingly would bring the story to a screeching halt, but these elements are always part of Wolfe's world, and Stout knows how to employee these elements as part of the story.
PLOT - 5: An author writes a book that may or may not reveal illegal goings-on at a law firm. But for me to say another word, other than "Brilliant", would be criminal. I'll add "mind-bending." And "ingenious".
CAST - 4: As always, Nero is a miracle of massiveness, physically and mentally. We have his side-kick Archie and their cook, Fritz. Then there is Nero's three runners: 'Saul Panzer, small and wiry, in his old browwn suit; Fred Durkin, with his round face and spreading bald spot...and Orrie Cather with his square jaw and crew cut, looking young enough to still be playing pro-football." Not to mention the gardener who lives on the roof with the orchids. Most often, one will fine 7, yes 7, men together for long periods, not a lady in sight. Makes one wonder.
But as Archie says to Nero, "You have a low opinion of women and-now let me finish-anyhow, you don't want them around." Perhaps Nero surrounds himself with thousands of magnificent orchids as substitutes: he himself weighs about 300 pounds and perhaps feels he is unattractive to the ladies. (I digress...)
ATMOSPHERE - 4: Nero's New York townhouse is fabulous and always nice to visit. Here, too, we have law offices with slabs of marble everywhere. Then there is the glass house on the roof, sweaty and swampy.
SUMMARY - 4.0. At one point, Archie finds himself in a trick situation that could result in a death. He starts talking and "a rattle came from the drum, and the band slid into a trot," as Archie talks his way through and out of a bad moment. I really enjoy Stout's writing. And about Nero's brilliance, Nero says to the cops as he wraps up the story/mystery, "...that would mean that I have exposed a murderer and forced him to a reckoning without a scrap of evidence against him." Which is exactly what happens. A smart work, all around.