Rating: 4/5

I loved the Pern series when I was a kid (still do, in fact) and it was one one of my go-to feel-good series for many years. This slim volume bought back many happy memories of the books (only reread a couple of years ago) as well as filling in some gaps I never knew existed.
Before I go much further, I should point out that I have a ridiculous love for source books such as this: if done well, they illuminate and enhance the source material, rather than just rehash tired bios and stories. I have been known to keep source books for series that I no longer have much interest in simply because they are beautiful artifacts that make me feel fondly towards something that may have been improved by the writer devoting more time to their writing rather than their worldbuilding.
In hindsight, I've often thought of the Weyr/Hold society as a post-scarcity quasi-mediaeval utopia (because while I dislike labels in general, I love snappy, sound-bitey pop-psych labels for things I have a ridiculously heavy interest in). This confirms it as we learn more about the screening process for the original colonists, which shows that characters such as Fax and Meron were aberrations and also why most of the "villains" of the series are more antagonists than actual baddies (I've loved this sort of retconning ever since I found out about the "Heisenberg compensators" built in to the transporters in Star Trek: The Next Generation). It also discusses the "adrenaline junkie" problem that the Oldtimers had which made them so agreeable to coming forward in time and being party to one of the more bizarre time loops in SF: Lessa goes back in time to bring the needed dragonriders forward because there are too few dragonriders in her time... because she went back and got them, thus creating the shortage...
The tone of the book is friendly (99% of people reading it are going to be fans already, right?) but not overly fannish (YMMV, of course) and it generates discussion and questions and a closer examination of the original texts (Sorry about all these brackets). It also allows you to look at characters in a new light which makes it a little more substantial than some other source books I've read in the past. It suffers from trying to make the information about crafthalls and holds more interesting than many readers might think (this one, anyway) but it does give you a glimpse into the wider society of Pern which was necessary for a book of this scope.