Rating: 5/5

I think I was kind of melancholy as a kid. I spent a lot of time inside my own head. The child of my memory is a friendless brood of skinny demeanor. The ones you see in corners of a jam-packed school playground, reading wall quotes and wise sayings all to themselves, the ones who blush at slightest attention, asking what’s the time from fellow mates, offering water bottles without being asked, preserving seats for the late comer fellows, just being nice so they’d be talked to. The child in my memory grows a wild void of human bondage lacking; the void gashes and gashes to turn into an abyss of darkened needs, it becomes her defenseless forte to fall for affection, to be touched for real, to be called some one’s own, to belong. 
Of Human Bondage wrenches out a story of deeply fractured emotions and inner conflicts experienced by an artist and an emotional man, which Maugham felt compelled to write about. He wanted to get it out of his system. He often said that he wrote because he couldn't help it. Which is what makes the novel one of the most intimate and searingly honest books ever written.
Club footed Philip Carey is believed to be the alter ego of stammering Maugham, both share a childhood of grim circumstances, having lost parents early and going to live to his childless uncle and aunt, this desolated stay confirms in him the obvious lacks he’s carrying. There's a heart-wrenching scene where Philip - with his absolute belief in God - fervently prays one night that he should be rid of his club foot and be made normal the next day. As it turns out nothing happens and therein are sowed the first seeds of Philip's disenchantment with religion..
Philip falls into many calls later in youth, only to be choosing medicine at last, it is while studying medicine that he comes across his utter damnation and infernal doom. Mildred, stupid, bare-chested, cold and vulgar Mildred explores in Philip his deep seated masochism and self tortuous inclinations. his masochistic relationship with Mildred many feel, alludes to a certain homosexual partner the author had. His relationship with Mildred underlines Philip's inner need to be humiliated and abused. His feeling of inadequacy - apart from his club foot - compounded by his non-success as a painter and general sense of despair - perhaps make him crave for a relationship where he can suffer. In fact, on various occasions, Philip brings this suffering upon himself.
 "He did not care if she was heartless, vicious and vulgar, stupid and grasping, he loved her. He would rather have misery with one than happiness with the other."