Rating: 1/5

This has to be one of the stupidest things I've ever read. The thing that irritates me is I had it in my head that I really liked this author. I only read one of her books previously and that was about 15 years ago. Perhaps I was still into cheesy romantic rubbish back then as that's basically all this was with some weird family drama thrown in. 

Where to start? For 250 freaking pages the idiotic woman who is the main character of the book whines about how much she loooooooves her family!!! And they looooooove her too!!!! They love each other sooooooo much!!!! Gross. 

But the thing is, her family consists of a bunch of self centered jerks who don't seem to love anyone. I don't know if the author is crazy or if she is deliberately trying to make the main character seem crazy. One page the woman is remembering her mother always hugging her and her brother being her best buddy and the family having long conversations together after dinner. The next is about her mother being too drunk to ever pay attention to her and her father a workaholic who doesn't ever pay attention to her. Is she that deep in denial? And the brother is written as incredibly unstable but suddenly he has a successful medical practice? That makes no sense. Then you have a FBI agent who is horribly disabled with arthritis one minute but can have a bunch of sex the next? hahahahahahaha yeah I'm pretty sure the author is the crazy one. 

Another part I could not figure out was why her father (who looooooves her soooooooo much) would set her up with an abusive loser. The breakup had been six months prior but her boss said it was "ancient history". Since when is six months ancient history? Especially when you still have to see the guy all the time because Dad keeps bringing this idiot to the house. But yeah, your dad loooooves you lol. And this family is supposedly soooooo close but she never told her mother why they broke up. My head is reeling with all the nonsense. 

Don't get me started on the horrific homophobia. I get that this book is written over 20 years ago, but the sheer hatred towards someone who is gay really was excessive and disturbing to read. The guy who murdered a bunch of children seemed to have more respect shown to him! 

There was one poorly written part where the FBI agent is on the phone explaining in intricate detail what happens when someone has a heart attack. Literally like he is a doctor himself to include someone being sent to the cath lab. Um, how would he know that? And other than the author needing a spot to dump her research on heart attacks, there really was no reason for this detailed information to even be included. 

The author is supposedly some sort of expert on police procedures but she clearly knows very little on the subject to be believable. Miranda Rights before beginning any questioning is a biggie. I get that the police dramas have led the public to believe that you are only read your rights when you're being arrested. Not true. It has NOTHING to do with being arrested and only has to do with being asked questions that may be incriminating. An expert on police procedures would know this and not have a character say something to the effect of "I'm questioning you about a crime" without rights being read. Especially when the author can go on for two pages detailing heart attacks lol. Just bad writing. Informing your superior IMMEDIATELY about a break in the case is another. You do not wait until a meeting the next day. That's not how it works!! And someone who is too disabled to be out in the field and saddled with a desk job does NOT go undercover! What part of "desk job" does the author not understand?? Not sleeping with victims seems like a no brainer but clearly no one told Ms. Gardner that lol 

And I don't think anything irritates me more than the tired trope of women being irrationally angry with men. Then that anger turns into animal lust and sexytimes ensue. Barf. 

The story just makes no sense and once getting to the end it still makes little sense. Yeah, I finished it but that's basically because I started it during a long wait in the ER and was too invested by that point. I had to see how the whole thing played out. I don't understand all the good reviews. What a bunch of garbage. I am removing all Lisa Gardner books from my "to read" list. Life is too short for garbage.