Rating: 4/5

The story of Jewish partisans in occupied Russia during the last years of WW2.
A group of people including some who escaped from camps, others that escaped pogroms and some Jewish Russian soldiers. People of different age, different background and different purposes.
Some just want to live and return to their houses, others want to fight and revenge their loved ones and others want to fight in order to immigrate to Palestine.

They are hunted by the Germans with their collaborators (Ukrainian, Hungarian, Czech and others), the local people who in some cases hate Jews, and in some cases other groups of partisans.
The book describes the group, the dynamic in the group, the day to day life and the various operations they did. We get details about the history of most of the people and the path they took until joining the group. The story is rich in details and includes various Jewish cultural information that effects the story. There is strong emphasis on the internal strength of each character and the effect of this strength on the actions of the person and on his chances to survive and contribute to the cause of the group.

The later part of the book describes the journey the group took, at the end of the war, through Poland and Germany until they arrived in Italy on their way to Palestine.
During this journey they meet the refugees of the camps and the author emphasizes the clear mental difference between the Jews that lived through fighting and between the Jews who were released from the concentration camps. While most of the partisans were strong in heart and ready to continue in life on whatever path they choose, the Jews that were released from the camps were mostly mentally broken and many committed suicide. 

 "In the concentration camp no one committed suicide. There was no time for that, there were other things to think about, bread, boils. Here we have time, and people kill themselves. Partly out of shame.”
“What shame?” Line asked. “You feel ashamed when you’ve done something wrong, and they did nothing wrong.”
“Shame that they weren’t dead,” said Francine. “I have it, too: it’s stupid but I have it. It’s hard to explain. It’s a feeling that the others died in your stead; as if you were alive free of charge, out of some privilege you never earned, out of some abuse you did to the dead. Being alive is not a crime, but we feel it as a crime.”

I found the second (journey) part of the book more convincing and realistic. In this part, the author draws from his own experience and therefor can write about it with more details accuracy and originality. The first (partisan part) was written through research and it impressed me less.

This is the first fiction novel I read by Primo Levi and it is impressive (I still like his non fiction more)