Rating: 3/5

Published in 1516 and originally written in Latin, Utopia is a framed narrative depicting a life on a fictional island. It is often described as sociological and political satire. Utopia is one of those books that one reads for educational purposes. I did find it enjoyable, but it is definitely more an educational read. I mean I cannot say that Utopia is a particularly entertaining book to read. It is interesting, but let's face it, not really a page-turner this one, right? Not surprisingly, I found Utopia to be interesting primarily from a historical point of view. In addition, I find the act of writing Utopian literature as something that is worth thinking about. (Questions that come to my mind. Why do human being have this desire for creating Utopia? Why have all our efforts to create it failed miserably?) So, yes it is definitely an interesting book, the kind that can make one think.It is more playful in tone that in might seem at first. It might be boring to some, but if you're interested in literature, classics or this particular historical period, you might find it interesting. 

I actually found Thomas More ideas to be somewhat revolutionary for his time and original. Some of his thinking was unexpected and hence alluring. Although, I must say that many of More's suggestions for improving society are unrealistic and well just plain silly. All in all, I liked Utopia and I don't regret reading it. In some ways I found it to be fascinating, but then again I was (well still I'm) interested in how a mind of Renaissance or humanistic thinker worked, so if you're not you might not enjoy this as much. On the other hand, If you're interested in Renaissance or Utopian literature, this could be a great educational read for you. In my opinion, one of the best ways to get a real feel of a certain historical period, you should read as many literal works from that time, even if they're not great literature or super interesting. To conclude, this is a great educational read. Not a great work of classical literature, but a fascinating book nevertheless.