Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars. 

First, a contemplation on mysteries in general. As I've gotten older (59) and read many, many books in this genre, I've found it harder to find a really great mystery, though I continue to read many very good ones. In my youth, I was more easily satisfied by them. 

Perhaps my partial mystery ennui results from growing accustomed to the genre's repeated structures and characterizations: protagonist/detective who is haunted by their past and/or who has preternatural deductive abilities; the cast of characters, most of whom are up to some brand of fishiness that seems to give them motive; the twisty-turny plots that sometimes require more coincidence or ignoring of reality than my left brain is wont to forgive.

So, "Instruments of Night". Despite (or perhaps because of) having many of the above prototypical characteristics, it is engaging and page-turning. The somewhat aptly named protagonist, Paul Graves, is not a detective but a writer who is haunted by a horrible event in his past that he sublimates into his stories and characters, even as he lives a stark, isolated existence. Graves's past and his fictions become intertwined with the long-ago murder he is asked to explore, giving the story a cool meta-aspect as he and the Watson he picks up along the way constantly re-write the narrative while trying to imagine who might have killed a teenage girl 4o-ish years earlier.

The three parallel plots--what happened to Paul in his childhood; the death of the girl; and the relationship between the two amateur detectives--unwind at an appealing pace and with unexpected, surprising revelations. 

Some things that, early on in my reading, I thought were weaknesses (oversights on the part of the author) turned out to be great strengths (he had thought some things through more carefully than I had expected). Others were just weaknesses, e.g., some of the events the latter-day detectives uncover would certainly have left clues that the earlier investigators would have found (I don't want to give any spoilers so won't go into more details than that), but these are just ignored by the author. Also, the dialogue often feels utilitarian and clunky, for example, but not limited to, Edward Davies's extended monologue on pp. 239-242 in the paperback.

Cook excels at creating moody atmospheres and psychologically tormented characters caught up in twisted events. If that sounds narratively appealing, this book should (mostly) work for you.