Rating: 2/5

We read this for a library leadership council retreat, and I would give it 2 and 1/3 stars. Overall it isn't well researched, Bennis throws in random political opinions that are so far on the opinion spectrum (as opposed to fact) that they fail to prove his point, and sexism is built-in to the text. It is also very focused on a corporate environment, and for our purposes, something more academia-specific would have been more useful. Yes, I suppose I am punishing this book for not being good for our purposes. I'm surprised to see this is still a standard text for MBA programs; surely there must be better books on leadership out there!

Throughout the book, Bennis tells the reader that you actually can't become a leader on purpose. So why read the book? Why, to hear advice like this:

"Unless you know where you're going, and why, you cannot possibly get there."

"Leaders have nothing but themselves to work with."

"What you are speaks loudly."

I hate those reviews that are full of animated gifs, but I kinda wish I had some eye rolling ones for this book. The entire thing is full of obvious statements that he then feels the need to support with anecdotes from Wall Street, often stories that could be interpreted differently than how he does, and seem to have to do more with luck than intentional growth.

Other ingredients of leadership (except you can't learn them) are passion! Candor! Curiosity! Daring! Reinvention! Look, I don't disagree, but he lists these all in two pages. Write me a book that focuses on how to develop these areas in yourself and in your business. That would be a book to read.

There were a few things I highlighted that I agreed with, so for fairness I should include them here as well:

"If one can look at life as being successful on a moment-by-moment basis, one might find that most of it is successful."
That and the need for reflection is something I resonate with. I used to be better at this. I used to spend more time on it.

"To become a leader, then, you must become yourself, become the maker of your own life."

"Unless you are willing to take risks, you will suffer paralyzing inhibitions, and you will never do what you are capable of doing. Mistakes - missteps - are necessary for actualizing your vision, and necessary steps toward success."
Risk taking and creativity and venturing out beyond our peer institutions is one of my big goals for where we're headed. I will repeat this one until it is heard.

"In a time of drastic change, it is the learners who inherit the future." - Eric Hoffer