Rating: 4/5

“I’m beginning to see now, many things aren’t as I supposed.”

Such an unusual novel--poignant, but confounding. A strange, unbelievable mystery, the upheavals of war, a most unreliable narrator, a tragic story of human suffering. But underneath it all and continuously throughout, there is Ishiguro’s gentle, probing prose. He may have over-reached with this sort of crazy plot, but the fact that he still got me to care about such a confusing and frustrating protagonist, that he kept me turning pages even when I was baffled, that he still broke my heart in the end and I’ll be trying to figure this out for a long time to come, means he’s created something worthwhile here.

Christopher Banks is looking back on his life, recalling his childhood in the International Settlement in Shanghai during the early 1900’s. His best friend was the Japanese boy next door, and their play together takes on various forms of saving the world. His father worked for an international trading company, and his mother fought against opium trafficking that was making addicts of so many Chinese people (a trade directly supported by the company that supported the family). Christopher was ten when his father and then his mother disappeared, and he was taken to England to live with an Aunt, later living on the inheritance she left him. After he grows up and becomes a detective, he returns to Shanghai at the beginning of World War II, and attempts to live out some of the fantasies he and his friend dreamed of when they were young.

This all sounds like an interesting story, but it’s not what you think. Christopher’s recollections range from suspect at first to ridiculous as the story continues, and you wonder what is going on here? Is any of this true? My mind is still spinning out possibilities.

I am not a reader of detective novels, but perhaps one thing people enjoy about them is that they end with satisfying answers. This is clearly a different type of detective novel. No answers here.

So we’re not clear exactly what Christopher’s journey really was, but we know these emotions were never far from him: the far-reaching pain of abandonment and the endless haunting of guilt. The way Ishiguro played with these emotions in this story left a powerful impression on me. 

How many different strange and unusual ways can Ishiguro find to break my heart? This is only my third of his books, so I’m expecting many more.