Rating: 3/5

OK, so I have to start by addressing a common complaint that I've heard about this book, which is that it only deals with, like, half a dozen mistresses, which, if that were true, hardly supports the theory that almost all European monarchs had mistresses. This is simply not true. Out of sheer perversity, I kept count, and there were more than seventy mistresses specifically named in this book. Most of them were either in England or France, but there were also some from Russia, Saxony, Austria, Tuscany, Belgium, Serbia, Portugal, Sweden, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Denmark, Spain, Bavaria, Prussia, whatever the heck Napoleon's empire was actually called, and even the Bible. And of those seventy or so, I'd say that at least twenty were discussed in a significant way, about thirty mentioned a few times, and maybe twenty mentioned merely in passing.

That said, Herman did go back to a few of them quite a lot. Mostly, I didn't really mind that, as they were generally the really famous ones, about which there simply is more information than about some of the others. You work with what you have. My only real complaint with this is that sometimes, certain parts of the same story were repeated too many times. Herman divided the book into segments of a mistress's life, if you will, so obviously, some of them will come up in numerous chapters. But since it seems likely to me that most readers will have read chapters 1-4 before reading chapter 5, for example, I don't think it's necessary to repeat a part of a particular mistress's story that you've already told at least once in those first four chapters.

The book also does feel like it lacks a certain structure. Not entirely, since, as I said, it is organized into distinct and sensible sections. I guess I just feel that it lacks a point. At no point did I feel like I really understood why Herman wrote this book, what precisely she wanted to say with it. It was just a collection of stories and factoids. Which were interesting (although I can't think of anything I would classify as outrageously funny), but still kind of directionless.

And she wasn't always consistent. As an example, she goes out of her way to point out that mistresses were not always the most beautiful ladies at court, and then proceeds to introduce us to a lengthy stream of stunningly beautiful women who became royal mistresses. Sure.

And the other things that weirded me out a little was the credence she seemed to put into the supernatural. She suggests that mistresses who married their kings and died shortly thereafter (from one means or another) were subject to divine retribution, she implies that the disgusting love potions that one mistress used on her king might have actually influenced him, and possibly my favourite, in reference to one mistress being painted as a madonna, the following (emphasis mine): "It is probably no coincidence that shortly after the painting was completed, the powers of heaven sent the Grim Reaper to harvest Agnes." (3) Seriously? I don't know, I guess I just prefer my historians to stick to actual, verifiable facts.

I found it interesting to read about Charles and Camilla, too, since that's actually current, and I found myself wondering if subsequent editions of this book might get edited to include the happy ending those two finally managed to get. At the time of this book, things were going in that direction, with the boys having accepted Camilla, and even the rest of the family and country starting to come around, but they weren't yet at the marriage stage. I hadn't realized, either, that the disaster that was the Charles-Diana marriage was actually a pretty historically important event, as very few (if any) royals since that time have gone the marry-a-noble-virgin-regardless-of-personal-feelings route. One modern prince apparently went and married a common woman who not only had an out-of-wedlock child, but the child's father was in jail. That simply wouldn't happen even fifty years ago.

Ultimately, the book was entertaining, but, for a non-fiction book, surprisingly light on intellectualism.