Rating: 1/5

30 DECEMBER 2015: I really thought about writing a raging, seething, foaming-at-the-mouth, slam-the-author review.

And then I thought: Nah.

I could talk about the terrible prose, the lack of plot, the painfully stereotypical characters. I could storm about how Melinda sounded like an eleven year old child rather than a teenager. I could go in depth about the horrendously obvious symbolism, or even the fact that several side plots that are introduced are never mentioned again. But I'm not going to do that.

You know why? Because I've got better things to do. Better books to read, better books to write, things to cook and eat and watch and places to go. All of which would bring me greater joy than writing a rage review for this puppy. I'd hate to end my year in a blind fury, and besides, I'd be lying if I said some of that fury hasn't blown over since I read this in May.

But, I think it is still important to warn you guys. Not only is this book horribly written, but it completely bypasses all the realities of rape (and no, that isn't a spoiler). I was not only angry but disturbed and sickened by the way the subject was handled in this book. It breaks down to something like: Girl gets raped, girl cries over it, girl doesn't seek help, girl makes a tree sculpture and suddenly feels way better.

NO. 

I won't stand for that.

It is a cavalier, disgusting, dangerous, and downright reckless way to treat such a complex, nuanced, messy topic. It disgraces survivors of sexual assault everywhere, telling them that rape is just an incident, and when you get it out of your system within less than a fucking year, you're all better.

NO.

Rape is traumatic. Everybody deals with it differently- I understand that- but I loathe the fact that Anderson has portrayed the single most self-destructive way to do so as the right thing to do. Melinda didn't really deal with any of the things that happened to her- she swept them under the rug and pretended that everything ended fine. It's so... superficial. Offhanded. It doesn't dive deep, doesn't even try to scratch the surface. It reduces such an important issue to a minor road bump.

And I'm sorry if I'm getting my knickers in a twist over a fictional young adult book, but that's just the thing- it's a young adult book. It's marketed to impressionable teenagers who may see themselves in an emotionally damaged, moody girl like Melinda, and I really worry about the message that this book is sending them.

So instead of slamming this book in traditional snark-fest fashion, that's my warning to you. It's a terribly written book, but more importantly, the subject is handled with care and respect equivalent to throwing it out of an aeroplane and running it over with a car, then beating it with a stick.

Damn. I feel a lot better. Now I'm off to go read a book I'll actually enjoy- happy reading everyone, and I hope that if you did read this and enjoy it, perhaps now you see a different perspective on how fundamentally poorly the main subject is handled. I don't claim to be right, I'm just putting my own viewpoint out there for you to disagree, agree, or feel conflicted about.