Rating: 4/5

Sylvia Beach, an American who moved to Paris during the 1920s and spent a good portion of her life as a player in the literary market, supported writers and readers at her bookshop Shakespeare and Company in Paris. If you are familiar with the name Shakespeare and Company, it is because her bookstore was renowned for being more than a bookstore. Shakespeare and Company was a second home for American writers in Paris, a space for French readers who wanted to get recommendations to American novels, and a resource for English-speaking readers who needed books in translation. The bookshop promoted literary reviews, which are the primary route to publication for new writers, it hosted literary salons and sold lending library subscriptions (which means it operated as a library and reading club). The bookshop also became the literary movement that would be responsible for the publication and awareness of the preeminent modernist novel Ulysses.

This memoir primarily details Beach's daily operations and her friendship with James Joyce and his family. When Ulysses became a banned book in the U.S. and in English-speaking countries, she became Joyce's official publisher and unofficial agent, administrative manager, marketer, and funder. With the help of Ernest Hemingway, she got the novel in the hands of readers in the United States  when Hemingway found a book smuggler to smuggle the book in his pants, one at a time, from Canada to the U.S. . When Joyce, who suffered with glaucoma, had inflammation, she took him to her oculist. She adhered to his specific needs about the printing and editing of the novel. Once you read the details, it leaves no doubt that without her, we would not have had Ulysses, so the way things end for her once the book becomes popular is disappointing. 

There are also anecdotal mentions of other writers. Ezra Pound seems like the poet always rescuing other poets, the one a person wants in their emergency contacts. Gertrude Stein is not cast in the best light, and one can understand why after a specific scene. Ernest Hemingway was the bookshop's most loyal patron. As a part of the resistance, he also went to war with German soldiers who tried to terrorize the inhabitants of Rue d'leon during the liberation. F. Scott and Zelda left "money on a plate in the hall of the house where they lived, so that people coming in with bills or those to be tipped could simply help themselves." Sherwood Anderson had a comical outburst in his French publisher's hallway when he felt he was being ignored, and so on.

I feel lucky to have visited Shakespeare and Company while in Paris, even though it is not the same iconic shop memorialized in this memoir. The original shop, which had its second location on Rue de l'Odéon, never reopened after World War II. It was shut down when during the German Occupation, a German officer walked into Beach's shop and demanded her only copy of Finnegans Wake displayed in the window. When she told him it was her rare copy and not for sale, he promised he would be back to confiscate all her goods. She quickly moved her precious books to a different location and painted over the sign. She was sent to an internment camp for six months. When she returned and her friends asked her to reopen the shop, she did not have the strength or funds to start again. The Shakespeare and Company bookshop in Paris may not be the original, but it bears the spirit of Beach's endeavors. 

Until the publication of this memoir, Slyvia Beach did not purport to be a writer. One should not expect the techniques of literary nonfiction. In part, this reads like a journalistic index of journal entries, as jotting down the history of this literary behemoth was important to her. What one should expect are valuable behind-the-scenes information, particularly those readers most interested in the Left Bank literary aura of the 1920s that influenced great works of literature. I closed the book knowing that I need to read Valery Larbaud, one of the most admired writers in France, according to Beach, and also someone she felt could have been more known in the U.S.