Rating: 2/5

Let me preface this review with the fact that the rating doesn't apply to Sarno's theory--that many physical ailments have mental causes--but rather to the book itself--to its execution. I feel like I could have gotten everything I needed from this book in the first chapter alone; the rest fel like overwrought redundancy, Sarno laundry-listing all of the ailments that are maybe/possibly/definitely rooted in mental causes.

I should preface this doubly with the suggestion that this may, in fact, but a really useful book for folks suffering from chronic back pain.

But here's the rub:

The invocation of psychoanalytical theory is either too much or too little. It's there for a good reason--to help assuage the doubts of more analytical readers, giving a scientific basis to psychological side of the book. For my taste, it didn't delve far enough--it just let me with a lot more questions. 

Sarno, via a handful of noted psychologists, suggests that the root of psychosomatic ailments is in unconscious "rage". But this rage, to use a Kantian term, is noumenal; we have no way of accessing or addressing it directly. We experience it phenomenally, but often not as actual expressed anger. We may not "experience" it at all, experience being a conscious faculty. This rage may manifest itself as any number of physical maladies however. Sarno suggests this is because--particularly in Western society--we (a) are more likely to store this type of rage, and (b) have no/fewer means of coping with/mitigating this rage. The problem, then, is that this rage must manifest itself somehow. 

First off, why? 

Secondly, Sarno seems to think that this subconscious rage wants to express itself as actual rage, or perhaps tears of frustration, which are not socially acceptable affect displays in Western society. Thus, we must sublimate the rage. But wait. I thought this wasn't conscious rage. Wouldn't we be sublimating conscious rage in that case?

I think perhaps what Sarno means is that stress is really damn hard on our bodies. Lots of things cause stress and we store that stress. And we probably lack good ways of releasing that stress. Sometimes this manifests as pain.

Acknowledging the pain's origin as mental probably gives us a feeling of control--or alleviates feelings of helplessness. This helps reduce the stress at the core of the pain. (There are often feedback loops involved in this process; a person experience a twinge of pain, which causes fear/stress about the pain, which induces more pain, more stress, and so on. Injecting a sense of control into this process effectively eliminates the feedback loop.)

See. Was that so hard? Sarno either needs to offer way less analysis, or way more.

This doesn't work against his larger thrust, though, that unalleviated stress can instigate actual physical problems. I don't think too many readers would find that conclusion startling. 

And his solution, for the most part, is also somewhat unsurprising:

1) Admit the problem is solely mental.
2) Begin psychotherapy.

It should be noted, very early on, that this only applies to maladies with no discernible physical cause. 

He then goes on to debunk a large collection of alleged physical causes (largely looking at various spinal and nerve abnormalities). The section on back and leg issues is pretty illuminating--probably the single most useful section on the book. Not surprising, given that this is his area of specialty. In most other sections, though, he over-reaches. He would have us believe that just about every physical ailment humans suffer from his psychological in origin. 

While I'm totally on board with his distrust of contemporary medicine's pervasive medicate/operate mentality, which focuses solely on "cure" and not at all on "cause" or "prevention". 

But let's be clear, other factors, like diet and exercise are extremely important.

And sometimes there really are physical causes to physical problems. This fact may be dangerously underrepresented in this book.