Rating: 4/5

“Swift is the dragon-fly's darting; swifter is fortune's change.”
*
“Long after this, when I had made my name, someone from Keos asked how it was I had not come to hate my brother, to whom it must have seemed the gods had given everything, leaving nothing for me. I answered that next to having the gods' gifts ourselves, it is best to honor them. If not, one must grow to hate them; and, Zeus be my witness, I have seen what can come of that.”
*

I've been wanting to read Renault, specifically one of her Socrates or Plato books, for several years now. I had been told they were good. At first I thought it would be little better than fanfiction or some such gratuitous nonsense, but as in so many things, I found myself to be wrong. First, in reading a little bit about Renault herself who was a fairly accomplished author who faced some adversity trying to write and publish books with homosexual relationships, but eventually found an easy way to write the 10 or so books she did set in the Ancient/Classical world (among others). Second, I think in my academic fervor, for lack of a better word, I had returned to adopt the oh so beloved dismissive air of judgment against historical fiction as being “unworthy,” when in fact it was true that in the past I had enjoyed and respected at least more than one book that could rightly be labeled as such. Nonetheless, disabusing myself of both notions that Renault was a subpar author and that historical fiction a subpar genre, I decided to read The Praise Singer, of all her books, because I happened to find it at a garage sale. Thank you once again Fate for handing me the things I ought to be handed. At any rate, I probably should have read the ones about Plato first since Plato is my guy, but this one came from Fate so there's really no questioning that. And to give Fate a little credit, my first love was Homer, not Plato. And since there are no Renault books about Homer, Simonides of Keos will have to do. 

So what did I think? I really enjoyed the book! For a classical/ancient/Homeric Greece fanatic like me I loved every bit of it. Contrary to what you might expect there wasn't ever a moment where I said to myself, “Bullocks! No ancient Greek would ever say that. All of this is wrong. WRONG.” or “How dare she depict x historical figure in such a manner? Disgraceful!” I recently had a much much milder reaction like this to Colm Toibin's book House of Names (which is still a very good book, check out my review). I think this book is another example of what happens when a modern novel just happens to be set in the past. Renault mines her historical resources well, but also doesn't flout them. I think she's pretty temperate when it comes to pillaging the salacious moments in history. And she transforms them into events in the life of, our narrator, Simonides, affectionately known as Sim. So as far as the protagonist, the world, the narrative frame, the chapter pacing, the historical events and figures, the setting, and the fictionalized characters-everything is spot on. I've heard that Renault's depiction of women is not so great and while I can kind of see what critics are getting at, I'm not so sure this novel has that as a prominent flaw. I would really have to read more of her oeuvre to get a feel for the criticism myself. I don't have much in the way of criticizing her prose either. It's measured, tight prose that lends itself to its protagonist. Perhaps not as flowery as I truly delight in, but not enough that I feel like ranting about it. It is pretty clever in general.

Some strengths:
The characters and their relationships to Sim are engaging and vivid. He has a difficult, to put it lightly, relationship with his father, an overbearing but silent man. And the opposite is true with his god-blessed, amiable brother. I loved when he encounters historical figures like Pythagoras, Anacreon, and Pisistratus and his sons (Hippias and Hipparchus). Heraclitus gets a noteworthy, but very brief mention. 

There is some talk of poetry and composing oral poetry in a period where writing was returning to be a useful technology for poets. Simonides has a gift for memory and subscribes to the old thinking that writing things down spoils the skill of the mind to remember. There are dinner parties and symposia. There's a chariot race and choral performances. Lots of cool historical scenes like that.

I found the intrigue of the book not to be gratuitous at all, but skillfully subtle. Like so many Greek tragedies, the most climactic action scenes happen off stage.

I would recommend this book to anyone who wants to try some historical fiction set in ancient Greece. You'll get a free pseudo-history lesson about the period. And it might just inspire you to read some actual history (or at least a wiki-page or two). For classicists, you might find some details frustrating, but if you have a generous heart like me-ha!-you might just end up enjoying them like I did. The book is certainly accessible to people outside the field, as might be obvious.

The one actually serious thing (and I haven't gone on about how she uses various details of the life of Simonides that we don't know are quite true, but they're interesting. Just one example, Simonides is supposed to have invented the whole "memory palace" thing which comes up in Sim's thoughts on writing as a technology for poetry. On the whole Renault brings these details into her story well, as I've said) is that Pindar never shows up! I think she should have had a whole thing with Pindar. Coulda been great. Oh well.

Quotes:

(Sim and his father)
“All in all I had been living very well; it had been foolish to let my accounting to my father hand over me for a month beforehand. He had a way of fidgeting while I spoke, so that I felt something was coming without knowing what. I had sometimes lied to him, but only about small things for the sake of peace; and to his profit, not his loss. yet these trifles had oppressed me, almost as if I were a boy who could still be beaten, even when I had just come from Athens with gold in my belt and praise in my ears. I went home after the funeral feeling as if a heavy mortgage had been paid off.”
*
“No matter. The Sight is rare. But the bonds of souls are for all men, as for every creature. Leave, when you can, your honorable grief. I foresee that you will live long. Even before your soul departs its present habitation, his in its new one may return, and you can repay your debt to him, as he, you may be sure, repaid to you some ancient kindness. In such ways we lift each other towards the light”
~ ~
“Not ours. We look for music, first in the heavens”–he pointed to the astrolabe–”then on earth in the laws of its creatures, chiefly in man; in himself, in his dealings with his fellows, in his body politic. That is as displeasing to tyrants as a doctor’s advice to a drunkard. Well, we have work to do, which we need to pursue in peace. There is a piece of coastal land in Italy, good land unused; I traveled there to find it. My students are coming with me. He will be glad to see us go.”

--Pythagoras