Rating: 3/5

The Abominable History of the Man with Copper Fingers
Man at club describes warning he got from a mysterious stranger; said mysterious stranger pipes up to offer the rest of the story. Ultimately: Peter likes to make a goddamned entrance, doesn't he? 3 stars.

The Entertaining Episode of the Article in Question
Huge sections of this were in French and I speak petit pois (peas, right???). :( Interesting solution, however. 2.5 stars.

The Fascinating Problem of Uncle Meleager's Will
This would have been far more enjoyable if I could have guessed even one of the clues. Instead, I feel like a proper idiot even while thrilling at the cleverness of it. 3.5 stars.

The Fantastic Horror of the Cat in the Bag
IT'S NOT A CAT SOMEONE LIED. 2.5 stars.

The Unprincipled Affair of the Practical Joker
Needed more Peter being the con-artist of my dreams and slightly less of cards, y'know? 2.5 stars.

The Undignified Melodrama of the Bone of Contention
This one was not entertaining enough to carry its length, weight, and strangely and intensely detailed description of the roads around the church. ESPECIALLY when the map provided does not allow for zoom in an ebook. 2 stars.

The Vindictive Story of the Footsteps that Ran
A bit shallow; a bit underwhelming. 3 stars.

The Bibulous Business of a Matter of Taste
OK, this one was absolutely a romp which I enjoyed quite a bit. I couldn't follow any of the wine tasting expertise (my palate is comprised of Swedish Fish and oversteeped black tea I am no gourmand) but I enjoy Peter going undercover immensely. 4.5 stars.

The Learned Adventure of the Dragon's Head
Definitely enjoyed Peter becoming the "cool uncle" by virtue of guns and sneaky-doings. 4.5 stars.

The Piscatorial Farce of the Stolen Stomach
There's just something about organs that doesn't sit well with me. (HA INDIGESTION PUN.) 2.5 stars.

The Unsolved Puzzle of the Man with No Face
I don't know how I feel about a puzzle that doesn't truly resolve itself; Peter's fairy tale is meant to be the truth but it is left as a nebulous 'what-if' that rather short-sheets the ending. 3 stars.

The Adventurous Exploit of the Cave of Ali Baba
WHAT? HOW? WHY? CAN I JUST? WHO? WHEN? (I didn't like this: all the good bits about investigating and how Peter figured out everyone's names and identities and how he set up and sprung his trap were left out, giving us only an unearned denouement and a lot of questions about the missing TWO YEARS????? 2 stars.