Rating: 4/5

Have you ever been on a plane ride through hell and you got so scared, you thought it was better to say what you have been dying to say all your life before you crash? I feel that way every time, honestly! Although I wouldn’t go into so much detail as Emma did in “Can You Keep A Secret?”

Once again Sophie Kinsella delivers a heroine that we want to cheer for and chastise at the same time! Emma is a lovable neurotic dreamer that I feel protective of. Spilling your deepest secrets, only to have them resurface at a very inopportune and public moment is a shame beyond measure. Yet she endures -- and triumphs. Kinsella builds these characters that we want to see succeed, although we hope they do learn a lesson or two along the way. 

The story is a big mouthful of pink cotton candy -- a light and fluffy romance. Fearing a plane crash, The heroine spills all her deepest secrets to a total stranger. Fortunately, their plane didn’t crash. Unfortunately, the total stranger turned out to be the CEO of her company.  Worse, he manages to spill all her secrets on national television. Of course he didn't use her name, but she gave it away by her behavior.  This is a delicious book!

There were some very hilarious moments in this story. Emma is absolutely engaging – she’s an adorable mess! It would be a delight to be around such a woman, although she has the morals of an alley cat. She's a "self-made career girl" and a future marketing executive. All in her head of course. So it's no wonder she gets herself into such tangles. She lives in her head! I think everyone knows people like this and can't help laughing at them when they get into trouble. I love the fact that she gets herself into constant binds, but good things invariably end up happening to her in the end. I think we all like a lovable loser, don't we?

Not much I can say about the hero, just another closed-mouth guy, but he did come through in the end. He eventually learns that communicating with someone you are interested in is the key to trust and a lasting relationship. A couple of snarky characters, and an imbecile ex-boyfriend made for good story telling. Only wish the ending was longer. Lots of buildup and ends in a few pages, and epilogue was not informative enough. Nevertheless, I was completely hooked on this book, and was immensely entertained. 

This story was so funny and so far-fetched that I could actually imagine it happening to me. I will never ever spill my guts to a perfect stranger on an airplane no matter where I am going or under what circumstances. Was it Maurice Switzer who said “It is better to remain silent at the risk of being thought a fool, than to talk and remove all doubt of it?” Wise man. Very wise....