Rating: 1/5

Ugh. This is another book that I've been carrying around with me for years, bought at a library book sale with no knowledge other than genre. If I hadn't been carrying it around with me so long, I probably would have put it aside after the first hundred pages, but I felt like all the muscle used carrying it around warranted at least making it to the end. I did skim the entire second half though, just so I wouldn't be wasting too much time. 

So, why the 1 star? Well, the number one reason is the sexism. I can just only be slapped in the face so many times before I lose all respect for your book. The main character of this book, Dan Randalph, along with most of the other characters, view women as sex objects and little else. Arranged political marriages are still very much a thing, as is sexual repression. Considering technology has advanced enough to make lunar mining a common reality, you'd think that society might have also advanced just a wee bit. There are a few women fighters and even a woman President, but the fighters feel like nothing more than a concession, especially considering the portrayal of the woman President as incompetent and cut-off from reality. It was pretty gross. 

The writing itself was fine. When I was actually fully reading, rather than skimming, it read quickly and flowed well. Bova does use some techniques that I didn't love, though. For example, the first chapter is a scene of the privateers from the title being slaughtered. The second chapter immediately flashes back to the beginning of the story, and we don't reach that slaughter until about 85% through the book. I always feel like this sort of technique takes the tension from a book. 

The science was also not very good. At one point there is talk of dropping a pretty large asteroid on Earth. I'm too lazy to go and check the exact details, but this is an asteroid of several hundred tons that is intended to be used for mining of metals. One of the characters states that it won't cause any radiation, so it will not impact any country other than the one attacked. Which displays a pretty staggering lack of awareness of what the effects of hitting a planet with such a large asteroid might be. I'm not scientist, but I'm pretty sure that's a pretty big oversight.

There's also the Cold War politics. Russia is the biggest world power in this book, and the US has been pushed out of world politics entirely. China is considered to be the only possible threat to Russian dominance, and even they aren't really a threat. As you'd expect, Communism is the real enemy. It felt dated, but more importantly, it felt dismissive. The US is not the only world power that matters, and I can't imagine the entire world rolling over quite so easily. Where was the guerrilla resistance, the secret weapons development, the behind-the-scenes maneuvering? It doesn't exist. As a basic political framework, the setting works OK, but it lacks any kind of depth or interest. 

And my final issue: What in the world was up with the Japanese people hissing? It's littered throughout this book - something good happens, and the Japanese hiss in approval. I've studied in Japan and visited Japan, and I'm pretty sure this is not a thing!