Rating: 2/5

2023 - 1970’s Immersion Reading Challenge

A Stitch in Time by Penelope Lively (1976; 2016 ed.) 221 pages. 

NOT ON THE ACCELERATED READING (AR) LIST!

Eleven-year-old Maria Foster is a little bit intuitive and can see and feel things at times…spiritually. A stitch in time refers to a one hundred year old 1865 sampler that was started by a 10-year-old girl named, Harriet, but for some unknown reason, finished by Harriet’s older sister. It depicted the house Maria Foster and her family were currently vacationing in on the coast at Lyme Regis, three hours from their home in London. It also had a swing and the ilet tree that Maria sits in every day to think about things. This sampler helps to reaffirm some of the things she felt, like the sound of a creaking swing when they first arrived, which she found later on in the story. Or, the little dog that was barking, which had died a hundred years earlier in one of the landslides. But, it did not confirm the death of Harriet, as she believed in her heart.

Although, I found the story itself to be extremely slow, I thought the author had pretty good character development in Maria. Being an only child, a bit reclusive and lonely, and being a bit intuitive, she was like an old soul in a child’s body. This I can relate to, although I’m not an only child. I am the middle child. I’m so reflective on the past, that, at times, I do forget to laugh and just have fun in life, just like Maria. And like Maria, I was, and sometimes still am, misunderstood in the way I think and the things I say and the things I do. 

 NOW, FOR MY RANT ABOUT ATHEISM PRESENTED IN THIS STORY

Why did the author have to go there? To trash the Bible and God’s Word? This was a great little story, which would have been perfectly fine without putting her two cents in discrediting God and His Words. I was instantly pissed and it did sway my review of the book. If you are a Christian, you might reconsider allowing your young child, with their impressionable minds, to read this.

P. 88: “Noah’s Ark isn’t true at all,” said Maria, with sudden illumination. “Course not,” said Martin. “It’s all a load of rubbish.”

Maria then makes a comment about how it seemed someone was playing around with things, as time went on, just to see what would work and what wouldn’t. Martin called it evolution, something they learned in school. He said things changed to adapt to their environment. They don’t just die off. (p. 89) 

I wish the author would have left out this section altogether because now I have to put my two cents in regarding this children’s book.

The Bible makes it clear, that God created things to reproduce after their own kind. In Genesis 1:

11 The God said, “Let the land produce vegetation: see-bearing plants and trees on the land that bear fruit with seed in it, according to their various kinds.” And it was so.

12 The land produced vegetation: plants bearing seed according to their kinds and trees bearing fruit with seed in it according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.

21 So God created the great creatures of the sea and every living and moving thing with which the water teems, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.

24 And God said, “Let the land produce living creatures according to their kinds: livestock, creatures that move along the ground, and wild animals, each according to its kind.” And it was so.

25 God made the wild animals according to their kinds, the livestock according tot heir kinds, and all the creatures that move along the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.

26 The God said, “Let us make man in our image, in our likeness, and let them run over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the livestock, over all the earth, and over all the creatures that move along the ground.”

27 So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created hm; male and female he created them.

28 God blessed them and said to them, “Be fruitful and increase n number; fill the earth and subdue it. Rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air and over every living creature that moves on the ground.”

 I don’t believe in evolution at all. You either believe in God, or you don’t. That’s what it boils down to.

There may be slight changes from one earlier animal to the exact same kind of animal today…but they are still the same animal. Changes in environment can change DNA, or even breeding can change DNA, but never a change to a different species. Plants and trees can be propagated to grow several types of fruit on a tree, or pollenated to grow desired different traits or to get rid of weak traits. The truth is scientists have never, ever found, or proven, an instance where one animal is now a different animal, or one plant is now a different plant, or one fruit is now a different fruit. Humans were never once fish or apes. Show me! Never proven! There…rant over, and sorry I had to go there!