Rating: 2/5

I can't even with this book. I. Can't. Even. The only reason this has 2 instead of 1 star(s) is that I'm a weak little bitch who apparently feels sorry for men even when they don't deserve it. I softened at his grovelling, and I hate myself for it. 

I'm not even going to put out a spoiler alert because anyone who decides to read this book must know that it's literally crazy and so very wrong. 

1. He blackmailed her into going to a party with him. 
2. He kidnapped her from said party.
3. Tried to seduce her even when she didn't want it.
4. Blamed her for Matt Strange's disgusting behaviour towards her.
5. Constantly insinuated that she was a woman of loose morals.
6. Told her if she didn't stop, one day one of the men she "teased" would snap and rape her. 
7. Basically forced himself on her on their wedding night and LAUGHED when she fought back.
8. Told her he had paid the highest price for her (his "freedom") and would now collect on what she owed him.
8. And she still fell in love with him?

A simple sorry in the end doesn't work for me. Even though, rationally, I know his willingness to sacrifice at the end was a good attempt at redemption, it's still too little too late. He was arrogant in the beginning, cruel and rude in the middle, and only showed a little penance towards the end. I don't see any reason why she fell in love with him, he was a bully and a brute. And what was his excuse? It was because he loves her and got jealous. I agree she was a stupid piece of shit, but he was no better. Every time he told her she was driving him crazy, she never tried to destroy the illusion that she was seeing other men. Like I GET why she couldn't out the Jason secret, but what about the others? What the actual fuck? This book made me so angry and so frustrated, I want to do a white man's punch-the-wall schtick. I'm also tremendously annoyed at myself. Because as much as I want to absolutely hate and abhor this book, I can't seem to hate it to a non-redeemable level and it's genuinely driving me insane. So damn insane that I've read the last bit of him apologising three times already (which is crazily annoying because I really do hate this entire book which thrives on the kind of miscommunication I abhor.) That's the curse of being a fucking understanding and empathetic piece of shit. I understand his frustration so I can't be as angry with him as I want to. I'm so irritated. I can't hate him. I won't love him. I can't get over this toxicity.

Oh and also, believe me when I say this, I would never, and I mean never let a man treat me like this. That, I can promise you. I will never be as weak-willed or as idiotic as her.

Edit: I have now come to the conclusion that the only Harlequin books I truly like (like truly truly, not trashy or corny novella truly) are written by our lord and saviour Julie Miller. No one else writes better Harlequin books than her because her men are considerate, protective, and aren't mfkn dicks. They're all respectful and understand C O N S E N T. 
On that note, can I get a fuck you, Damien? FUCK YOU DAMIEN.

Edit(2): Okay, I've given it a lot of thought and I'm being unfair by not subjecting Kate to the same level of animosity. She claims to hate this guy, but in the same breath kisses him back every single time he's close. Also, every time he comes to her aid or he says he's missed her or whenever he's being all I-really-like-you while other people try saying shit to her, she NEVER clears the misunderstanding. Unnecessary drama. How hard can it be to say, "I know what it looks like, and I don't even care what the rest of them think. James and I are friends. Old family friends. And if you can't believe me when I say that, you don't deserve any of my caring. And also, not that it's any of your business but I'm not sleeping with everyone, you dick."
See? That took me, what, 10 seconds to conjure up? Does it reveal her and James' secret? No. Would it have shown Kate having an actual fucking backbone instead of just pretending to have one? Yes.