Rating: 2/5

Now see here, Pally, this here's a 1920's humdinger of a read with all sorts of wiz-bang gadgets, gee-wiz characters, highfalutin plot points and more action than a speakeasy's got hooch. As a new SF book, "Skylark" has every possible shortcoming of a first draft by a new author in an infant genre of fiction. It begins on the first page with the accidental discover of a new element, "X" (I kid you, not) by a young, rakishly handsome, adventurous scientist with a hunch for exploring space. Armed with only his accidental theory, a millionaire friend and a generous supply of Gumption, he procedes over a week or so to build the first spacecraft that can travel beyond the outer limits of the solar system into infinity - over 30 years before Yuri Gagarin would orbit the Earth for the first time.

My review is unfavorable because it's poorly written and a weak construction as a story. It's not because the book hasn't aged well (although it hasn't) or because it fails in the suspension of disbelief (it does), but because it's pulp fiction at it's lowest quality even at the time that it was written and hasn't improved at all with the benefit of time.

There are maybe between 5-7 important characters, every one of which is as flat as a cardboard cut-out. The enemies are perfect in their wickedness, cunning and amorality, but are also defeated by their own plans gone awry. The protaganists are sensible and unerringly chivalrous and the 1920's women are pliant maguffin's, very important to the plot only by their presence and not through their actions. 

And the science...God, the science is absolutely selective in it's introduction or application. The author flaunts openly the gems of invention such as the spring-mounted floors to absorb acceleration, the Infini-Compass that can point to Earth from a billion light years away (yes, they broke Einstein's Law) and the fully-stocked Bar-In-Space. Now the reader might ask 'How do they have enough oxygen' or 'Why is the craft is powered by burning pocketwatches and copper pennies' (yes, it happens.) The answer to that is...we don't know and that's part of the ADVENTURE. The author, E.E. Smith, doesn't stop and explain little points any more than necessary and, by that standard, there's a whole lot that apparently wasn't necessary. There's a line from the video game "Portal 2" about 'Throwing Science at the Wall and Seeing what Sticks' and there's a lot of that here, but it gives the feeling that the author is bored of the tedium of explanation and just wants to fight some space mutants.

Which takes us to the pacing, which is at Light-Flipping-Speed. If you skipped a page in the book, you could go straight from a kitchen table conversation to a space battle without knowing how it got there. A paragraph might start with "After discussing the matter at home, Crane and Seaton took off and were on Mars." There were so many places where I had to take a moment and internalize how the characters got there. A human mind that is looking for consistency will flatly reject some events in the book as impossible to read in proper order. The best comparison would be any episode of Star Trek:TOS where (1) Kirk is beaming down, (2) Kirk is in prison, (3) Kirk is kissing a green alien (4) Kirk is firing phasers, (5) Kirk is fighting with fists and kicks - all in a 40 minute TV show. The plot doesn't matter at all, the constant Action is what matters.

"Skylark" is given credit for being the first work of a new genre and opening up possibilities for other (better?) authors, and maybe that's why I'm giving the book 2-stars instead of 1. But it's like a book that can't decide if it wants to be humor or adventure, and it doesn't succeed at being either.