Rating: 3/5

Blast From The Past Year Zero: 

Hooboy. I have conflicted feelings about the book, and my feelings about those conflicted feelings are also conflicted. So there's that. 

To make a long story short I loved this series when I was kid, I needed to pick up a gift for my nephew who is apparently Mini-Me, so I grabbed him the first couple of books in this series. Figured I'd give him something better to read then the Eragon type crap he's reading now. Of course I couldn't resist but take a look at them first, after all it's been about ten years since I've read these things. 

I was both satisfied and disappointed. To get the bad out of the way what my twelve year old self didn't notice is that Lloyd Alexander is not a particularly graceful writer. One could even call him clunky. If one was cruel one could say that he lays on exposition like it's fucking mortar. Also it's pretty clear now that Alexander is basically doing Tolkien for kids, right down to the grotesque man creature with a panache for talking in the third person, a wise mentor who "falls into darkness" only to come out with a greater understanding of the world and Olde English mythology. The characters who once lived in my mind now come off as pretty flat and the quest that once seemed so important is now kind of pat. Some of these things would deepen as the series went on, some wouldn't.

That said, what still holds this above the crap mill of JK Rowling wannabes that passes as young adult fantasy literature today, is the fact that there is a real imagination burning beneath this thing. He didn't write it because that's where the money is, he wrote it because he felt he had too. Also I have to love the fact that someone apparently told Lloyd Alexander that the purpose of Young Adult literature is to scare the shit out of young adults. The main antagonist The Horned King, goes around wearing a human skull his arms literally stained red from blood, and is introduced burning men alive inside wicker baskets. 

I'm always going to have an affection for these books, as far as I can recall they are the first ones that made me write. So I owe my life of poverty and degradation to Mr. Alexander at least in part. Still I couldn't help but be a bit disappointed. Was I unfair? It is after all a children's book, the point of which is not to confuse the shit out of children. 

Yeah I probably was unfair, but what can I say? You always expect more from the one's you love.