Rating: 4/5

I can only describe this book as magical realism, but about the first two thirds of it seem to be straightforward historical fiction. Berthe, the narrator, is the devoted lady's maid to Adele de Fourchet, an 18th century upper class French girl whose parents arrange her marriage to an aristocrat, the Duc de Malvoeux. Their lives are spent in a round of expensive and exclusive pleasures: chocolate every morning, new gowns, books, entertaining, and traveling back and forth between Paris and the Duc's country estate, Beauxpres. The Duc is obsessed with collecting birds. Thousands of francs go into maintaining and heating his aviary, caring for and feeding his exotic birds, and financing expeditions to find more birds. Adele and the Duc have three children: a dissipated eldest son, Leon; pious young Justin; and a daughter, Linotte. At first, the occasional mentions of magic are so subtle that it's not clear whether the magic is "real" or is only the result of belief and imagination. It is hinted that Adele's black pageboy, Pompey, has magical powers and is tutoring young Linotte in magic. Beaxpres is bordered by a forest said to be haunted by the ghosts of dead children. The palace also contains a room called "The Cabinet des Fees" with cases of artifacts said to contain magical powers. However, Berthe and Adele, both children of the Enlightenment, dismiss these magical elements as mere peasant superstition. But when a powerful sorcerer shows up disguised as a beggar, he is rejected three times by the Duc and curses the whole family to never know peace or happiness until the Porcelain Dove is found. From that point, the novel makes use of traditional fairy tale elements. Both sons fail in the quest for the Porcelain Dove, but the youngest, daughter Linotte goes forth to eventual success. In the meantime, however, Beauxpres is attacked in the throes of the French Revolution. The novel's magical resolution is truly unique in both tone and content, as the terrible secret deep in the history of Beauxpres has to be uncovered and atoned for. That's all I can say without spoilers! I don't think this novel is going to become a favorite that I'll read over and over again in my remaining years, but I did really enjoy it. It's a unique creation that deserves more readers.