Rating: 5/5

This is an absolutely *excellent* book, a comprehensive masterpiece of nonfiction that gracefully explores the historical, cultural and political interpretations of the breast and, by extension, womanhood, from the beginning of time until now. Clearly, Marilyn Yalom is a well-researched historian and an engaging storyteller. This is such a good book, I wish I had written it! 

Chapters of the book cover "The Sacred Breast," "The Erotic Breast," "The Domestic Breast," "The Political Breast," "The Psychological Breast," "The Commercialized Breast," and "The Medical Breast," and more. I wholeheartedly recommend this book to anyone interested in history or women's studies, or anyone who loves learning about the "little details" or "hidden gems" of history. I learned so much from it, and am so glad I read it.

Quotes that struck me:

1) "Because women have breasts and the potential to provide milk for their young, females have been seen as closer to Nature than their male counterparts." (p. 16)

2) Hera and the mythological explanation for the creation of the Milky Way, p. 20

3) "The lactating breasts of the Virgin Mary and the great goddesses were nothing less than sacred symbols of all that was benign in the universe." (p. 48)

4) During the 15th century: "Increasingly, in art and literature, the breast would belong less to the baby, or to the church, and more to men of worldly power who treated it solely as a stimulus to desire." (p. 51)

5) "The meaning of the breast in Renaissance high culture was unequivocally erotic." (p. 74)

6) Regarding Elizabeth I: "There was to be only one star in the English firmament, shining as queen, king, and mistress all in one. To that effect, she projected an androgynous image. Too much femininity would undermine her authority, too much masculinity would make her appear monstrous." (p. 76)

7) Regarding the French Revolution: "In the revolutionary discourse, the pure milk of loving mothers was implicitly compared with the tainted milk of ancien-regime aristocrats, most of whom were raised by wet nurses. This pairing of maternal nursing with republican virtues and wet nursing with royal decadence allowed women a 'patriotic' choice: those who chose to suckle their young could be seen as making a political statement in favor of the new regime." (p. 116)

8) Referencing an 1858 speech by Sojourner Truth: "At the close of the meeting, a group of proslavery sympathizers challenged her sexual identity. They sought to prove that she was not a woman ... this charge of imposture, meant to undermine Truth's authenticity ... 'Sojourner told them that her breasts had suckled many a white babe, to the exclusion of her own offspring ... In vindication of her truthfulness, she told them that she would show her breast to the whole congregation; that it was not to her shame that she uncovered her breast before them, but to their shame.'" (p. 124)

9) "It took time for the word 'brassiere' to supersede all the other English terms. Vogue magazine first used it in 1907, and the Oxford English Dictionary in 1912." (p. 173-174)

10) "If big breasts were the markers of sexuality and fertility, what was left for small-breasted women? Actresses like Katharine Hepburn and Audrey Hepburn ... represented something quite different. They were not symbols of sex, but of upper-class elegance. It was as if they were above the exigencies of the body." (p. 193)

11) "According to historians John d'Emilio and Estelle Freedman, American sexuality has changed over the last three and a half centuries from a family-based system in the colonial period, to a romantic-maternal ideology in the nineteenth century, to a commercialized industry in the modern period." (p. 197)

12) "The love affair with science that had begun in the eighteenth century was beginning to rival religion as a comprehensive guide to life." (p. 226)

13) "The United States and Great Britain, which have some of the world's richest diets, also have the highest breast-cancer rates, whereas countries such as Japan and China, which have low-fat diets, have one-fifth the incidence of white American or British women." (p. 232)

14) "the transcendence that can occur when human beings see each other's wounds and caress each other's scars" (p. 257)

15) "The more daunting the world becomes with its awesome bureaucracies and endless inventions, the greater the nostalgia for intimacy and basic connections." (p. 277)