Rating: 1/5

The “Hero” in this novel leaves the heroine ( after not consummating their marriage ) to spend Christmas with his mistress !

I AM serious ! 

I was enjoying this novel until the fucktard “Hero” cheated. And, what’s worse than cheating is the fact that he even implies that his mistress, Cordelia, has a slack or loose vagina. What the F kind of man will actually keep a mistress with a vagina like that? 

  Damn Cordelia! Her tongue was as loose as her ... never mind.

Those Endearing Young Charms. Marion Chesney (Kindle Location 1515). Kindle Edition.

The best thing about this novel was the heroine’s cat, Peter. He was a stray cat she’d rescued and she took him with her wherever she went:

Peter hated the H and the H was jealous of all the attention the cat received from the heroine:

  There was a soft thud as the large cat leaped on the bed. Its fur slowly rose and it green eyes glared. All of a sudden, the earl lost his temper. A male rival was one thing, but he was damned if he was going to compete with a cat.

Those Endearing Young Charms. Marion Chesney (Kindle Locations 1307-1309). Kindle Edition.

Peter the cat scratched and growled at the H !

That wasn’t the only stuff that Peter did to the hero. Peter even urinated on the H’s clean laundry !

  "Indeed. Well, when you turned your back, this is the result. Smell this." 
The valet moved cautiously forward and then looked at his master in dismay. 
"Exactly," said the earl grimly. "Cat's piss. Here and now I want it known that that animal is not to be allowed in my quarters or anywhere near my person."

Those Endearing Young Charms. Marion Chesney (Kindle Locations 1326-1328). Kindle Edition.

Peter probably used his extra strong cat nostrils to sniff out the OW’s skanky loose vagina on the hero ! But Peter was a resolute and brave Cat. He continued to mess with the H all the time until the very end when he was sure that the H had changed:

Other stuff I hated in this novel included:
1.	The stupid maid Felice threw Peter outside during a snowstorm and the heroine had to endanger her life to go search for her pet. The maid wasn’t even fired or punished ! And the f*cking H even thought the whole thing was funny:

  "Oh, no, my friend," said the earl softly. "I am not going to have a mangy cat as a rival." He scooped the cat up with one quick movement and placed it on the floor. "I must ask Emily not to be too harsh with Felice," he thought sleepily. "It is an eminently throwable cat."

Those Endearing Young Charms. Marion Chesney (Kindle Location 1220-1221). Kindle Edition.

Eminently throwable cat ? This motherf*cking H has an eminently choppable dick !

2.	The mistress continued to order clothing at the mantua makers and the dumbf*ck H paid the bill, even after he had dumped her !
I am just gonna put this one down to a fluke failure and continue with my travels into the wonderful world of Marion Chesney’s regency stories. Hopefully, I will not encounter this kind of shit again…