Rating: 1/5

Now this was just plain WEIRD, as well as a bit gross. It starts out intriguing, as the h, Jennifer, plots revenge on the villain, Robert Harbison, whom she blames for her mother's death (he apparently having led her astray, into adultery, unwanted pregnancy and abortion.) When Jennifer's of age, and after her father's death, she decides to plot her revenge. Even a chance meeting with Nicholas, the artist she falls for, won't deter her purpose.

At first, I got the impression that Robert was a wealthy businessman, and Jennifer would get a job working for him and then attempt to destroy him financially, maybe by spying for his competitors or setting him up in some way. Instead, Robert turns out to be down on his luck, and she purposefully takes a room in the seedy building where he lives to get his attention, make him fall for her, and then laugh in his face and break his heart. Seriously???? That's her revenge??? She sure thinks a lot of herself, if she believes telling him to get lost will send him to the roof to jump off; talk about conceit!! Besides, this man was an amoral womanizer (or to put it in modern terms, a pump-and-dump guy) who was incapable of really caring for anyone, so her scheme was doomed to fail from the start.

What happens instead is unbelievable, even by early HR days (this came out in the early 80's. before standards climbed higher). Despite her hatred for Robert, (and her love for Nicholas, whom she surrendered her virginity to) Jennifer finds herself attracted to him, and when he corners her in her room, making it clear she can't escape him so she might as well give in, she sure does, with multiple orgasms! To make things worse, she used the same flimsy excuse that men have made in more than one of these stories: she loves Nicholas, but he wasn't there, Robert was, and her body has needs...oh, brother!!! Even the most radical feminist wouldn't approve of that!

Meanwhile, Nicholas is wondering where Jennifer got to, and when they meet again, she (naturally) doesn't confess to her rape/seduction/lust fest with Robert, so when she discovers she's pregnant, and later miscarries, he of course assumes it was his baby and for some reason, blames himself for what happened. She doesn't have the guts to tell him the truth, just let him go on believing it was his baby.

To make matters worse, she discovered that Robert was (get ready to vomit) her uncle!!! That's right, she slept with her father's brother!!! (This is a real WTF moment!!) It gets even crazier, as her other uncle (the one she didn't f---) is really her father, who also slept with her mother (this lady apparently opened her legs for every man in town) because the man she thought was her father all this time was actually a guy with defective balls, as he couldn't get a rise if he dipped his willy in a starch vat! Is this book nuts (pun intended) or what???

The topper is when Jennifer gets preggers again (this time by Nicholas, though with her, you never know) and the mistress of her former uncle/now dad delivers her baby, who's there by her side? Not Nicholas but Uncle Daddy!! An added bonus to all the incest insanity: he gets a view between his daughter's legs as she pops out his grandchild! (I wonder if he helped drain her milk supply, too?)

My advice: STT (skip this trash)!