Rating: 5/5

This is a serious historian's analysis of historical methods by using the historical events of the Mutiny on the Bounty and its after events. 

Greg Dening divides his book into three Acts, The Ship, The Beach and The Island. In The Ship he describes the events of the Mutiny on the Bounty and the awful voyage of the Pandora which carried some of the men left on the Bounty back to England to trial. The Beach examines the Europeans and Polynesians in Tahiti and on other islands such as Hawaii and The Island looks at the events on Pitcairn Island. There are scenes of reflection in each Act and a fascinating look at Twentieth Century movies about the mutiny, all five of them, and how we have incorporated the Mutiny and the Bounty into some sort of cultural literacy that has nothing to do with history and events and facts and context. 

Dening asks what happened and why and surmises that we cannot actually ever know but that the story then becomes important for other reasons and part of our own mythology. And just the examination of this becomes a wonderful exploration of the what and the why. What did the sailors mean when they complained about William Bligh's bad language? He was far from being brutal. Why was he unable to command the respect of the men? Why did they not regard him as a gentleman? 

The chapter on Tahiti looks at the rituals and symbolic behaviours of the Europeans and the Tahitians and how neither group really understood the other although each group took part in one another's rituals and thought they knew what they were doing. Bizarrely the Europeans thought that raising a flag and installing a plaque gave them possession of the land. The Tahitians incorporated pieces of the flag into their own ceremonies. Dening was a former Jesuit priest and he knows about rituals and the mixed meanings people take from them. 

The chapter on Pitcairn Island was like an awful horror story that somehow I didn't know about. It was an awfulness arising from violence, lack of order, exploitation and religiosity with all the mutineers except John Adams dead within three years, most of them violently. 

Dening quotes E H Carr who says that an historical fact is not what happened but that small part of what has happened that has been used by historians to talk about. History is not the past: it is a consciousness of the past used for present purposes. Twentieth Century Hollywood needed Bligh to be a brutal tyrant and Christian to be a man fighting for liberty and justice. And we want the Tahiti to be a paradise. It wasn't. It was a lot of things but it was also a brutal society that practised human sacrifice.

Charles Laughton played the part of William Bligh in the 1935 film. 'Laughton told of going to Gieves, the military tailors in Savile Row , London, with inquiries about eighteenth century naval uniforms. He was told by the clerk assisting him that, if he would wait, they would check Mr Bligh's measurements from an account on the last uniform Bligh had ordered. Laughton himself lost fifty five pounds in some historical awe at his discovery.' 
We love historical artifacts. I love such historical artifacts too. 

Dening explains that he taught a detailed course on this subject to undergraduate students and 'that out of events so trivial and unimportant as the Bounty they would discover questions large enough for them to answer as well as the creativity to find the mode of their answering them.' I wish that I had had him as my teacher.