Rating: 3/5

I have some very mixed feelings about this book.

On one had it had many astute observations. I might not have experienced many of the things described, because I went through pregnancy, childbirth and postpartum period in a completely different country, and 20 years later, but I found it enlightening to learn about what challenges women face in a more patriarchal country. I found it horrifying what was (is?) happening in American hospitals and this further solidified my astonishment about why the US is considered to be a first-world country. I am grateful I'm not living there. 

And even in 21st century in countries more advanced than the US we still have a long way to go in the subject of pregnancy and parenthood. It's important to talk about this, because the awareness is the first step towards a positive change.

But on the other hand, I felt many times that the author went too far and tried to demonize modern medicine thanks to which it's no longer common for women to die in childbirth. I'm happy that c-section is well-researched and right there, if something goes wrong. I'm happy that when I asked for epidural, no one tried to change my mind and force me to keep dying of overwhelming pain. I'm tired of people idealizing "natural birth", where women who are not masochists are seen as inferior.

And then I was in doubt about some non-American data the author mentioned. Epistemology is not common because of offered perineal massage? Never heard of it. In which country? Because "Europe" is pretty vague. Episiotomy is not common at least where I live, because most natural tears heal easier than a scalpel cut. And then there's the subject of homebirths. I hope the audiobook narrator read something incorrectly (I rewound to make sure I didn't mishear), because the idea that "in Holland and Denmark 1 in 3 births is a homebirth" is so absurd that I don't know if I should laugh or cry. At least in Denmark at the time the book was written the homebirths constituted around 1% of all births, not 30%. 

So my experience while listening to the book was going back and forth between nodding in agreement and sighing with frustration. It was a very strange book.

Note on reviews

I saw some hateful reviews calling the author "a privileged white woman". I'm not even sure, if those made me more sad or angry. It just shows that the situation in the US is so dire and the inequalities so pronounced that people stopped trying to understand each other and lost their empathy. In this case what they are saying in response to a person describing some very serious and real problems is: "I have it worse, so you should shut up and suffer in silence". *shudders* Yup, I feel very lucky not to be born in the US.