Rating: 5/5

An evocative read and perhaps my favorite of the major Heian Court women diaries I've read so far (the others currently are Lady Murasaki's and the Pillow Book). I felt this woman's pain, and longing, and love throughout the pages. She was an excellent writer and even though I knew what was to come, I kept rooting for her nonetheless. She no doubt struggled with some sort of depression, and while it could be argued that could have been exaggerated due to Heian Literary tradition and its importance on melancholy, I do think the Author, our Lady Kagero, seemed to genuinely struggle with it. I do love the inclusion of her poetry on her part, as her personal anecdotes throughout. The former adds a literary dream feeling to the poem, while the latter made this account a lot more personable. 

While I am sad for the Author's sake about the divorce happening at the end, I am also relieved for her. She made peace with the falling out of the relationship, especially how much she stressed over it during Book 2. That man was worthless, and frankly I am glad she had her son and adopted daughter with her. I am convinced her daughter's 'not-suitor' was actually more interested in her than in the girl. Like why not try to have secret overtures with her, hm? Why did he keep returning to the Author? I hope she had a good and happy life post divorce/diary. I will hope so, given that the diary ends as it does. 

I thoroughly enjoyed the translator's (I read the Arntzen edition) style of translation. Having the notes on the opposite page of the diary is a stroke of genius and made for reading a lot smoother. I wished Mckinney's trans. of Shonagon's the Pillow Book and Bowring's translation of Murasaki's Diary were laid out like this. If I must contest something, is that she insisted on the Kagero Nikki's Author's relationship with the Principal Handmaiden being purely platonic. Perhaps there are details that are missing on my end, but I don't know if I can buy that their relationship was that, given how distinct the poetry between them was compared to how she wrote to other women. It's quite intimate to say the least. We have so little knowledge of how queer women lived at the time, it could be missing the forest for the trees to not see it as suspect. Or not. 

5/5 Stars. Recommend if you like: Japanese History especially the Heian period or plan to write on it (our Lady Kagero makes a lot of historical/cultural notes about the time), if you like romances especially ones that are tragic/falling out, have a love or interest in poetry, and/or enjoy literary works. 

For those reading this who are daunted by the prospect of reading a memoir, don't be. It's a great read, but read this translation please.