Rating: 4/5

This was really fun!
The hero is a charming sheikh who was severely wounded and maimed years some year ago.
He has been completely impotent for 9 years (yep!). Not even a twitch down there.
When he meets the heroine suddenly something happens. 
He feels something special for the heroine, a naive young woman who should work for him.
Her work should be: PA with benefit. But her benefits are of course limited since he cannot function at all.
So they will have petting instead.
Why?
Because there are rumors that he's incapable to procreate and his rivals plan to take the lead.
So they will pretend to be lovers.
He ouf course, after 10 years of complete death of the flesh, thinks he won't feel anything as usual.
Then suddenly... 
Miracle! Resurrection!
There's life on Mars!
His lil boy is alive and kicking!
Immediately, and too stunned and happy even to hope that he could function as a man again, he starts having heavy petting with her and his lil one is very much alive, so he thinks that the best thing to do is marry this miracle lady.
The most exhilarating scene is when he watches himself in the mirror and, only thinking of the heroine, he has a hard-on! It's something you don't want to lose, because, hey, it's Diana Palmer writing, and she obviously doesn't use such words as c**k, d**k or hard-on. 
In her usual language it was almost a mystical experience!
So they get married and they have much and hot sex that is unusual to find in DP books.
Brief drama with a group of terrorists, where the heroine behaves like Rambo and threatens the villain.
Enter the ow.
Yes.
Because the hero has been in love years ago, with another woman who married another man, and he let her go because he couldn't perform any more.
He describes her to the heroine as the love of his life, that is not cute at all, but we readers, that are smarter than him, already know that he was never really in love with her, and the irrefutable proof is there, between his legs, shouting, hey, you, dumbass, it's the heroine we love, not the ow!!!
The hero though is very thick and when the ow comes to his palace to avoid a criminal who wants to kill her, he brutally neglects the heroine and keeps going around with ow without a second thought.
Of course when she packs and is ready to leaves him, he understands his idiocy and apologizes declaring his love.
And he's not even sterile!
She's just a miracle girl!
It's really the first time that we hoped a hero listened to what is under his belt, because in this case the lil one knew better!
What a cute and entertaining reading!
I recommend it because it's fun and safe, and unexpectedly sexy.