Rating: 3/5

This was an enjoyable book about the behind the scenes workings of Desilu Studios as well as the tumultuous marriage and divorce of Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz.

As most people in America are aware of, regardless of the generation they belong to, Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz starred in the groundbreaking TV show “I Love Lucy”. They were married a decade prior, and ended up turning to Television as a kind of last resort. Lucille was known as “The Queen of the B’s”, as she never was able to get out of “B” movies, and her career was pretty much stalled. Desi was a bandleader, and was touring throughout the country. In an attempt to keep their marriage intact, they started their own studio. Though their TV marriage was a happy one, their real life one was not. It was filled with fights, infidelity, miscarriages, alcohol, all the while trying run the studio and maintain the TV image of their marriage.

Through the 50’s and 60’s Desilu studios was responsible for some of the more famous TV shows to air. Besides “I Love Lucy”, there was “The Lucy Show”, “The Untouchables”, “Star Trek”, and “Mission: Impossible”, to name a few. Unfortunately, the pressures of running a studio, a failing marriage, in part due to womanizing and increased alcohol use, started Desi down a path of illness, multiple hospitalizations, and increased loneliness, especially after Lucy bought his shares of Desilu from him. Lucy, meanwhile, was so focused on her career that her marriage to Desi suffered, and was so temperamental to work with that she alienated many people after they worked with her. She was not a “Mommie Dearest” type, but she always had to be number 1. The ironic part of her relationship with Desi was that it got better after they divorced. There was still a deep love between them, even after each got remarried, that they carried to their dying day.

I enjoyed this book about Lucille Ball, Desi Arnaz, and the building and running of Desilu Studios. It seemed to be written more from Lucille’s perspective than Desi’s, but it is an overall well written book. There is a little bit of “tell-all” moments within the pages that can distract from the story, but I think it does help flesh out this complicated relationship of two very famous people. I would recommend this book to people who like biographies, non-fiction books about television and/or TV personalities, and people that enjoy reading books that are based mainly in the 50’s and 60’s.