Rating: 4/5

3.5*
Marion Chesney has a sense of humor not expected in an older Regency - almost morbid and dark. 
The book veers between being a traditional Regency, a train-wreck and things more unpleasant. 

I like this story despite or because of the complication - the h's marriage to another. 
Lady Lucy is a young and naive young woman, a relatively new bride who doesn't understand why and how her doting and handsome fiancé has turned into a husband who so blatantly humiliates her by openly consorting with the demimonde while drinking, clubbing and gambling away the money that he hardly has.

Unknown to her, her 'mushroom' father had 'bought' the Marquess for her. The husband is a truly callous man. The worse kind because he occasionally remembers to be kind to her before resorting to form - leaving her confused and hurt but still hopeful of salvaging her marriage. 
The husband consorts with a sought after courtesan, a Harriet Comfort and the h is more devastated as the ow is not even beautiful. The thing is that the marquess seeks everything that's fashionable. He wishes to be seen with people who are the leaders and his connection to Harriet was more 'fashionable than sexual' 
'“the fashionable life of London consumed him. It meant all the world to him. To be seen, to be noticed, to be envied—that was what he craved.”

Seeing her hurt and neglect, a well meaning friend ask her to get a lover - a idea that the h immediately dismisses in horror but ...
Then, the couple meet the H, the Duke of Habard who's polite but is contemptuous of both.
“I would not have given either of ’em the time of day. He is a boor and she is a timid little mouse, but I promised Ann Hartford to be civil to them. ”
But as the H keeps meeting the h, he begins to appreciate her quiet strength and the quandary that's her marriage. And they form a friendship of sorts. 

Then the intrigue begins as the husband, stupidly but predictably, falls in to even more unsavory company. The h tries her best to extricate him, going as far as to meet the moneyshark but the husband reacts violently to her interference. 
And his troubles keep multiplying.

The h/H meanwhile become closer. He falls for her before she does - understandably as she still has confused feelings for her mostly absent husband. 
But slowly the inevitable happens -
“I said I would not compromise you,” he said harshly, “But ’fore God, it’s hard. I must go.”
“Where?” said Lucy, stretching out her arms, all restraint gone.
“I am going to my bed to bite my pillow and scream,” he said”
But they have a long way to go till they get to their deserved hea. 

And then there's the H's mother. *shudder*
A more grotesque character I'm yet to see. And highly meant to boot. 
A dowager duchess - from some horror comedy. 
“But she has become eccentric to the point of madness.” 
Oh no, this is beyond eccentric, my boy!