Rating: 3/5

The Ectoplasmic Man was a fairly short novel centering around a locked room theft of which Harry Houdini is suspected. When someone peripheral to the theft is later found murdered in such a way that all but frames Houdini, he is arrested and Sherlock Holmes is on the case. 

This is the first I've read of the Further Adventures of Sherlock Holmes series and it's a pretty good introduction. The case is interesting and keeps on moving, though - as some reviewers have pointed out - characterization is bit uneven. Holmes is bit less cutting than in some of his depictions and Watson is little more obtuse. I wouldn't have noticed and wouldn't be addressing it here except some reviewers took exception, apparently having forgotten that ACD's canon characterization is not exactly consistent and that both of these have been accurate in various stories. One of the things I like about Stashower's characterization here is that it doesn't flanderize Holmes as being more cutting the way a lot of portrayals do. That's enjoyable in its own way (who doesn't love BBC Sherlock tearing a strip off Anderson with one sentence?), but the less flanderized characterization is nice to see too. 

However, the reviewers who take major issue with Lestrade's characterization are probably right: he's a little too credulous, especially for cop. Especially for cop who works semi-consistently with Sherlock Holmes, solver of cases with no apparent solution. Especially when the accused - Houdini - can actually show how the trick leading Lestrade to believe he stole the stuff is performed and can conclusively illustrate that is not an influence of the spirit world, but trickery. I am inclined to forgive this because it seems like all cases with a potentially supernatural cause - both canon and noncanon - have to have someone who stands in for ACD himself, who at least seriously considers if not insists that the supernatural cause is the correct answer, who speaks for the victorian spiritualist belief that were strange happenings and people who could do strange things...it's just that this credulous person is usually Watson. I don't mind that it's Lestrade in this story, though Stashower does take it a bit far at a couple of points. That, however, becomes less important as the story goes on due to political pressure on Lestrade to make the case GO AWAY. At that point, the frame up and the politics become the reason Houdini is arrested, not Lestrade's beliefs that he might actually be able to walk through walls with help from beyond the veil, as some reviewers have erroneously implied/stated. 

Lastly regarding issues with this book are some typos. There aren't many, but the ones that exist were blatant enough my brain went 'wait, what was that?' and I had to reread to make sure I'd gotten the gist of the paragraph. Overall, though, The Ectoplasmic Man was a decent book. I do plan on reading others in this series.