Rating: 3/5

“There is a time in the life of very boy when he for the first time takes the backward view of life. Perhaps that is the moment when he crosses the line into manhood. The boy is walking through the street of his town. He is thinking of the future and of the figure he will cut in the world. Ambitions and regrets awake within him. Suddenly something happens; he stops under a tree and waits as for a voice calling his name. Ghosts of old things creep into his consciousness; the voices outside of himself whisper a message concerning the limitations of life. From being quite sure of himself and his future he becomes not at all sure. If he be an imaginative boy a door is torn open and for the first time he looks out upon the world, seeing, as though they marched in procession before him, the countless figures of men who before his time have come out of nothingness into the world, lived their live and again disappeared into nothingness…”
-	Sherwood Anderson, Winesburg, Ohio

Small towns hold an outsized place in the American imagination. Even though most people live in cities or suburbs, we still feel a strong pull towards those tiny specks on the map, those places with the town square and the bronze Civil War cannon, the five-and-dime and savings-and-loan, and one main street called “Main Street,” those places where everyone knows your name and your secrets. For many, the small town is the “authentic” or “real” America. 

There are no shortage of books exploring, celebrating, or deconstructing life in a rural community. You can take your pick of classics, from Peyton Place to Lake Wobegon Days to Empire Falls. 

One of the most famous and influential examples of this literary subgenre is Sherwood Anderson’s Winesburg, Ohio.

Published in 1919, Winesburg, Ohio is not a traditional novel, but a series (or cycle) of loosely interconnected and sometimes overlapping short stories. These stories, twenty-two in all, each focus on one main individual. Anderson writes in the third person, utilizing a roving, omniscient viewpoint, though he occasionally slips into the first person singular. Most of the stories are one-offs, and to the extent that they have any commonality whatsoever, it is in the person of George Willard, a reporter for the Winesburg Eagle. Willard’s life provides a chronological marker as the stories progress, letting the reader know that we are moving forward through time, even if the tales themselves lack such specificity. 

According to the introduction in my Penguin Classics edition, Anderson’s work influenced a whole host of later authors, most of whom achieved far wider fame than Anderson himself. The list includes Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, and John Steinbeck. Not being an English professor, I will have to accept these assertions as having some basis in truth. 

Regardless of its putative impact, Winesburg, Ohio did next to nothing for me. At its best, it was tolerable. At its worst, it was a frustratingly repetitious waste of my time. 

Despite being the setting, the fictional Winesburg never becomes a character. Only vaguely described, Anderson doesn’t give it any permanence or atmosphere. My edition of the book contains a small map, which is an odd affectation given that Anderson is apparently unconcerned with the town’s physical reality, and uses it mainly as an opaque, passive antagonist for his characters.

The stories themselves are almost aggressively unspectacular, defined not by action or incident but by interior monologues. In other words, Anderson is concerned with character, not location. This would have been fine, if any single character was worth reading about. Unfortunately, in my opinion, there was not. 

Each person that Anderson introduces, man or woman, is almost exactly the same. His themes – of loneliness, isolation, and an inability to communicate with others – are extremely well-worn. The idea that small-town folk might feel cut off from the rest of the world does not exactly blow my mind or deliver any real insight. One chapter simply bleeds into the next, as Anderson plays the same tune over and over. 

By way of example, the first chapter features an old writer working on a book called The Book of the Grotesque. In this book-within-a-book, the writer expresses “hundreds” of “truths,” all of which were “beautiful.” Yet Anderson never describes what any of these beautiful truths are, or convinces me that it contained a single meaningful idea. We are asked to take on faith the importance of this writer’s work. The whole of the chapter is given over to an imprecise description of this book, concluding with the observation that it was never published, apparently because its ideas were too profound. 

The very next story is a variation on the first. It’s about a former teacher named Wing Biddlebaum. Like the aforementioned writer, Wing has a lot of big ideas, and like the writer, he can’t satisfactorily express them. When those thoughts are finally given outline, they are almost laughably corny, such as Wing telling George Willard that “You must try to forget all you have learned” and that “You must begin to dream.” In other words, the wisdom in Winesburg, Ohio is just on par with that which you would find inside a fortune cookie. 

It goes on like this, story after story. There’s a man filled with religious notions that he wants to share. There’s another man who really wants to talk about the imaginary people in his room. There’s George Willard, who wants everyone to know that he’s going to be a man, and that he wants to leave his small town, as though he’s the first young person to ever have such a concept.

When you write a book about ideas, the ideas better be interesting. When you base your entire story on psychological perceptions, they better be acute. For me, nothing that Anderson – or his characters – said or screamed or thought made any lasting impression. He was clearly trying to convey something grand, something evocative, something unique about the human condition, but like the citizens of Winesburg, he did not succeed. 

I will be the first person to admit my own limitations as a reader. Frankly, I picked this up with certain expectations. The fact that my expectations were not in line with Anderson’s intent probably colored my experience. This is not entirely the fault of Anderson or his book. 

With that said, I wanted something rather simple: I wanted to believe this town existed. I wanted to know its geography, its architecture, and its weather; I wanted to know its rhythms, history, and customs. I wanted to follow the town doctor as he made house calls, the milkman as he made his deliveries, and the local politico as he gathered votes. I wanted to hang out with the old farmers at the feed store, with the old ladies on a porch swing, and with the young kids skipping school to spend the day at the fishing hole. I wanted to spend a warm summer evening at the county fair on the Fourth of July, watching fireworks while surrounded by people wearing overalls and chewing stems of grass. 

Instead, I found that my entire visit to Winesburg was taken up by chemically-imbalanced loners and narcissists, whose only form of communication came via unhinged rants directed at their neighbors. It was unpleasant, to say the least, and far from the chords of nostalgia that I wanted strummed. 

Far be it from me to tell you what to do. But if you happen to be in the area of Winesburg, Ohio, I recommend that you just keep driving. After all, Peyton Place or Lake Wobegon is somewhere up ahead.