Rating: 4/5

Jim Wickwire writes that the title of his memoir, Addicted to Danger, came to him as he recalled his repeated promises to stop climbing and his inability to follow through, despite small children at home and the deaths of several companions. He admits that he climbed not only for the solitude, beauty and physical exertion, but also because "of an attraction to danger." Wickwire's book provides ample proof of the truth of those words. Was he addicted to danger? Judge for yourself.

In 1971, Jim Wickwire nearly died trying to climb Mount Ranier's Willis Wall. Only the heroic efforts of his climbing partner saved Wickwire's life. Wickwire was 31 years old at the time, with a wife and 5 small children at home. Wickwire had started climbing in 1960, a year in which he survived a 50 foot fall with only a fractured wrist. He writes that falling made him a more careful climber, but "also left me with a heightened attraction to danger."

So perhaps it isn't surprising that despite his close call on Mount Rainier, Wickwire became consumed with the desire to climb higher mountains. He was a member of the unsuccessful 1975 American expedition to K2. As he left to board the plane to Pakistan, his nine year old daughter whispered to him, "Daddy, don't get killed." The expedition was famously beset by all kinds of trouble, infighting among the members and a barrage of criticism when the members returned home. 

Stung by the criticism, Wickwire decided to do an extraordinary climb to "shut the critics up." This was the genesis of his decision to attempt to climb Mount McKinley in 1976 by a new route, solo. His wife told him she was afraid for him every time he left on a major climb, and that he was on a "bloody ego trip." Wickwire had grossly underestimated the difficulty of the route, and at points, dangerously, he had to descend unroped. He decided his wife was right, doing the solo climb was an ego trip, and putting his life at such gret risk when he had five small children at home "was incredibly irresponsible and utterly foolish."

Nonetheless, when he was invited to join the 1978 American expedition to K2, he eagerly accepted, racing home euphoric to throw his arms around his wife in celebration. Shortly before this, a good climbing friend, Leif Patterson, was killed in an avalanche along with his 12 year old son and a 17 year old friend. Patterson had been a member of the 1975 K2 expedition, and was slated to go on the 1978 expedition. 

To get ready for K2, Wickwire decided to climb in the Fairweather Range in Alaska along with 3 other members of the 1978 expedition. All four reached the summit and began to descend. About 300 feet below the summit, Wickwire heard a scraping sound, and turned to see Al Givler and Dusan Jagersky, who had roped together, sliding down the steep slope. Wickwire "watched in horror" as the two slid down the slope and disappeared into a gully. The 4,000 foot fall was unsurvivable. Wickwire was shaken because these friends had "died right in front of me." Nonetheless, he decided that he could not think of the expedition as a failure: "It had been a good -- even a great -- expedition. We were the first to climb Mt. Abbe and Peak 8440; the first to stand on their glaciers, their ridges, their summits, and I felt enormous satisfaction for what we had accomplished." The bottom line was that although his friends had died, and he had seen their "horrible remains," Wickwire did not want to stop climbing.

Wickwire successfully climbed K2 in 1978, wlthough he nearly died in the process, being forced to bivouac at 28,000 feet without food, water, a tent or a sleeping bag. Upon arriving home, he underwent surgery to remove a part of his lung and parts of two toes. He says after his surgeries, he seriously considered quitting climbing, but as his health improved, this resolve diminished.

Invited to join a 1982 expedition to Mount Everest, Wickwire happily accepted. He decided to get ready by climbing Mount McKinley by a new route up the Wickersham Wall. While he and Chris Kerrebrock, a 2 year old climber, were traversing a glacier, they fell into a deep crevasse. Wickwire's shoulder was broken, but he was able to climb out. But Kerrebrock was wedged into the crevasse headfirst, and despite Wickwire's strenous efforts, he was unable to free him from the cravasse. In what must surely be one of the saddest and most horrible of climbing deaths, Kerrebrock froze to death in the crevasse. 

Again, Wickwire says he decided to stop climbing: "From now on I would live differently, my priorities would change -- I owed it to those I loved." He even went so far as to tell his wife he was going to withdraw from the Everest expedition. Of course, he didn't. Instead, to get in shape he climbed Mount Aconcagua, the highest mountain in South America. On that expedition, he met and started to fall in love with a young female climber, Marty Hoey, "the most competent woman climber I had ever known." Hoey, who was also a member of the 1982 Everest expedition, would end up being Wickwire's climbing partner on that trip, in his eyes, Chris Kerrebrock's "logical successor."

At 26,000 feet, Wickwire was going to take some rope to two companions slightly higher up. Hoey stepped back to get out of his way. He heard a sound and turned to see her "pitching backward, head-down the icy slope." Then he "watched in shock and disbelief as she slidat an ever increasing speed, disappearing into a tunnel of mist, over a huge ice cliff, and onto the glacier six thousand feet below."
Hoey had made an inexplicable, fatal error, having failed to secure the belt of her waist harness. Wickwire decided to continue his quest for the summit, but was unsuccessful.

After this, Wickwire says he once again considered calling it quits, but "in spite of Marty' death, I did not expect to look back on the expedition with negative feelings." Although he did not summit, he felt that "we had given it all we had."

In 1984, Naomi Uemura, a famous Japanese climber and adventurer, and a close friend of Wickwire, died on Mount McKinley after having climbed it solo in winter. Wickwire participated in the search for his body. Also in that year, Wickwire again attempted unsuccessfully to climb Mount Everest. At the age of 44, for the first time in his life, he felt his physical powers beginning to wane, and could no longer keep up to the younger members of the expedition. He told his wife he was never going back to Everest.

A year later, one of Wickwire's law partners was murdered, together with his wife and two children, and Wickwire began to think about death and risk once again. He writes that after losing so many friends in the mountains, "mountain summits seemed an absurb target for my ambitions, yet I could not break the habit." He concluded that he climbed mountains not because he wanted to die, but because "I wanted to know death, to understand it."

Despite his declining physical prowess and gossip in the climbing community that he was "bad luck," Wickwire continued to climb, including 1989 and 1990 expeditions to Kanchenjunga and Menlungtse in the Himalayas. When he returned from Menlungtse, he determined to end his climbing career, and even cancelled the climbing coverage on his life insurance policy. Nonetheless, when asked to join an Everest expedition set for 1993, and secretly decided return to climbing. To prepare, he planned to climb Mount McKinley in 1992. Thus, Wickwire was on McKinley during that famously deadly season, which saw 12 climbers perish on the mountain. Wickwire and his partner took part in several rescues of injured climbers, as well as the recovery of the bodies of some of the dead. 

Wickwire's attempt to climb Mount Everest in 1993 was not successful. He decided he was no longer willing to spend the time necessary to climb 8,000meter peaks, and instead climbed smaller peaks, being unready to hang up his crampons.

After reading Wickwire's book, and many other climbing memoirs, I have decided that climbers are not ordinary people. Their books almost uniformly paint portraits of driven, self-consumed and selfish people who seem to be unable to appreciate life except by risking death. Although they all seem to realize that it makes no rational sense to risk one's life to stand on top of a mountain, they nonetheless continue to undergo great pain, risk life and limb, brush off the deaths of companions and give short shrift to the feelings of and fears of their families and friends. Despite their best efforts, no climber has ever been able to make a case that what they do is really worth the price of the effort. In that regard, Wickwire's memoir is just as unconvincing as all the rest, and succeeds only in telling an exciting story and convincing the reader that he is a little bit crazy.