Rating: 3/5

Scholastic Book Fair Throwback here!! 

I got this from (you guessed it) ✨The Scholastic Book Fair✨ when I was in 5th Grade. It seemed like a good purchase. I mean, the main character was in 5th Grade... I was in 5th Grade... It's always encouraging when the Reader shares common ground with the MC, amiright? Especially when said Reader is at such a dangerous age when their reading habits could go either way (To be fair, this was looooong before there were such things as Smart Phones, Social Media, and Robolx to distract and corrupt young minds, but still... There was Oregon Trail and Paint Programs and Waldo's mysterious female counterpart, Carmen.). But I digress... I don't recall much about this book except a girl wanting to get a part in a school play and calling upon an accident-prone Fairy Godmother for help and then everything going awry, but I recall I loved it. A sucker for Magic and Mayhem even at the young and tender age of 10. 

Funny thing: I've been wanting to revisit this since reading A Dash of Trouble, but not being able to recall the title (and therefore unable to locate a copy). The premise was similar: Well-intended magic gone wrong. Today a battered and much-loved copy of this book was donated to my library, and I excitedly snapped it up, eager to revisit Gretchen and her (perhaps misguided) quest to thwart Queen Bee Amy and land the starring role. I suppose the Librarian of the Universe kept this in mind and finally delivered me a copy. I love when stuff like this happens!

So you might be asking: Did it hold up?

Yes... and no. 

The magic was there as well as the fun. But the deeper I got into the story the more I hated Gretchen. The girl was a jealous brat, plain and simple. And she pulled some VERY underhanded, VERY sneaky, and downright vindictive stuff in attempt to get get what she wanted. And she didn't care who she stepped on along the way. Girl has the makings of a True Diva and I hope she got something out of the Karmic slapback she got (although, personally I thought she got off waaaaay too easy). I suppose some books are better left in the Library of Distant Memory.

p.s. Poor Amy!! Probably took years if therapy before she was fit to rejoin society again!