Rating: 5/5

How much did I love this book? Well, I named my son after one of its characters. There's a clue.

This is romantic historical fiction at its finest. The love story is a major theme, but if you know anything about the history of Kentucky, it's very historically on par, too. If you like James Alexander Thom novels, but wish the romantic angle was played with more finesse, you may also love this one. The only difference is that Kitty Gentry is a completely fictional character while Thom's characters usually were based on real people. No matter, though, as Kitty could be anywoman in frontier Kentucky.

The story is moving with moments of action, drama, sorrow, and elation. I don't rate many books a solid five stars, though I will with this one. Kitty Gentry is a woman's woman, a heroine that everyone will love in this is a sweeping, epic tale of love and survival on the Kentucky frontier. 

This was one of two books that launched me into a love of all things frontier America. The other was 'Follow The River' by James Alexander Thom, another novel about a strong woman on the early American frontier. Thom's book is based on real events so I definitely recommend it for a read. However, this author is able to get away with much more vivid detail of her character's life because her character is fiction. 

This is not a bodice-ripper romance, but there is a love story that I loved. This coming from someone who pretty much hated Twilight, The Notebook, etc. but who also wouldn't touch a Harlequin romance with a 10 foot pole. That should give you an idea of where this book falls on that scale.

Overall, very satisfying read and I was sad when it ended. Then, I found out it had a sequel 'Kentucky Home' - which was much too sad for me watching the beloved characters in this book in their later years. You just HAVE to read the sequel once you know it's out there, though. This will always be one of my most beloved books. It's one of those I wish I owned in hardcover because it's just an unpretentious little book that I thoroughly enjoyed and enjoy every few years or so when I re-read it.