Rating: 4/5

I would like to start by saying that I don't plan to use this book as gospel when it comes to my tarot readings, however, I did really enjoy the perspective offered by it. 

To get straight to the point, I don't know if I believe Warwick-Smith's interpretations of the cards wholeheartedly even though I appreciate how she built these interpretations off a Quabbalistic formula instead of just blindly correlating them to Rider-Waite tradition. I also especially loved Warwick-Smith's theory of support, in which the courts are in a fourfold perspective of Supporter-Detractor/Inner Resource-Challenge and the spreads she provided have returned good results for me in getting to understand these characters. I also appreciated the worksheets and meditations she provided. 

In terms of formula and why I don't necessarily agree with her intpretations, I have a few words. First, though I appreciate her Quabbalistic approach, I wouldn't necessarily use the keywords she chose for each suit even though I do agree that Quabbalistic World + Suit Interpretation is a good place to start in generating such a formula (Love being the keyword for Cups for example seems a bit shallow of an understanding of the suit). I also think that the astrological decans represented by the cards should be equally important in their interpretation, especially considering Warwick-Smith's own emphasis on their role as actual people who both support and detract from our lives. Therefore, I prefer the formula (QW + Suit) + (Astrological Decan* x 3**) for a better understanding. Ultimately I plan to continue to use Warwick-Smith's theory of Support but use my own formula to interpret each of the four positions.

I would definitely recommend this book, but as with any study and journey towards wisdom I also recommend that one reads any book of authority with an open and critical mind.

*This applies only to King-Prince, the formula for Page would need to read "Astrological Sign" here
** Kings through Princes are all represented by 3 different Astrological Decans while the Pages are represented by 3 different Astrological Signs