Rating: 4/5

This oftentimes humorous account of a young girl growing up without a mother, in Philadelphia, was priceless to read! The insecurities of this young girl, the whole reason she left home to go and meet her husband -- all of it reveals the character of this Jane Peck. 

She is absolutely a selfish, uppity girl, trying her best to please and impress everyone she knows. Her life is shallow, built around her wants and proving herself to all those around her -- and in Philadelphia, that means learning etiquette, becoming obsessed with clothing and gloves, and learning to pour tea and coffee. 

Then she leaves, takes a horrendous trip to meet her betrothed, the young man who was apprenticed to her father. 
Her father has realized the character of this man, and he tells her no when she receives his letter proposing marriage. 
But she wears him down, and eventually he realizes that if she won't be happy without William, she had better just go ahead and head to him. I kinda think that we are going to learn in a later book that he was sick and has died, and he didn't want Jane to be left alone, and so he tells her she can go. As Jane puts it, he gave her his permission, but never his blessing. 

And then she drives in Shoalwater Bay, and there is no William to meet her. This fine lady must learn how to survive in the wilderness -- and she grows more and more into a woman of character, who can kill a mountain lion, and make a house a home.

The transformation of Lady Jane Peck to Boston Jane was fun to read about. It was definitely an adventure, and one that I enjoyed immensely. I could;dn't tell if it was written for younger children -- some phrases sounded like it -- or if it was written for young adults -- there was kissing. Whoever it was written for, the phrases and the language was almost poetic, and it was so very descriptive. 

And, as I mentioned, there was a kiss. One. And it did have a bit of description -- but it wasn't an uncomfortable kind of description, but a "wow, I've never heard anyone describe it like that!" kind of description. 

And while this was a book about a girl doing off to meet her betrothed, and she did think about him -- not in an inappropriate way, but in an all consuming way, if that makes sense -- it wasn't offensive. 

The ironies of what society was really teaching girls at this time was accurate, historically, and the way those things taught as truths had to be debunked and relearned and put into their proper sphere was a challenge for our heroine . . . but she rose to the occasion, most marvelously. And the end character of this anomaly of a lady was more lovable and sweet than when we were first introduced to her. She went from being a tomboy, to being an affected little goose, to being a lady in every sense of the word. 

And, may I just say, Jehu is the best? 

I didn't realize there was more than this one book until I searched for it on here -- and I am most definitely looking forward to reading more of Jane's adventures!