Rating: 2/5

This book was soooo boring! And it could’ve been so exciting! That's annoying enough. But what really grated my nerves was the profound and harmful disconnect between the content of the book and the book at a meta level.

⚠️ Let’s talk about the framing:

The smaller beef: Genre-wise, this isn’t science fiction. It’s fantasy. Time travel ≠ science fiction. Peering into the past or seeing shades is not necessarily science fiction. Just because it won a Nebula doesn’t mean it's science fiction.

The elephant in the room: The synopsis states that the main character Elizabeth "abandoned her husband and daughter years ago to pursue her career." This is so incredibly sexist and wrong-headed that I almost don't have the words to express what vile feelings this sets off in me. The fact is, Elizabeth fled an abusive marriage and was forced to give up custody of her daughter if she didn’t want her emotionally and financially abusive husband to commit her to a psych ward. She periodically tried to re-establish a relationship with her daughter by attempting to get into the good graces of her ex-husband, who, in being fickle and controlling, would dangle possibilities and just as soon snatch them back. How is that "abandonment"? Did the writer of this synopsis simply resort to the cheap thrill of a "bad mother" narrative, however misrepresented? Even if the lead character had "ran off" to live out a career of her dreams, how often do male characters do the same damn thing without their decision being framed this way? Men do things. Men make sacrifices for their career. Men are the heroes of their own story. Men can be bad partners and bad fathers with minimal and often no judgment or repercussions. But not women! Heaven forbid!

Think about it. And whoever wrote that synopsis can [insert your favourite angry expletive] off. Or, even better, correct it.

📖 On to the book itself:

Almost nothing happens, except in fits and bursts near the end. I’m left wondering what the point was. As much as I appreciated the glimpses into Mayan culture from a woman’s perspective, it felt more like a storified encyclopedia entry than a story in its own right.

Also, I know this is a mark of the time during which the novel was written (specifically, 35 years ago), but it’s filled with ageist and sexist commentary. Elizabeth, at 51, is too old to do anything, including run, even though she’s roughing it in the jungle on the regular. Her daughter, Diane, has a rapey rendezvous with a romantic interest whose advances she's repeatedly declined—eventually she relents, even though she's not interested and he's already touched her intimately without her permission. Diane reflects on this experience with a combination of unease and apathy. The other women characters frame it as "a game" and "vying for respect" with the men, but these days we recognize this behaviour as a facet of rape culture—more gag-inducing than sexy.

That said, Elizabeth and her daughter Diane were women characters ahead of their time: "I led an isolated life, having little in common with the women in my boardinghouse. I was uninterested in mixers, boyfriends, and football games, and far too interested in science classes and books." Here here, sister. Elizabeth just wanted something different, something beyond the narrow confines of her gender. And she was roundly penalized for it, including in the damned synopsis of this very book.

Speaking of which, let me provide a bit more detail through select quotes (my emphasis in bold) so that you can understand just how perverse the synopsis is:

"Metaphor is reality once removed. I said that [my ex-husband] Robert wanted to kill me. Really, he wanted me to be quiet and compliant, as good as dead. He was not evil, but he did not understand what I needed to live. He wanted me to be dead to the world."

"'... I think that a great many people we call insane are just in the wrong place at the wrong time.' I shrugged. 'I opposed societal norms, so I was crazy by Robert's definition. ...'"

"'... Finally, [Robert] said we could divorce, but only if I would grant him custody of [Diane]. I had to agree that I would never try to see you without his permission. I wouldn't try to be your mother. I think that he was seeing someone else at the time and he wanted me out of the way. I had to be free of him, so I promised.' I hated the apologetic tone that crept into my voice. I shrugged lightly. 'He kept his part of it. He let me out.'"

"'... I came when Robert wanted me to. On his terms. At one point, I think he was lonely and wanted me back. When I told him that I wasn't interested, he cut off my visiting privileges.' I shrugged and smiled a small tight smile. 'He wasn't cruel about it. He sent me pictures of you.'"

That's pretty damned clear to me, but some a-hole interpreted a traumatized and powerless woman's actions as "abandonment" of her family. Shame on you.

Okay, moving on ... albeit with bile in my throat. I also appreciated the burning criticism of white supremacist patriarchy, especially for the times:

"At a party given by one of Robert's colleagues, an arrogant man had been talking about the limitations of what he called the 'primitive' mind. He seemed to regard all nonwhite races as primitive. I argued with him for a while, and ended up calling him a stupid bigoted fool. Word of this had finally filtered back to Robert. 'Couldn't you have used a little tact?' he asked. 'You want me to kowtow to that idiot?' 'I want you to use a little sense. That idiot is head of surgery and he has a lot of pull at the hospital,' Robert said. 'You should know better. You used to know better. ... What's wrong with you these days? ... Why are you always so touchy?'"

A white woman stands up to white supremacy and the patriarchy bats her down. She cows. And this is how white supremacy and patriarchy work together, strange and insidious bedfellows.

The writing was fine. The problem was the empty plot that slithered along at a snail’s pace. So much missed opportunity.

"'I know what you want,' Zuhuy-kak said softly. 'I can tell you. You want power. ...'"

What a story that would have been.