Rating: 5/5

4.5 stars

*Beware of spoilers if you don't already know who ends up with whom!* 

I have the unfortunate habit of reading book reviews before or at the beginning of the book I am reading. Usually with Regency romances that is not a big deal as the couples are always so predictable, but with Sprig Muslin had I not known prior to starting, how it would end, I would have been surprised!

The hero of this novel is Sir Gareth Ludlow, and there is no doubt whatsoever about that. He is in all likeliness the most "perfect" kind of hero I ever read about; tall, handsome, rich, fashionable, well-liked, admired, and respected, lively sense of humour and impeccable manners. Everybody loves him. Except Amanda.

Amanda is a young sixteen year-old who has established a plan of campaign which constitutes of running away from home in order for her grandfather to capitulate to her marrying a Brigade-Major. She hopes of becoming a chamber-maid or some such thing, to that her grandfather will have pity on her and permit her to marry. What a lovely plan. ;)

Only, Sir Gareth encounters her alone in an inn, and perfect gentleman that he is, feels honour bound to restore her to her family. Hence ensues hilarious confusions and entanglements, as Amanda keeps running away from Sir Gareth and claiming to everyone that he is abducting her. Moreover, matters are further complicated when Sir Gareth sees no choice but to bring Amanda with him to Brancaster Park, residence of the Earl of Bracaster and his sensible daughter Hester, whom Sir Gareth hopes to marry. Awesome. So now it looks like Sir Gareth has abducted a lovely piece of muslin, just as he was about to offer a very respectable marriage of convenience to the Lady Hester!

Next, everyone who meets Amanda wants to help her escape from Sir Gareth, who is in reality the only one who is truly  trying to help her. Then the story takes an interesting turn at the point where I'm sure he would've just abandoned her saying "Getting real tired of your ish Amanda!" and the last third of the book is really good.

I expected to hate Amanda. I thought she would be a Tiffany Wield kind of girl (from Heyer's The Nonesuch), but she had none of Tiffany' conceit and arrogance, and beneath her bold, adventurous façade she was very sweet and intelligent. Being very innocent and inexperienced, she did a lot of foolish things, but she also had a great presence of mind in dangerous situations. Now, what is a bit puzzling is that Amanda is a central character in the book, yet she cannot really be considered the heroine, since she doesn't end up with the hero. If Lady Hester hadn't been a character, Amanda and Sir Gareth would've probably made a match of it. As one read the story, one feels that Amanda and Gareth wouldn't exactly be the best matched couple, because for one thing he's 35 and she's only 16. Yet, in Heyer's The Corinthian for example, which has a similar setting (Regency Corinthian aged 35 needs to marry and have an heir, etc..) Sir Richard and Pen do end up together, and the reader is made to believe that it is a good match! Granted, Sir Gareth and Sir Richard might have been very similar, but I must say that Pen was a bit less of a goose than Amanda, even though they were both running away and both wanted to have silly romantic adventures.

Instead, Sir Gareth comes to love Lady Hester, who was such an amazing woman that it is too bad she didn't have a bigger role in the story. At first, she refuses to marry Sir Gareth because she has been secretly in love with him for years, and does not wish to marry him based simply on mutual respect and tolerance (which he feels for her at the beginning). Unfortunately, their romance only blossoms between the lines. We never really know how or why Sir Gareth comes to love her, be we are just happy for them both because they both deserve to be happy, as they were such awesome, perfectly nice characters. The kind that just has to have a happy ending.

  " 'When I asked you at Brancaster I held you in affection and esteem, but I believed I could never be in love again. I was wrong. Will you marry me, my dear and last love?' "

4.5 stars because not as awesome as my favourites These Old Shades or Devil's Cub, but no less because so darn hilarious and fun, featuring a set of ridiculously embarrassing relatives, rude landladies and funny people trying to help Amanda! Sprig Muslin is a very sweet, funny, engaging and sunny book, perfect when you need a good laugh!