Rating: 4/5

A blow against bourgeois hypocrisy, or just an old Victorian letting off steam? In his Introduction to MAN AND SUPERMAN Bernard Shaw (you know you're big when you can drop your first name) admits to a critic and collaborator that he is often accused of writing only expository plays, not comedies or dramas. Shaw is that rare playwright, Bertolt Brecht is another, who can be treated seriously as a writer of ideas, yet this play makes one wonder whether Shaw even understood what he purports to show. MAN AND SUPERMAN is dedicated to the dominion and triumph of the Life Force, always written by Shaw in capital letters, over love, marriage, politics, and war. We serve it, not the other way around. Shaw claims he got this idea from Friedrich Nietzsche, who the Devil assures us in the DON JUAN IN HELL section of this play "stayed with us for a while and then moved up to Heaven". Funny, but not profound. Nietzsche's "will to power" is not some innate Life Force driving creation ever upward. Unlike Shaw, Nietzsche believes life has no purpose, and certainly not self-perfection, a subject that bewitches Shaw's characters. At times this bogus, second-hand notion enlivens this play, as when the revolutionist Tanner matches wits with Ann Whitefield, coquette and all-around witch. Their meeting in a dream sequence in hell, along with her guardian and the Devil himself is the funniest and most pungent sequence of MAN AND SUPERMAN. The Devil gets the best lines in DON JUAN IN HELL. The force that rules the earth, he tells Tanner, is not the Life Force but Death Force. Humans owe all their achievements to war, and are constantly perfecting ways to kill each other. Is that progress? Satan is speaking for Shaw, obviously, but Tanner replies that killing too is a tool of the Life Force, sounding suspiciously like Dr. Pangloss. Shaw's rants against bourgeois marriage, savaged by Tanner and defended by Ann, no doubt drew howls in London in 1901. Tanner insists it's a trap for fools, death by conjugal boredom. Today these musings sound dated and trite, like knocking over a wooden doll. MAN AND SUPERMAN is a flawed work of theater based on a philosophical misunderstanding and a benchmark in deconstructing the morality of the British upper classes.