Rating: 4/5

This is Durrell's second installment in his trilogy about the years he and his family lived on the Greek Island of Corfu from 1935 to 1939. I read and really enjoyed the first book in the trilogy, 
  My Family and Other Animals
, a few years ago and am glad I finally got around to this second book. I also have a copy of the complete Corfu Trilogy which contains the third book, The Garden of the Gods, which I hope to read sometime soon. The Durrell family consisted of the mother, Louisa; brothers, Lawrence (Larry), Leslie, and Gerald or Gerry; and sister Margo. Gerald was a British naturalist while Lawrence became a noteworthy novelist.

Birds, Beasts was published in 1969, thirteen years after the first book in trilogy but it was again full of enjoyable and humorous anecdotes about the family and other residents of Corfu. Of course the book focuses on Gerry and his obsession with the fauna of the island but some of his adventures with the locals are what makes the book the most interesting. For example, he tells of going to visit a local woman who was imminently expecting a baby only to get there and be a witness to the actual birth along with many others as seemed to be customary. Then there were the eccentric friends of Larry's that often came to visit including Sven who constantly played his accordion and tended to sing off-key. There was also a local countess who called Gerry over to lunch to give him a wounded barn owl found on her property. While there, Gerry was stuffed with several courses of a meal and ended up throwing it up on the way home. There were Gypsies, one of which had a dancing bear who took a shine to Gerry. And long days at the beach, days in the myrtle forest looking for specimens, and days and nights fishing with the locals. A rather idyllic life overall.

I'll be looking forward to reading the final book in the trilogy. The Corfu books were also made into a TV series called the Durrells in Corfu which I watched after reading the first book and found to be highly enjoyable.