Rating: 2/5

This is the fourth book in Eric Van Lustbader's Sunset Warrior cycle and with it we return to the fantastic world of the Sunset Warrior, a place of exotic sword and sorcery action.

The story's protagonist is Moichi-Annai-Nin, a navigator and 'blood brother' to the Sunset Warrior who is cooling his heels in the wondrously chaotic metropolis of Sha'angh'sei after having participated in the Kai Fang, the last battle for humankind. Moichi's reverie however is brought to a harsh end when he is asked by a friend, and the regent of the city, Aerent, to investigate a series of brutal deaths. Along the way Moichi meets the beautiful and enigmatic Aufeya, who is linked to both the victims and murderers, and the Bujun warrior Chiisai. Moichi's adventures take him, Aufeya and Chiisai to exotic lands to confront a mad sorceress, Sardonyx, and the struggle to possess a powerful magical artifact, the fabled Firemask.

I thought the story began well. I love the exotic setting that is Sha'angh'sei, a huge city and melting pot of cultures, predominantly oriental, which Lustbader's brilliant writing brings to vivid life. The action in the book bears Lustbader's hallmark of being brutal and bloody and the author keeps it coming thick and fast and if the story and adventure had matched the pace of the violence then I suspect it would have been a corker. Unfortunately, it didn't.

Sadly, somewhere between the descriptions of places, people and food the story slowed to a plod and ran out steam so that I didn't feel kept on the 'edge of my seat' with suspense but rather wondering when we were going to get to the real adventure. The quest for the Firemask, supposedly the meat of the story, only occupied the last few chapters of the book and the characterization of the female protagonists was also horribly clichéd with nearly all of them described as being beautiful and curvaceous - not to mention lethal! By the time I got to the end of the story not only was I bewildered but I also left feeling unsatisfied by the lack of real paced adventure, a bit like having a nibble and a sip instead of being well fed and watered.

I would describe Beneath an Opal Moon as swords and sorcery with a strong oriental, martial arts flavour. It has also the standard early Lustbader ingredients of well written descriptions of people and places and nobody does violence better but, in terms of a pacey adventure, this book left me wanting.