Rating: 5/5

I love e-v-e-r-y-t-h-i-n-g about this book. 

Start with the cover—the big red family car, the white suburban houses in the background, the silhouette of a tree and a tumble of fallen, autumnal leaves scattering the ground. Doesn’t it put you in the mood of the hopeful fifties in New England, in America? That is the setting of the book. We look at a couple of suburban families, three to be more exact. What happens over the course of almost a year? That is it; that‘s the story. Two are young families with young kids. The third is past middle-age with an adult offspring, certified as insane. He, the “insane”, is about the same age as the kids’ parents.

I love what the book says about conformity. 

I love the dialogs. They are utterly perfect, so absolutely real. The prose captures to a T how couples interact--how we behave and the things we say to one another. 

The book looks at life in New England communities in the fifties, but it speaks to us still today. I could site example after example of how it so well mirrors conjugal relationships—then and now. One must suffice. Isn’t it often the female of a couple that cares less about what others, those observing a verbal dispute, might think? Who says, “Lower your voice?!” The husband or the wife? Which of the two desires to keep disputes private? 

The story illustrates the reality of the American Dream. We start on the surface; everything looks hunky dory, but what lies underneath? Cracks begin to show. Kids picnicking, playing on the lawn, frolicking under a sprinkler. A radio announcement advertises men’s clothing at rock-bottom prices. Parties, cocktails in hand and spouses eyeing a neighbor’s wife or husband. Clothing, the feel of the weather, the tension and atmosphere in the air, facial expressions and body poses are all minutely and expertly drawn. Emotions resonate—vibrating anger and cold detachment, attraction and sexual appeal. It is this that makes the book work so well for me. Life is drawn with a blend of the serious, the absurd and the ridiculous. Pathos and humor are intermixed.

Mental stability is a central theme. Is it only the insane who, lacking inhibition, dare to speak out against the emptiness of everyday lives--of going to a job you hate, of never daring to step out of line to honestly speak your mind? Why do we abdicate control of our lives to others? Why are people generally so scared of being different? Why are we so complacent, satisfied by so little? 

Life is a mix of the serious and the funny and both are drawn here. The ups and downs of marriage—disagreements and arguments, loss of tempers, biting retorts, lashing out of bitter words and regrets and reconciliation. too. Then, with sore points visible, the book circles back and looks at why problems have arisen. What in the past has shaped the characters? People get married scarcely knowing who they are themselves, and then, when married, are expected to figure out how to deal with another, someone they know even less. These are the themes the book looks at, and I think it does this extremely well.

The audiobook is magnificently narrated by Mark Bramhall. Every single character sounds exactly as they should. He brings out what the author wants said, yet he never over-dramatizes. The young and the old, the male and the female, all the different character types are perfectly drawn. Five stars I have given the narration. It perfectly captures the nuances in the author’s prose. 

I want to champion the book’s message, and I find it to be extremely well executed.