Rating: 4/5

I'm currently trying to solve an RSI issue. I had previously read It's Not Carpal Tunnel Syndrome!: RSI Theory and Therapy for Computer Professionals. Funnily enough, that book mentions Dr. Sarno's The Mindbody Prescription, but dismisses it because the authors take offense at the idea that it might be all in your head. And then I read a blog article in which the author took issue with It's Not Carpal Tunnel because the authors claim that RSI is a lifelong problem that can only be managed. The blogger said that he hasn't had a problem with RSI since reading The Mindbody Prescription.

Now, on first reading the blog article and the synopsis of The Mindbody Prescription, my gut reaction was, "That won't apply to me. I'm the most emotionally stable person I know." But lo and behold, after the seed was planted, I started to realize just how much anxiety I was holding in. Sarno describes me to a T - I recognize that I have perfectionist tendencies, and I'm a goodist all the way. [Aside: one side of my family has auto-immune disorders in abundance; we might be a high-strung sort of family.] He also describes my physical problems as if we've talked. Every health professional I've discussed my problem with has given me a skeptical sort of look at the range of problems I've been experiencing, saying things like, "Well, it could be this, but that's usually only experienced in such and such a way." Or, "It's weird that..." So it was kind of nice to receive a certain sort of validation.

Other than my initial reaction, it hasn't been much of a leap for me to believe that my physical problems might stem from emotional distress. The body is a complex organism, and I'm aware of many scientific studies that have shown how much of an impact the mind can have on physical outcomes. Also, given that I am physically fit and have been following the advice for treating RSI and have seen therapists to help me deal with my physical issues, after a couple of months of not seeing improvement except for temporarily, it seems fairly obvious to me that something else is at play here.

So I'm trying Dr. Sarno's strategy. I've experienced some short-term relief, but I wouldn't call myself cured yet. I'll stick with it for a while before looking for the next fix, but I hold out hope that this will do it for me.