Rating: 3/5

I read my very first Western! And, I liked it.
There was a fair amount of what you’d expect and somethings that you, or at least I, wouldn’t.
Ride the Dark Trail opens up with a description of a house (I love descriptions of houses) and a group of three men trying to get in except they can’t because Emily Talon will shoot. I envisioned the hero of the book to be a big burly man, and it ends up being so, but at the end of the book it’s not just the big burly man that rides off into the sunset (and this is not a romantic kind of scene).

The big burly man is Logan Sackett and turns out he and Emily Talon are both Clinch Mountain Sacketts. Since they are family, Logan decides to stay and help Emily Talon defend her ranch against the man who’s trying to take it for his own. After taking care of a few local nuisances (i.e., that group of three men), Logan sets out to get word to Emily’s sons of the danger she is in. He gets on his horse and off he goes, and, as anticipated, he crosses paths with less than desirable characters and specifically one that will make things more difficult for Logan.

“The Dutchman was hard…he was stone. His brain was eroded granite where the few ideas he had carved deep their ruts of opinion. There was no way for another idea to seep in, no place for imagination, no place for dreams, none for compassion or mercy or even fear. 
He knew no shadings of emotion, he knew no half rights or half-wrongs or pity or excuse, nor had he any sense of pardon. The more I thought of him the more I knew he was not evil in himself, and he would have been shocked that anybody though of him as evil. Shocked for a moment only, then he’d have shut the idea from his mind as non-sense. For the deepest groove worn into that granite brain was the one of his own rightness. 

And that scared me.

A man like that can be dangerous, and it made me uneasy to be riding in the same country with him. Maybe it was that I’d sense guilt around him and he smelled it.”

I expected adventure, chases, fights, and all, but I wasn’t expecting a bit of mediation on personalities. 

This book was supposed to be completely different from my previous read, The Game of Kings, as it left me with a huge book hangover and I needed a completely different kind of story to get through it. And although Ride the Dark Trail is not at all like The Game of Kings, that quote reminded me a lot of the main character from The Game of Kings, Francis Crawford of Lymond.
 
Logan and Lymond don’t claim to be perfect. They recognize their own faults and weaknesses and they are suspicious of those who don’t recognize any faults within themselves or rather those that do and try to cover it up with self-righteousness.

What else can I say about Logan that endears me to him – 
He’s loyal, courageous, gives men and women their due - for their strength, bravery, and wits. His respect for women goes beyond saving a damsel in distress. 

Logan is continually impressed with Emily Talon’s daring along with the courage of the girl that he does rescue along the way (yes, a damsel in distress moment in this book does exist, although I wouldn’t call Pennywell a damsel). After a particularly intense altercation in which the women hold their own Logan enthuses “Man, those were women!” 

And after finishing the book, I say “Man, that was fun!”