Rating: 5/5

I am a long-time fan of Robert van Gulik's Judge Dee series of mysteries. Van Gulik, a celebrated Orientalist and linguist and the Dutch ambassador to Japan, was fluent in Mandarin, among other Asian languages; his first Judge Dee book, Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee, was actually a translation of the cases of an actual Tang Dynasty magistrate and statesman by the name of Dee Goong An (sometimes transliterated as Dee Jen-Djieh and Dí Rénjié). Van Gulik realized that, if he recast the case files as mysteries by withholding the solution, these true-life investigations and court cases would make find mysteries. And so they do!

The Chinese Maze Murders marks one of the first of 16 novels, novellas, and short-story collections in which Van Gulik, inspired by court cases and his own imagination, actually penned the plots. (The Chinese Maze Murders was the first of Van Gulik's own Judge Dee tomes published, but it ranks third chronologically after The Chinese Gold Murders, my favorite Judge Dee book, and The Chinese Bell Murders.) The writing style is a bit formal, as you'd expect from books written 40 to 60 years ago. (Although himself Dutch, Van Gulik wrote these novels in English, which may also account for the formal phrasing.) However, the plots are very enjoyable, and the books act as a window into a far-off time and a very different sensibility. Van Gulik tried to retain the ancient Chinese flavor of the stories, and you'll find omens, luck, ghosts, and other supernatural phenomena play a part in some of the stories -- as they would have when recounted and transcribed more than 1,300 years ago. They also, as according to Chinese custom at the time, usually involve three intertwined cases. (So that isn't an over-the-top touch, but an homage to the original authors/scribes.) 

Adventurous readers interested in something unlike anything else they'd read or those who have an interest in Ancient China will devour these books, as I have. The plots are quite clever, and Judge Dee's henchman -- in particular, his brawny lieutenant Ma Joong -- frequently add humor to the tales. I can particularly recommend the first book, The Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee, and Van Gulik's own The Chinese Bell Murders, The Haunted Monastery, The Emperor's Pearl, The Red Pavilion, and the short-story collection Judge Dee at Work: Eight Chinese Detective Stories.