Rating: 4/5

The book and the movie had many mostly small differences. Some things left out, some things added in, some things in a different order, some things between characters different in the series than they were in the book. All of which added up to different stories, almost. Almost, but not quite.

Interesting Moran's idea of 'the family'. And 'the house'. It almost seemed like 'the house' was a character in and of itself. "Don't embarass yourself, and don't embarrass the house.", one of the children is told, when she goes out to a dance. (paraphrasing)

Interesting too, the way he accepts every one of the children's choices of spouse, "If it'll do you, it'll do me.", he says each time. 

It seemed like alcohol was a sub-theme of the book. Moran doesn't drink anymore - he used to. He tells McQuaid when McQuaid (his old lieutenant from the war for independence) comes for Monaghan Day, that he can't drink anymore. 

In many ways, the author makes clear, that Moran's need to hold himself separate from the rest of his community is not a common thing for the time, or for the place.

Anyway, interesting book.

------------

picked up from the library. ISBN # is 0140092552, or 978014092554, which is tied to this edition, but that cover isn't the book in my hand, the cover on this card is. The date on this card is wrong tho, it says 1991 published, copyright in book says 1990 ... 

Anyway, this is the book I checked out. Interestingly, they mounted the paperback cover onto a hardcover cardboard, and then mounted the book inside. Kinda ingenious ... 

Have already watched the BBC series, looking forward to reading the book now. 

------------

My home library didn't have this title, but the state-wide catalog did - it also had a DVD series available, which I requested in addition to the book. The DVD arrived, still waiting on the book. The DVD is a "Parallel Films production for BBC Northern Ireland in association with RTÉ and Bord Scannán na hÉireann", according to the state-wide library catalog. On IMDB, it's described as a 4-episode television series. I normally don't like to 'watch' a book before I read the book, but ... I popped it in anyway. Watched episode one so far, it's really good!