Rating: 3/5

When you think Louisa May Alcott, you think “Little Women”. The author is so synonymous with her much-loved classic that one forgets she wrote other types of stories too. It might come as a surprise to some that before she worked on “Little Women”, she wrote plenty of gothic thrillers. Published in popular magazines anonymously or under the pseudonym ‘A. M. Barnard’, the stories were the pulp fiction of their day, full of deceit and depravity. Alcott dismissively called them “blood-and-thunder tales.” 

My copy of this book contained an opening note by Madeleine Stern, the lady who discovered the existence of these stories. She was a rare-book dealer and following clues sprinkled in Alcott’s correspondence and other writings, found evidence that Alcott had written potboilers too. Her introductory note is extremely insightful about Louisa May Alcott and gives a lot of details of when and how Alcott brought these stories to life.

This book was my attempt at knowing Louisa May Alcott’s works better. I am a huge fan of ‘Little Women’ and Jo March has a firm place in my heart as one of the best female characters in classics. Some shades of Jo’s independent streak can be found in the women of these stories too, but overall, I was left with mixed feelings. Of the four stories, two worked brilliantly and two left me feeling meh. Here’s a brief feedback on the stories. 

1. Behind a Mask, or a Woman's Power: Written under the pseudonym of A M Barnard
It starts off in a very confusing manner with too many characters too soon, but you soon figure out who is who. The story is in the romantic suspense thriller style. Of course, for readers in 2022, there’s not much of suspense, but considering that this was first written in 1866, it must have been mind-blowing then. I never expected Alcott to write a heroine like this, what with her secretive deviousness and flirtatious behaviour. (It stunned me almost as much as Jane Austen’s Lady Susan.)
3.75 stars.

2. Pauline's Passion and Punishment
When Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper offered a one hundred dollar prize for a story, Louisa May Alcott anonymously submitted, and won the contest with this story. Originally published in January 1863, this was the first of Louisa May Alcott's "blood-and-thunder" tales to be printed. It is the shortest story in the book with only four chapters and therein lies its shortcoming. It starts decently but soon becomes a tad boring. The ending is very abrupt and unexpected. At the same time, it has strong shades of feminism as the traditional gender roles seem to be reversed.
2.5 stars

3. The Mysterious Key
First published in 1867, this was my favourite story of the book. It is quite wellwritten and is the only story to create well-defined characters. Though it has its creepy moments, it is a bit predictable. Of course, considering it sprung from a young woman's mind more than 150 years ago, it's amazing. This is the only story in the book with a male hero and the only story that progresses at a steady and quick pace.
4.25 stars.

4. The Abbot's Ghost
Published under the pseudonym of A M Barnard in the year 1867, this is suppoed to be a Christmas story with a ghost. I tried a lot to keep my attention on this but I simply couldn't. There were too many characters (hardly any of whom are developed well) and the writing style was insipid. This was a dud for me with the ghost being the only surprise factor as I didn’t expect that from Alcott.
2 stars.

Overall, I would recommend this only to staunch fans of Louisa May Alcott who want to see her beyond “Little Women”. The stories are all in the public domain so you needn’t purchase this copy but can just download the individual stories from public domain book sites such as Gutenberg or Archive.org.

***********************
Join me on the Facebook group, 
  Readers Forever!
, for more reviews, book-related discussions and fun.