Rating: 3/5

In Harry and the Lady Next Door, a dog named Harry is disturbed and irked by the loud and high singing of his neighbor lady. His antics to stop the lady from singing are hilarious. After being thrown out of the house for attempting to bite the lady's leg, he finds other sounds that are more pleasing to him. When he hears the low and wonderful sounds of cows and tubas, he tried to convince the lady also. Finally, the lady sings in a singing contest and when all the other contestants are scared by two frogs which leap out a watering can Harry had placed behind the lady, she won and was sent far away to perfect her singing.

Instructional Ideas:

pre-reading: 
Ask students to bring up prior knowledge about pets and dogs. Have them share one thing each about their own dogs and dogs in general.

The suffix and word pattern: ing appears often in this book. Present a mini-lesson using some of the words from the book. Have students practice making new words using ing to create a word family, as well as adding the ing suffix to root words to create new words. Er and ed or other endings that could be introduced or reinforced before reading the book.

To activate schema of Harry books, ask students what they know about the character Harry and the characteristics of other Harry books.

During reading:
Assign the book to a more-proficient reader and a struggling reading for paired reading.

Ask students to use phonics skills only for first phoneme. When they come to word they can't figure out using context, by either rereading from the beginning of the sentence or reading on, they will write the words down on a bookmark to look up later.

The text of the book is repetitive and predictable. While reading, have students use their strategies, such as looking at pictures, noticing the repetitive language and events, and predicting future events.

Post-reading
Have students write their own stories of more of Harry's adventures using the same characters and setting.

Ask students to be quiet for a minute, or whatever time you see appropriate, and listen to the sounds around them. Make a class list with these and other sounds students offer. Which sounds do they find pleasant or unpleasant?