Rating: 3/5

Ricardo is a university professor nearing the end of his life. A terminal diagnosis has led him to take a cruise around Europe, but his planned vacation ends with the fiery impact of a meteor. But he wakes up, on another world, in another body. Another life. A second chance. But living means taking on the identity of Markasset, the former owner of that body, and Markasset had problems of his own . . .

I read this once years ago and never got around to finishing the series, so I thought I'd give it another go.

The characters can be pretty thin. Illia, Markasset's girlfriend, is probably the worst drawn of the main cast. She's beautiful and interested in Markasset, and that is the extent of her characterization. Zaddorn, the police chief that Ricardo inadvertently crosses, is better but still fairly straightforward: he wants to recover the stolen jewel and thinks Markasset either did it or has answers about what happened. Thanasset, Markasset's father, has the most depth. He recognizes immediately that his son is not the same, although he's also remarkably quick to come to terms with his son's death. 

The plot is a bit better. Ricardo tries to analyze the new world in which he finds himself, piecing together what clues he notices to try to figure out who he is supposed to be, and later on, what happened to the jewel that was stolen. He can't even say with any certainty that the body he wears now DIDN'T do it. And I liked that although Zaddorn is an antagonist, Ricardo has a great deal of sympathy for the man, as he's only trying to do his job. 

I also liked Keeshah, the gigantic cat that Markasset had bonded. In this dry, desert world, the cats are used as mounts by those who have bonded them (everyone else goes on foot). It's a little strange to me that a meat-eater would be the largest creature in the desert, but I do like the relationship between him and Keeshah. The cat, of course, knows that Ricardo is not Markasset. But Keeshah's trust opens a number of opportunities for Ricardo, not the least of which is the ability to get from place to place much faster than anyone else.

Overall I'm ambivalent on the series so far. I'm not particularly fond of any of the characters except Keeshah, but the plot was decent, and the book is short enough that it's not a slog. I rate this book Neutral.

See my reviews and more at https://offtheshelfreviews.wordpress....