Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars

This was my second time reading Suddenly You, but I had read it so long ago that I couldn't remember anything about the plot. Either it didn't make much of an impression,  or (and this was the most likely scenario) I was going through Kleypas books too fast to savor the sweet taste.

Upon second reading, I can definitely say that this was another winner from this author. No, it wasn't my favorite book ever, but it was a really good romance from a really talented writer.

So, Amanda hires a hooker for her 30th birthday, because she doesn't want to die a virgin. &lt;--and who can blame her? She's a successful novelist who, due to taking on the role of caregiver to her ailing parents, missed the window of opportunity to snag herself a man. 

Too bad, so sad. But other than that one little thing she's mostly happy with her life. Especially the amount of freedom and independence she has because of her advanced age (30!) and the ability to make her own money.

BUT.
Due to the madam at the brothel having a wicked sense of humor, Amanda mistakes book publishing powerhouse, Jack Devlin, as her paid escort - and he doesn't bother to correct her.
And so begins a steamy romance between the spinsterish author and the dark and moody publisher.

It was an excellent book right until the end, at which point it went off the rails...like a lot of romances do. And instead of just ending when they would have both organically realized that they loved each other, the plot turned into a lot of unnecessary drama that didn't actually add anything to the story. And then, just when you thought it was over? There was yet another unnecessary piece of added drama --&gt;  The miscarriage. 
I suppose it was tossed in there to make sure that we all knew he loved her for her and not the baby, but it was (to me) just a stupid way to drag the book out and work in ONE MORE sex scene. 

Then again, I'm the asshole who skims the love scenes in books and fast forwards through them in movies. So, maybe I'm not the best person to judge the 'romance level' for this sort of thing.
Regardless, this was still a (mostly) adorable book, and pretty much what I've come to expect from this author.