Rating: 5/5

***I normally use my Riverside Shakespeare solely as a reference text, preferring the Everyman series for its ease of portability and short but helpful introductions. But I think it's only recently that the Two Noble Kinsmen has become an accepted part of the canon of Shakespeare, and hence does not appear in the Everyman series.*** 

A play at the end of Shakespeare's career, and one that was not even entirely his own, but shared with John Fletcher. And yet, it's a wonderful retelling of Chaucer's Knight's Tale. The questions of platonic and romantic relationships, chivalry and selfishness, the state and the individual, are just a few of the ones probed by both playwrights in this play.

"Our hearts / Are in his army, in his tent." (I.iii.16-17)

"I am not / Against your faith, yet I continue mine." (I.iii.97-98)

"That no man but thy cousin's fit to kill thee." (III.vi.43)

***This is also the case for Edward III, which apparently only entered the canon in the 1990s.***

"And where he sets his foot he ought to kneel." (I.i.81)

"To hear war beautified by her discourse.
Wisdom is foolishness but in her tongue,
Beauty a slander but in her fair face:
There is no summer but in her cheerful looks,
Nor frosty winter but in her disdain."
II.i.39-43

"Devise for fair a fairer word than fair."
II.i.85

"What, thinkest thou I did bid thee praise a horse?"
II.i.98

"In violating marriage' sacred law
You break a greater honor than yourself"
II.i.260-261

"We have more sons
Than one to comfort our declining age."
III.iv.23-24

"If we fear not, then no resolved proffer
Can overthrow the limit of our fate:
For whether ripe or rotten, drop we shall,
As we do draw the lottery of our doom."
IV.v.146-149

"Ah, what an idiot hast thou made of life, 
To seek the thing it fears; and how disgrac'd
The imperial victory of murd'ring Death!"
IV.v. 151-154

"Since for to live is but to seek to die,
And dying but beginning of new life."
IV.v.159-160

"For I do hold a tree in France too good
To be the gallows of an English thief."
IV.v. 63-64

"Thy fortune, not thy force, hath conquer'd us.
An argument that heaven aids the right."
IV.ix.9-10