Rating: 4/5

In his preface to this quixotic attempt to label the fifteen most 'decisive' battles in history up to the time of writing in 1850, Creasey announces himself loud and proud as a classically educated Victorian, asserting with brazen chauvanism how the battle of Marathon "confirmed the superiority of European free states over Oriental despotism", then ultimately crediting all that happens in love and war to "the design of The Designer". 
The point about Marathon is subsequently echoed twice more in the chapters that focus on the battle of Chalons (AD 451) where a combined Roman and Gothic army finally stalled the extraordinary advance of Attila the Hun across mainland europe and the battle of Tours (AD 732), where Charlamagne did the same with regards the Saracens. So, you know the eastern half of the globe won't get much of a look in here, but it's still a compelling list, beautifully written with extensive quotations from a timeless set of sources. 

In truth, knowledge about the east was pretty thin to early Victorian historians. Creasey does acknowledge the (then) recent translation work of Rawlinson, which decoded the writing on the monuments of the Persian kings, conceding, rather poetically, how those kingdoms "appear before us through the twilight of primeval history, dim and indistinct, but massive and majestic, like mountains in the early dawn." 
Generally though he paints all wars between east and west as straight up battles between free thinking democracies and despotism, which limits "the extent to which it shall be lawful for the human mind to prosecute its inquiries". Even pointed reference to the slaves the Athenians brought into battle with them is an irony that passes Creasey by. Yep, it's the democratism of the elite that he favours, with kings as benign heads of state and proletarians as canon fodder!

When it comes to his treatment of other historians, however, Creasey is entirely contemporary in his outlook, or, rather, timeless. He slags them off from the preface onwards, at one stage accusing a particular one of partiality whilst seemingly oblivious to his own shameless tub-thumping towards all things British. Of Hastings (AD 1066) he says "no one, who appreciates the influence of England and her empire upon the destinies of the world, will ever rate that victory as one of secondary importance".
Well, maybe that's true, but elsewhere he gets a bit carried away whilst drawing parallels between Victorian colonial successes and those of Alexander, then likening the sight of a British officer on the battlefield in India to the inspiration the Syracuseans took from the support of a Spartan general whilst defending themselves against the besieging Athenians in BC 413.

That said, his inherent belief in the essential rightness of all things British makes the book more than just an excellent introduction to some of the world's greatest battles, it is also an interesting period piece. Most compelling though is his mid-19th century view of the burgeoning powers of America and Russia.
He marvels at their express acquisition of territory and rise in influence, taking a vicarious pride in the achievements of the english-speaking Americans whilst delivering a stern warning about the Russian's adoptive status as "protectors" of the Slavic peoples. The advent of the USSR was less than a hundred years in the future.

A seminal work, still of value and highly enjoyable, but utterly Victorian in tone and outlook.