Rating: 5/5

5+ stars (8/10 hearts). Oh my. This was my first Rosemary Sutcliff book and it completely turned me into a Sutcliff fan. The writing style is amazing. She completely brings to life the setting and time. I love the witty humour that pervades the narration, and she says so much with so little. The descriptions are amazing... and oh, the themes and messages! But oh, the characters!

Above all I love the characters. Marcus. Just… Marcus. &lt;3 What a manly, mature, noble, friendly, witty man. I absolutely love his character and his relationship with people. He totally draws the best out of everyone he comes in contact with, even as Demetrius of Alexandria. (*snorts*) And Ecsa. Oh, I love Ecsa!! His story arc is amazing. He is such a courageous man, and his love for Marcus is so strong. Their relationship is one of the best “brother” relationships I have ever read. Also, Cub. I LOVE Cub. He’s just amazing! He totally seems like a real character. And Cottia! She is amazing and I loved her relationship with Marcus. And Uncle Aquila... so quietly and sarcastically loving. He’s splendid.

And that’s just the beginning. There were just SO many amazing characters in this book—I haven’t yet mentioned Roman soldiers or British warriors... And then the ending is SO amazing. &lt;33 I’ve never read anything like this before, and I love it so much. This is definitely one of my favourite books and I’m eagerly devouring the next book in the series. 

Content: There was a lengthy description of a ritualistic Druid dance &amp; a scene set in a temple where Marcus &amp; Ecsa feel the darkness and horror of that religion and try to shove it away by hunting of the light. Also some prayers, a sacrifice, &amp; some talk above the Roman false gods, often referred to with capitals—a capital G for God, a capital N for Name, and a capital L for Light. 

A Favourite Quote: “Better to be a laughing-stock than lose the fort for fear if being one[.]”
A Favourite Beautiful Quote: [N]ow that they seemed lost to him, his own hills grew achingly dear, very detail of sight and scent and sound jewel-vivid on his memory. The shivering silver of the olive-woods when the mistral blew, the summer scent of thyme and rosemary and little white cyclamen among the sun-warmed grass, the songs that the girls sang at the vintage. 
“And here in Britain the wind moaned through the desolate woods, the skies wept and wet, gale-blown leaves pattered against the windows and stuck there, making little pathetic shadows against the steamy glass. There had been wild weather often enough in his own country, but that had been the wild weather of home: here was the wind and rain and wet leaves of exile. 
A Favourite Humorous Quote: “And what,” inquired Uncle Aquila[,] “do you suggest that I should do about it?”
“If you could make a few neighbourly remarks to the Lady Valeria the next time you cross her path, I think it would help.”
“But […] I scarce know the woman[.]” 
“Which is exactly why a few neighbourly remark seem indicated.” 
“And what if she becomes neighbourly in return?” demanded Uncle Aquila in blighting tones. 
“She cannot invade you here in your stronghold, at all events, since there are no womenfolk to receive her,” Marcus pointed out, quiet unblighted….
“It was peaceful in the house before you came,” said Uncle Aquila with resignation. “You are an unutterable nuisance, but I suppose you must have your own way.”