Rating: 5/5

I read the book “Heart of a Champion” by Carl Deuker. This book was one of the best books I’ve read. It had a lot of meaning to it. Seth Barham’s dad had died of a stroke at a hotel during work. Seth didn’t really know his dad, but from what he heard about him, he was a really good golfer. One day, Seth went to Henry Ford Park and saw this boy, Jimmy Winters, playing baseball with his dad. Jimmy saw Seth and called him over to play. From that day on, they were best friends. They played baseball every Saturday at Henry Ford Park. Seth started to love baseball and became really good at it. They stuck together and decided in high school that they were going to be starting varsity shortstop and second baseman. Seth didn’t make varsity his freshman year, but his sophomore he did, and so did Jimmy. Their team was suppose to be so good and win state that year. Jimmy had a drinking problem and after one game, he went out. He got in a car accident and died because of his drinking problem. After that Seth really suffered without his best friend. The team had two games to go. They forfeited their first but played the second one for Jimmy. That was it, they just didn't want to play without Jimmy. Jimmy brought all the energy and loved the game of baseball. Seth had a hard time with his death, but he knew he had to move on.

 Seth Barham was the main Character in the book. His best friend was Jimmy Winter. Seth and Jimmy both went through a lot throughout this book. They loved playing baseball and never wanted to stop. Seth was very well described in the book through what he did and said. He learned a lot through Jimmy, especially that drinking would never get you anywhere. Jimmy had a drinking problem and couldn’t stop, and because of this, everyone suffered.

They lived in Redwood City, Los Angeles. Normally, the boys are at Henry Ford Park playing baseball, which is how they met. They go there every weekend to play baseball, and that is how Seth became good at it. He never was as good as Jimmy, but he tried really hard to do his best all the time. The book starts out one summer and takes us through the boys high school life. Its warm all the time so they can play baseball.

The author’s message in the story is that everyone can become really good at something with hard work and effort. It’s the people who know how to act and use their talents for good that will succeed. People have to realize that bad things happen to everyone, but don’t throw something they’re good at and love away for what they think is cool. People don’t need to be cool to have friends. Everyone makes mistakes, but we all have to know that in the end it will never work out if they keep making those same mistakes.

I would recommend this book to everyone who loves sports and need a good message. This book is very easy to read and it will never get boring. This book would be good for anyone in middle school and high school.