Rating: 4/5

The genre of this book is Intergenerational readers and fiction. I chose this book because I read another book by Kyoko Mori (One Bird) and loved it. I wanted to see what her other book was about.
Plot: 
This book is told in the third person point of view and the story starts in the mind of Shizuko Okuda. She is dreaming about the celebration going on in Kobe, Japan after the war has ended. She is confused because all of the children that are running around are not the ones that she played with before the war; they were her daughter, Yuki’s (protagonist), friends. Then, all of Shizuko’s surroundings fade and change into a park where she sees her daughter playing in the cherry blossom petals. Shizuko wakes up from her nap and has her mind made up. She writes two notes; one to her husband and one to Yuki. When Yuki comes home from her piano lesson, she finds her mother on the ground and the house filled with gas. Yuki is twelve years old and is too young to be going through something this tragic. Yuki is a bright young girl that is the smartest girl in her grade; she is the fastest runner at her school and is a fantastic artist. All of these traits contribute to Yuki’s future successes.
Just a year after her mother’s death, Yuki’s father, Hideki, decides to remarry to a woman from his work named Hanae (antagonist). Over the years, Yuki is still troubled by her mother’s death and does not like her father’s new bride. She is constantly reminded of her mother when she has flashbacks but manages to make new friends and conquer many obstacles despite her constant downheartedness. Later in the book, Yuki confronts her stepmother and tells her that she is just pretending to be the perfect piece to complete this family. This gets Hanae very angry and she smashes Shizuko’s tea set that was considered a prized possession to Yuki. As the story continues, Yuki must face some difficult obstacles that are clouding up her path to her future.
Conflict: 
Man vs. Man or Man vs. Self
Yuki faces two main forms of conflict. She faces her new stepmother who absolutely despises her and Yuki also faces a battle within herself. Yuki must suffer through all of the hardships that Hanae puts her through at home. She also has to overcome all of the sadness and feelings of loneliness caused by the death of her mother. 
Theme: 
Love is lost easily and not gained back quickly but love will always find its way back into an open heart. Yuki loses a very important figure in her life; her mother. When her father remarries, she does not like his new bride and refuses to accept her love. When Yuki is at her grandmother’s house, she realizes that not everyone in the world is out to hurt her, and that if she allows people’s love into her heart, then she will ultimately become a stronger person.
Writing Style: 
Kyoko Mori has a very unique style of writing that is strong, passionate, meaningful and detailed. She uses rather complex sayings and phrases but they are easy to understand. “I think now that it’s worth it all the same, loving someone. It may not turn out right, but I want to love someone in spite of it. In a way, it means more because the odds are against us” (142). This shows how meaningful her words are but they are easily comprehendible.
Critique: 
I loved this book, but I wouldn’t recommend it to anyone who isn’t interested in the cultural type of books. It really helped that I could, on some levels, relate to Yuki and that I could understand some of the simple Japanese words used throughout the story. But if someone is just interested in a good book, I would say to definitely read it.