Rating: 5/5

This, you see, is the trouble with Rumpole audiobooks. Once you start, they become an addictive substance, like audio crack.

The further into Rumpole you go, the more it begins to remind you of something. Rumpole is a flawed, shallow, selfish creature, who nonetheless, compared to most of the other people in his life, wins our admiration and respect by the lack of side or sexism, the lack of bigotry or pretension he brings to life. He's essentially Wodehouse's Bertie Wooster, but with a more middle-class upbringing and a useful purpose in life. For more evidence, I refer my learned friends to the fact that just as Wooster calls on a handful of lines of knowledge and poetry that have somehow stuck in his head over the years and harks back almost continually to the highlight of his academic career - the winning of a prize for scripture knowledge at school - so Rumpole relies on his knowledge of the poetry of Wordsworth, and his career personal best, when he defended in the case of the Penge Bungalow Murder, without - as he's determined we should know - a leader.

Similarly, as you go on, the tropes of the stories become familiar - Claude Erskine-Brown, the silk-hungry barrister, continues to grind his sexist teeth as his wife Phillida climbs the career ladder faster than him, and he continues, it seems, to seek out absolutely anyone who'd be prepared to have an affair with him. There's been a change at the top of chambers, Rumpole now coming under the thumb of 'Soapy' Sam Ballard, one who believes lawyers should exhibit the precepts of Christianity in their dealings, leaving Rumpole - an inveterate old sinner, and proud to be so - increasingly open for clashes. 

But Mortimer does use Rumpole to explore elements of the evolving cultural landscape of his times - here, we see the Rumpoles taking advantage of the increasing tendency towards package holidays to get a little winter sun, and the increasing fetishization of wine and wine tasting in the eighties to put Rumpole onto an unusual case of the emperor's new claret. There's even a nod ot the popularity in the eighties of cold war spy thrillers, Rumpole running into a would-be secret-stealer on a park bench and people ending up mysteriously, conveniently, tripping in front of tube trains when their treachery is uncovered.

Mortimer has also, it seems, almost from the very beginning, been searching for a way to finish Rumpole's career - he's been retired once, killed off once, and here, in Rumpole's Last Case, there's a third iteration for what could be the end of Rumpole, as he takes a gamble on a four-horse accumulator and a bit of extra-curricular policework both, on the promise of ending his career on a financial supernova.

There's also a charming, dark, exhausted tale here of what happens when a married couple stop making allowances for each other's familar curves and grooves and stories, as Rumpole and the formidable She Who Must Be Obeyed actually separate, seemingly for good, forcing others around them to drive their implacable stubborn wills back together. 

All in all, while the curves and bumps of a Rumpole collection are becoming familiar, they certainly have yet to lose their charm in this collection, and they led me straight on to want more, and more and more, of the incorrigible Old Bailey hack.