Rating: 5/5

I unexpectedly found myself without a book to read, so I picked a book off the shelf at work--the first one to catch my eye. This was that book.

I thought I knew a little bit about the Endeavor and her voyage around the world, but it turns out I was wrong about most of what I thought I knew. :P I thought this was the voyage that discovered Antarctica, but it turns out they failed that mission. So, don't get your hopes up for that. :P

But this book is an excellent place to start for learning more about Endeavor and her voyage. I'm not sure on most of the fact versus the fiction, but this appears to be a highly accurate retelling of said voyage.

The story is told from young Nicholas Young's POV in the form of journal entries. I simply thought him fictional while most of the other characters not, but it turns out even his presence as a stowaway on the ship is fact. Rather, this book's fiction is in fleshing him out and in filling in the gaps of the little bit that is known about him.

Most of his journal entries are short and state the type of things I imagine are in the captain's logs, adding to my belief this book is mostly fact.

Regardless of what is fact and what is fiction, though, I really enjoyed this book. Nick was a great main character, and I loved his view on the world and on this grand adventure he was on. The biggest frustrations of this book come down to the frustrations of real life, as often the ship and crew made little progress against the might of the ocean and wind, and the last leg of their journey was quite heartbreaking to read.

I gained a new appreciation for what sailing was like in those days, with many of the short entries showing just how difficult such a thing was.

The search for the proposed final continent was quite frustrating as a modern person, as they started searching for it when basically at the farthest from it--though it did make sense to search there back in the day, it a massive stretch of ocean. That's really my only complaint about the book as well. It does include a map of Endeavor's voyage, but it doesn't show where the ship ventured south--I had to turn to Google for a more accurate map.

I really enjoyed the character arc the author gave Nick. It's a very gradual thing, an arc I didn't know was there until near the end of the book, but I was really glad for it, and it helped give a more positive closure to this book after all the hardship faced.

I honestly wasn't ready for this book to be over. I wanted to see more of the aftermath, both of the bigger news of Endeavor's voyage, but also of the smaller bit with Nick. I would also love a sequel of seeing him on his second voyage. None of that was necessary for a satisfactory conclusion, but the fact I wanted more shows how much I enjoyed this book.

Overall, this was an enjoyable book to read. It appears to be highly factual, but Nick is a very likeable character, and I was always excited to see what happened next with the voyage and with his life. This had made me want to pick up a nonfiction book about this voyage, but this book is an excellent place to start if you aren't quite ready for that.