Rating: 2/5

Book Riot '15 Read Harder Challenge Task 10: Microhistory

I picked up this book at a second-hand shop, thinking that a book about the history of Hollywood as it relates to America as a whole would be a particularly interesting way to fill this category; a novelty, if nothing else, and a quick read in contrast to the meticulously researched volume I had originally selected. 

I found myself thinking a little regretfully of all the nice citations and academically objective overviews that other book might've contained while reading this. It's not at all bad read, however, just very dense. I had a hard time keeping track of what or who was important and why, what was an insult and what was a joke, which war we were referring to, and if I'd ever heard of this movie/actor/political figure before. (It varied from vaguely to no.) An introduction wouldn't have gone amiss, maybe a few footnotes. But that would detract from the purpose of the volume. The anecdotes and opinions are interesting because they're the anecdotes of Gore Vidal; if you are so foolish as to pick up the volume without any idea of who Gore Vidal was (like I did), then you're obviously at the wrong party.

In such a case, the book reads very much like listening to a very interesting, very elder relative reflect on whatever crosses their mind, with startling glimpses of History and occasional interesting perspectives mixed in with my friend such-a-one whose first wife was dancer. He married a politician's daughter after the divorce, ahh he never did have much sense. (Haha?) Anyway, what you have to understand is back then we didn't xy like you do today...

This is partially due to the age of the films he references (he only gets up to stars like Bette Midler halfway through, if that gives you a reference), partially due to the political commentary (if my movie history wasn't up to snuff my knowledge of Depression era politicians was positively shameful), and partially due to the time, culture, and social climate he relates. 

I simply don't recognize the landscape of America he describes. This is especially disorienting because the book isn't about introducing this landscape, it's about dissecting and deconstructing it while offering ironic reflections , so you're really expected to show up ready and raring. 

Perhaps an interesting history review for those who already know the material.