Rating: 3/5

The Coral Island by R.M Ballantyne is a wholesomely humorous "boys' adventure" style0novel from 1857. Ralph, Jack and Peterkin are three plucky, pious, absurdly well-prepared young sailors who wash up on a deserted Pacific island. They explore, make shelter, find food, battle sharks, storms, tidal waves, pirates, cannibals, while making innocent quips. They also become accomplished boatbuilders, hunters, butchers, naturalists, carpenters, shoemakers, and ropemakers. Eventually they escape to another island where there is adventure and intrigue among the pagans and the converted.

This novel strikes me as 19th-century version of edutainment. One can imagine Victorian papas purchasing it for their sons: a rollicking adventure story, or a ripping good yarn, which also allows the eager young reader to absorb proper grammar and wholesome virtues from its upright, manly heroes.

Jack gives kindly lectures on the flora and fauna of the south seas and Ralph (our narrator) expostulates his young readers to wash every day, get enough rest, keep a salt water aquarium, refrain from making silly faces, support missionaries, and force one's "attention upon ALL things that go on around me ...whether I feel it naturally or not." The good guys are rarely out of temper and never intemperate. The tone is cheery, sunny, manly and pious. There is no despair, no cowardice, no losing of faith.

The language of the novel is the typical stiltiness with the occasional bit of daring "slang" thrown in by that rapscallion of Peterkin ("that's the ticket!" he says). See the following three excerpts.

"Most remarkable!" said Jack.
"Exceedingly curious!" said I.
"Beats everything!" said Peterkin.

"Now, Jack," he added, "you made such a poor figure in your last attempt to stick that object, that I would advise you to let me try it. If it has got a heart at all, I'll engage to send my spear right through the core of it; if it hasn't got a heart, I'll send it through the spot where its heart ought to be."

“Peterkin did not answer, and I observed that he was gazing down into the water with a look of intense fear mingled with anxiety, while his face was overspread with a deadly paleness. Suddenly he sprang to his feet and rushed about in a frantic state, wringing his hands, and exclaiming, "O Jack, Jack! he is gone! It must have been a shark, and he is gone for ever!"”

It also boasts many unfortunate references to "savages" and the boys' "horror" at their customs, which increase in frequency as the novel goes on.

The "savages" are not painted as creatures that must be destroyed, but as creatures that must be converted. Not all are monsters (one lighter-skinned girl is quite sympathetic) and the white pirates are as equally evil. Indeed, the kindly missionaries (and Ralph) take pains to explain the native evils are not as bad because they simply do not know any better. However, while not purposefully malicious, this kind racism is VERY condescending, cringeworthy in more than a few spots.

Notwithstanding the racism, there is a certain charm in these old-fashioned stories. The formality of the language may strike a modern ear as stilted, but that's not necessarily a bad thing; I found a great deal of humor in it. For a 19th century book, it IS readable and the phrasing goes down smoothly. And let us not forget that Treasure Island, for one, is written in a similar, though far superior, fashion (Stevenson admired Ballantyne). The awesome earnestness of its moralizing and the delight the author takes in telling the tale, also make one smile.

I am not sure who this book would be good for, these days. The uneasy racism, the formal language, the endless moralizing... they aren't for the youngsters of today. The advanced reader, on the other hand, won't find much beyond a cheerful historical curiosity, and if in a good mood, will beam mildly on the pleasures of the past.