Rating: 4/5

This book is actually a two hander, the first (and major) section deals with the killing of two toddlers by schoolgirl Mary Bell in 1968. Sereny, in her formal, school headmistress tone, dissects the killings and, rather than plaster bland and cheap sentiments onto Bell (and her friend Norma Bell, who played a lesser part in the killings, perhaps acting as an enabler) Seveny takes a microscopic look at Mary's formative years and her dreadful upbringing.

The murders are gone over in some detail, as is the subsequent trial but Seveny steps in to fill the void that others wouldn't or couldn't, by looking at the family life of Mary.

So, rather than the worn trope of 'monster' or 'born evil' Seveny actually humanises the girl and perhaps explains part of the reason why she ended up as she did. No doubt the masses want easily digestible answers and are happy with tabloid level indignation but, as always, these sad incidents are the end of a long and sad road, these killers do not commit their crimes without some precursor or lead-in. 

The background is intensely interesting, Mary's mother had huge issues after her father died when she was young and she became a seeker of sensation, disappearing for weeks, months and sometimes a year at a time to play out other lives in distant towns. Mary learnt, from a young age to manipulate and connive, she was a very bright girl whose upbringing led her leanings and energies towards darker thoughts. On four occasions during her young years, Mary's mother almost killed Mary, through neglect, indifference or manifest action. The most disturbing episode narrated concerned her mother holding Mary over a sink in an upstairs flat to urinate and the child falling from an open window, her life was only saved when a male relative bound across the kitchen to grab her as she was upside and pitching out of the window. Small wonder, then, that Mary was never destined to become a stable child from a secure home.

The reactions recorded by the multitude of police officers (invariably women in those days) who looked after Mary before and during were also interesting. Some of the officers utterly despised her and others found her very endearing. It seemed that she prompted outpourings of affection in many who knew her but some people felt they were being tricked into giving this affection and they seemed to dislike Mary because of it.

Depressingly, Seveny's revisit of this book came at the tale end of the Bulger killing, 25 years later and, one would hope, a more enlightened world. But, no, the problems plaguing Mary and her family seem to be no less formidable and intense than those facing families at the tail end of the millenium.

Seveny is a very erudite writer and brings a social work perspective on these crimes. This makes for an engaging read as the insights she offers are arresting in their clarity. To quote:

"Unhappiness in children is never innate, it is created by the adults they 'belong to': there are adults 
 in all classes of society who are immature, confused, inadequate, sick, and, under given and
 unfortunate circumstances, their children will reflect, reproduce and often pay for the miseries of
 the adults they need and love. Children are not evil."

This book is a very worthwhile read.