Rating: 3/5

MY RATING GUIDE: A low 3 Stars for me. I thought this one was marginally okay but I didn’t find the characters as likable as in the previous books. 
1= dnf/What was that?; 2= Nope, not for me; 3= THIS WAS OKAY; 3.5= I enjoyed it; 4= I liked it a lot; 5= I Loved it, it was great! (I seldom give 5 Stars).

England (early 1800’s) ~ 
Miss Hannah Pym, at 45, is the former housekeeper of a wealthy but reclusive man in Kenningston. When her employer dies, Hannah is bequeathed with a generous gift of 5000 pounds in appreciation for her 33yrs of service. Considering her sudden financial gain, Hannah decides to indulge a little. For a time, she will travel throughout England by stagecoach and experience life through the sights and the people she meets. 

Hannah is on her third stagecoach adventure in PENELOPE GOES TO PORTSMOUTH where she meets a new group of people - a much disappointed spinster, the sheltered daughter of a wealthy merchant, an irascible and penniless lord, an American involved with shipping and then there is Miss Hannah Pym. Excited with her matchmaker success on her previous journeys, Miss Pym has meddling on her mind again.

Comments ~ 
1) PENELOPE GOES TO PORTSMOUTH is bk3 in MC Beaton/Marion Chesney’s “The Traveling Matchmaker series.” PGTP could be read as a Standalone tile but an arc runs throughout the series loosely connecting the books. (I actually preferred the early 2 books over PENELOPE and would recommend those first). 
2) I purchased and listened to the audiobook of PGTP. Helen Lisanti’s performance pulled me into the story quickly and she did a nice job. 
3) Nevertheless, I wasn’t as engaged in PGTP as previous books (it marginally kept my attention). I thought the passengers seemed quite miserable and self-absorbed with the exception of Mr Cato, the shipping man, and perhaps the young, idealist Miss Penelope Wilkins. IMO, matching any of them off would simply make others more miserable by association. I found myself not caring whether or not Miss Pym’s matchmaking efforts would be successful, idly considering others better suited not even riding the coach. I thought Miss Pym, herself, seemed less content and more waspish and temperamental in this book. 
4) Overall, I find this series a mild palate cleanser which I am drawn to after completing books particularly dark, graphic and/or simply depressing. The Matchmaker series is like a simple tonic, not particularly memorable or pleasing but easy going down. 

READER CAUTION ~ 
PROFANITY - Yes. Strong language is used on a few occasion. 
VIOLENCE - PG. Yes, but not dark or violent. 
SEXUAL SITUATIONS - None. Sweet kisses.