Rating: 4/5

This novel requires the reader to give it thought and patience in order to absorb its multiple layers. The simplest description I can give it is that it is a strange combination of any novel by Dan Brown and the first novel in The Magicians trilogy. Aegypt treads a line between fantasy and quantum physics, and its theme is that truth and history can vary with time, data, and the observer. It's also about coming of age in America, and a good chunk of it is historical fiction.

Ursula Le Guin said that Crowley's book Little, Big, published in 1981 “all by itself calls for a redefinition of fantasy.” Having not yet read the Little, Big, I will say that I saw in Aegypt--published in 1988--the foundation for more recent fantasy novels, such as the aforementioned Magicians trilogy. The characters in Aegypt are similar in a variety of ways to those of The Magicians--Americans stumbling through life, not quite fitting in--but the most important commonality is the existence of magic (theurgy) in the real world. Aegypt (and I must note that I mean the first volume of the series because I haven't yet read the rest) subtly explores this theme by positing that magic exists as a body of knowledge that was suppressed (by Christian religious leaders) and then forgotten, as practitioners died and the sciences of physics and astronomy moved forward. But small clues remain to suggest that these sciences cannot completely explain the functioning of the universe on either a macro or micro scale, and the central character of Aegypt, Pierce Moffett, has finally reached a point and place in time and in his life to be able to explore those clues.

But if you choose to read Aegypt, do not expect the adventures and drama that are frequently found in books that cover fantasy and magic. Aegypt is subtle almost to a fault, and it wasn't until I got well into the book and did some additional background reading on people like Giordano Bruno and John Dee that I felt like I had caught or been lured into the flow of the novel. By the end, though, I was definitely hooked and am looking forward to part two.