Rating: 5/5

I do like my World War II fiction to be dark and disturbing rather than uplifting and sentimental, and The Ogre most definitely ticks those first two boxes. Not only is this probably the most remarkable and terrifying novel I've ever read set in Nazi Germany, it is also one of the most bold and original novels I've read for a long time. Told in the form of both journal entries—or ‘sinister writings' as they are known—and third-person narrative, it is one of acute observations; of baroque language; of stunning descriptive beauty, and refers constantly to mysticism and ancient heroes, as our protagonist of great size and strength Abel Tiffauges, who has a penchant for raw meat and blood; for excrement and naked children, goes from childhood memories as a passive car mechanic in late 30s France—he escapes jail for a possible rape because the war breaks out, to French soldier behind enemy lines, to French Nazi sympathizer in the dying days of the Third Reich. A large chunk of the novel takes place in the woodlands and countryside of East Prussia, with Tiffauges having been captured and sent to a work camp. He is one who seems to rub off well with the Nazis, and soon finds himself as assistant forester to Hermann Goering's hunting lair after being found feeding blind elks in an area Tiffauges calls his 'Canada'—there is a chilling cameo by the Reich Marshal himself, before the last third sees him arrive at the castle of Kaltenborn to take on the job—with a trusty black horse called Bluebeard and a pack of Dobermans, the rounding up and recruiting of children for SS military service. The further Tiffauges enters into this monstrous beast of a kingdom, the more he is engulfed in the idea of a master race. Despite being deemed pro-Nazi in some circles, the novel still won the Prix Goncourt in 1970. I don't really take any notice of literary prizes, but in this case I'm glad to hear it. Hell, if it were up to me, I'd have it winning the literary equivalent of The Oscars. The climactic last few pages with Russian forces closing in on Kaltenborn; seeing Tiffauges go from ogre to St. Christopher, after finding and taking care of a starving Jewish boy who had fled Auschwitz, were simply unforgettable. I haven't felt this way about a WW2 novel since reading Curzio Malaparte's masterpiece, The Skin, about five years ago.