Rating: 5/5

WOW WOW WOW... ! 
My feelings are just out of control after reading the last book of this series. Maybe that's because this is my first series I have ever completed OR maybe I am over happy after reading a series of 4 books because this is my biggest series I had ever started. I don't know the exact reason. Never mind, who cares! I just wanted a good series and I think I have read one. 
Before saying anything else I must say this series is totally for children. Maybe some teens or adults will not enjoy this because some elements I felt were totally for children. But I also must say I enjoyed this no matter what.

The last book was totally unexpected for me. At first, I couldn't understand that I am reading a right book or not because this book started just like a proper story not like a sequel to the 3rd book. I think persons who haven't read its previous books will also enjoy this book. But if you have read its previous books, you will understand it better and things may get predictable for you. 

▌BOOK'S INFO.▐

Chapters 
--- 22 

Narration 
--- First Person 
I really liked it. Actually, it's my favourite.

Setting 
--- Enchanted Forest 
One of the amazing settings I have ever read.
This forest is full of magic. Magic floats in its atmosphere. Every place in this forest changes its position after some time. To get the more info. on this forest you should start from the 2nd book. 1st doesn't contain much info. about it.

▌MAJOR CHARACTERS▐

Daystar
Bio
--- 16 years old, son of Mendanber and Cimorene (King and Queen of Enchanted Forest). He is also the narrator of this book.
My Feelings
--- This character was just amazing. I couldn't stop myself from reading just because of this character. I liked this very much. I will always remember this character.

Shiara
Bio
--- A fire-witch who doesn't know how to use her magic. But when she finds out: How to use her magic, I can't stop laughing. 
My Feelings
--- She was also amazing but sometimes she became a bad-girl type, you know. Nevertheless I liked her. She was adorable.

A Dragon
Bio 
--- Its gender was unknown because it was not old enough to define who is it.
My Feelings
---- It was sort of a funny character. I liked it and its comedy. It always wanted to eat every thing. I liked the scene how it entered the book.

The characters who were the focus of the previous books became the secondary characters in this book. But I did't hate hate that fact. Instead I liked how they appeared in this book.

▌OVERVIEW▐
[I think this book is a sort of retelling of a tale: 'Sleeping Beauty'. I kept feeling many references from that tale while reading. I haven't read that but I have heard about it many times that I think I don't need to read it. But if someone knows about a book totally on this tale you can tell me. I may get new things from that]

At the end of its previous book King of Enchanted Forest was captured by the Society of Wizards in some secret place in the Castle. And castle was surround by a shield, created by wizards, through which no one except for wizards can pass. Only King's Sword can break that shield which can only be handled by the right heir who was Daystar. That means only Daystar can free his father. Daystar was born at the end of its last book. So the story continues in this book.
This book takes place after 16 years of the previous book: Cimorene and Daystar live at the edge of Enchanted Forest. They encounter a wizard (Antorell, one of the villains of the previous books and also in this book). After melting him, Cimorene gives the King's Sword to Daystar and force him to go to the Enchanted Forest without telling him anything (for a reason). He goes and meets Shiara, who is escaping from wizards. Both are alone so they stay together and wander through the Forest. Eventually, Daystar finds his reason that Why he is in the Enchanted Forest and What he supposes to do? So, he free his father from the Wizards' trap. (that's obvious, not a big revelation I think)

How simple is that: But it's not. There are adventures in this book.

▌LESSONS FROM THIS SERIES▐ 
I don't have plans to follow them. *wink* hehehe...

- Always keep a handkerchief with yourself. 
- Never take a shortcut.

▌THINGS I DIDN'T LIKE▐
--This book was very predictable for me. I almost guessed every part of this book except for the ending. That was little unexpected but didn't look that bad. 
--Villains were same. This whole series have the same villains: Wizards. Villains should have changed. I didn't like this fact because neither the Protagonist did any thing to kill wizards permanently nor the Antagonist did any thing to get rid of melting by Protagonist in its previous books. 

Regardless of its predictability, I liked how author wrote each scene in an excellent manner. I liked this fact in all of its books. 

According to the facts I mentioned above, I would like to give:
***4.8 Bright Stars***  (round off to 5 stars)

▌BEST BOOKS OF THE SERIES GOES TO▐
1. Dealing with Dragons ◄
2. Searching for Dragons
3. Calling on Dragons 
4. Talking to Dragons ◄
That's my personal thinking. Different people may have different thoughts about it.

Feel free to point out my mistakes in this review or my misunderstandings about this book if there are any. I would be happy to see that.

Thanks for you attention...^__^