Rating: 5/5

In this little known novella a miser sees the evil ways his life has become and with the help of some horrific spirits turns around the direction of his walk on Earth. But seriously folks this moving classic has heart. Ebenezer Scrooge is wealthy yet a lonely , bitter man living in a vast mansion by himself . During Christmas while others are celebrating the joyous occasion Scrooge the tightwad tells all who have the effrontery to say Merry Christmas and retorts the legendary bah humbug. Turning down two gentlemen with those remarks after they request help for the destitute with the statement are there no prisons, are there no workhouses ? Bob Cratchit the clerk in the skinflint's employment, a poor man his low salary the cause, and the large family suffers greatly. As he the friendless, travels back from the office to his home in the cold night the prosperous loan business is the only thing he loves. However the door's knocker transforms into the eerie image of his late partner Jacob Marley a person who was as money hungry as Mr. Scrooge in fact today the seventh anniversary of his not grieved demise. No surprise Ebenezer quickly eats and jumps in bed the simmering blaze in the fireplace slowly disintegrates into ash. Safe he's not, the ghost of Marley once more appears dragging a long , long chain a consequence of the man's crimes perpetuates against his fellow beings. Warning him this will be the same fate if he doesn't change his ways. Three spirits the ghosts of Christmas past, present and future will arrive to show Scrooge's life good or bad, naturally the future petrifies the old man most, his tomorrows . Not uneasy the outcome to figure out for any that indulge in reading or seeing the many film versions, sad shadows bring flashes to the remembrances even he is not made of stone, seeing the woman Ebenezer loved nevertheless gold he liked more. The story will always perpetuate how a person's choices can make living happy or otherwise. Still it gives clarity to some especially those unsure of what they think is inappropriate decisions that caused pain, suffering and certainly uneasiness. Mr. Charles Dickens again and again gains much esteem as the people change the pages very quickly and view them with ultimate respect, reading all of these superb unparalleled parables,
 his elegant stories. As long as Christmas is celebrated this magnificent account takes a trip to the imagination and makes a second chance possible.