Rating: 4/5

Rory MacLean has just returned from the sea. His oldest brother Patrick left 3 years ago to fight in France and his youngest brother has no interest in being the clan leader. Rory doesn't want to be clan leader either, he wants to return to the sea, so his hopes are that Patrick returns home.

Felicia Campbell finds out that her Uncle has betrothed her to a horrible man, a lecher 3 times her age. If she can get to her cousin Jamie, he will help her Felicia arranges to leave under the guise of her sister to be Janet Cameron. Luckily when the days comes it is raining and she is covered in a cloak with a plaid around most of her face. When the fog covers them, she veers off from her riding party to go to her cousin Jamie.

Men from the clan MacLean intercept her and bring her home with them thinking she is Janet Cameron. They feel if Rory marries he will stay and also her family would be a good alliance.

Rory is very angry when he finds out what they have done and apologizes and assures her he will get her home but she doesn't want to go home. She even fakes illness. Of course she and Rory are attracted to one another but try to push it out of their minds.

Her cousin Jamie comes home to find out what she did and goes looking for her. When he approaches the MacLeans, he is taken hostage. The Campbells and the MacLeans have been enemies for a hundred years so he is literally taking his life in his hands.

It finally comes out who she really is and after Rory recovers from the feelings of anger and betrayal he still wants to get her out of the marriage she has been committed to. They both have feelings for one another but will not deal with it. Besides there could never be a marriage between a Campbell and a MacLean!

Rory, Jaime and Lachlan (Rory's younger brother) work on a plan to relieve her from the betrothal. Can they do it safely....can they keep her out of it...

I did enjoy this story. There is nothing like a hot man in a kilt and a feisty female! The MacLean clan were so beaten down that you really wanted them to get a good Laird and be a successful clan again. 

I would recommend this book if you are a true highland lover.