Rating: 3/5

Steiner’s given himself an impossible task. Hitler found alive in South America. 

It’s simple enough, in all but the telling. 

The problem is the narrativization, for when you make a story a story, you burden it with all the necessary demands of storytelling. And here those crowd around what I think Steiner wants to write at its core, which is 1) A philosophical Ideenroman, in which we consider how pain is best directed, and if it makes it any less justifiable if the locus of that anguish falls on a false target and 2) a cathartic cry of anguished commemoria. And, indeed, both elements are here in plaintive, visceral ways rarely matched in other holocaust literature (witness, for example, the collective ‘meh’ with which I greeted both Appelfeld’s BADENHEIM and Albahari’s GOETZ AND MEYER). 

The justly famous chapter 6 — in which Steiner juxtaposes a four page unbroken sentence of real and imagined nazi atrocity and humiliation with the corresponding demand that Hitler’s keepers attend to him humanely, consider his ailments compassionately, and do whatever it takes to keep him alive, for the express purpose of making sure that all of that aforementioned pain might be acknowledged — most successfully accomplishes both of these goals. As such, it might have, if given the proper quick context, stood alone. 

Still, we have the rest. And the mechanics of novel making require answers. Thus the necessary historical backfilling for the uninformed on the sidelines, such as 1) what are the details of his death 2) how do we know those details 3) are these reliable details and 4) how did the narrative become the official narrative, and did anyone question that version of events from the beginning. And, probably the least relevant question in the logicworld of the book as a whole, but the most important when considering it’s reverberation through society in general: how to get across that this book deals with the Hitler surviving hypothetical purely as a means to those aforementioned ends, rather than as license to question these narratives altogether? 

And this is all to say nothing of the initially latent and then boom explicit apologia at the end, which, whether question-begging, mania-betraying, or quasi-matching Steiner’s stances, more than anything betray the fictional amateur at the helm.