Rating: 4/5

It's no exaggeration to say I've been curious about this book for at least thirty years. It's cited as the inspiration behind two popular '80s movies I saw a lot back in my video store days; Talk Radio and Betrayed. So I always wondered which one more accurately depicted the circumstances surrounding the murder of (arguably the original) "shock jock" Alan Berg. The answer is that Eric Bogosian and Oliver Stone definitely poured over this source material more feverishly than Costa-Gavras did, as there are more details in Talk Radio that are taken directly from the transcripts of the radio shows featured in Talked to Death and (more surprisingly) the musings of Stephen Singular, the author of this book. However, weirdly enough, Costa-Gavras' uncharacteristically pulpy adaptation is more in the spirit of this true-crime novel, which only spends half its time with the background and life of Alan Berg, and the other half diving headfirst into the lives of a half dozen neo-Nazis responsible for his murder. So here's the final scorecard for any movie people out there who care about this sort of thing: Repurposed snippets and scenes that found their way into Bogosian's one-man play and Stone's mostly-one-man movie include... the "What if someone takes your job?" speech Bogosian uses to shred a caller (which I always wrongly assumed was an Oliver Stone addition, especially the Vietnam stuff, but it's actually the thoughts of the author, Stephen Singular, not Berg), the entire harrowing conversation with the "Turtle Creek" rapist is here, which is apparently the word-for-word, on-air conversation Berg had with a disturbed caller, and the "kid" who flashed a camera at Bogosian to foreshadow his murder (in the book, a neo-Nazi Berg invites up to the booth points a gun-like finger at him), and, of course, almost every Holocaust denier's on-air rants are included. But probably the most surprising is the much longer epilogue of friends, family, rivals, and straight-up haters who commented on Berg's death over the end credits of Stone's movie. Now as far as material Costa-Gavras used for his very '80s "Debra Winger Gets Abused Again" thriller Betrayed... there wasn't a whole lot, at least not at first glance. Berg's murder does serve as the prologue to that movie, but the gruesome "manhunt" setpiece in the film, which remains its most memorable moment (a racist sorta Most Dangerous Game deal), is not found in here at all (not even in the "8 Pages of Shocking Photos!"). But besides the possibly off-kilter focus on the white supremacists' day-to-day, a moment that captures the spirit of that film very well also comes at the end of the book; a lyrical passage describing Midwestern farmers riding their tractors and combines for hours and hours on end, and just like someone on an endless, mindlessly circular road trip, finally clicking over to some talk radio in their cockpits as a respite from the long days in the fields... only to discover some liberal pontificating they could get murderously angry about. Indeed, Berg and his ultimately fatal dance with both the hard-working and idle dipshits stewing out there under the sun, becoming increasingly addicted to radios instead of keyboards, is a dead-on accurate preview of our addictive internet nightmare to come.