Rating: 2/5

Here we are with volume three of Jim Davis's newspaper comic strip Garfield, spanning August 27, 1979 through March 30, 1980. The evolution of the characters continues, though not as noticeably as in the first two books. Garfield walks on all fours sometimes, though he stands up on his haunches more than in 1978. Lyman—Odie's owner and Jon Arbuckle's housemate—appears less, but he's still involved. Garfield generally one-ups Odie, but everyone gets their moment in the sun as the new decade begins. The 1980s was arguably Garfield at its very best.

 Nermal the kitten is introduced September 3 (page seven) when his owners (Jon's parents) go on vacation. Garfield mocks Nermal's cuteness and the fact that he looks up to Odie, and he's happy to be rid of the kitten after six days. The week's best strip is September 6 (page eight), where Nermal has shed hair in Garfield's food. Garfield's grumpy observation that he only tolerates his own hair in his food is a subtle philosophical point. Sunday, September 16 (page twelve) is one of the funnier comics in the book, Garfield pretending to sleepwalk when he's caught stealing food at night. He can't resist pushing the charade beyond believability. "Fat Week" comes next, a tongue-in-cheek celebration of fat pride, and September 27 (page seventeen) features a good gag with Odie's tail "wagging the dog." A visit with veterinarian Liz is scheduled, and Jon tries as usual to ply his charms for a date. Liz typically comes out ahead, but Jon scores a few points this time. October 11 (page twenty-three) is another funny joke with Odie and his tail, about who's chasing whom. Odie is a great source of physical comedy. Jon battles to get Garfield in the bathtub (Garfield's teddy bear, Pooky, makes an appearance on October 16 [page twenty-five]), and then there are some funny lines with Irma the waitress. October 22 (page twenty-eight) is an effective sight gag as Garfield sneaks up to pounce on Odie, and then Garfield demonstrates for a few days how finicky he is with his food. We head back to the vet, though not long enough to see Liz. Jon takes Garfield on vacation to the beach, despite Garfield's discomfort riding in a car. November 18 (page thirty-nine) is one of this collection's funniest Sundays, Garfield inviting an attractive girl cat into the house. But she'd better watch out when she takes liberties with his food. No girl is worth that.

 Jon and Garfield have a few humorous episodes driving in the car, followed by a hilarious Sunday (December 2, page forty-five) observing that people often resemble their pets. The punchline is laugh-out-loud. Nermal returns, and when Garfield can't successfully emulate his cuteness, he frames him for bad behavior. Nermal isn't defenseless as he seems, however. A storyline follows with Garfield getting stuck in a rollup window shade, beginning with a clever remark (December 17, page fifty-two) that misadventures like this tend to conveniently cover Monday through Saturday's comics. A low-key Christmas is followed by New Year's, and Garfield peeks out of bed into 1980 with his trademark apathy. Lyman features in a set of strips that find Garfield sniping food from the dinner table, the funniest of which (January 11, page sixty-two) has Garfield at his brazen best. Garfield suffers a head cold starting January 14 (page sixty-four); even his thought bubbles sound stuffed up. Lyman's name is used for the only time in this book (as far as I can tell) during the January 27 (page sixty-nine) Sunday comic. Jon and Garfield go back to Liz the vet, who rebuffs Jon again when he asks for a date. A mini Arbuckle reunion is on when Jon takes Garfield to his parents' farm for a week, and Garfield enjoys his new arena for daily mischief. Back at home, Jon restricts Garfield's diet when he gets overly plump, but Garfield figures a humorous way out of it after a week's deprivation. Nermal is back for the week of March 10, the funniest episode (March 14, page eighty-nine) coming when Garfield tries to teach him to gnaw a turkey drumstick instead of playing with a ball of yarn. Saturday's comic shows that Garfield doesn't mind Nermal so much anymore. The book ends with Garfield entering a cat show, but his weight has a comedic effect as he joins the other cats in the competition area.

 Garfield isn't as consistently funny as Lincoln Peirce's Big Nate or as touching and insightful as Bill Watterson's Calvin and Hobbes, but hanging out with Garfield and the gang is good, comfortable fun. Garfield isn't exclusively a children's comic, but the books function well as kid lit, always leaving the reader wanting more. I'll be back for volume four, Garfield Weighs In. I want to see how the rest of 1980 goes for "America's #1 cat."