Rating: 5/5

DID FREUD ABANDON EVIDENCE FOR CHILDHOOD ABUSE TO PROTECT A FRIEND?
 
Author Jeffrey Moussaieff Mason has written other books such as 'Against Therapy,' 'When Elephants Weep: The Emotional Lives of Animals,' etc. 

He wrote in the Introduction to this 1992 book, "In 1895 and 1896 Freud, in listening to his women patients, learned that something dreadful and violent lay in their past. The psychiatrists who had heard these stories before Freud had accused their patients of being hysterical liars and had dismissed their memories as fantasy. Freud was the first psychiatrist who believed his patients were telling the truth. These women were sick... because something terrible and secret had been done to them as children." (Pg. xxx)

He begins by stating, "On the evening of April 21, 1986, Sigmund Freud gave a paper before his colleagues... The address presented... Freud's new theory that the origin of neurosis lay in early sexual traumas ... This is what later came to be called the 'seduction theory'---namely, the belief that these early experiences were real, not fantasies, and had a damaging and lasting effect on the later lives of the children who suffered them. 

"Freud uses various words to describe these 'infantile sex scenes'... All of these words explicitly state something about the violence being directed against the child expressed in the sexuality of the adult, with the exception of the word 'seduction,' which was an unfortunate choice, since it implies some form of participation by the child... In Freud's later theories... this ambiguity inherent in the word is exploited. The implication is that the ... [child] has brought on the sexual act by his or her own behavior..." (Pg. 3-5)

Later, "Freud was to retract ... the belief that external, real sexual traumas lay at the very heart of neurosis. His patients, he now felt, had been lying to themselves and to him..." (Pg. 11) Masson asks, "What had happened? Why did Freud abandon the 'seduction theory'?... The purpose of this book is to make public evidence... that would point to a more illuminating explanation for the single most important step Freud took..." (Pg. 12-13)

He says, "I have suggested Emma Eckstein was the patient who provided Freud with the seduction theory." (Pg. 87) After a bungled operation performed by Freud's colleague and friend Wilhelm Fliess, "Freud had the option to ... confess it to Emma Eckstein... Or he could protect Fliess by excusing what had happened. But in order to do this... it would be necessary to construct a theory of hysterical lying, a theory whereby the external traumas suffered by the patient never happened, but are fantasies. 

"If Emma Eckstein's problems (her bleeding) had nothing to do with the real world (Fliess's operation), then her earlier accounts of seduction could well be fantasies too. The consequences of Freud's act of loyalty toward Fliess would reach far beyond this single case." (Pg. 99) Masson later contends that Fliess's son Robert "believed that his father had sexually seduced him when he was a young child. Now, if it is true that Wilhelm Fliess was ... harming his own child at the same time that Sigmund Freud was on the track of his greatest discovery... then we see here one of the poorest matches in the history of intellectual discoveries." (Pg. 142)

He concludes, "Between 1897 and 1903, Freud came to believe that ... most ... of his women patients had deceived themselves and him. Their memories of seduction were nothing more than fantasies... they were the product of the Oedipus complex, part of normal childhood sexuality. The new world that opened up to Freud with this 'discovery' ... permitted him to make a large number of genuine discoveries..." (Pg. 189) He adds, "I do not think that Freud ever made a conscious decision to ignore his earlier experiences... in my opinion, Freud had abandoned an important truth: the sexual, physical, and emotional violence that is a real and tragic part of the lives of many children." (Pg. 190)

Definitely a controversial book (the theory is critiqued in 'Freud: A Life for Our Time'), it is also a fascinating and compelling one, and a book that anyone seriously studying Freud and his ideas should contend with.