Rating: 4/5

To me this book sums up the last 3 books in the Deverry cycle: more of the same. Not that that's anything to scoff up but merely to indicate that this isn't really a series that reinvents itself from book to book. Because of this it's become my cozy and comforting read; it doesn't ask too much from me and gives me a fair amount of time with characters I like (Rhodry, Jill, Nevyn), some interesting tidbits of magic and a plenty of blood and warfare. I enjoyed finally seeing some concrete advancement in the elvish lore rather than vague references. I was surprised that we actually got to see and fight one of the creatures from "The Hordes", that was pretty cool. That being said I tire of the Guardians and their bullshit. I still don't really understand why Alshandra is so pissed that Dallandra wants to "bring" Elessario into the world or why Evandar is such an annoying riddle hoe. It feels like things happen in their real of existence "just because", without much sense. I mean, wtf is that stupid whistle that shows up out of nowhere? It's also bizarre that Rhodry wants to keep it and refuses it to give it to Dallandra when she comes to fetch it only to hand it willy-nilly to Evandar even after he basically refuses to answer any of his questions. I mean even Rhodry doesn't understand why he's keeping the damn whistle, it's just a stupid plot device. I don't know, the whole Guardian world to me lack depth and weight. It's like a stupid la la land where anything can really happen (e.g. summoning entire armies out of nowhere) at any moment. I get it but also it makes things feel so flighty and ephemeral. Oh and then Dallandra fucks Rhodry and is like "hmm actually I belong to the world of flesh", and I was like umm, what the fuck, why couldn't you have that same attitude with Aderyn instead of abandoning him for Evandar's ghost cock? 

So yeah, I don't love the whole Guardians thing but I AM curious to see where the whole plot with The Hordes goes I guess. Probably will take a break before the next one, read something else.