A short note for those who may have an interest ::
 
William Carlos Williams’ 1925 essay collection ought to be read as supplementary by those reading William T Vollmann’s Seven Dreams: A Book of North American Landscapes. It is a compact attempt to survey an american spirit by way of its history. And more than the mere sweep collected in this slim volume, and Williams’ concern with the what and wherefore of what being american is all about, are his stylistic choices, mimicking the subject in its own voice, using the subject’s own voice, writing from and out of the source documents themselves. Williams’ choices of style, form, and voice should be familiar to Vollmann readers. Which choices also create a dense reading experience, always somewhere between essay and story, where it belongs. Prior familiarity with the subject of each piece is required in order to see exactly where Williams wants to place himself, as essayist, within the questions of the time; when a writer ventriloquizes, there is no easy route to discover merely that “which he wants to say.” But, too, there is the innocent hearing of what is said, as it is said, in the manner in which it is said.

Red Eric -- Chris Columbus -- Cortez and what happened at Tenochtitlan -- Ponce de Leon -- De Soto -- Sir Walter Raleigh -- the mayflower -- de Champlain -- Thomas Morton -- Cotton Mathers and some wonderful witches -- Daniel Boone -- Washington -- Poor Richard -- John Paul Jones -- Aaron Burr -- Poe and even a final page on Lincoln. more.

The names will be familiar to readers of Vollmann; yes, that is where my head is right now. More importantly, those names should be much more familiar to the average american citizen than they are to me; I mean of course that I know the names but I’ll be damned if I could tell a decent story about most of them. 

It occurs to me as well, dear readers of fiction, that the territory which Williams covers, in addition to all which makes me think of Seven Dreams, also overlaps with another great series of historical novels by another Great American, Gore Vidal’s Narratives of Empire.