Rating: 2/5

⚠️ There are spoilers. 

I bought this book a long, long, time ago. I was in my early 20s maybe. Or maybe younger. All I know is I bought this book in Illinois. 

This is a mystery and fantasy book for teens so don't expect fancy writing or college level words. I'm a YA librarian so I'm trying to read more teen books to recommend at work. 

That said, I was intrigued with this book. I read it in two days. When I read the back I figured it was a book about a teen who was reincarnated. I also expected a love story, or a love triangle or romance because again it's a teen book

I didn't expect the twists or endings. I liked that Sophia was Averil/Megan's reincarnated friend. The plot made sense. It was executed greatly until the end. 

I could have done without the possible incest. 

Megan is the main character. She's the adopted daughter of Carolyn Barnes and Kent Tilby. Her cousin Matt is the biological brother of her uncle, her adoptive Mother's brother. He looks exactly like his grandfather Thomas Barnes. At the end of the book they date each other because Avril and Thomas were soulmates. And Megan and Matt are their current incarnations. 

This makes me feel uncomfortable because if Megan is really the incarnated version of her "adopted" great-aunt then Matt is still biologically her grand-nephew. 

Also, what grandmother is going to be like yeah you're totally my older sister and you can date my grandson who is really my husband who died?! Absolutely not. Thomas was clearly not that smart. He dated Helen first, then decided his soulmate was the older sister. Then when Avril died he went back to his old girlfriend?! The chick I love is dead let me marry her sister instead. 

Nevermind, that even if Megan is adopted she's still her grandchild and she's not going to be okay with her grandkids dating or marrying. I know I wouldn't. 

How could an adopted girl look exactly like her adopted grandmother's sister?! I'm not buying that. Which leads me to my next logical throught that also gives me the ick. Partners or parents can adopt their spouses kid's from other marriages. Or if one of the people is sterile they can have a kid with someone else. This book is about secrets. I think it's possible that Mom was pregnant with Megan. Megan is biologically related to her Mom but not Dad. That still makes Megan related to Matt. Still gross.

 I know Maryland is considered the South but really?! We're going with that stereotype? 

It's been scientifically proven that children carry the memories of their relatives and ancestors. And it's also possible for kids to look like their aunts or uncles. Or to act like them. 

I would have given this book 3 stars if it wasn't for the cousin love story.