Rating: 4/5

Atom is the story of a single oxygen atom from its origination at the Big Bang to modern-day Earth and even beyond as the author speculates what will become of the Earth and all of the atoms which make us who we are. What a neat concept for a book! One of the chapters in Primo Levi's excellent book The Periodic Table is based on a similar concept, tracing a portion of the life of single carbon atom, and Krauss refers to Levi's story and compares it to this book. I thought both authors created fascinating histories. 

Essentially, this book is about what went in to making the universe, life as we know it, and what will eventually happen to everything. It is heavily steeped in chemistry, as our atom combines with numerous others during its life to form all sorts of molecules. Everything is chemistry. Everything! And all atoms, including the ones inside you, were born in now-extinct stars. I loved how this book solidified my belief that there is a scientific basis and explanation for everything and no outside magical or spiritual component is necessary or evident in the universe. 

What I didn't like: I thought the cosmology in the first third of the book was a little too dense and hard to understand for my intelligence level, even through Krauss did an admirable job keeping it as simple as he could and even adding humor here and there. This part of the book is heavy in physics and my head hurt reading some of it. It was never boring, just complex. On the plus side, Krauss starts each chapter with a relatable modern-day science story which introduces the concept he is about to address. 

The book got better and more understandable and relatable as it went on, as the universe and matter began to resemble what it is today. Once the atom arrived in our embryonic solar system is where the book really became a good read for me. While the life of the oxygen atom makes up the primary thread in the book, Krauss tells us the history of the universe along the way, and gradually goes in to the history of our solar system, the Earth, and life on Earth. Again, all based on chemistry - everything is just a different combination of elements. The atom's time spent on Earth, and description of the Earth's history with its cooling and warming periods and extinction events, were the highlights of the book for me. Also excellent was the parts about post-Earth history. The atoms in our body at this very second will live on long after the Earth is absorbed by our future red giant sun. 

It's quite remarkable how much science Krauss fits in to his ~300 page book. 

In addition to the mind-blowing epilogue, Krauss also lists fifteen other recommended books (with synopsis) in physics and cosmology, including Levi's' book which I also highly recommend. There is also an index in case you want to go back and re-read the section about quantum chromodynamics or quark interactions. 

I bought an old hard cover library book online. The book used to be in the library of the New Hampton School in New Hampshire. One night after I finished reading and shut off all the lights I noticed that the title and cover design of atoms glowed in the dark. What a neat surprise. 

4.5 stars.