Rating: 5/5

this book was simply incredible, and, although that would usually be due to the mystery itself, that wasn't the case with this book. the mystery was quite intriguing, in all honesty, but it's not what made me appreciate this book so much.

one of the main aspects that i really like about this book is how detailed every little thing is. i know that that's one of the reasons that people don't like sayers' books, but it's the reason that i found one of them to be quite admirable. it makes the characters realistic, and it's not entirely unrelated to the mystery. it gives the opportunity for the reader to be confused about relevant information; there's a lot that's given about the characters, figuring out which of it would be relevant is its own mystery.

this brings me to the next point, which is sayers' character writing. because ive read a lot about sayers' life, i know that she included a decent bit of her personal opinions and her personality within her characters, and the fact that it's so noticeable is very fascinating. she put quite a bit of herself into her characters, and it's just really enjoyable to see that. her characters are very interesting people; not a single one of them is inherently good, actually. they could be a bit unreliable with the information they're mentioning, actually, and the reasons for that are just as fascinating as the characters themselves. something else that i liked is that you can see a bit of their personalities and their personal lives. they're more than just puppets or actors being involved in a mystery; they each have their personal lives beyond that and expanding on that aspect, even though it might be considered pointless, is something that i, personally, really liked.

the mystery itself is interesting, but only in one aspect. it's sort of like a locked-room mystery, but not quite. what i found to be most intriguing, and it's also the reason why i read this book in the first place, actually, was the method of murder. it's poisoning, but not the typical type. i won't expand further, because then i would be spoiling, but it's simply incredible. what's more incredible, as a matter of fact, is that all the scientific facts relating to the murder are true. sayers wrote this book with the help of a specialist, so most, if not all, of the facts included here are accurate, which is simply brilliant.

overall, i can confidently say that this book was incredible and that im looking forward to reading more of sayers' works. her way of writing and her meticulousness is something that's simply mind-blowing. id recommend this book to those who want to read more "golden age" mysteries, or just a mystery in general.