Rating: 5/5

"Be good to the earth and the earth will be good to you."
 
Harry Middleton grew up an Army brat, living all over the globe. When his father was stationed in Okinawa during the mid-sixties, twelve-year-old Harry was traumatized after witnessing a friend's horrific death. It was decided that perhaps Harry should go live for a while with his grandfather and great-uncle, two elderly men living a simple, quiet life in the Ozark mountains.
 
There he received the education of a lifetime at the hands of Emerson and Albert, and their neighbor, Elias Wonder: men who somehow managed to work the farm just enough to allow them to spend the bulk of their days as they wished - that is afield, along the creek, in the cool shadowy hollows, up in the hills. Harry learned to fish, and hunt, yes, but he was also taught a deep respect for the earth and all the creatures that dwell and depend on it.

Like anxious, spiritually ravenous pilgrims, they traveled to the creek each day, in every season, as much in pursuit of solace as trout. It was their presbytery, their mosque, their basilica, their bethel, their sacrarium.
 
They were firmly harnessed to the earth as it was and they took the land, its beauty and its blind treachery, a day at a time. Inconvenience and poverty were as much a part of their lives as hailstorms, tornadoes, bountiful harvests, drought, good trout, plump quail, plagues of insects, and deer moving up in the high country. They never prayed for help, for a change in their luck, for anything, although I did once hear Emerson ask the Great Mystery to bless a No. 18 dry fly he had just tied on in the hopes of tempting a huge rainbow trout that stalked the deep water of Karen's Pond. 
 
I think it's fair to say that in the company of these ancient men, Harry learned all that is important in life.

A couple of decades ago, I briefly worked for a mom &amp; pop fly fishing book company called The Angler's Art. (Honest to god - they sold NOTHING but books about fly fishing. Oh, those glorious days before Amazon . . . ) The owner, Barry Serviente, loved this book, and upon learning of Middleton's death, he ordered several cases of this title. He graciously gave copies to his employees . . . all two of us. My husband read it immediately, but I put it on the shelf where it remained for so long. I'm not sure why I decided to take it down and read it now, but I am SO GLAD I finally did. This is undoubtedly one of the best books I've read this year, and it may someday make the leap onto my favorites list.

Though I don't fish myself, I have indeed beheld the Power of Fly Fishing, as I've seen an hour in the creek turn my husband from this 
 

to this
 
 
Do you need to be a fisherman to enjoy this one? No, not at all. The beauty of the writing, and the imagery that Middleton conjures has a universal appeal to anyone who appreciates nature and solitude. 
Most highly recommended.
 
"I just raise a good drink down by the creek, offer a toast to Albert and Emerson, even that old bastard dog of theirs. And now to you as well. There are so few of us left. That's all, just a toast to trout men, one and all. There are so few left, so few who believe the earth is enough."