Rating: 5/5

Riveting and edgy, with lush - and usually creepy - settings just waiting to be explored. I thoroughly enjoyed The Glass Flame and it is the first book of Phyllis A. Whitney's that I've read, but it won't be the last!

Right from the beginning, I was drawn in. There are lots of little mysteries, nagging questions, to chew on...a cast of extremely colorful and memorable characters...and as with any really good mystery book, though at the end you can look back and see how it all fit together, when you're reading it the first time, it isn't in the slightest bit obvious, and nobody is above suspicion.

Karen, the heroine, is someone I felt for, and cheered for. Especially for the time (this book was written in 1978) she's pretty plucky and doesn't go to pieces very easily (a couple of times, a little, but it's understandable.) Since some of the information I saw on this book before I read it labeled it as a "mystery/romance" I was wondering how much would be mystery and how much would be romance, as the mix can vary wildly. I don't mind a romance in a story like this as long as it doesn't completely overwhelm the entire book - and this one certainly doesn't. It ended up being very much in the background, with mystery and exploration taking the front seat, which was exactly what I'd hoped for. 

I found the architectural details fascinating, too. I loved the detail put into Trevor's sprawling mountainside house, as well as the creepy octagon house on the Belle Isle. Great atmosphere and mood. Intriguing yet also with an undercurrent of horror (though not overtly so).  The romance between Karen and Trevor (or, more specifically, Trevor's sudden decision to fall in love with Karen after giving her the cold shoulder for the first 90% of the book) did seem a bit rushed at the end, from cold indifference to "let's spend our lives together," but in all honesty, I wasn't reading this for the romance angle so I didn't care.

I couldn't put this book down, and I know I'll come back and read it again!