Rating: 2/5

I seriously took my time before actually reviewing this on purpose. I just had to think about what on Earth I just read.

So lets go by parts:

- I was recommended this book because I was looking for gay characters to read about. As a straight guy with no gay-friends (at least not that I know of) I have little to no idea how exactly homosexual relationships work. However, for a story, I needed to add a gay character so off to research I went. The last books I remember to read with gay characters in them were the Song of Ice and Fire books but there neither Renly nor Loras were properly developed (actually, it was so mitigated that I only realised they were gay when the TV show came out).

- This book came as a recommendation because it was apparently gay literature written by (or partially by) Oscar Wilde. And since I love The Picture of Dorian Gray, I thought "Well, if you have to read gay literature, at least read some written by a writer you know is good".

And so off I went to read "Teleny". And God was I in for a disturbing ride.
First of all, I highly doubt Oscar Wilde wrote this. It's not badly written overall. A bit sloppy here and there but not at all badly written. I've read worse. Say...Twilight. Or The Stone Dance of the Chamelion. That one had gay characters too but was so bad I didn't even bother read the rest of the books. But it's got nothing to do with Oscar Wilde's style.

The book has a sort of interesting take, as the narrator is, apparently, talking to his shrink. And that ought to set the tone for the book. Probably a shrink would help me make some sense out of the message of this book.

But this is gay porn. Plain and simple. It has an attempt at making the love affair between Teleny and Camille more psychological, true. And as far as that goes, it's not so different from the relationship men and woman have. I could relate the feelings Camille had towards Teleny with feelings I've had towards girls and vice-versa. So that's good, I think. I'll take it that, from the psychological point of view, homosexual relationships function just like heterosexual ones. 

Then came a rape scene. I was honestly disgusted by it. In an attempt to try and deny his gay tendencies, the narrator rapes a servant girl and tries to pass it as a fulfilment of HER wishes. She obviously ends up committing suicide, something that Camille quickly forgets about. The reader, however, doesn't.

And then came the gay porn. And God, there was a lot of it. I'm ok with reading gay porn. I've enough literary tolerance for that. It does nothing to me, but fine. 
However, if badly written straight porn puts me off, badly written gay porn is even worse. I honestly doubt that men in the XIX century France were THIS perverted. This is just too perverted, even for Frenchmen.
Oh and lets not forget the gay orgy where, apparently, half of Paris male society was...an orgy that has a man shoving a bottle up is arse. Obviously, the sooner I thought to myself "That sh*t's gonna break" the sooner it broke. And the guy died of internal bleeding because he couldn't, obviously, go to a Hospital.
Well, I hope this serves as a lesson to any person, male or female, that decides it's a good idea to shove glass objects inside their body.

I honestly was pretty shocked by all the sorts of depravity in the gay sex scenes. But then again, it shouldn't REALLY have come as a surprise.
I'm a man myself and I know how perverted we men are. Luckily for us, our girls tend to put a brake in our amounts of perversion. So it doesn't take a big stretch of the imagination to see how such brakes would not exist between guys. I was shocked but I could rationalize even that.

What I couldn't rationalize was the message of the book. It tries throughout it to pass on the message that homosexual relationships aren't different from heterosexual ones. 
But then presents a main character that is almost a XIX century male Bella Swan, who's madly in love with Teleny, lives on his dependency and even threatens to kill himself if Teleny doesn't love him.
For every attempt this book makes in convincing the reader that homosexuality is a normal sexual inclination of a human being, it spends another amount showing behaviours that represent homosexuality as a truly deviant abnormality.
If I had to summarize what I learned about homosexuals in this book, I would say "They're unbalanced, co-dependent and really really horny and perverted men, with no shred of self-respect and ruled by animal-instincts". Which I think isn't neither the objective of the book nor an accurate depiction of gay men.

Again, I may be wrong. I don't know, personally, any gay men. But I have a really hard time believing Camille and Teleny represent them. One thing is certain...if any of the things narrated here represent gay men, then this book is enough to justify why homosexuals shouldn't be allowed to marry and even less adopt. All the other more serious arguments that exist to justify that wouldn't be necessary. This book would suffice.

As for the author of this...whomever he was, he was clearly gay. He describes male organs and bodies always with the nicest of adjectives but when it comes to describe what is, to me, a way more beautiful subject - a woman's body - the adjectives are always feeble and out of place. Actually, women in this book are always described as repugnant, week or manipulative bitches.

The writing itself was ok and the psychological part of the book was fine. Not Oscar Wilde, but fine. The gay sex scenes were ok for what they were even if poorly written and repetitive. The rest went from disturbing to downright disgusting.

In the end, I don't think I learned much about gay men mentality and behaviours which was the reason I picked this book in the first place. And I honestly don't think I'll try to investigate any further. I've a strong stomach and a considerably high level of literary tolerance...but not enough to read another "Teleny".

1.5/5 stars.