Rating: 3/5

This is the second Rendell novel I successfully finished consecutively without skipping to the back. I started reading Dennis Lehane's Sacred, but regrettably my heart and mind was not completely in it. I posthaste dive into another crime mystery book have stocked in my reader - this book. 
I am faintly and pleasantly surprised at my ease in finishing this book. Reading works of Ruth Rendell had not always been smooth journey for me. Wolf to the Slaughter and A New Lease of Death had evoked in me nothing beside a strong urge to yawn and call it a day. 
I still find it difficult to find Wexford and Burden endearing. They most surely do not have that Hastings-Poirot dynamic. And Wexford in this book does something that hopefully can make him understand and empathize with Mark Drayton (I am really disappointed that he no longer appears in subsequent books!). 
The crime is ordinary in method, crude even. Death by blunt force trauma. I am sure that not even the fussiest of readers will find it as a spoiler, will you? But the motive is pretty shocking. Rendell gives the readers a good red herring this time. But some characters' presence seem superfluous, in that they can be scrapped out from the book without affecting the story in a major way.
As usual, Rendell scatters pearls of quotes in her book and forms sentence with the highest degree of beauty, which somehow fits well with her narrative without giving it any pretentious feel and succeeds in delivering the information and nuance to her readers. Woman really gets the talent of arranges the words into rich, fluent narrative like a jeweler's talent of stringing together a handful of natural pearls into a mutely radiant necklace or bracelet. Here is an example of a quote she inserted:

 So much he soared beyond or sunk beneath
The men with whom he felt condemned to breathe 

The couplet above was created a long time ago by literature enthusiasts idol and poster boy, Lord Byron.
As for neat sentences which Rendell herself had formed, no example is better than the last part of this book. Read this book if you enjoy crime novels in which all gory and ugliness is hidden beneath a pretty, respectable facade. No part in this book is vulgar - but there are a lot of parts which will stir slight uneasiness in you.