Rating: 4/5

With all the complex political struggles for power, betrayals, and everyone either wanting to worship you as a god or put a knife in your back, it makes sense that Paul Atredis decided to fuck off into the desert instead of raise his superhuman twins as they struggle with thousands of years of knowledge uploaded into their brains and the fate of a planet at stake. And not just any planet, but one filled with monstrous worms and religious fanatics and while the environmental climate is getting less hostile, the political climate is ready to boil over into violence. Again. Children of Dune, the third installment of Frank Herbert’s space epic is a mind-blowing ride of political scheming, possession, murder, fake deaths and even a marriage plot to spice things up. The first hardcover sci-fi novel to top the bestseller list when it was released in 1976, Children of Dune shows the series continuously hit new highs of thrilling plot, character development and impressively constructed political landscapes that keep you on your toes the whole way while diving into some rather fascinating philosophical musings on government and the nature of power as a corrupting force. 

‘One uses power by grasping it lightly. To grasp too strongly is to be taken over by power, and thus to become its victim.’

Something I’ve always loved about the Dune series is the way the novels probe ideas of power and control. Here we have Leto II and Ghanima with the ability to see the future, like their dad, but questioning their abilities to change things. There is as much grappling with moral ambiguity as there is grappling for power and in a world where religion has been weaponized for social coercion and rallying an army of fanatics ready to die for a cause, every event is primed to explode in mass violence. Herbert uses the themes to craft a very dynamic universe and add a rather epic weight to every decision, especially as we see power valued over people. It makes for a stern warning, such as the texts of the Bene Gesserit’s warn that all power spirals towards abuse and oppression:
‘Governments, if they endure, always tend increasingly toward aristocratic forms. No government in history has been known to evade this pattern. And as the aristocracy develops, government tends more and more to act exclusively in the interests of the ruling class - whether that class be hereditary royalty, oligarchs of financial empires, or entrenched bureaucracy.’
Chilling. Especially in a novel where fate seems to rule the day and attempts of evasion prove to only walk directly into its grasp. There is a rather Amor fati nature to the novel, particularly in a Nietzschean way around Leto accepting the Golden Path. ‘ You saw this, father, and rejected it,’ Leto thinks of his father, ‘it was a thing too terrible to face’ but was Paul able to sidestep the intentions of fate or was it that the path was never for Paul but Leto instead. Leto strength and his prescience, which goes one step further than Paul since he was granted genetic memory as well, is also rather Nietzschean with regards to the concept of the Übermensch, or super human. Nietzche’s idea of ‘beyond good and evil’ are also present in Leto’s morally grey attitude with decisions made to shape the whole of humanity itself that have him feeling his choices are above standard morality of everyone else. It makes for a fascinating dichotomy with the mysterious Preacher.

‘ Seeking the absolute of orderly prediction, he amplified disorder, distorted prediction.’

Fate is also interesting with regard to Alia. A rather tragic figure here in Children of Dune, we see how Alia’s fate is one that is a rather self-fulfilling prophecy.
‘The habits of generations had imprinted the fate of Abomination upon her. Alia had known no hope. Of course she’d succumbed. Her fate made the accomplishment of Leto and Ghanima even more difficult to face. Not one way out of the trap, but two.’
Much of the novel juxtaposes those who try to assert agency over fate and those who fall in line with it. Ultimately we see how freedom isn’t found in trying to avoid or subvert fate, but by accepting it and allowing it to shape you as you shape it in tandem. 

‘Abandon certainty! That’s life’s deepest command. That’s what life’s all about. We’re a probe into the unknown, into the uncertain. Why can’t you hear Muad’Dib? If certainty is knowing absolutely an absolute future, then that’s only death disguised!’

 Children of Dune is a wonderful continuation of the series and, honestly, each book just gets better and adds such texture to the world that it makes you love the series as a whole all the more. Just when you think things can’t get more epic, they do. Long, but well worth the journey.

4.5/5