Rating: 5/5

A PERSPECTIVE ON ‘SPIRITUAL EMERGENCIES’ AS BEING ‘TRANSFORMATIVE’

Authors Christina and Stanslav Grof wrote in the Introduction to this 1990 book, “Spiritual development is an innate evolutionary capacity of all human beings… entire cultures have treated inner transformation as a necessary and desirable aspect of life… For some individuals, however, the transformational journey of spiritual development becomes a ‘spiritual emergency,’ a crisis in which the changes within are so rapid and the inner states so demanding that, temporarily, these people may find it difficult to operate fully in everyday reality. In our times, these individuals are rarely treated as if they are on the edge of inner growth. Rather, they are almost always viewed through the lens of disease and treated with technologies that obscure the potential benefits these experiences can offer… [This book] is for people whose lives are touched by spiritual emergency… 

“It is also a guide for anyone who is involved in personal transformation… the lessons contained here are also applicable to those whose emergence, though relatively gentle, is nevertheless bewildering and, at times, uncomfortable… Christina’s exposure to spiritual emergency began with a powerful spontaneous spiritual awakening during the birth of her first child. This experience was followed by years of difficult and demanding mental, emotional, and physical states… Christina’s almost daily involvement in the transformational process forced us to learn many of the lessons that constitute the core of this book.” (Pg. 1-5)

They wrote in the first chapter, “‘Spiritual emergencies’ can be defined as critical and experimentally difficult stages of a profound psychological transformation that involves one’s entire being. They take the form of nonordinary stages of consciousness and involve intense emotions, visions and other sensory changes, and unusual thoughts, as well as various physical manifestations. These episodes often revolve around spiritual themes; they include sequences of psychological death and rebirth, experiences that seem to be memories from previous lifetimes, feelings of oneness with the universe, encounters with various metaphysical beings, and other similar motifs.” (Pg. 31)

They state, “In recent times, we live with the reality that our entire planet is threatened by nuclear destruction, and a great deal of fearfulness about the situation is appropriate. However, someone in a spiritual emergency may encounter a very vivid internal experience of a nuclear catastrophe, and the fear that arises at this stage can seem beyond personal anxiety. If a person faces such an apocalyptic inner event, it is frequently followed by a sequence of planetary or universal restructuring. He or she enters a new world, reintegrated and radiant, and the cosmos has been restored to a loving and benevolent order.” (Pg. 63)

They note, “Encounters with the divine regions during the process of spiritual emergence are extremely healing. Reaching them, one often feels positive emotions such as ecstasy, rapture, joy, gratitude, love, and bliss, which can quickly relieve or dissolve negative states such as depression and anger. Feeling oneself to be part of an all-encompassing cosmic network often gives a person who has problems with self-esteem a fresh, expanded self-image.” (Pg. 68)

They observe, “It is not surprising that a considerable increase in intuitive abilities and the occurrence of psychic or paranormal phenomena are extremely frequent concomitants of various forms of spiritual emergency. Practically any tie of transpersonal experience can under certain circumstances provide astonishing information that the individual could not have acquired in conventional ways and that appears to come from paranormal sources… many individuals report specific instance of extrasensory perception… remote viewing, precognition, telepathy, and other psychic phenomena… occasionally the influx of information from nonordinary sources becomes so overwhelming and confusing that it dominates the picture and becomes a major problem.” (Pg. 90-91)

Christina recounts, “My spiritual emergence preceded my addiction to alcohol, and yet the process of ‘hitting bottom’ with this disease and going into recovery was for some reason the key to resolving many of the dramatic problems that had occurred during the years of the Kundalini awakening. It has become very clear to me that both my spiritual crises and my alcoholism have been essential elements in my transformative process, although beforehand I would have imagined that addiction could have the profound positive impact on my life that it has had.” (Pg. 101)

They state, “We are usually limited in our perception of the world by the range of our senses and the configuration of the environment… Without ordinary senses, we can experience only what is happening here and now---in our momentary geographical location and at the present moment. In transpersonal states of mind, all these limitations appear to be transcended. We can experience ourselves as a play of energy or a field of consciousness that is not confined to a physical container… What we ordinarily perceive as elements separate from us… we can actually become and identify with in a transpersonal state.” (Pg. 151)

They explain, “Now comes the period when one returns to daily life, whether after a relatively subtle awakening or an all-encompassing crisis. What can one expect to feel during this time of transitions? … This period is the homecoming. People at this stage frequently experience a new home within themselves, an inner source of comfort and nourishment. They also discover or rediscover meaningful and comforting elements in the world around them, such as sustaining relationships with those who are close of familiar environments and activities.” (Pg. 212)

They conclude, “Because of the positive transformation it induces, spiritual emergence might play a significant role in the world if it could occur in a sufficiently large number of people. Many researchers in the field of transpersonal psychology believe that the growing interest in spirituality and the increasing incidence of spontaneous mystical experiences represent an evolutionary trend toward an entirely new level of human consciousness. Some go even further and seriously consider the possibility that this accelerated spiritual development reflects an effort on the part of the forces of evolution to reverse the current self-destructive course of the human race. This possibility throws new light on the need to create supportive networks for people undergoing crises of spiritual awakening.” (Pg. 237)

This book will be of keen interest to those studying the relations of ‘spiritual’ experiences and psychology.