Rating: 4/5

Deviant’s Palace
Steaks, Unconventional Seafood,
Progressive Cocktails 
Meditation Chapel! Petting
Zoo! Souvenir Shop!
GIRLS! GIRLS! GIRLS!
Explicit Scenes &amp; Offensive Sounds

”People are so tasty when they’re truly embittered, truly despairing…and that’s when they come to Sevatividam. They can’t stand the bitter rain, so they run in under one of the two awnings — religion or dissipation — and guess who’s waiting for them under both awnings at once…”

”Some people, he thought, simply have no will to survive — they’re walking hors d’oeuvres waiting for someone who can spare the time to devour them. And while it’s probably some such unattractive quality as egotism or vanity that has kept me clear of that catastrophic relaxation, it’s the reason I’m still alive and able to think, and I’ll work on keeping it.”

This is not your typical Tim Powers book. Instead of occult hidden histories or strange twists on historical fiction, Dinner at Deviant’s Palace serves up a post apocalyptic man on a mission tale, with tasty sides of weird cultists, a decadent and dangerous drug trade, frightful mutations, and lethal biker gangs. Of course, this being Powers, the tropes are all twisted uniquely — the biker gang rides chopped out bicycles (fossil fuels are part of the remote past), the mutations have an uncanny, ghost-like quality, and a godlike alien intelligence is somehow at the heart of the weird cultist. And this all unfolds in Powers’ beloved California landscape, somehow still uniquely his despite being hundreds of years in the future and its post apocalyptic setting. 

Dinner at Deviant’s Palace was winner of the Philip K. Dick Award. This feels particularly appropriate, as, out of all of Powers’ books, this one is the closest reflection of the work of his friend and mentor PKD. It’s themes of personal identity lost, surrendered, or stripped, of controlling alien intelligence, and its protagonist agonizing journey through his own identity crisis are all clearly influenced by PKD. But Powers, the student is a much better writer than was the master, PKD. Unlike Dick, Powers’ prose is elegantly constructed. His world building is masterful, and his characters are more than the sum of their traumas and anxieties. With Dinner at Deviant’s Palace, the student surpassed the master.