Rating: 3/5

Like almost every multiple author short story collection ever written, this is a mixed bag. One or two stories are very good, a few are good, and some are a chore to get through. I have a feeling that which categories the stories fall into will vary between readers. I have a few notes overall:

I thought I was getting some standard fantasy stories but was pleasantly surprised to learn that this was traditional sword and sorcery all the way. Everyone is morally gray and magic is mysterious and chaotic. Despite the unevenness of the stories themselves, the background and worldbuilding was fantastic. 

Some people complain that the characters that are used in multiple stories act differently because different writers are using them. Asprin hand waved this by saying that these are just characters that are being looked at from different points of view. I not only accept this answer, I actually kind of dig it. I know that there have been times that I thought someone was an asshole while someone else thought they were great and vice-versa. 

I didn't care for the Poul Anderson story, which surprised me. I have loved every fantasy story that I have ever read of Anderson's, but his Thieves' World story was unnecessarily the longest of the bunch because of way too much setup and it devolved into something of a Dungeons and Dragons adventure (which, unless you are playing Dungeons and Dragons or reading a D&amp;D novel, is usually a big no no). 

I liked the Offutt story, which was less surprising. Had Offutt not wasted his time churning out so much garbage to make a quick buck I honestly think people would be saying his name in the same breath as Howard, Wagner, and Leiber when they talk about 20th century masters of the sword and sorcery genre. 

My favorite story was probably the Asprin contribution "The Price of Doing Business". Any story that shows in gory detail who would win a fight between a grown man and a hundred children is probably going to be a good time.