Rating: 5/5

I fell for the dedication first: 

My dear Gilbert,

I dedicate this story to you. First: because the only really noble motive I had in writing it was the hope that you would enjoy it. Second: because I owe you a book in return for “The Man Who Was Thursday.” Third: because I said I would when I unfolded the plan of it to you, surrounded by Frenchmen, two years ago. Fourth: because I remember the past.

I have been thinking again to-day of those astonishing times when neither of us ever looked at a newspaper; when we were purely happy in the boundless consumption of paper, pencils, tea, and our elders’ patience; when we embraced the most severe literature, and ourselves produced such light reading as was necessary; when (in the words of Canada’s poet) we studied the works of nature, also those little frogs; when, in short, we were extremely young. For the sake of that age I offer you this book.

How can you not love that?

And that's not even with all the accolades that this book won from the great writers of Golden Age Detective Fiction. G. K. Chesterton: "The finest detective story of modern times". Agatha Christie: "One of the three best detective stories ever written". Dorothy L. Sayers: "It shook the little world of the mystery novel like a revolution ... Every detective writer of today owes something, consciously or unconsciously, to its liberating and inspiring influence."

And does the book live up to all that hype? 

Yes and no. It is a fun story. I guessed the ending but then second-guessed myself enough times to take genuine enjoyment as the final scenes drew out. The book has a slightly strange pace, with the "solution" being uncovered about halfway through, leaving the reader confused why there is still 100 pages to go. (There is a reason, I promise.) 

The characters are fun but not particularly dimensional outside of the main detective. There are a smattering of racist jokes or stereotypes thrown in, courtesy of 1913.

Overall I'd say a fun, semi-memorable novel that I rated up for this book's historical significance more than any overwhelming surprise at the conclusion or loyalty to the detective.