Rating: 4/5

While writing this episode of the Miss Seeton chronicles, the author must have had a bee in her bonnet and elected to write as if inside Miss Seeton's brain. One feels the weight of an earlier, more formal style of writing compounded by the rapid changes in thought asserted as parentheses and addenda in the Miss Seeton manner. A little of this can go a long way, but is useful in defining the background and bringing one up to date, especially for those who are new to the series. Yes, yes you can start with this book and pick up other titles at your leisure. Obviously, read in order one is better able to grasp some of the nuances of references to earlier episodes and adventures, but one is unaware of the loss as a tyro.

The pace of this story is relatively sedate until, all of a sudden, in the center of London and about midway through the book, there is a scene to rival anything Monty Python ever thought of. In fact it may well have stood as inspiration for some of their skits. But while it did resolve a few issues for Scotland Yard, this action was not the nexus of the plot. Read on Fair Reader!

I, myself, read fairly widely and frequently come across words which either I don't know, or about which I would like more information. Enter Google. Or the dictionary or Wikipedia. For instance, in this novel the national sport of Britain, cricket, is highlighted. As a "damn Yankee," I know "bugger-all" about cricket. (And while my last phrase might be amusing in the States, it's rather rude in Britain.) But I did, using my phone Kindle app's built-in resources, look up "googlies" which are a particular style of pitching. 

I was very tempted to say that I had Googled googlies, but I didn't want to confound you with my wit; I merely wish to confound you (full stop) and suggest if you want to know how it all comes out you pick up a copy for yourself and enjoy it thoroughly, as I did. No knowledge of cricket required!

Disclaimer: "I was given an advanced copy. All opinions expressed at my own." Please note, however, that I SELECT the books I want to read, much as you do, with an expectation of enjoyment. Should the book fail to live up to my expectations I'll so warn you! This one did not fail.