Rating: 5/5

“Watchtower” is a powerfully intimate examination of personality, desire, tragedy and renewal set in a fictional world that rivals LeGuinn’s Earthsea books.

It’s taken 41 years for me to finally read “Watchtower,” the novel that won Elizabeth A. Lynn a World Fantasy Award. Sometime in late 1979, I came across the second book in the Chronicles of Tornor trilogy, “The Dancers of Arun.” I don’t know how many times I re-read sections of “Dancers,” a book that went a long way in convincing me, an isolated farm boy, that there might be a place for me in this world. It was about a fantasy world that had real world resonance for me.

Reading “Watchtower” all these years later is a revelation. My younger self would have missed Lynn’s artistry, the remarkable depth and breadth of her imagination, and her impressive psychological insight. It also shows that her work stands the test of time, confirming her legacy as a visionary literary pioneer who pushed past the limits society places on gender and sexuality.

“Watchtower” is told from the perspective of Ryke, a 26 year old commander serving the Lord of Tornor Keep. The book opens with the burning of Tornor, it’s Lord killed by a renegade army, with Ryke forced to serve the renegade leader in order to save the life of his prince, Errel. As events unfold, Ryke is forced to leave and confront ideas, beliefs and people radically different from what he knows. 

Lynn eschews easy answers to Ryke’s inner journey. Rather than a clear cut portrait of transformation, in Ryke she offers an in-depth look at the ways we paper-over ambiguities in our lives, how we latch on to external commitments and old learning so that we don’t have to look too deeply into who we really are. Along the way, Lynn offers startlingly original and memorable characters that bring out different emotions and conflicts in Ryke. With each new character, Lynn’s world becomes ever more nuanced, rich, and compelling. She lets the ambiguities resonate and grow, until her fictional world feels just as complex and real as everyday life.

Lynn’s style is one of acute observation and accretion of details. Each sentence is specific and pointed, and they build on each other until the rich texture of her world is vivid and clear.

And now I know the origin of the cheari, the famous dancers of the second book. It’s only now, after all these years, that I am finally seeing the sweep and beauty of the Tornor world. 

We encounter many possible and fantastic worlds in the books we read and the movies and TV shows we see. But how many of them would we really, deep down and honestly, want to visit? How many resonate clearly enough, sincerely enough, to wholly enchant us? 

Lynn’s Tornor is one such world. If someone opened a magic door, would I go? In a heartbeat.