Rating: 1/5

I have officially given up on Antia!

After the last two books gave me a serious case of squint-eye, I had almost given up, but I decided to give Anita the benefit of the doubt one more time and try and ignore the fact that she now seems to have sex with every single male character in the series.

Well, I tried, peeps. Really, I did. But I have to draw the line at this one. It's devolved into Erotica sprinkled with only the tiniest morsels of paranormal plot, and I don't even read Erotica.

This series was meant to be Urban Fantasy, and it was a damn good one. Now it's vampire/shifter porn. Talk about being mis-sold on a premise. I wouldn't have ever picked up the first book at all if I'd known this was going to happen. And it just makes me so sad because Anita books 1-7 were great. Okay, the love triangle was annoying, but the plots were rich and innovative and she really set the benchmark for female-led UF. So it's even more of a kicker than she's now become such a joke character. LKH needs the memo that you can't just switch genres on your readers half way through a series and not expect to lose most of them because of it.

Apart from the fact the books are now boring and somewhat icky to read, they also feel very disingenuous. Am I supposed to believe the Anita that we met in the first book, who didn't even think you should have sex before marriage, suddenly likes to participate in group sex and other things that I'm too polite to even type? Any "love scenes" (and I use that term with reference to this book, very loosely), have to be relevant for me. I'm not saying it always has to be hearts and flowers, but it has to at least be believable and fit what's happening and the character's personalities. This is just ridiculous now, and I can't bear to watch it any more. So I am officially calling it quits.

Do let me know if I miss any further hilarity in this car-crash series from here on out. I'm no longer bothered about spoilers so feel free to tell me what you like.

1 star  ★