Rating: 4/5

JEWS WITHOUT MONEY

The author’s real name was Isaac Granich, and this book was loosely based on his own childhood memories.

In doing research I learned that Gold was a communist who wrote for the communist magazine, The Liberatora where he expressed his strong views. I found this one to be interesting:

"The Russian Bolsheviks will leave the world a better place than Jesus left it. They will leave it on the threshold of the final victory—the poor will have bread and peace and culture in another generation, not churches and a swarm of lying parasite minister dogs, the legacy of Jesus."

So much for getting a better world. 

Immigrants came to America for various reasons and ended up at Ellis Island before being sent to live in the tenement apartments in New York City’s East Side where their living conditions were deplorable.

I remember reading about rats in apartment buildings, but I don’t recall what else was wrong with those apartments, and there are Americans today that live like they did, where landlords don’t fix leaks in the roofs, or the plumbing, electricity or even the heaters. And if you don’t pay the rent you are out on the street. I know that some cities have rent control laws, and they really help but back then you had nothing.

What Gold does in his book is describe his family’s living conditions in one of the tenements: the starvation, lack of work, having only neighbors to help them in time of need--neighbors who are also poor. I think of how all of this could have been solved by having employers who paid a person higher wages and gave them medical coverage, but medical coverage probably didn’t exist back then. Sick leave; they could have given them that as well. Things have not changed much over the years, but Roosevelt’s New Deal went a long way to helping people. 

I remember reading that F.D.Roosevelt gave us social security and the jobs program because the influential communist party told him what would happen if he didn’t help his people, but ever since, the Republican Party has been trying to end these programs. Making America great again must mean living in conditions like what are in this book. 

While reading this, I thought of my own childhood of growing up in a small town where I felt safe, where I had the run of the town, the hills and the river. When I see what Michael had to deal with, I realize how wonderful my own childhood was. Our river was clean, while his, the East River, was “an open sewer with scum and garbage. It stank with the many deaths of New York. Often while swimming I had to push dead swollen dogs and vegetables from my face.” I don’t think much has changed in this area either, since man has been polluting rivers ever since, but at least in my childhood the Salinas River was clean or so I thought.

He says that he could find no grass in his neighborhood. There were also no trees, flower or birds. One day he and his friend found grass growing between the sidewalk cracks. They were excited and tried to save it, but it died. I take grass, trees, and flowers all for granted. 

He had a lot to deal with: “everywhere the garbage, plop, bun, and another fat, spreading bundle dropped from a tenement window,” because, instead of walking downstairs, garbage was just thrown out windows. Then there were the “flies and bedbugs that kept him awake at night. There were also sick cats, sun struck horses, men and women, not to mention the prostitutes, or the killings. Wages were low, and if you couldn’t work, you were just out of luck and kicked out on the street. Not to mention how hungry he was most of the time. Still, I found his story entertaining because I like reading about kids childhood, that is, when they have free range of the neighborhood. 

 He ended his book by saying: 

 “O workers’ Revolution, you brought hope to me, a lonely, suicidal boy. You are the true Messiah. You will destroy the East Side when you come, and build there a garden for human spirit.

O Revolution, that forced me to think, to struggle and to live.

O great Beginning.”

Things never worked out as he would have liked them too. Mankind is way too selfish, too greedy. As for me, I can’t imagine liking communism, but I would like Democratic Socialism or as some claim of Bernie Sanders, he wants to bring in a New Deal.