Rating: 3/5

A classic adventure story set in 18th century Jacobite Rebellion Scotland

After the death of his father, David Balfour is sent to meet his Uncle Ebenezer for advice and guidance and perhaps some token assistance to set him on the road to adult life. But David’s discovery that his father was the elder of the two brothers means that he is the entailed legal beneficiary of the estate that Ebenezer means to hold onto, come what may. After a failed murder attempt, Ebenezer arranges to have David kidnapped and shipped to the USA for a probable future as a slave in the Carolinas. But he and his shipboard acquaintance, Alan Breck, are “fortunate” to escape as the result of a shipwreck off the coast of Scotland. And, of course, what kind of young adult adventure tale would KIDNAPPED be, if it didn’t stack one misfortune on another? Shortly after their narrow brush with death in a storm-tossed north Scotland ocean, Alan and David witness a political assassination. Authorities believe them to be the murderers and the manhunt is on!

No doubt about it! Like its companion tale, TREASURE ISLAND, KIDNAPPED is an exciting tale that will enthrall young people of all ages. In the bargain, it will provide teachable moments on themes of friendship, morality, loyalty, and, of course, bravery, selflessness, heroism and courage. In today’s uncertain world of hard-core partisan politics, KIDNAPPED even goes so far as to demonstrate that friendship can transcend and survive differences of political opinion that do not constitute differences in morality.

One caution that I might pass along to potential readers! It was my personal experience that the plot became somewhat difficult to follow at points because of my unfamiliarity with 18th century Scottish history, clan politics and Scotland’s relationship at the time with England. That problem never became a “deal-breaker” but it did hold a potential 4- or 5-star rating to a mere 3-star rating with a qualified “I enjoyed it” recommendation.

Paul Weiss