Rating: 5/5

Sometimes people will say how awfully SFF writers speak of each other these days, sometimes people say it was never really different decades ago, I saw this book series once used as an example. A lot of these writers knew each other so I wonder if some of them remained friends despite the criticisms but some of them really do trash each other.

There has been lots of different editions of the Dream Makers books, none of them complete, these 2021 editions leave out the Hank Stine (now Jean Marie Stine) and Andre Norton interviews with no explanation. But I'd urge you to get these newest editions because the new introduction and "historical context" afterwards to the interviews double or maybe even triple the substance and entertainment; Platt is able to say a lot of things now that he couldn't in the 80s and talk about his further relationships with the writers. I found some of the introduction and the afterwards about Disch, Bester and Brunner quite sad.
 I already knew lots of bad things about Harlan Ellison but there's some truly appalling behaviour described here that I hadn't heard about before. Platt's criticisms of Damon Knight were very interesting too. But there's lots of funny stuff here too and almost everyone comes across like a really vivid character. A E Van Vogt is especially eccentric (and its nice to hear him talk about TJ Bass because I never hear anything about him). Algis Budrys was fascinating too.

A recurring subject is the increasing commercial pressures that were coming in with the late 70s and that has never really stopped. When people talk about the artistic freedom of the late 60s to the mid 70s, and the idea that it's been downhill since then, it's striking what a short period of time that was.

Getting a feel for Platt's sensibilities was interesting. Initially I knew about him only as a new waver who rubbed some people wrong but he's actually somewhere between new wave experimenter and golden age optimist, very idealistic about what science can still do for us. He was even disappointed about the extent of the backlash against John W Campbell.
 He wanted to do a third Dream Makers book but he said no publisher would pay for this now and crowdfunding was probably too steep a challenge.

This book and the next were a real joy. Highest recommendation, lots of fun.