Rating: 4/5

It is that time of year when I feel a desperate need for a vacation but I am unable to get away. The next best thing is to take a virtual holiday to Corfu, a Greek island in the sun. For a short spell each day, I looked forward to being back in the company of Gerry Durrell, the ardent ten-year-old aspiring naturalist, his exuberant family and close friends. As with my first introduction to Corfu and the Durrells in My Family and Other Animals, this second book in The Corfu Trilogy is just as charming and exhilarating. 

Once again, I was impressed by Gerry’s immense interest in the natural world and amazed at the extent he went to collect specimens of a wide range of animals and learn about them. His extraordinary power of observation was matched by an artful and vivid power of description that was often humorous and painted a jocular picture of the world he saw, studied, and loved. Gerry’s passion for all the insects and creepy crawlies he carted home in his jam jars and biscuit tins was communicated in a language so full of affection that each animal seemed like a sentient being worth knowing. 

Gerry’s enthusiasm became my own. I googled pictures of the dung beetle that was said to roll its dung into perfect round balls, pipefishes, and beadlet anemones. It was lovely to read about the spider crab weaving his camouflage, a frond of seaweed at a time, on his carapace. Gerry’s pictorial script is a treat to read. Here’s an example of one of his discoveries at the Bay of Olives: ‘Along the shore, under the rocks, you can find tiny crabs or beadlet anemones like little scarlet-and-blue jewelled pincushions, or the snakelocks anemones, their slender, coffee-coloured stalks and long, writhing tentacles giving them a hair style that Medusa might well have envied.’ I learned that snails are hermaphrodites. I stumbled on a new discovery about seahorses. Thank you, Gerry!

Another aspect that lent this book its charm are the colorful characters and loony family that shaped Gerry’s young life. Spiros, the Corfu native, is a rock solid family friend. George, his first tutor, was affectionately described as a fencer who loved to fight an olive tree with his walking stick. Dr. Theodore Stepanides, a famous medical doctor, biologist, poet, translator, and historian was a significant influence in Gerry becoming a world renowned naturalist and conservationist. There were hilarious episodes such as his brother, Leslie's court case; his sister, Margo’s encounter with a charlatan spiritualist; Gerry’s outstanding luncheon with a Greek countess; older brother Larry’s eccentric friends; and of course, adventures with Gerry’s dog, also an ‘indefatigable student of natural history.’

One gets an insider welcome from mingling with the local Corfu residents. It was lovely to share their hospitality and be part of a wine harvest where one got to witness grapes being trodden in the wine barrels and to taste vicariously a free flow of wine as red as garnet. Gerry wrote so convincingly I felt quite intoxicated just reading about the exchange of goodwill and fellowship in this community. It is a bit sad, therefore, that the brilliance of these heady days were short-lived as war was soon declared. 

Below are some lines I enjoyed.
Description of Gerry’s luncheon at the Countess’ mansion: 
‘The first course that Demetrios-Mustapha set before us was a fine, clear soup, sequinned with tiny golden bubbles of fat, with fingernail-sized croutons floating like crisp little rafts on an amber sea. It was delicious, and the Countess had two helpings, scrounging up the croutons, the noise like someone walking over crisp leaves.’

Description of a spider crab building a camouflage:
‘Making the best of a bad job, he had decorated the top of his shell with a number of ingredients that I had left him. He looked extremely gaudy and had an air of carnival about him. Striped top-shells had been pasted on, interspersed with bits of coral, and up near his head he was wearing two beadlet anemones, like an extremely saucy bonnet with ribbons.’

Description of a day out at sea:
‘The sea crisped itself along the sides of the boat with the sound of winter leaves, wind-lifted, rubbing themselves affectionately against the trunks of the trees that gave them birth.’

 Birds, Beasts and Relatives is a vastly entertaining, enjoyable, and informative read. It is highly recommended. I shall return to Corfu again soon as there is a Part III waiting. What larks!