Rating: 4/5

They have been at a great feast of languages, and stolen the scraps.
-Act 5, Scene 1

This is probably my favorite of the three comedies I've read so far on my chronological journey through Shakespeare's works (the other two being 
  The Comedy of Errors
 and 
  The Two Gentlemen of Verona
), though it's also the densest and most challenging of the trio. The analysis I've read on this play makes a great deal of its preoccupation with language, the excessiveness of the wordplay even by Shakespearean standards, and that seems pretty spot-on to me. I depended a lot on my footnotes to make sense of this one, and it doesn’t surprise me at all that it’s not performed very widely today.

That being said, there’s plenty to recommend Love’s Labour’s Lost. There are a number of memorable characters, especially (for me) the pretentious Spanish courtier Don Armado, and that obsessive attention to words and their uses allows Shakespeare to have a lot of fun with the mannerisms and verbal tics of each. It’s also maybe the first Shakespeare play to really emphasize the strength and intelligence of its women, with the level-headed female characters exerting far more influence over the bombastic and arrogant men than vice versa. Finally, this is one of only two Shakespeare plays (the second being The Tempest) without an identifiable source text. That doesn’t necessarily mean Will wasn’t drawing from existing materials, but it does at least allow for the possibility that this story is one of the most purely Shakespearean of all Shakespeare’s works. The subversive final act, which defies the comedic conventions of the day by leaving its characters still single (for the time being, at least) at the end, seems to me to lend evidence to that conclusion.

Probably not the best Shakespeare to start with, but interesting and a lot of fun for those who already consider themselves fans. In the second act, a character is described who "[d]elivers in such apt and gracious words / That aged ears play truant at his tales, / And younger hearings are quite ravished; / So sweet and voluble is his discourse." The same could be said, of course, of Will.