Rating: 1/5

What this book is not:
1) about music
2) short
3) coherent
4) about the topic of its title

What this book is:
1) Primarily about the lifestyles of some well-known musicians, some you haven't heard of, some producers, and various other people. Almost everyone receives a tiresomely complete biography. 
Did you want to know which musician you don't remember slept with which roadie from somewhere you've never heard of? (Also which celebrity musician slept with which other celebrity musician, and about how certain other celebrity musicians were annoyed by this.)
2) A Tony Blair love fest. His biography is the longest and he recurs throughout the book, never depicted in anything but a positive light.
The Red Wave politics stuff was musicians interacting with politics, the rest (ie. most) barely relates to the topic.
3) A complete mess of detail. The narrative is not linear. Okay, so the chapters are thematic. No. So we have an exhaustive list of precisely what concoction of drugs and or alcohol was being consumed and precisely which bar they were in, but since it could have been any time between 1992 and 1996, it matters even less. Throw in Tony Blair and the Labour party into this mix. Plus randomly timed biographies of a seemingly random list of people. 
4) Definitely not a cultural history. Somewhere in this mud pie, there is comment on cultural trends, such as the rise of nationalism in pop music (eg. Union Jacks become prominent, lyrics become made to be as working class as they can be.
One story I liked was about a very short-lived band who went on tour (rinse-repeat: drugs, alcohol, hi jinks) with only four songs and the label kept throwing money at them, despite them having nothing to show for it. There should have been some comment about the pop music industry there. But we're soon back to exactly which clothes one or other of the Gallagher brothers (keep up-they're the ones from Oasis, so I remember their names) is wearing and which store they bought them from.
5) Not about 'The Spectacular Demise of English Rock'-the 'spectacular' overuse of adjective and exaggeration in the prose is another thing you have to wade through. In order for their to be a 'demise', it would have to have been strong in the first place. In fact, the book describes (I mean announces) many different 'great' bands from The Beatles, through the 70s, and the 80s, and the early 90s. So what is...demising? A demise FROM WHAT? Whilst its true that for a time, a couple of so-called rock bands became pop stars were quite famous, and that, like all pop music, quickly faded into nothing, the very title of the book betrays the fact that this is not really about rock music. The title is a contradiction in terms. British rock kept going and it's still going now. What are you talking about?

Art from artlessness or a lack of technique is important in understanding punk in rock, but instead of this we are given a vague impression that Oasis just weren't very good at playing their instruments.

Almost none of this book is about music. Here's a classic and indicative moment allegedly about the music:
[Of Oasis' 'Some Might Say'] ...a musical power that offered the listener little opportunity but to surrender (that's impossible and meaningless-pointless opinion). 
It's brutally constructed verses (okay, potential, what does that mean?) 
thought they soon tumbled into doggerel (oh, he's off again, I guess we don't get to know what 'brutally constructed' means)
initially gave Liam lines that not only nailed what made him such a compelling presence (more celebrity worship-also meaningless: it requires that everyone find him compelling to make sense. Some might. I don't, so it doesn't)
but identified him with an unspeakably potent archetype: the same Dionysian menace that... (Eurgh, what? Tall about exaggeration. 'Unspeakably potent'. What?! Like something kind of satanic Dionysus? My socks at the end of the day? That doesn't even begin to make sense. Take a thesaurus, hit a random adjective, talk about Liam freaking Gallagher as some kind of evil god genius. What?!)
'a chorus that...sounded like a heartfelt acknowledgment of the Gallagher's mutual dependence' (Okay, musical comparison with The Beatles. Probably valid. In what way? That's right. We're not told. We just have to assume he's right. (It is a valid comparison, but the point is that Harris doesn't really describe the music at all, so it may or may not be true.)
but the Gallagher's sheer conviction meant that they managed to avoid sounding cheap. 

That last statement is typical. Almost everything said about the music throughout the book is ENTIRELY dependent on opinion ('perhaps the greatest song ever/worst song ever' et. al.). He almost gets there by describing the shortness of early Elastica songs as 'cut up', but it's so bogged down in how angry somebody is about shagging or what drugs they're on, that you have to dig deep for the almost non-existent gold nuggets. 
If you want a celebrity love/shag fest, like I said, because there is so much other crap, you have to get through that and a 'narrative of high jinks' doesn't work because the story is not linear, so it's just 'some high jinks', you have to have patience.

I think the word is 'indulgent', but this is a typical value judgement is precisely what this book feeds on. 
'Bullsh*t' is much more accurate. Or 'hot air'. Lots and lots and lots of words that say just about nothing.