Rating: 5/5

We are vagabonds, and each of us follows a dream. 

What an apt one line review for the whole series: it captures the rambling style of presentation, the numerous characters setting out on quests and the mythical, otherworldy setting of the Elder Isles, home to Arthurian knights and fairy shires or ‘shees’, powerful wizards and ambitious kings.
I am talking about the whole series, because that is the best way to experience the journey, starting with the story of Suldrun, following the curse of the Green Pearl, and now searching for some closure in the company of Madouc.

There is a symmetry to the three part Lyonesse sequence: Suldrun in the first book is the lonely, melancholic daughter of King Casmir. Unable to confront directly her father’s wishes, she is exiled to a forgotten garden by the sea. Madouc in the third book is also the (adoptive) daughter of Casmir, but her temperament is as fiery as her red hair, and her rebellion is an active one, where she takes the reins of her destiny in her own hands and is not resigned to the dictates of Casmir / Fate. The two princesses frame the middle section, where at first nothing significant seems to happen, but where the Green Pearl may be the key to a danger that can destroy the whole realm.

 Travante looked off down the road, smiling. “It is an extraordinary quest. I am searching for my lost youth.”
“Indeed!” said Madouc. “How did you lose it?”
Travante held out his hands in a gesture of puzzlement. “I cannot be sure. I had it one moment and the next time I thought to notice it was gone”
“I suppose you are sure of your facts.”
“Oh indeed! I remember it distinctly! Then it was as if I walked around the table and poof! I found myself an old man.”
“There must have been the usual and ordinary intervals in between?”
“Dreams, my dear. Figments, wisps, sometimes a nightmare. But what of you?”
“It is simple. I do not know my father. My mother is a fairy from Thripsey Shee. I am seeking my father and with him my pedigree.”
“And Sir Pom-Pom: what does he seek?”
“Sir Pom-Pom seeks the Holy Grail, in accordance with King Casmir’s proclamation.” 

From all the panoply of oddball vagabonds, knights, monsters and scoundrels I believe the recently introduced Travante is the one that I identify with the easiest, and the one that holds the key to the attraction exercised over time by the works of Jack Vance. His fantasy is not the typical heroic or ‘grimdark’ fare, and his quests lead his characters to surprising locations: 

 The mind was a marvellous instrument, thought Shimrod; when left to wander untended, it often arrived at curious destinations. 

It is the journey itself that matters, our search to recapture the sense of wonder, of re-discovering the world with the innocent eyes of the child. Lyonesse is not without its classic fantasy epic political / military plot – following the conflict between Casmir and Aillas for control of the Elder Isles, and it also has a cataclysmic finale with a sort of evil overlord  that is actually a her – the witch Desmee – getting her revenge against the men who mistreated her , but my lasting impression of the series is of a huge and colourful tapestry of minor characters and exotic locations, of sometimes humorous, sometimes deadly encounters with fairies and trolls and highway bandits. I was thinking of making a connection to the grotesque and detailed wood panels of Hieronymus Bosch (“The Garden of Earthly Delights”) but I’m not convinced the approach is similar – Vance is more humorous and optimistic than the Dutch painter.

The dialogue I have quoted earlier is a good example of the flowery language used in the story. The following one illustrates the light touch at introducing a new character called Gundeline, a fairy:

 … a slender maiden of enchanting charm, with flowing lavender hair and green fingernails. She mimed, preened, cut capers, but never spoke, and no one knew her well. She licked saffron from poppy pistils with quick darts of her pointed green tongue. 

	I could go on with more examples of the style that often appears to overwhelm the straight story and prefers flights of fancy to logic and seriousness. The prose, like the legendary and secretive Sir Pellinore, demonstrates a pronounced “frivolous bent”.

 So for a time the two dallied in the glade, at last becoming languid. 

In case you are wondering, this above quote is how Vance describes a sexual encounter.

Like the prose and the plot in Lyonesse, my review rambles, and I am loath to explain how the numerous plot threads are solved, not so much refraining from giving out spoilers, but mostly from a reluctance to let go of the Elder Isles and of the wonderful adventures I was witness to. I have turned the last page of what I consider his best work, but I am consoled somewhat by knowing I have many of Jack Vance’s books still to discover, so many worlds still to explore, wizards and scoundrels and fiery maidens to lead the way:

 The roads never end; they simply join into another road, so that a wanderer never comes to the journey’s end.