Rating: 5/5

Winesburg, Ohio, is a fictional town that took shape in the imagination of Sherwood Anderson; but in its own way, Winesburg is every bit as real as any actual Ohio town that exists today in our shared physical reality, from Akron to Zanesville. Anderson’s creation of his town – of its people, and of the textures of life there – is that complete.

Sherwood Anderson may not be as universally well-known as Ernest Hemingway or William Faulkner, but both Hemingway and Faulkner admired Anderson’s work – Hemingway because of the spare, minimalist quality of Anderson’s prose, and Faulkner because of the painstaking manner in which Anderson set forth the unique characteristics of an American region. Yet Anderson’s Winesburg, Ohio deserves to be read not just as an important contribution to American literary history, but also as a great book in its own right. 

What links together the 21 stories that make up Winesburg, Ohio is the presence of George Willard, a youthful journalist employed by the local newspaper, the Winesburg Eagle. Fortunately for George Willard, and for us, he is a gifted listener; he knows that if he just sits, and listens, and gives people an opportunity to talk, they will talk, and in the process they will reveal a great deal about themselves – chiefly, the sort of loneliness that we Americans, inveterate and gregarious joiners though we are, often feel in spite of ourselves.

On its surface, Winesburg embodies homespun Midwestern virtues. Below the surface, however, there is a much grimmer reality, as when Doctor Parcival in “The Philosopher” tells George Willard his story of refusing to come down from his office and examine a little girl killed in an accident on the town’s main street. In fact, no one in town has any real awareness of Doctor Parcival’s un-doctorly unwillingness to come and help; but Doctor Parcival does not know that, and therefore he is convinced that, sooner or later, a lynch mob of angry Winesburg residents will come for him. “I will be hanged to a lamp-post on Main Street,” Doctor Parcival says with terrible certainty (pp. 56-57). Clearly, this is not your grandparents’ safe and peaceful Midwest. Rather, it is a place where unhappy people bemoan the life choices they have made, and where the potential for violence forever lurks just beneath the surface of American life.

Evident throughout the collection is Anderson’s determination to demonstrate that the materials for modernist high art can be found within the workaday textures of ordinary Midwestern life. So strong is that determination, in fact, that there are places where Anderson may be trying too hard. For example, “Godliness: A Tale in Four Parts,” one of the longer stories in the collection, is an affecting multi-generational tale of religious fervor, romantic longing, and economic ambition. In its last section, however, Anderson brings together an old man named Jesse; his descendant David, a young man who carries and often uses a sling that he made himself; and a lamb that seems likely to be made the subject of a sacrifice! Biblical allusions, anyone? Some of the more “literary” elements of the story seem too “literary” for their own good. Anderson is on firmer Ohio ground when he steps back from such self-consciously artful flourishes, and gets back to the straightforward, understated storytelling that gives Winesburg, Ohio its power.

One of the most beguiling features of the collection is the way in which the stories, like the lives of the people of Winesburg, are intertwined. I liked for example, the way in which the stories “The Strength of God” and “The Teacher” worked together. “The Strength of God” chronicles the struggles of the Reverend Curtis Hartman, a respectable Presbyterian pastor who discovers one day that from his church’s bell tower, where he likes to work on his sermons, he can look down into a neighboring house and see Kate Swift, the young schoolteacher next door, reading in her bed, her throat and shoulders bare. Hartman struggles with the temptation implicit in this opportunity to play Peeping Tom, and ultimately finds himself running to George Willard’s office at the Winesburg Eagle, raving that “The ways of God are beyond human understanding” (p. 155). The following story, “The Teacher,” similarly focuses on Kate Swift’s own unfulfilled yearnings; while the town feels that “There was something biting and forbidding in the character of Kate Swift” (p. 161), she has her own “passionate desire” (p. 165), and something of her inner life comes forth in her own conversations with George Willard at the newspaper office. 

Indeed, some of the finest moments in Winesburg, Ohio occur when George Willard loses his safe isolation as listener and interlocutor, and participates, whether he wants to or not, in the life of the town and its people – as when, in “An Awakening,” George unwittingly finds himself in the midst of a passionate love affair between bartender Ed Handby and milliner Belle Carpenter, who enjoys making Ed Handby jealous by walking about the town with George, in spite of Ed Handby’s threats: “You stay away from that kid….If I catch you together I will break your bones and his too” (p. 186). By book’s end, the loneliness and sense of futility so characteristic of Winesburg seems to have filled George Willard’s spirit as well. People in Winesburg feel trapped within the grip of the outwardly placid community’s rigid social norms, and privately wonder how they might break free.

I re-read Winesburg, Ohio some years ago, on a visit to the college town of Marietta. As I walked along Marietta’s peaceful, tree-lined streets, or looked out upon the Ohio River from the long sloping hill by the old Lafayette Hotel, I wondered how much of Winesburg there might be in Marietta and towns like it. Anderson’s Winesburg feels so real that it seems that one should be able to travel there and walk its streets. There is even a map of Winesburg in the book, provided by Anderson provides between the stories “The Book of the Grotesque” and “Hands” – a nice touch, though I am not sure that it is necessary, given the skill with which Anderson draws Winesburg using language alone, in this masterwork of American regional literature.