Rating: 4/5

In the Heart of a Different Darkness

My only previous encounter with the late Peter Matthiessen was his final novel, In Paradise, which impressed me immensely. So I went back almost fifty years to this novel of 1965, and was thrilled to see many of the same themes, yet treated in a strikingly different way. The protagonist of In Paradise attends a conference on the site of Auschwitz; a Gentile among Jews, he is joined by those of other faiths and some of no faith at all, none of which emerges unscathed from the moral issues that are raised. In At Play, Matthiessen tackles another genocide, or at least a potential one—that of Indian tribes in the upper Amazon—viewing it through the eyes of several different Christian missionaries, as well as at least one non-believer who may exhibit a truer humanity than any of them.

In the opening scene, Martin Quarrier, his wife Hazel, and nine-year-old son Billy fly over what I take to be the Peruvian Andes to a small frontier town on the headwaters of the Amazon. Martin is an evangelical missionary from North Dakota, sent to convert the Niaruna (four syllables), a savage tribe on the Espíritu river. He is met by his immediate superior, Leslie Huben, a gung-ho perennial boy scout, and his beautiful wife Andy. Also at the airstrip is Padre Xantes, representative of what Leslie persists in calling the Opposition, and the local administrator, Commandante Guzmán, a venial character whose comic manner conceals a real danger. Parked on the field, Martin notices a beat-up aircraft with "Wolfie &amp; Moon Inc., Small Wars &amp; Demolition" painted on the side. This belongs to two soldiers of fortune, nominally American, but persona-non-grata in most countries that they go; Guzmán intends to use them for his own conquest of the Niaruna. Between them, these nine people (but especially Martin Quarrier and Lewis Moon) comprise most the cast of the rest of this substantial novel, other than the indigenous characters that will play an increasingly important part later on.

Matthiessen wrote this some three decades before Barbara Kingsolver came out with The Poisonwood Bible, that other now-classic novel about a missionary venture gone wrong, and I am sure that comparisons will have been made. The back cover makes the inevitable link with the Conrad of 
  Nostromo
 and of course Heart of Darkness. But the author I thought of most strongly at first was Graham Greene, especially in the scenes involving Padre Xantes, whose debates with the evangelicals are a masterpiece of theology disguised as worldly comedy. But he is a relatively minor character. Matthiessen's main focus among the Christians is the dynamic that grows between Martin, Hazel, Leslie, and Andy, as each reacts in different ways to the conditions in which they find themselves. I know the Les Hubens of the world from years of listening to delegates to the Worldwide Missionary Convention that was one of the summer highlights of my seaside town while I was growing up, and have long since come to see through their rhetoric. At first, I thought that Martin would be made out of the same stuff, but no: he is too brave, too intelligent, and too honest:
You see, a man like me, a cautious man, has his life all figured out according to a pattern, and then the pattern flies apart. You run around for a while trying to repair it, until one day you straighten up again with an armful of broken pieces. […] I needed badly to talk to someone who didn't refer each problem to the Lord.This is Martin talking near the end of the book to Lewis Moon, who is in many ways his spiritual opposite, but is perhaps the most like him as a man. Moon plays a fascinating role in the novel, and may actually turn out to be its real protagonist. Conrad went upriver, glimpsed the fringe of his Heart of Darkness, and retreated exclaiming, "The horror, the horror!" Matthiessen, on the other hand, goes deep inside. In a series of chapters that may make or break the book for many readers, the author uses Moon as a kind of spirit guide, first into the recesses of his own psyche in a near-fatal overdose of a hallucinogenic drug, and then by having him penetrate the tribe of the Niaruna themselves. I won't say how this comes about, but the sections among the Indios raise ethical issues at a more basic level that makes the concerns of the missionaries seem petty and self-serving. Moon is half Cherokee, though he feels himself to have been a bad one; this background gives him a respect for tribal ways that the others simply do not possess. We must not forget, too, that Matthiessen is an award-winning naturalist and ethnographer; while his account of life among the Niaruna is presumably imaginary, it is imagination guided by observation and intelligence.

As in life, this story is a tragedy. Several of the original nine characters will end up dead or incapacitated. Some faiths will be lost or shaken. It is clear that the cards are stacked against the Niaruna or other tribes retaining their way of life intact. Yet I admired the way that Matthiesen ended the novel on a moment of balance. It would have been so easy for him merely to condemn or squeeze out his last drop of blood. I found his alternative, in the last three or four chapters, both moving and beautiful.