Rating: 3/5

I've mentioned in the past how time and place can influence your perception of a book a great deal. There are books I was fond of as a child or young adult I probably will never read again, because I know their influence on thirteen year old me will never equal the reality of reading them decades later. Was it Asimov who joked that the golden age of Science fiction is "When your about twelve". Conversly there are works I didn't understand, or didn't enjoy as a young person I find new value in, and works I did enjoy but find different value in.

Occasionally I read a book and enjoy it but think "Man, I would have really loved this when I was younger" and the Sleeping Dragon falls into that category. Had I read Rosenberg's work when I was thirteen, it would probably rank up there for me and frankly I'm astonished I never did read it, given how it cleaves to so many of my interests.

The Book is basically a 'what if' in which a group of table-top Role-players engaging in a psuedo-Dungeons and Dragon game are transported into the world of that game, 'merging' with their characters. Supposedly the book came about after Rosenberg thought how cool it would be to be in such a world and than realized how horrific it would be to actually live day to day in such a place. Where Wizards and Clerics had actual magical powers, rule of law was absense but rule of might everywhere, and where actual monsters roamed the world. Not to mention the absense of modern dentistry and sanitation. 

So plunged into this world the protagonists are off on an adventure to get back to their own world while realizing how dark this world is. They learn some lessons along the way and are hit with some pretty horrific actions. The conflict between their 'real-world selves' and the psyches of the people they now 'inhabit' was really interesting. It was something I wished played out more than in just two of the principal characters. That element seemed a little inconsistent. The book is also rather dated at this point in many ways. To not put too fine a point on it, there is a not graphic, but plot central gang-rape near the end of the book that is rather off-putting. Elements of it and it's outcome are handled alright(it's not salacious or anything) but it does feel very routed in elements of the gaming world of the late 70's and early 80's. 

Over-all I quite enjoyed the book, and thirteen year old me would have loved it. Those without my potential for nostalgia and love of RPG's might find it only a middling portal fantasy. Those with the requisites though will find it a nice quick read.