Rating: 5/5

I’ve read They Shall Expel Demons by Derek Prince many times. I think it is a great book on real life spiritual warfare that many Christians try to ignore. Deliverance should be a normal part of the Christian life not something for specific ministries. It should be a part of everyone who believes in Jesus. The title of this book is explained in the gospel of Mark. “And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.” Mark‬ ‭16:17-18‬ ‭KJV‬‬. I was excited to see how this classic book has been updated and expanded. In the expanded version, each chapter has several questions relating to the chapter making a study out of each informative chapter. Some examples of questions asked are Why can’t demons be fallen angels? What was Jesus’ one requirement for those who minister deliverance? What are four simple conditions people must meet to receive deliverance? To what areas of our lives must the Holy Spirit have access in order to indwell us? After the study questions there is a life application. The life application is further questions and activities to apply what the reader has learned to their own experiences. After the life application, there is a memory verse like Galatians 5:1 and 2 Corinthians 2:14. Each chapter ends with a faith response. The faith response is a prayer or declaration for the reader to walk in greater freedom through Jesus. I think that the expansions of this classic deliverance book will help many people in greater ways because it gives further insight and help. I encourage every believer to read this book because it’s a part of what all believers should be able to walk in. Now more than ever our walk as a believer in Jesus needs to be normal to walk in the supernatural. Disclosure of Material Connection: I received this book free from the publisher through the Bethany House/Chosen Blogger Review Program. I was not required to write a positive review. The opinions I have expressed are my own. I am disclosing this in accordance with the Federal Trade Commission’s 16 CFR, Part 255 : “Guides Concerning the Use of Endorsements and Testimonials in Advertising.”