Rating: 4/5

Setting: Great Britain
Time Period: Middle Ages
Series: Part 1 of The Once and Future King series

Plot Summary: Wart (Arthur) is a young orphan living with Sir Ector and working as a page in medieval Great Britain. While fetching one of Sir Ector’s birds, which his companion and foster brother Kay has lost, he encounters the wizard Merlin who becomes his and Kay’s tutor. Through a series of adventures made possible by Merlin, Wart learns about the world, nature and man’s duty to nature. His adventures include but are not limited to rescuing people with Robin Hood and Maid Marian, questing for the Beast with King Pellinore and turning into a wide array of animals. Through these adventures he learns the skills necessary to become a great ruler and these enable him to pull the sword from the stone.

Subject Headings: King Arthur, knights and knighthood, Arthurian romance, Fantasy fiction-English, wizards, Merlin, Robin Hood, Great Britain-History- Anglo-Saxon Period 449-1066.

Appeal: quirky, familiar and vivid characters, relaxed pace, coming of age story, third person omniscient, cinematic, detailed, rural, bittersweet, humorous, poetic, nostalgic with unusual and conversational language.

Related Authors and Works (Fiction): J.R.R. Tolkien, 
  The Lord of the Rings
 trilogy which is also a coming of age story filled with adventures involving wizards, like this series it starts out lightly and gets progressively darker; Sir Thomas Malory, Le Morte D’Arthur which is one of the most famous accounts of the Legend of King Arthur (written in the 15th century); Mary Stewarts Merlin Trilogy  which chronicles the life of Merlin vividly and poetically.

Related Authors and Works (Nonfiction): Sean Martin, The Knights Templar: The History and Myths of the Legendary Military Order which is a clear account of both the history and myths surrounding the Knights Templar, who are prominent players in Arthurian legend; Geoffrey Ashe, Mythology of the British Isles which contains not only the actual myths, but their history and illustrations; C. Warren Hollister Medieval Europe: A Short History.