Rating: 1/5

Holy cow, what a disappointment. I have loved other Michener novels (e.g., The Source, Alaska, Caravans) and had high hopes, but this was a stinker. Maybe because he wrote it when he was of advanced age? The copyright is 1994, but the attitudes and style are of another era. It all takes place in an age-in-place retirement center that features regular apartments, a rehab division, and nursing home sections. You have men wondering if women have regrets like men do. African-Americans speak in an ignorant-sounding black dialect; Asians are referred to as Orientals; there is reference to the "yellow-race Japanese." A white person says "Yes, Jaqmeel Reed. Where do they dream up those names?" A woman who suspects she is pregnant goes to her GP, and (remember this is 1994), he sends her to a "specialist" who "ran tests" to confirm that she's pregnant. A highly regarded female pastor says "the poor female who is 100% female with no stiffening attributes of the male is apt to become a nymphomaniac, unable to control her sexual urges." The white director of the facility "could not anticipate how the management would look upon one of their black employees daring to date a white girl. (again, this is copyrighted 1994). The supposedly college-educated residents ask each other stupid questions just so another resident can expound Michener's view on everything from living wills, to Pete Rose's legal problems, to health care costs, to how lawyers create problems. There were several wasted pages that were told from the perspective of a rattle snake and a blue heron living in the undeveloped area near the facility. A wealthy young woman who suffered two below-knee amputation is amazed to learn that women in Pakistan might have suffered more severe physical damage than she. Despite the fact there is a rehab section, the facility had no physical or occupational specialist and little equipment (and this was supposedly the chain's upper-crust flagship center). When they finally hire a PT, the guy also does occupational therapy even though that's a separate specialty, and the director brags to the father of a rehab patient about their new equipment, "we have this system of parallel bars at handgrip height...A patient who wants to test her new legs can walk between the bars and catch herself if she feels she's about to fall." Ooo, cutting edge stuff! There was barely a plot. The characters were one-dimensional and near caricatures. I was putting in notes such as "Gag me." Can't believe this loser was written by James Michener.