Rating: 5/5

I DID IT!!!! …. 🏄🏽‍♂️👙🩴🌴🌈🐚🍂🍃🍄☔️🌤🍍RAIN or SHINE…. I finished the longest book I’ve read all year!! 😎

The first chapter, “From the Boundless Deep”, is long - but so informative— 
describing the formation of the islands. 
The history and mystery about why nine out of ten things grow in Hawaii that don’t anywhere else in the world, is fascinating. 

As Paul and I explore 
the islands from year to year ourselves - it never seizes to amaze the numerous unique plants here - breathtaking beautiful - they seem to thrive like no other place on earth. 
All the incredible vegetation-local fruits — birds - trees with their amazing roots - all have such unique qualities. 
As for the ocean: 
Hawaiians believe there is balance between ocean and land. 
The intimate relationship with nature resonates today. 

I don’t need a 1,490 page historical book about Hawaii to tell me how magical and lush this place is….
but having Michener to provide language and history to my own personal experience — (Paul and I have been coming to these islands for 43 years since our honeymoon)….
Michener- brilliantly-and ambitiously enhanced and engaged my thoughts deeper. ….
as well as challenged my will to continue reading &gt;&gt; it’s long undertaking (especially while reading about half of it during our Kauai vacation) 

Like destiny… or *good karma* I was rewarded from reading this book. 
I met a native —shortly after having finished chapter 2 …. and asked him
A few questions from my reading….
A chapter about Kings and Priests fighting - canoe battles, dogging spears —fighting over land, and women …
 [those ancient Hawaiian wars and battles were violent]….
Well, the native spent the next forty minutes with Paul and I telling us stories about his grandfather- one of sixteen siblings - and what the land ‘use-to-be’….
Our new native friend was a glorious storyteller….giving us a grand oral account of the Aboriginals, hula dancing, their long standing issues with settler colonialism, and life before tourism. 

Paul and I are enjoyed *Everything Hawaii*…. more than ever this year (after a two year hiatus due to the pandemic. And…it may have taken many years until I finally committed to reading this long book….but the timing 
just finally felt right! 

In the beginning…
Michener explores the rainfall, climate, sunlight, soil, and eons of time in which diverse growing things were basically left alone to work out their own best destinies — fact remains these islands have prospered. Their growth is strong. 
Volcanos still build fresh flows of lava. 

I enjoyed how Michener described the beautiful oceans — 
waiting in sun and storm was like a beautiful woman waiting for their men to come home at dusk, waiting with open arms and warm bodies and consolation. (ha, such a romantic)…
“All that would be accomplished in these islands, as in these women, would be generated solely by the will and puissance of some man. I think the islands always knew this”. 
Men of Polynesia and Boston and China and Mount Fuji and the barrios of the Philippines, did not come to Hawaii empty handed. 
They were not afraid to starve exactly, but there was no certainty of food on the islands—they had to bring their own. If men came without resources to these islands, they wouldn’t perish. 
But if they came with growing things, and good food, and better ideas—“came with gods that would sustain them”—and willing to work hard until their arms were aching—miraculous connections with nature were free to develop and blossom. 
As Michener said….
“On these harsh terms the islands waited”. 

In the second chapter: 
“From The Sun-Swept Lagoon….Michener dives into historical storytelling…it almost felt like a legend tale…
with Kings, Priests a sacred temple, and who was the ultimate god. 
The powerful people of Tahiti and Bora Bora had a vision - 
“We well go up on the sea and find other islands where we can worship our own gods”. 
There was dancing men — and a powerful beautiful dancing Havaiki girl with her ti-leaf skirt whirling about. Sexual tension, seductiveness, and evil thoughts of destruction, were all high. 
A young girl animated her hips doing the hula dance. 
Island parents encouraged their young daughters to experiment with many young men and to learn the ways of life, since potential husbands did not like to marry any girl who had not already proved that she could bear children. 
It was an ancient island custom that high-born women could seek their husbands. 
Class status …made a difference to whether or not women had independent power. 
Brave stupid men - needing revenge—contaminated the islands ….

There was also prayers of fertility….prayers that came with warnings. A man could see a woman die starvation…
Rations were brought in:
Bread fruit partially dried and rolled for fermentation’s, pandanus flour made by baking and grating the i tasty fruit, just barely powerful but useful on long trips, dried sweet potatoes, shellfish, coconut meat, bonito hard as rock, drinking coconut, dozens of watertight bamboo, and endless supplies of pigs. 

Men were more stubborn than wise. 
But later ages would depict these men as all-wise and heroic, great ventures seeking bright new lands…. but such myths would be in error…,
“for no man leaves where he is and seeks a distant place unless he is in some respect a failure; but having failed in one location and having been ejected, it is possible that in the next he will be a little wiser”. 

This book is packed filled great history- and great characters ….
The engaging personal storytelling (for me), took off -read faster - more -during the second half of this ambitious book…
Hard to imagine all the work that went into writing this book! 
James Michener is unbelievably skilled! 

A few of my favorite parts were - when in KAUAI….🌴🏄🏽‍♂️👙🩴…
 “There was one tree specially dedicated to Kauai, and it made both life and agriculture on the island possible. Whenever the powerful north-east trades whipped sea and salt air inland, killing everything that grew, men had planted the strange, silky, gray-green cascarina tree, known sometimes as the Ironwood. 
Groves of this curious tree, covered with ten-inch needles and seed cones that resembled round buttons, stood along the shore and protected the island. The foliage of the casuarina was not copious and to the stranger each tree looked so frail that it seemed about to die, but it possessed incredible powers of recuperation, and what it thrived on most was a harsh, salty trade wind that whipped its fragile needles into a frenzy and tore at its cherry-bark truck; for then the casuarina dug in and saved the island. The sea winds howled through its branches; it’s frail needles caught the salt; and all who lived in the shadow of the casuarina tree lived securely”. 

 “As men rode they saw for the first time the full grandeur of Hawaii, for they were to work on one of the fairest islands and they Pacific. 
To the left rose jagged and soaring mountains, clothed in perpetual green. Born millions of years before the other mountains of Hawaii, these had a road it first and now possessed unique forms that pleased the eye. At one point the wind had cut a complete tunnel through the highest mountain; at others the erosion of softer rock had left isolated spires of basalt standing like monitors. To the right unfolded a majestic shore, cut by deep bays and highlighted by a rolling surf that broke endlessly upon dark rocks and brilliant white sand. Each mile disclosed to Kamejiro and his companions some striking new scene”. 
 “But most memorable of all he saw that day was the red earth. Down millions of years the volcanic eruptions of Kauai had spewed forth layers of iron-rich rocks, and for subsequent millions of years this iron had slowly, imperceptibly disintegrated until it now stood like giant piles of scintillating rust, the famous red earth of Kauai. Sometimes a green-clad Mountain which show a gapping scar where the Side of a cliff had fallen away, disclosing earth as red as new blood. At other times the fields along which the main road would be embellished furnace-red, as if flame had just left it. Again in some deep valley where small amounts of black earth had intruded, the resulting red nearly resembled a brick color. 
But always the soil was red. It shone in a hundred different hues, but it was loveliest when it stood out against the rich green verdure of the island, for then the two colors complemented each other, and Kauai seemed to merit the name by which it was affectionately known: the Garden Island”. 

I can contest the gorgeous lushness of Kauai myself….
multitude of trees: palms, pandanus, Bunyan’s, hau and kou…beautiful trees of the islands — their thousands of aerial roots….
swift-growing wild plum that had been imported from Japan….
moss-pocked trunk rising majestically toward the heavens. 

In Kauai… people don’t run from storms. It rains a dozen times a day. Soon the sun comes out. So people never bother to run or worry about the warm rain. 
It’s all soooo spectacular! 

Sooo many great things to say about Hawaii….
…. Almost 365 days of beautiful weather: rain or shine - it’s outstanding 
….beaches, surfing, sunsets
….Tropical 🌴 flora 🌸
….Hula 
….Rainbows🌈 
….the great outdoor
….the Aloha spirit 
etc!! 

Wonderful book … Took me almost a month of reading *daily* to finish … 
But what’s the hurry? 
I enjoyed the meditative learning -contemplative experience!