Rating: 3/5

Fun read, I definitely think it could have been so much more than a novella. The dystopian (?) setting for the story was very quickly glossed over, although I can understand in keeping it a short story there was little point in exploring it in depth. 

I really wanted more meat to this, particularly in exploring the main character’s growing obsession with Gabriella, despite being a woman that he initially claims he rebukes. His lack of self-awareness in how fickle he is comparing the two main women in the story (i.e. Gabriella and his own wife Honor) could definitely have been further explored through a feminist lens, if that is what the author intended. One moment, he criticises the superficiality of Gabriella, and speaks highly of his more subdued wife, but then the next moment he has visions of a buxom sixteen year old (!!!) Gabriella and criticises his wife’s lack of attention to the laundry in a way Gabriella never would have done! Women must somehow be a loving and loyal wife, yet also a seductive provocateur to be chased… at the same time but not at the same time! 

At first we see Gabriella for an egocentric and shallow character, and this she may be… for that’s what everyone else in the story tells us she is, and there’s no doubt that her inconsiderate behaviour towards her serving staff is abhorrent. Yet, there is something sad in the way that throughout her life, Gabriella goes through phrases of being “owned” starting with the manner in which her father literally gambles her away. But! It is not only through life that she is controlled by the equally egotistical men around her, but after death, where the protagonist sees his ownership of her “rewind” as his right to ownership of her, leading to him ultimately referring to “my Gabriella” despite her not having the ability to respond to him. This however, was spoilt, in my opinion, by the visiting of her ghost to both him and his wife Honor. 

Fun dark comedy, was a nice morning read but ultimately needed to be more than a novella in my very very humble opinion.