Rating: 5/5

This is a classic sword and planet type book. The third in a trilogy by Leigh Brackett. Ms Brackett was a writer from the Golden Age of Science Fiction writing for many of the pulps and science fiction magazines in the 40s and 50s when much of the Sci Fi took place in our own Solar System. The hero of these stories (The Trilogy is known as the Book of Skaith) is her greatest fictional creation Eric John Stark. Her husband was Edmond Hamilton who also wrote many Sci Fi stories at the time including the more juvenile Captain Future stories. 
Her character, Stark, is inspired by Edgar Rice Burroughs' John Carter with a bit of Tarzan thrown in. His parents were from Earth but when his parents were killed on a mining expedtion on Mercury he was raised by the Aborigines there and finally saved by Simon Ashton, an Earthman and Galactic Administrator. There were about 6 short stories published in the 40s and 50s featuring Stark in our Solar System and Ms Brackett returned to her favorite character in the mid 70s to feature him in this trilogy. This is the first time the action takes place on a planet far from the Solar System where he goes in search of Simon Ashton, his foster father, who has been missing on Skaith, a planet with a dying sun. The action is plentiful and the alien characters unusual as he cuts a swathe across the planet where he is apparently the "Dark Man" of prophecy who has come to destroy the Citadel of the Wandsmen and lead the population away from their dying planet to find a new life in the stars. Good reading and fascinating characters. 
BTW Leigh Brackett was a well known screenwriter in Hollywood as well as an author of Sci Fi. She wrote the Screenplay for the Bogart-Bacall movie "The Big Sleep" with William Faulkner as well as several Howard Hawks' John Wayne movies like "Rio Bravo", "El Dorado", and "Rio Lobo" and finally the Robert Altman-Elliott Gould version of "The Long Goodbye". She also wrote the first draft of "The Empire Strikes Back".