Rating: 5/5

One of the funniest, laugh out loud books I have ever read. When I read I like to mark the funny or interesting quotes I find, and by the end of the novel I had bookmarks everywhere, like I was studying it. Ms. King's ability to describe the Southern experience is like no other. Her point of view from being an outsider, raised in a household which was unconventional at the time, and growing up only around adults provides such a unique perspective. Her trying to find her place in a world in which she doesn't seem to fit in is a theme common to so many, but seemed to be quite taboo at the time. She was a unique person in a world where everyone was expected to fit into a mold and not question it or the world around them. Women had their place, blacks had their place, gay people had their place, and "that's just the way it was". But not for her. She refused to be a cookie-cutter woman and instead explored all aspects of religion, education, sexuality and careers. Coming from the atypical family that she did probably influenced and paved the way for her even though she may not have realized it. She was a woman who seemed to be born in the wrong time, yet she paved the way for the women of today. At first her hatred of femininity and men was off-putting, but then I started to see those attitudes were all part of her journey to find herself. I think because I related to parts of her character I expected her to go in a different direction, like I would. But that's the point, she showed how no two people are the same. Even when she found people to relate to, no one person was an exact mirror of her. And that's how it should be. We are individuals and although we may find some fascinating people along the way no one will be exactly like us and do things exactly the way we would do them. And that's ok. We can understand and connect with someone on one level but then completely disagree with them about something else. That doesn't make them any less of a friend, parent, teacher or significant other. We learn something from them all which is why diversity should be celebrated. 

I happened to read this book at a time when tensions are high in our country over race relations, sexual orientation and religion, which made it even more poignant. When you look at not just the most prevalent instances of discrimination, but the things that occurred in everyday life at that time, you realize how far we've really come. No one should ever have to live in fear and loneliness because of their personality, sexuality, gender, religion or skin color. We've made such strides in this country because we have the freedom to do so and we should never take that for granted. We should also never take for granted the women and men who have gone before us, making all of this possible and having to live through times of such discrimination. As a woman, reading about the short list of options for a woman with education, careers and lifestyle made me really appreciate the life and freedoms I now have. My education wasn't limited to certain options, I could attend any college and have any major I wanted. I can be single in my thirties and not be whispered about or considered a spinster or old maid. My femininity is not connected to being intellectual, having an education or having a job. And I would imagine many who could relate would feel the same with "the way things were" for blacks and gay people in those times. I don't have to ask permission for a black person to live with me. I can stay over at a female friend's house and it's not considered improper. Imagine having to tiptoe around like that for these simple everyday things. At the same time, interracial marriages and gay relationships still do get a lot of hate and sometimes even violence directed at them. We still have some work to do, but we're getting there. While we are celebrating and mourning everything going on in our country today, let us not forget where we came from, how hard people had to work to get where we are today, and make an effort to view everyone through different eyes, remembering they may have a completely different set of circumstances and upbringing than we do because no one is exactly like us. Ms. King found a way to report the signs of the times in a way that shows the ugliness that existed but still allows us to celebrate our Southern heritage of strong women and people who fought for the civil rights of all.

And we can all agree that drinking in Mississippi is a right we all should have.