Rating: 4/5

You don’t understand spirituality inside and out by being wide-eyed, innocent and very Much-Afraid. 

For those attempting to scale the high and forbidding heights of insight, after taking the Hind at His word and following Him, sheer brute stamina as well as steady, unremitting endurance are mandatory. 

All of these traits come together perfectly, for example, in the life of the great Georg Wilhelm Hegel.

But they don’t at all meld in Ms Hurnard’s work. And the rather fey ungroundedness which sustain this work, howbeit flimsily, doesn’t make the final cut of endurance in Faith to one’s end, in real life. 

That takes sheer intellectual fortitude... it’s an unrelentingly hardscrabble climb to true wisdom.

Now, Hegel was nothing if not strong. 

And if you read him, he will show you how to achieve full salvation and keep your two feet planted firmly on level ground - rather than fly off into space with the groundlessness that Ms Hurnard evinces here.

Hegel shows us salvation is primarily the long-lasting fortitude of endurance in our faith. 

At the end of his Phenomenology he speaks of the utter crucifixion of the Spirit on the Cross of the Real. That’s telling it like it is, though it’s anything but palatable to most people nowadays.

Hegel was continually tormented - and simultaneously challenged to go further - by the anguish of his intuition of Being eternally colliding with the Nothingness within and around him, and, his students tell us, he developed a terrible stammer - his lectures at the end being delivered in a hoarse and barely audible rasp. 

Like Sisyphus carrying his boulder eternally uphill. 

And he died an awful death as a victim of the dread disease, Cholera. But he somehow maintained his fervent Lutheran faith to his last gasp.

Hannah Hurnard might have portrayed such a rugged ordeal in her ascent of the peaks, but she can’t - since for her Paradise must be all hearts and flowers. In other words, she fingerpaints. Her fiction lacks the feeling of being LIVED - or being authentically human.

I really enjoyed this book, but the problem is simply that Hurnard probably can’t portray the self-pity of the victimized Much-Afraid ever being conquered through gruelling hard work. Because it probably never was for her.

Hegel did it. Simone Weil and Dorothy Day too. Why can’t she - and we readers as well?

The moral of the story, then, for me, is that the spiritual path takes guts and pain, as well as good intentions.

It’s true that many converts to religion have been bruised and ill-used, and come to the faith in brokenness...

But if we can’t learn to check our self-pity at the gate - 

We may quite simply never make it to the golden peak of the Mountain.