Rating: 5/5

"I live in a permanent Christmas because God gave me you." - Ronald Reagan to Nancy

This compilation of letters, telegrams, and cards (including some wonderful "doodling") from the actor, then governor, and finally 40th president, to his wife Nancy over the course of their 52 years of marriage, reveals a gentle romantic with a sweet sense of humor. A man who was both reflective and creative, his many letters over dozens of years show fresh imagination with each one.

"By now you must have figured out that I'm hinting, I love you more than anything in the whole, wide world. I'm running for reelection as your own totally dedicated husband." As Nancy observes, Reagan was a man who wasn't complex, but who was very private. Clearly, he was not only fully devoted to his wife, but he leaned on her over the many years of travel, campaigning, and leading the state of California, and then the Free World.

The letters also reveal a man of deep faith: "I have to write this because of all our talks about flying in because you try to take the blame personally if ever something did happen. That would be wrong. God has a plan and it isn't for us to understand, only to know that he has his reasons and because he's all merciful and all loving we can depend on it that there is purpose in whatever he does and it is for own good. But you must understand without any question or doubt is that I believe this and trust him and you must, too."

Reagan is my most beloved president, and while I was only a little kid while he was in office, I can still remember watching his speeches on the little television my mom sometimes moved to the kitchen while she cooked. After mourning with millions of Americans the week following his death, I drove to D.C. in 2004 and glimpsed his flag-draped casket being carried from the Capitol. 

Something else of his nature comes through these wonderful compilations: Reagan reminds me of my own beloved grandfather, a personal hero of mine. This past Christmas, I had the singular joy of reading through several letters my grandpa wrote to my grandmother during World War II - WITH my grandfather (100 years old) - and the winsome reflections and yearning for his wife and family were very much like Reagan's. 

Also included in this book are some wonderful photographs, as well as some portions of timeless speeches: 

"You just stay in there, and you stay there with the same beliefs in the same faith that make you do what you're doing here. The individuals on the stage may change. The cause is there, and the cause will prevail, because it is right. Don't give up your ideals. Don't compromise. Don't turn to expediency. And don't, for heaven's sake, having seen the inner workings of the watch, don't get cynical.
No, don't get cynical. Don't get cynical, because look at yourselves and what you were willing to do, and recognize that there are millions and millions of Americans out there who want what you want, who wanted it to be that way, who wanted it to be a shining city on a hill." -Ronald Reagan to America

"You and I have a rendezvous with destiny. We can preserve for our children this, the last best hope of man on earth, or we can sentence them to take the first step into 1000 years of darkness. If we fail, at least we can let our children, and our children's children, say of us we justified our brief moment here. We did all that could be done. " - Ronald Reagan

The final letter Nancy includes in this volume is a love letter to America and its people:

 Nov. 5, 1994

 My Fellow Americans,

 I have recently been told that I am one of the millions of Americans who will be afflicted with Alzheimer’s Disease.

 Upon learning this news, Nancy and I had to decide whether as private citizens we would keep this a private matter or whether we would make this news known in a public way.

 In the past Nancy suffered from breast cancer and I had my cancer surgeries. We found through our open disclosures we were able to raise public awareness. We were happy that as a result many more people underwent testing.

 They were treated in early stages and able to return to normal, healthy lives.

 So now, we feel it is important to share it with you. In opening our hearts, we hope this might promote greater awareness of this condition. Perhaps it will encourage a clearer understanding of the individuals and families who are affected by it.

 At the moment I feel just fine. I intend to live the remainder of the years God gives me on this earth doing the things I have always done. I will continue to share life’s journey with my beloved Nancy and my family. I plan to enjoy the great outdoors and stay in touch with my friends and supporters.

 Unfortunately, as Alzheimer’s Disease progresses, the family often bears a heavy burden. I only wish there was some way I could spare Nancy from this painful experience. When the time comes I am confident that with your help she will face it with faith and courage.

 In closing let me thank you, the American people for giving me the great honor of allowing me to serve as your President. When the Lord calls me home, whenever that may be, I will leave with the greatest love for this country of ours and eternal optimism for its future.

 I now begin the journey that will lead me into the sunset of my life. I know that for America there will always be a bright dawn ahead.

 Thank you, my friends. May God always bless you.

 Sincerely,

 Ronald Reagan