Rating: 2/5

Changes in visual design to the characters aren't especially noticeable from the first comic strip of Garfield Weighs In (March 31, 1980) through the last (November 2), but a few storyline developments occur. Jon Arbuckle's romantic pursuit of Garfield's veterinarian, Liz, meets with modest success for the first time. Garfield's begrudging affection for Nermal the kitten morphs into a rivalry between them for Jon's attention. 1980 was a year of patterns being set in the Garfield universe, patterns that repeated for decades as the strip became of one America's most popular. Garfield had yet to walk exclusively on two legs, but he was already dominating his environment. Even Jon knows that Garfield runs the household, though he wouldn't admit it out loud.

 Garfield Weighs In resumes right where Garfield: Bigger Than Life left off, with Garfield in a cat show. The road to victory for a fat housecat is marked with humorous asides. On April 11 (page eight), Garfield's self-satisfied smile has Jon worried the cat has done something wrong, but the final panel reveals the real reason for his oversized smile. A couple of weeks later, Jon takes Garfield to Liz for a checkup. She agrees to Jon's request for a date, and he doesn't even have to trick her! The date might have gone better if Garfield hadn't tagged along, though. May 3 (page seventeen) is a good gag about the water in Garfield's bowl needing to be changed, and two days later Nermal visits for a week. Garfield resents how Nermal exploits his own cuteness, but Nermal has the sharp wits to hold his own against Garfield. For a few weeks there are miscellaneous comedic bits, no stories, until early June when Garfield's sweet tooth prods him to swipe cookies from Girl Scouts who are out selling them. That is, until he meets a tough Girl Scout who doesn't fall for his tricks. June 9 (page thirty-four) kicks off a week of Garfield pretending to be a variety of predatory cats on the prowl. The first strip, Garfield "hunting" the food in his bowl, is good for a laugh. Garfield's second birthday (June 19) passes with a small party, and then Garfield is freaked out by a scary movie featuring the "sludge monster." His imagination has him overreacting in all sorts of ways. Jon uses an "attack doll" to train Garfield to fight, but Garfield isn't interested. His verbal combat tactics on July 23 (page fifty-two) are funny, though, and there are other good strips that week. On July 29 (page fifty-five) Jon is reminded in comical fashion that Garfield can't speak, human though he often seems. It's too bad Jon can't read his thought bubbles!

 There's a brief interlude with Liz, who accepts another date with Jon, then a new attempt by Jon to restrict Garfield's diet. The first strip (August 4) that week, showing what happens after Jon tells Garfield he can only have food he's able to suck through a straw, is hilarious. The rest of the week is pretty funny, and August 5 rings true as a description of how diets can feel. Then it's off to the farm to see Jon's parents. Garfield's romps around the farm are amusing, and August 20 (page sixty-four) is one of my favorites jokes of the book, as Garfield learns the shocking secret of where milk comes from. August 26 (page sixty-seven) is a quintessential Garfield moment, Garfield observing that "It's not the valleys in life I dread so much as the dips" while staring at Odie. Zing! September starts with "Garfield's History of Dogs", and the first three episodes are among the best of this collection. September 1 (page seventy) has the world's first dog being confronted by its timeless comical foil immediately after crawling "out of the sea". September 2 contrasts the tail-wagging and slobbering of dogs, and September 3 is a humorous play on the idea of dogs hunting the only prey available...dinosaurs. Garfield's History of Dogs is arguably the highlight of this book. National Fat Week is next, a Garfield staple. It's only Garfield, no other characters all week, but he sure is entertaining. September 23 (page seventy-nine), Garfield has a hilarious reaction to a joke Jon cracks about his weight. After another week, Jon takes Liz to a fancy restaurant, and shoves a baseball cap low on Garfield's head to convince the waiter he's a kid, not a cat. Liz is never warm toward Jon, but she's thawing a bit. As he's done before, Garfield gets caught in a rollup window shade, a three-day adventure. In October Nermal visits again, and Garfield tries to prove he's as cute as Nermal all while sabotaging the gray kitten. Odie's flea problem spreads to Garfield, then to Jon, and the following week a run-in with a big canine lands Garfield in a full body cast. Being unable to move is infuriating, but Garfield gets a measure of revenge once he's out of the cast. The book ends with a visit to Liz, Garfield eager to prove he doesn't need a vitamin shot.

 I like Jim Davis's humor. It's comfortable and funny but doesn't push the barriers of good taste, which is why Garfield works as children's literature. You know for the most part what you're getting, but that's part of the appeal. It's lasagna jokes, Garfield's rivalry with Odie, and trying to outwit Jon. It's hating Mondays and exercise. It's Liz shooting down Jon's romantic overtures, but giving a glimpse of hope now and then. The first two and a half years of Garfield are fun, and Garfield Weighs In is a good compilation of the daily strips. I look forward to more of these books.