Rating: 4/5

This review is apt to be shorter than usual (though still too long). Friends and followers may send thank you notes to my current flareup of De Quervain tenosynovitis, c/o Jason Pierce, etc., etc. I probably shouldn't be typing at all, but I don't always have a great deal of sense.

It took six and a half years, five to ten pages here and there with a few week/month break in between, and then a big push for the last couple hundred pages this past month, but I finally got it done. (Well, it is over 800 pages.) That doesn't mean I didn't like it; quite the contrary. It's just not the kind of book I sit and read cover to cover; I prefer novels.

I love Miss Manners' column, or at least I did before my stupid newspaper stopped carrying it a couple of months ago. This book has several of those letters/responses, which I loved, and Miss Manners going on about some other matters on her own without being asked, which I liked. She is quite sarcastic and her responses are often a scream, but I tend to enjoy them more in small doses.

Here are a few I marked. ("DMM" = "Dear Miss Manners;" "GR" = "Gentle Reader" which is Miss Manners' salutation for all her responses.)

For expectant mothers who have to endure people "poking and patting the work in progress" (which is such a weird thing to do to pregnant women, especially when such attentions are uninvited. I don't even do it when asked. "Here, it just kicked, feel it!" ...NO! I have no interest in feeling a parasite at work on its host.) Anyway, the mothers should tell those interested that they "will be glad to let them hold the baby if they will be kind enough to wait until it is born."

"DMM: Please list some tactful ways of removing a man's saliva from your face.
GR: Please list some decent ways of acquiring a man's saliva on your face. If the gentleman sprayed you inadvertently to accompany enthusiastic discourse, you may" blah, blah, blah... "If, however, the substance was acquired as a result of enthusiasm of a more intimate nature, you may delicately retrieve it with a flick of your pink tongue."

"DMM: What can you do after accidentally calling your present lover by your former lover's name?
GR: Seek a future lover. Such a mistake is easy to do and impossible to undo. Why do you think the term 'darling' was invented?"

"DMM: I enclose herewith the text of a recently received thank-you note, and wonder what you think of the bride's forthright frankness. Do you consider this the nouvelles mercies? 'Dear Friends: Thank you so much for the beautiful vase. Unfortunately, it was the seventh one we received, so we did want you to know - and we hope you won't mind that we exchanged it in order to complete our china pattern. We send our love to you, etc.'
GR: It isn't the bride's frankness that worries Miss Manners - it's her brain. If one has seven vases, it should not be difficult to figure out how to exchange six of them, while letting the seventh represent, to each of the seven donors, the one that was kept. Miss Manners hopes that this couple is not planning to have children."

(Lengthy letter about a woman who hosts parties and complains when guests bring "bunches of loose flowers that they just hand to (her) in a soggy mess," and she has to leave the door, neglect her other guests and hosting duties, find a vase, arrange everything, fill it with water, and find a place to display them even though she's already arranged the room. It's so inconsiderate, etc.)
"GR: When Miss Manners entered the advice business, she knew that some day it would break her heart. As dear Nathanael West warned in his Miss Lonelyhearts, mass exposure to the insoluble suffering of this world can drive one to despair. Now you've done it. Miss Manners doesn't know if she can bear to go on living in a world where people such as you - for surely, no problem is unique - are plagued with the untimely floral offerings of their friends. What to do? Miss Manners, although she is herself groping for the strength to go on, will offer one last timid, faltering suggestion to help you in your time of need: Why don't you just keep a filled vase in the pantry on party nights and dump whatever you get into it?"

(Letter from someone in a high-rise apartment wondering about the correct attire during a fire alarm when everyone gathers in the lobby after midnight. "My feeling is that one's dress should be adequately covering but informal. I generally wear a navy blue nylon pajama and matching coat, and tennis shoes. Last time, I spent an agreeable hour chatting with (1) a young man clad in running trunks and running shoes; (2) an executive type in a business suit and vest, carrying a briefcase; (3) a young lady in a scarlet caftan, her head swathed in a brilliant yellow towel. Her accessory was a brown grocery bag that contained a live cat.
GR: Your instincts are correct, then, so are everyone else's, as fires are classified socially with come-as-you-are parties. However, Miss Manners' instinct would be to avoid the man in the three-piece suit. A person carrying a briefcase at midnight is up to no good."

Miss Manners often makes clear that her area of expertise is manners and generally doesn't offer advice on moral/legal/etc. issues. This was never more clearer than one section where she discussed drug use. After all, you can take manners with you anywhere, even to the local crack house. Whether or not you should be there in the first place is up to you and not in her wheelhouse. "Why do people keep asking Miss Manners what to say, in a social situation, when they are offered drugs? What ever happened to 'Yes, please' and 'No, thank you'?" 

One other thought: The section on "Celebrity and Publicity" should be required reading for everyone on social media since we now live in a world where anyone who wants to be a celebrity can post whatever they want to the masses whether or not they're worthy of that distinction.

I endeavor to be well-mannered, but I have a lot to learn, and some things in here are pretty tall orders. I sometimes let my manners take a backseat to practicality, and other times I'm just an ass.

This book was great, and I recommend it to anyone. It also comes with a handy and extremely detailed index so you can look up her advice involving a specific issue. She covers just about everything.

As for this hand...