Rating: 4/5

Well, it seems this venerable guide has finally gone out of print after half a century. Inevitable, but it had a good run. There's been a considerable reorganizing of botanical knowledge during that time, with some species being split or merged, and more importantly the landscape keeps changing -- habitats for plants shift (not usually for the better), climate change and human activities change their ranges, and invasive species keep spreading and new ones arrive. Time for a fresh take, but I hope the new will learn something from the old.

● The thing I like most about "Peterson's Guide": the stylized illustrations. They're not as pretty as those in other books, but they show you exactly and clearly what identifying features the author is pointing out. Down with modern guides that rely on photos--at least with the internet, you can get lots and lots of different photos, which is no doubt even better, but it takes time and effort to figure out what to look for there.
● The thing I hate about it: no key! Within sections organized by color, the plants are further organized with "similar" ones on each page, but the only way you can find the right page is by flipping through.
● Lesser problem 1: tries to cover too large of a geographic area, simply can't fit in enough species to do justice to the variety found in any one place.
● Lesser problem 2: arbitrarily includes a few shrubs (particularly showy-flowered ones), but should have stuck to non-woody plants only, not made just a few exceptions.
● Nostalgia factor: I have an affection for the icons placed next to each entry to indicate the plant's family, even if today's system of families is a bit different!

Footnote: Some internet resources, even if using photos, at least provide good closeups. Two that excel are Minnesota Wildflowers and Missouri Plants. Though I say it with some reservations (species descriptions very hard to read, photo quality variable [with a few drawings included, hooray!]), GoBotany is the resource for New England. All those sites cover trees, grasses, sedges, and aquatic plants as Peterson didn't. The first two sites don't have a key, the third has one but it's kind of aggravating to use.