Rating: 4/5

This book is very, very American, which is not a problem but I picked this one up out of curiosity in a charity shop in England.

Civil Disobedience intrigues me intensely, having read Monkey Wrench Gang by Edward Abbey and Walden Pond by Thoreau I feel quite connected to the anti-establishment sentiments of the Americans.

The first quarter of the book flew by, filled with great words and ideas. Then I found Zinn became too preoccupied with countering what this Mr Fortass had written about Civil Disobedience. Having not encountered the article, it reduced the impact of the argument. Some things that caught my eye whilst reading:

"When nations ignore international agreements at will, are they not contributing to gang warfare in the world?"

"Something seems to have happened to the old claim that what distinguishes the democracy from the totalitarian state is its belief in the rights of the individual over the rights of the state."

"What does all this mean - the country reaching fever pitched, and the old medicines not enough? It means that if we want to prevent a perspiring, writhing, life-and-death struggle involving massive violence, we had better develop devices for change, prods to the government, that go beyond what we are now willing to accept, yet trying to keep inevitable costs of turbulent change to a minimum. A new politics of protest, designed to put pressure on our national leaders more effectively, more threateningly, more forcefully than ever before is needed. We need techniques of civil disobedience which will not only ruffle the complacency of the powerful enough to bring needed changes - but begin to replace the old institutions, the old leaders."

I've written this review a week after the United Kingdom voted to leave the EU. Something I support and I have found it quite serendipitous to have read a book upon Civil Disobedience when I had already come to the conclusion that for many of the older voters; their vote to leave the EU was an act of Civil Disobedience.