Rating: 4/5

Books read late at night invite the mind to wander. This winter, reading some book I’ve forgotten, the name of Loren Eiseley slipped across my thoughts, a writer I hadn’t read since college. Hunting on Amazon I came across this memoir with its intriguing title. For a couple months I read a few pages before sleep, in no hurry to finish it. What caught me from the first page was the desolation at the heart of this life, the loneliness Eiseley made no attempt to disguise or lighten, the hardscrabble childhood and sometimes terrifying wanderings of a solitary man – painfully unlike the elegant musings on science and time I remembered from The Star Thrower and The Night Country. Writing this book toward the end of his life, Eiseley echoes Thomas Hardy or Du Fu.I can only put it that this is the human autumn before the snow. It is the individual’s last attempt to order the meaning of his life before a spring breaks in the rusted heart and the dreams, the memories, and the elusive chemical domain that contains them fly apart in irreparable ruin. Oncoming age is to me a vast wild autumn country strewn with broken seedpods, hurrying cloud wrack, abandoned farm machinery, and circling crows. A place where things were begun on too grand a scale to complete.In the introduction (which I’m glad I read as an epilogue because it foretells too much), we learn that Eiseley’s biographer compares All the Strange Hours to a surrealist painting; a friend considers himself misrepresented; another wonders at his absence. “It’s as if I didn’t exist.” Even Eiseley’s wife barely appears. Instead the book is haunted by his broken, mad mother and his vanished father; the troubled flashbacks of an abandoned child; and a youth spent among hobos or surviving alone in the desert. His later fame and success as a professor and writer seems to matter hardly at all. Too much had been lost at the start. Yet there are a few uncanny grace notes, one of which is a talking cat he hears complaining in the snow on Christmas Eve. He coaxes it out from the shrubbery.The cat ran directly to me and rolled over on its back in a gesture of trust. I dropped to my knees. The cat, a beautiful young male, rolled from one side to the other while I stroked his stomach. He made some further remarks about the cold and being hungry. I felt the dust of travel in his fur. He had come far. He also talked about the dependency of cats upon humankind. He retained faith in them. I shuddered but it was not in me to disillusion him.He will not desert this cat, he declares to his wife. “I spoke my ultimatum to a room where we had lived for a quarter of a century. ‘if it becomes necessary we shall move, so help me.’” As it turns out, he finds the cat a home but not before giving him a name: Night Country.