Rating: 4/5

Having only just started my Britpop novitiate, my grasp on the greater cultural zeitgeist of the time is limited, so take my thoughts with a grain of salt. With that in mind, if you're a newbie to the genre like me, I highly recommend giving this a read!
It won't be for everyone. Other readers have pointed out Harris's clear bias towards the musical stylings of certain groups, but he still does a rather thorough review of some of the most notable records of the time, regardless of his personal investment, so this habit didn't personally deter me. Others have also pointed out how his bias extends past his color commentary on the music and into the actual documentation of the scene, which focuses on a few core groups (Oasis, Blur, Suede, Elastica, and to a lesser extent, Pulp, Menswear, Radiohead, The Stone Roses, Happy Mondays, Sleeper, et cetera). To be honest, this just feels like a matter of logistics rather than prejudice, as the book is already lengthy covering the exploits of its main characters, who are all decently intertwined both personally and professionally. While it could be argued other groups were unfairly pushed to the side in the interest of harping on the mythos of the genre's most popular acts, I'd argue that is in fact the point, as Harris seeks to dismantle the populism he ultimately concludes was the Achilles' heel of the movement.
Another common criticism is the portrayal of certain figures, which I felt was a decent shake all-around. Perhaps if you're coming to this from the perspective of a fan rather than a music historian, it could feel like some characters get off better than others (Tony Blair in particular comes across a little too ambiguously for my liking, though I am reading this twenty two years after the initial publishing, so I digress). Everyone comes across as at least a little bit of a caustic asshole because that was just who they were when they were. More a sign of the times than a personal indictment.
When it comes to Harris's style, that'll really be up to personal discretion. I enjoyed his very opinionated and empirical point of view, which reflects his music journalism background. However, there are times where he can come across as a bit overly prosaic and tart. Overall, his observations about the greater scene and his insight into the cultural contexts surrounding the Britpop craze were very enjoyable.
I got a kick out of reading this and a pretty sweet playlist as well. Definitely a great jumping off point for newcomers!