Rating: 4/5

In this magnificent book Arthur Koestler tries nothing less than to explain the act of creation. And what he does he sheds some light on the question of how creativity emerges. He looks at three seemingly totally different areas, humour, science and art.

In his earlier book "Sleepwalkers" he has presented a fascinating (and maybe idiosyncratic) history of science. Many of the themes and topics return. We certainly meet Galileo and his hero Kepler again. But he tries to go deeper.

Some of his examples are well-known, like the discovery of the Archimedes principle. Some were new to me, like the studies of Köhler about the Mentality of Apes.

One thing I am inclined to be very sceptical about is his claim that "true creativity starts where language ends." (p. 177)

But he has Einstein as a witness who is quoted: "The words or the language, as they are written or spoken, do not seem to play any role in my mechanism of thought." (p. 171)

On the other hand he gives examples how languages changes and literally creates new ways of thinking. He quotes Alice (for a long time a must-reference in any piece of analytical philosophy): "How can I know what I think till I see what I say?" to show that "in some forms of intellectual activity language is not only an indespensable tool, but that the stream of language actually carries the thought." 

One example is "Space" and "Time". Space taken as an abstract concept, he says, did not exist in medival times. "It was merely an attribute of material bodies. Empty space was unthinkable: "Nobody in his senses would have said that things moved through space or in time – how can a thing move in or through an attribute of itself?" (p.175)

Then in 1277 a council in Paris declared that the Aristotelean doctrine that God could not create empty of infinite space was wrong. So empty space and infinite space became thinkable.

The book is full of anecdotes and also of some original thinking. And of course, some neologisms like bisociation and egomorphism (the pendant to anthropomorphism), meaning the tendency to assume that other must feel like I do.

In another examlple he beautifully explains how training changes behaviour. Talking about a chess novice who has to remind himself at the beginnig how pieces move and maybe has to consult a book of rules:

"After some practice it becomes impossible for him to move a rook diagonally without a feeling of aesthetic and moral 
revulsion, of having committed an obscenity or violated a sacred taboo: the rules have become automatized, encoded in his nervous system." 156

A truly wonderful book. But, written after all by a (brilliant) layman. So one should not take everything at face value. One blunder that I find quite shocking is when he assigns the quip that philosophy consists in nothing but footnotes to Plato to the wrong guy: Popper!

9/10