Rating: 3/5

This is a very short memoir/long essay of sorts about Irving turning his novel “The Cider House Rules” into a screenplay. I have not read the book or seen the film, but after reading this, there are enough spoilers and details to extinguish most of the mystery within both. The author also gives us some insights into many of his previous experiences in trying to adapt some of his other novels onto the silver screen, with some predictably mixed, though entertaining results.

There is some interesting historical background information in here, particularly in relation to abortion and medicine within the US. But this is also, in part a pro-life essay/novel/film and Irving himself says, “Politically speaking, if I were to make a list of people who should see ‘The Cider House Rules’, two groups would go to the top of the list: politicians who call themselves pro-life (meaning anti-abortion) and twelve year old girls.”

He recalls one story when he was doing a book signing and a pro-life woman cut in line to tell him, “We just want people to be responsible for their children.” as she patted his hand. He patted her hand in return and quoted from his own book, “If you expect people to be responsible for their children, you have to give them the right to choose whether or not to have children.”

With this basically being a promotion for the film, we get plenty of script excerpts and even small passages from the original novel. There are also many run of the mill images and stills from the movie, including three of the author himself, who plays the role of ‘the disapproving stationmaster’. 

This is sprinkled with some colourful detail about his rather snobbish sounding, yet highly talented grandfather, who was a doctor and Harvard graduate whose stories informed many aspects of the novel in question. There are some interesting insights into Irving's writing process but owing to the nature of the subject it can get a little tedious and self-indulgent. And yet this does possess a quirky, understated appeal. Some of Irving’s various digressions can often give it the feel of sitting down with an old timer by an open fire, recounting really interesting old war stories, which really come to life nicely.