Rating: 4/5

A Texas Christmas With Madeline

Ludwig Bemelmans (1898 -- 1962) published six Madeline children's stories in his lifetime, beginning with "Madeline" in 1939, together with much else. I had been reading these six stories to my four-year old granddaughter in Texas in a collection called "Mad about Madeline" when she brought me her "new" Madeline book, "Madeline in America". I had known of this book, but I had never read it. And I didn't know it took place in Texas.

Bemelmans wrote "Madeline in America" in 1955 following a visit to Texas during the course of which he met and befriended Stanley Marcus of Neiman Marcus. In 1956, Neiman-Marcus gave out a small version of the book to Christmas shoppers. The version in this book includes Bemelmans's text together with new color illustrations by his grandson, John Bemelmans Marciano. In addition to the "Madeline" story, this book includes two other Bemelmans stories, "The Count and the Cobbler" which appeared in 1935, and "Sunshine" written in 1949 with some new illustrations by Marciano. In addition the book includes a short reminiscence, "A Bemelmans Christmas Memory" by Bemelmans's daughter, Barbara Bemelmans. All the stories in the book are loosely organized around Christmas.

In the title story, young Madeline learns that she has received an inheritance from her great-grandfather in Texas. Miss Clavel, Madeline's 11 little girl companions, and Genevive, the dog, travel to Texas where Madeline learns she has become wealthy indeed. She sees a large ranch, oil fields, and a department store and causes her usual mischief when she gets lost. Commendably, Miss Clavel is alarmed at the materialism of it all. But the story comes out right in the end as Miss Clavel and her entourage including Madeline return to the "Old house in Paris covered with vines" where, by the terms of the will Madeline is to remain under the tutelage of Miss Clavel until she is 21.

The early story, "The Count and the Cobbler" is a delight and has the feel of a folk-tale. "Sunshine" is set in New York City and seems to me a bit sophisticated for 4-year olds. My granddaughter did not seem to enjoy it as much as the others. Similarly, the short essay by Barbara Bemelmans is more a reminiscence for adults than a story for young children.

Marciano's full-color illustrations are good in their own right. They are more self-consciously artistic and lack the spontaneity of his grandfather's own "Madeline" illustrations. The major attraction of this book for my granddaughter was a Madeline story set in Texas. Little children, and their parents and grandparents who love Madeline will enjoy this follow-up volume.

Robin Friedman