Rating: 3/5

In recent years James H. Schmitz has become a bit of a cult favorite with the space opera reading community, and I'm not sure why that is - maybe it's because he was more technically competent than the average writer of space adventures in the 60s and lots of older space opera readers don't really want to read the contemporary stuff? Regardless of why that status was born, it's the reason I decided to pick this book up when I was used bookshopping, and after reading it, I can see where his reputation and appeal come from. Now, I'm not a bon a fide Schmitz cultist just yet - this is a good work, but nothing that breaks the bounds of what space opera could be - but I have some nice things to say about it, which I'll get to right after my summary...

*The Witches of Karres* is about the misadventures of a Captain Pausert, a space trader who's been doing pretty good for himself ever since he was able to exponentially multiply the business loan he took from his suitor's father. When the book starts he's on Porlumma for one last shore leave before returning home to hopefully get married, but all of these good things seem to evaporate when he walks past a slave master treating his young slave unfairly; you see, Pausert is a good man, and he can't let this go. So he has a little conflict with the man which winds him in court, where they decide to make him purchase the slave as a resolution. Slave ownership is a big no-no where he comes from, so he's pretty nervous about it, but he resolves to take her back to her homeworld. But then she insists on him purchasing back her two younger sisters too. So he hunts them down and collect them, but he has a weird feeling about these girls, who first get him into trouble when they teleport a large stash of jewels into his cargo hold as repayment for rescuing them. The jewels' owners attack him and aren't content to let his ship go once the girls teleport the jewels back off the ship. Pausert doesn't have enough firepower to survive, but the girls are able to jack into his systems and use some kind of "Sheewash drive" to teleport away from the trouble. Pausert is freaked out and happy to drop the girls off on Karres. He stays there for a few weeks as a welcome guest, but upon leaving he discovers that the inhabitants swapped out all his cargo for unsellable native goods - they meant well, but they screwed him over, and he returns home with his tail between his legs, where he discovers his would-be-bride has pledged herself to a rival suitor who's trying to arrest Pausert for trading in slaves and stealing jewels. Pausert fights back and escapes thanks to Goth, the middle girl, who stowed aboard without his knowledge and used the Sheewash Drive to get them out of trouble...

They wind up by a planet called Uldune, which was once known as a haven for pirates and ruffians. Thankfully, it's been reformed, and upon landing Pausert finds out that they're willing to pay large sums for native Karres goods. Suddenly he's rich and can afford to refit his ship. He also learns a bit more about Karres' witches, like Goth, especially after an encounter with a prankster "klatha" entity called a vatch. He also sees these storms on the horizon and learns of these aliens Worms and their planet-sized Worm World, which supposedly wants to wipe everyone else in the galaxy out? As they deal with ship refitters they wind up held hostage and almost killed by a crazy woman, but Goth's witch powers come in handy, and they go to court where Goth uses light "magic" to make their assailant look like a pig until her soul shapes up. This display of power makes the planetary governor meet with them and show them an old man from Karres he's been holding away until he had witches to send him off with (he has a high respect for witches, and tries to leave himself out of all the politics around hunting them down and discovering the Sheewash drive going on). This old man holds an object which we come to discover might hold the key to destroying Worm World, and Pausert and Goth agree to take the man and this object to a planet beyond a dangerous channel of stars in order to meet with other witches and get him in the right hands. Three other people (the governor's spy, an Imperial spy, and an artifact dealer) go with, and eventually the artifact dealer uses a war robot that he'd tricked everyone else about to try and take over the ship. Pausert lands and they're able to trick the robot into destroying the artifact dealer. They continue on and this vatch appears to Pausert and gives him visions of Worm World, which was apparently inhabited by a different race before an evil computer intelligence moved in. The vatch arranges Pausert and Goth's sisters onto the ship where they have the old man's item and free ship's original (pre-Worm) intelligence, which apparently was just as hellbent on galactic domination as the one that controlled the Worms... the vatch eats this up and laughs, but Pausert is able to use his latent witch abilities to make the vatch send Worm World and its original leaders back to their home dimension. Back on Karres this crazy ability is praised, and Goth - who wants to marry Pausert when she's of age - stays on his crew (with the two former spies) to run space missions for the witches...

If I had to think of one word to describe this book, it would be "competent." And that's not a back-handed compliment; there are enough SF books from this time with obviously inept prose or plots which go completely haywire in the final act that a book which knows what to do with itself deserves to be commended. And the prose does avoid the pitfalls of blockiness that these books sometimes stumble into; I didn't find myself having to re-read actions sequences over and over again to discover what actually happened because of ineptitude, and the way Schmitz described things was never confusing or contradictory. Now, there were some things he had to describe in the final passages that I didn't really love or get into, but... that was personal preference, as we'll get into. One of the more objective oversights about the book was its lack of memorable worldbuilding. Now, the world was perfectly competent - there was a web of interstellar trade centered around the Empire even most of the main planets in the book weren't a part of the Empire, and the way they were positioned throughout the characters' interactions made sense - but the world didn't feel too unique. There was privateering and there were weird interdimensional entities, but there wasn't a thick depiction of interstellar politics like in *Dune* or the unique and memorable environments crafted in every installment of Stableford's Hooded Swan series. The book is kind of devoid of flavor, which is one of the most important elements of space opera. When I look back upon this book a year from now, I won't think of the world of Karres or the politics around it, and as I'm concerned that is a bit of a bummer.

A bigger bummer for me is how the plot took some kind of... floaty turns towards its end. Without spoiling anything, I'm on record saying that telepathic or pseudo-magical events can be a bit lost on me because I find them very hard to grip on some primitive level, and the book's telepathic plot threads do kind of culminate in some noncorporeal shenanigans to end things off. But by and large, it isn't badly done. In fact, everything leading to the vatch first teleporting Pausert and the witches to Worm World and then shoving Worm World back where it came fromwas properly telegraphed earlier in the novel. While this book is definitely a bit episodic in nature (you've got side stories on a seemingly random planet and plenty of phases that everyone has to go through), its end is tightly telegraphed from the get-go without being obvious. It is, by that definition, a better plot than a fair number of its type. This book shouldn't really hit you out of nowhere (with the exception of the aliens who originally inhabited Worm World being just as bad as the obviously evil ones, which did kind of seem like a cheap way to raise the stakes). But then again, it did give the main character the opportunity to have more agency than he would have otherwise, so it kind of work out well from a character-building perspective.

*The Witches of Karres* does have pretty competent characters; while they feel a bit like archetypes, they never feel wooden. And as I just mentioned, Schmitz is able to take this wandering do-gooder and build him up throughout the plot in a way that is a little obvious but not uncharmingly so. The characters are ultimately given agency, one of those things which sometimes gets lost in space operas with a strong telepathic bent. The telepathic characters are also not overused, and while their powers aren't implied to be mystical (remember, technology can be indistinguishable from magic), they're not explained in cheap ways. Most of the characters aged decently since Schmitz seems very capable of writing competent female characters with a bit more common sense than some contemporary feminine heroes, but there's one relationship - Pausert's and Goth's - which might make you feel icky. Basically, he's 28 and she's 10, and she's convinced that they'll marry when she's "of age." Pausert kind of ignores these comments, thinking them to be silly wiles, but Goth's family isn't so sure... and they don't mind. I mean, based on all the characterization displayed I'd say that a ten-year old witch is much more adult than a ten-year old non-witch, but that doesn't make this turn of events "okay" - it wasn't a detractor for me because of how Pausert handled it, but it might be something worth warning you about...

Some authors did jump on the Karres bandwagon after Schmitz's passing and keep the story going after that, but I don't think I'll read those; this book might've been ripe for a sequel, but I think I'd get more satisfaction through reading some of Schmitz's other work, like that from his Hub future history. I'll definitely consider it because this was a competent and enjoyable work that earns a solid 7/10, but Schmitz is also not exactly on the top of my list; *The Witches of Karres* doesn't display the experimentation and flavor of someone like Samuel R. Delaney, and it wasn't as charming as H. Beam Piper's 60s work sometimes was, so it feels a bit dry. But it's perfectly competent and worth your time if you're reading through the Ace Science Fiction Specials or 60s Hugo nominees or just like a good, old-fashioned space adventure. You could certainly do much worse, especially if you made the same mistake as purchasing a witch from Karres...