Rating: 3/5

I finished the book more ambivalent than I thought I would be when I began it. It is essentially a travelogue on Siberia with rich and lengthy digressions into the histories of various native Siberian ethnic groups along the way. As a compilation of a lot of early ethnographic sources, and what later research was available when the book was written, it's very easy-to-read although perhaps a little too comprehensive; as a history ditto; as a travelogue it's very readable. But at various points I felt like it had a little too much of an agenda, by which I mean: this was the author's first trip to and through Siberia, and I wasn't really certain how good her Russian was (she's criticized at one point for not speaking it well; she mentions looking some words up in dictionaries; she's occasionally accompanied by translators and I couldn't quite tell whether their role was to interpret non-Russian languages or heavily-accented Russian speech) or, for that matter, how long she spent in each location she was visiting. She was very clearly looking for some sort of specific manifestation of Siberian native culture and she didn't really find it - but I'm not sure I believe that means it's not there, so much as she might not have been looking for the right thing or might not have been able to recognize what was in front of her. 

At various points reading her descriptions of Siberian towns and cities I was reminded of a visit to Moscow with my mother a few years after this book was published; at one point we were approached by a screaming, wildly gesticulating old man who stank of vodka. My mother assumed we were about to get mugged or something; I had to explain that his actual words had been, "Young ladies, the sidewalk ends ahead and Moscow traffic is very dangerous; you need to turn around and cross the street back there." It's all about context, basically, and in a flying visit to a Siberian town (at what time of year?) in 2001 or so sure everything looks depressing and miserable and no one will talk to you about native Siberian culture (in the former USSR when you are a total stranger and native culture was explicitly repressed as was any sort of dissent and you could trust no one). I'm not sure that says everything you need to know, though.

The book on the whole is readable and engaging and I do recommend it, because it's well written and books about Siberia with this kind of approach remain rare. It just made me wish that there were something by someone with a deeper engagement with the topic, basically.