Rating: 4/5

Even if I hadn't read any James M. Cain before, I had expected a particular kind of story: murder, dangerous men, even more dangerous women, dark seductions that led to terrible things... And what I got with "Mildred Pierce" was actually a very literate and sophisticated story about an unhealthy mother-daughter relationship! Like any good noir novel, it builds a thick and paranoid atmosphere, there's a lot of greed and backstabbing, as well as plenty of sex (though given the time it was written at, it's hinted at, more than anything else), and while there is undoubtedly a female character made of pure evil, no blood is spilled. This book is more about broken illusions, the price of what one perceives as success.

For those, who, like me, had been oblivious about this book, it's the story of a beautiful young woman named Mildred, with a very strong character and a gift for cooking, but truly awful taste in men and inexplicable love for her horrid daughter. The story opens on Mildred kicking out her unemployed, cheating husband Bert, and finding herself in a precarious position: single mother looking to keep a roof over her head in the middle of Depression-era California. Through strong will and resourcefulness, she manages to get a waitress job, which eventually leads her to owning her very own restaurant - and soon booming dining business. But none of that is good enough for her haughty, insufferably snob daughter Veda, who despite her middle-class upbringing, seems to think she ought to have all the privileges and perks of royalty. And Mildred will go to great lengths to satisfy Veda's expectations.

While I couldn't understand Mildred's attachment to that devil-spawn of hers, I otherwise admired her a lot as a character: no-nonsense, proud, independent spirit, hard-working, clever and determined, she pulls off what few women manage to do today - claw their way out of a truly bad situation and live life on their own terms. Cain certainly surprised me with this proto-feminist story! I also liked how he captured that middle-class yearning for what is often perceived as the easy life of the rich and famous. Veda is obsessed with it, sure, but Mildred is also attracted to the grand houses, fancy clothes, cars with drivers and opera seats. Of course, the difference between her and the entitled and boorish Monty is that she worked as hard as one could to earn access to such things, as where he squandered his privilege until he had to scheme to get it back.

Now everyone loves to hate Veda, and trust me, I did too. In fact, I was surprised she didn't end up dead: she is so manipulative, cruel and almost psychopathic that pretty much every other character in the book had a good reason to off her. But none more so than Mildred, whom she seems determined to hurt at every turn. She belittles her hard work and station while profiting from every advantage it offers her, she lies, she schemes - and yet Mildred still passionately loves that monstrous child! The strange power that terrible girl yields is, to me, the true mystery of "Mildred Pierce": I would have kicked her to the curb a lot sooner than her mother does! As for Monty, I hated him almost more than Veda, because while he is an absolute weasel, he doesn't have the brains to realize he's being used just as much as anybody else. Dumbass.

Cain's prose was exactly what I expected though: simple, clean, direct. Not a word is wasted and not a superfluous adjective is added. It works well for the genre and the story, but he was no prose stylist. While I found the pacing a bit too rushed in the second half (especially the ending, which while perfect, could have been fleshed out a bit more), I still really enjoyed "Mildred Pierce": it's a pretty fucked up story, but the characters are unforgettable, and if you like dark and dramatic, you will definitely enjoy this book.