Rating: 3/5

THE FOUNDER OF THE "HARE KRISHNA" MOVEMENT COMMENTS ON THE BHAGAVAD-GITA 

Abhay Charanaravinda (A.C.) Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada (1896-1977) was the Founder of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON; the "Hare Krishna Movement"). He wrote many books/booklets, such as 'Krsna: The Supreme Personality of Godhead,' 'The Nectar of Devotion: The Complete Science of Bhakti-Yoga,' 'The scientific basis of Krsna consciousness,' 'The Perfection of Yoga,' 'Perfect Questions Perfect Answers,' 'Beyond Birth and Death,' etc., and translated many East Indian scriptures, such as 'Bhagavad-Gita As It Is,' 'Srimad-Bhagavatam, First Canto,' etc. His "authorized" biography is: 'Prabhupada: He Built a House in Which the Whole World Can Live.'

The publishers noted in the Introduction to this 1979 book, "what is yoga? The Sanskrit word 'yoga' literally means 'union,' and refers to the union, in love, between the individual consciousness and the Supreme Consciousness, the self and the Superself, the soul and God. Yoga is, indeed, 'the path of perfection,' because it aims toward this most exalted human attainment." (Pg. viii)

Prabhupada explains, "No one really wants to sit down and meditate. Why should we? We're meant for positive activity, for recreation, for pleasure. In Krsna consciousness, our recreation is dancing and chanting, and when we get tired, we take prasada... It is natural to enjoy music and dancing and palatable foods. These are our recreations, and this is our method of meditation. So this yoga system is not at all laborious. It is simply recreation... It is natural, automatic, and spontaneous. It is our real life in the spiritual world." (Pg. 8-9)

He points out, "In this Sixth Chapter... the Lord... states from the very beginning that one cannot become a yogi unless one renounces the desire for sense gratification. Therefore, if one indulges his senses, he cannot be accepted as a yogi. Yoga demands strict celibacy. In the yoga system, there is no sex life. If one indulges in sex, he cannot be a yogi. Many so-called yogis come from India to America and say, 'Yes, you can do whatever you like. You can have as much sex as you like. Just meditate. I will give you some mantra, and you will give me some money.' 

"This is all nonsense. According to the authoritative statements of Sri Krsna, one cannot become a yogi unless he renounces the desire for sense gratification." (Pg. 14) Later, he clarifies, "If one indulges in sex, one's determination will be flickering. Therefore sex life should be controlled according to the rules and regulations... or sex should be given up altogether... but if this is not possible, it should be controlled." (Pg. 67)

He asserts, "This Bhagavad-gita is the science of Krsna consciousness, and in order to understand Krsna, we must be fortunate enough to associate with a person who is in pure Krsna consciousness. We cannot understand Bhagavad-gita simply by acquiring an M.A., Ph.D., or whatever. Bhagavad-gita is a transcendental science, and it requires different senses in order to be understood. Our senses must be purified by the rendering of service, not by the acquiring of academic degrees. There are many Ph.D.'s, many scholars, who cannot understand Krsna." (Pg. 32)

He states, "In the United States and other Western countries, there are many so-called yoga societies, but they do not practice yoga according to these prescriptions. 'A sacred place' refers to a place of pilgrimage... In order to earn one's livelihood, one has to live in a congested city. There is no question of finding a sacred place, but for the practice of yoga, that is the first prerequisite. Therefore in the bhakti-yoga system, the temple is considered the sacred place... 

"[T]he temple of Krsna is the only secluded place for this age... nor is it useful to make a show of practicing yoga in so-called yoga societies and at the same time engage in nonsense." (Pg. 38) Later, he adds, "pseudomeditation on the impersonal void is simply a waste of time. Such a show of yoga practice may be materially lucrative, but useless as far as spiritual realization is concerned... if my students do not attain the real goal of yoga practice, they have wasted their time and money, and I have cheated them." (Pg. 96)

He observes, "One modern example of such determination is that of Mahatma Gandhi, who was determined to resist the powerful British empire by means of non-violence... Such a policy required a great amount of determination, and Gandhi's determination was very strong because he was a brahmacari. Although he had children and a wife, he renounced sex at the age of thirty-six. It was this sexual renunciation that enabled him to be so determined that he was able to lead his country and drive the British from India." (Pg. 46-47)

He suggests, "Lord Jesus Christ ... was God conscious, Krsna conscious, but he was not satisfied in keeping this knowledge within himself. Had he continued to live alone in God consciousness, he would not have met crucifixion. But no. Being a devotee and naturally compassionate, he also wanted to take care of others by making them God conscious... he continued to do so at the risk of his own life. This is the nature of a devotee." (Pg. 70) 

Later, he adds, "in Buddhism... there is no bhakti-yoga, because they do not recognize the Supreme Lord existing as the supreme objective. Christians, however, practice bhakti-yoga when they worship Jesus Christ, because they are accepting him as the son of God and are therefore accepting God." (Pg. 117)

He says, "When a devotee sees a cat or a dog, he sees Krsna in him. He knows that a cat, for instance, is a living being, and that due to his past deeds he has received the body of a cat... The devotee helps the cat by giving it some krsna-prasada so that someday the cat will come to Krsna consciousness. This is seeing Krsna in the cat." (Pg. 79) 

He critiques "theosophists and philosophers who are trying year after year and life after life to understand God... Their attempts are like those of a frog in a well trying to comprehend that vastness of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans." (Pg. 129) 

Later, he adds, "we should not try to understand God and His kingdom by experimental knowledge...in order to understand who God is and what His nature is, we have to accept the information given in Bhagavad-gita." (Pg. 140)

Prabhupada's books will be of great interest to anyone interested in the Krishna movement.