Rating: 4/5

This installment brought us a lot more insight into the lives of French Jewry in the late 12th century (I think it's the first book where the dates that head each chapter are given in Gregorian and Jewish calendars.) The details of medieval life, work and industry are not only interesting, they're integral to the plot -- good plotting.

Newman continues to develop her main characters -- Solomon and Edgar, especially, get some new wrinkles in this volume. I continue to be impressed by Newman's ability to use historical characters seamlessly and gracefully. I was surprised to find, in the Afterword, how many incidental characters are plucked from the annals!

Audiobook note: I do still enjoy Donada Peters's narration, but I am a little surprised that as of this book (the third) the French Catholic characters suddenly have French accents. It means the narrator and the handful of British characters are the only ones without a put-on accent. She does them well, but I find it somewhat offputting, especially since it puts a little distance between me and Catherine, who is after all the ostensible protagonist.This installment brought us a lot more insight into the lives of French Jewry in the late 12th century (I think it's the first book where the dates that head each chapter are given in Gregorian and Jewish calendars.) The details of medieval life, work and industry are not only interesting, they're integral to the plot -- good plotting.

Newman continues to develop her main characters -- Solomon and Edgar, especially, get some new wrinkles in this volume. I continue to be impressed by Newman's ability to use historical characters seamlessly and gracefully. I was surprised to find, in the Afterword, how many incidental characters are plucked from the annals!

Audiobook note: I do still enjoy Donada Peters's narration, but I am a little surprised that as of this book (the third) the French Catholic characters suddenly have French accents. It means the narrator and the handful of British characters are the only ones without a put-on accent. She does them well, but I find it somewhat offputting, especially since it puts a little distance between me and Catherine, who is after all the ostensible protagonist.