Rating: 5/5

GOULD'S NINTH BOOK OF ESSAYS FROM "NATURAL HISTORY MAGAZINE"

Stephen Jay Gould (1941-2002) wrote in the Preface to this 2000 book, "In the fall of 1973, I received a call from Alan Ternes, editor of Natural History magazine. He asked me if I would like to write columns on a monthly basis... (Until that day, I had published only in technical journals.) The idea intrigued me, and I said that I'd try three or four. Now, 290 monthly essays later... I look only a little way forward to the last item of this extended series---to be written, as number 300 exactly, for the millennial issue of January 2001. One really should follow the honorable tradition of quitting while still ahead, a rare form of dignity chosen by such admirable men as Michael Jordan and Joe DiMaggio... 

"This ninth volume of essays will therefore be the penultimate book in a series that shall close by honoring the same decimal preference lying behind our millennial transition." He adds, "I can only thank readers who have joined me on this rocky journey. For only the conjunction of growing fellowship and increasing knowledge... can validate the accident of our existence by our free decision to make maximal use of those simple gifts that nature and evolution have granted us."

He observes, "The idea that observation can be pure and unsullied (and therefore beyond dispute)---and that great scientists are, by implication, people who can free their minds from the constraints of surrounding culture and reach conclusions strictly by untrammeled experiment and observation, joined with clear and universal logical reasoning---has often harmed science by turning the empiricist into a shibboleth... we must also act as watchdogs to debunk the authoritarian version of the empiricist myth---and to reassert ... that scientists can work only within their social and psychological contexts." (Pg. 31)

He points out, "We must not equate the fading of a name though time with the extinction of a person's influence. In so doing, we propagate one of the many errors inspired by our generation's fundamental confusion of celebrity with status.... under certain definite circumstances---all exemplified in Buffon's life and career---a loss of personal recognition through time actually measures the spread of impact, as innovations become so 'obvious' and 'automatic' that we lose memory of sources and assign their status to elementary logic from time immemorial. (I do not, of course, challenge that truism that most fadings record the passage of a truly transient reason for celebrity; Linda Tripp and Tonya Harding come immediately to my mind, but surely not to the consciousness of any future grandchildren.)" (Pg. 76)

He notes, "Lyell presented the three pillars of Pozzuoli as a triumphant icon for both key postulates of his uniformitarian system---the efficacy of modern causes, and the relative constancy of their magnitude through time... Now I admire Lyell enormously as a great thinker and writer, but I have never been a partisan of his uniformitarian views... But my own observations of the pillars of Pozzuoli seemed only to strengthen and extend his conclusions on the extent and gradual character of geological change during historical times." (Pg. 160)

He admits, "Darwin remains my personal hero, and 'The Origin of Species' will always be my favorite book---but Darwin didn't invent evolution and would never have persuaded an entire intellectual community without substantial priming from generations of earlier evolutionists (including his grandfather). These forebears prepared the ground, but never devised a plausible mechanism... and they never recorded, or even knew how to recognize, enough supporting documentation." (Pg. 188)

He argues, "We suppose that we have introduced sufficient caution in qualifying statements about 'genes for' traits by admitting their only partial, and often quite small, contribution to an interactive totality. Thus, we imagine that we may legitimately talk of a 'gay gene' as long as we add the provisio that only 15 percent of sexual preference records this cause. But we need to understand why such statements have no meaning and therefore become ... worse than merely false. Many genes interact with several other factors to influence sexual preference, but no unitary and separable 'gay gene' exists. When we talk about a 'gene for' 10 percent of behavior A, we simply commit the old Davenportian fallacy on the 'little bit pregnant' analogy." (Pg. 280)

Besides being a highly creative evolutionary theorist, Gould was also a brilliant writer and an engaged "public intellectual." His presence is sorely missed on the scientific and literary scene.