Rating: 1/5

This started out intriguing, but there were two big flaws that ruined it for me. The first was that the h's musical talent was pretty much ignored until the very end of the book, The second was, that after she had a husband who was abusive and a lover (the H) who apparently abandoned her, she was willing to get involved with yet another Mr. Wrong, a man who was ready and eager to set her up as his mistress. True, she was had lost her job, was pregnant and felt she had nowhere to turn, but with all that musical gift, and living in a city, she could have found employment somewhere, her pregnancy notwithstanding. It may have been the 19th c, but she was telling people she was a widow so she'd have been considered respectable, and penniless widows always garnered sympathy.

Instead, she too easily gets talked into something that goes against her moral standards, even bargains with her would-be lover, telling him he either buys her a house or she keeps her legs together. We're supposed to believe this innocent Mary Sue has become a calculating kept woman overnight???

Even worse, she feels nothing for this man, not even a hint of desire (she tests this out by letting him kiss and grope her), and after being beaten by her ex and supposedly seduced and abandoned by the h, it's tough to believe she'd be so ready to let another man use her body, let alone offer it up as a business deal.

Worse still, was the way he talked to her, asking for a feel here or there, to let him put his hand up her skirt, for her to open her legs a little, DISGUSTING!!! He sounded like a horny teenage boy! At least a teenager has an excuse for that crude talk, but a grown, supposedly sophisticated man???? If I were her, I'd have put my knee to good use and made him sing soprano!

Worst of all, she was contemplating having sex with him while pregnant with the H's baby! GROSS!!!!

Not that the H was anything to rave about, as he had kidnapped her and planned to use her as part of a revenge plot against her ex. But still, it just seemed so sleazy to me!

Also: the reason she ran away and got into this mess was because she believed some negative stuff she heard about the H, without considering the source (the H's former father-in-law, who was not exactly unbiased). Not the brightest person!

Afterward, when the H explains a lot of things (finally) and points out that she had several alternatives she could have considered, rather than become a rich guy's plaything, she acted like a dim bulb and felt she had no choice. In fact, at one point in the story she actually felt it was her duty to go back to her ex, and nearly got the crap beaten out of her by that dumb decision!!! 

 (The ex did the beating, NOT the H!)

I think this h was a bit of a masochist and maybe got a kick out of men using her. After all, she fell for the H when he was in revenge mode and wanted her for a bargaining chip, as well as a bed warmer. And later, when he kept telling her he loved her, wanted to marry her and wanted their baby, she kept stubbornly resisting him. Maybe if he had slapped her a bit, called her a bimbo and fondled her breasts in public, she'd have said yes sooner???

Even after she learns the OM cared so little for her that he readily accepted money and a good job offer to dump her, she was still polite to him the next time they met, as if she were afraid of hurting his feelings. RIDICULOUS!!!

I'll bet if some crazy man showed up in town with tons of dynamite, ready to blow up everyone in sight unless he got a night of passion with a woman, she'd gladly have offered herself up as a sacrifice!

TSTL AND DNF