Rating: 3/5

Disturbing. 

Tenderness is the story of two emotionally stilted young adults: Lori, a fifteen-year-old runaway with an unhealthy fixation with finding what she calls "tenderness" and Eric, an eighteen-year-old who has just been released from a "facility" he was in for three years for murdering his mother and stepfather. Lori, whose body matured far faster than her emotions, has left home temporarily because her mother's most recent live-in boyfriend has gotten a little too close for comfort. Not Lori's comfort--she doesn't really mind, as she finds his touch "tender", but she is worried that it will upset her mother if she finds out. She leaves home to find her current obsession, Throb, a music idol who will be playing a concert in a nearby town. When a surprise kiss from Throb turns out to be a disappointment, she finds a new object to fixate on: recently released Eric, who just so happens to be staying at his aunt's house in the same town. Lori recognizes Eric as a boy who had been nice to her once three years earlier, and decides she must see him again.

From Eric's point of view, we find that the murders he was convicted for were neither his first nor his most meaningful victims. Eric is a serial killer, having started with small animals and graduating rather soon to human victims. He found "tenderness" with three girls before moving on to his mother and her husband. Even while still in the "facility" he begins to fixate on a girl he sees there, who he calls "the senorita". He plans to meet with her once he is released, and she indicates that she is more than willing to meet with him too. 

Eric and Lori's paths soon intersect, and readers view their disturbing relationship through both participants' eyes. Lori admits her obsession, slowly comes to realize what Eric really is, and soon tells him that she loves him and would never betray him to anyone. Eric, for his part, does appear to feel something for Lori, though it is not at all a healthy, real concern for her as a person for in his mind he never refers to her as anything but "the girl". They spend time together, and readers are kept in constant suspense about what Eric will do next--just how safe can Lori possibly be with him? The ending is surprising, and leaves one contemplating the nature of true justice.