Rating: 5/5

Imprisoned by the Nazis during World War 2, Simon Wiesenthal accidentally encounters a dying SS soldier. The soldier regrets his participation in Nazi crimes, especially the killing of a young Jewish family. He begs Wiesenthal for forgiveness. Uncomfortable and uncertain how to respond, Wiesenthal remains silent, but remains with the soldier, and listens, a witness to his account. After the war, he visits the soldier's mother, and finds a woman grieving her dead son, who she still considers "a good boy", unaware of his crimes. He witnesses her grief, but realizing she is a fundamentally good woman, he remains silent on her son's actions.

Wiesenthal is haunted by his encounter with the SS soldier. Should he have forgiven the man? Or, contrariwise, would offering such forgiveness have itself been wrong? How should he relate to the encounter?

The book poses many problems: when should we forgive? What should we forgive? What do we have no right or ability to forgive? How may victims relate to their oppressors?

Wiesenthal's account is followed by responses from 53 people, with very diverse experience -- from the war in Bosnia to Desmond Tutu to a Nazi (Albert Speer, Hitler's architect). They are not easy to read. It's a written symposium on both forgiveness as a general topic, as well as the Holocaust in particular.

I cannot do this book justice here. I simply haven't read it sufficiently deeply. But I will make five observations:

First, convening the written symposium is immensely powerful. You are forced to confront many different points of view, often in opposition to one another. Many of the writers have themselves suffered -- in the concentration camps, or elsewhere in the world. This clash of viewpoints is extremely helpful in clarifying your own thinking.

Second, one recurring theme is of deeply devout people who lost their belief after experiencing terrible events. In some accounts, they come to believe "God has gone away"; in others, that "God is evil". How terrible that must be, and their experiences must have been, for someone who previously put their God at the center of their life. Yet others, experiencing similar events, retain and even grow their belief in a loving God. What makes one person come to believe God is evil, while another's belief in a loving God deepens?

Third, one is reminded that forgiveness is a skill. And yet it is one I understand poorly; I do not understand the series of actions that make forgiveness more or less effective; deeper or shallower; wise or foolish; ethical or unethical. What meaning would it have had if Wiesenthal had simply mouthed words of forgiveness? To what extent would a rote forgiveness have any meaning? I've occasionally noticed that our collective understanding about the *how* of forgiveness seems very weak -- much weaker, for instance, than the collective understanding of what makes a good apology. It is one thing to say words of forgiveness; quite another to go through the deep emotional changes that express true forgiveness. I expected the responses in the symposium to show a more developed account of how to forgive well, but by and large did not find that to be the case.

(Note that I am writing this review about a third of the way through reading the Symposium. Usually I finish a book before reviewing it. Here I thought writing the review would help me process it better, so began earlier.)

Fourth, one is reminded throughout that evil is its own punishment. In Alice Walker's book "The Color Purple" the main character Celie, abused by her husband, eventually leaves him, telling him "Anything you do to me, already done to you". But while it's punishment, it's not sufficient. For practical reasons, other powers must hold to account. As one of the people comments in their response to Wiesenthal: "For me the question is not can we forgive Karl [the SS soldier] or should we forgive Karl, but dare we do so? If there are crimes in my lifetime which are unforgivable, certainly those of Hitler and his henchmen have committed them."

Fifth, I notice one point of discomfort for me: the idea of "a Jew" forgiving "an SS man". This is the logic of the account: both are largely anonymous to one another, apart from very coarse identity markers, and the specific crime to which the SS man admits. And yet relating to one another through such coarse identity markers seems to me at the root of much that is bad in the world. I don't say this as a criticism of the book -- I'm quite certain this is a deliberate choice by Wiesenthal. It perhaps implicitly carries the question of to what extent we *must* learn far more of each other, to judge or to forgive.

A challenging book, but also one that will be rewarding to frequently and more deeply re-engage. I suspect my point of view will change a lot.