Rating: 5/5

It is 1666, The spring after Hélène's papa passed away of small pox. Leaving her and her sixteen year old sister, Catherine orphans. Their cousin Pierre and his wife and daughter come to the house, but they kick out Hélène and Catherine, forcing them to fend for themselves. But then a merchant named Mousier Deçhamps recommends that they sign up to be Filles du Roi, a program sending young women to be wives for the largely male population in New France. In a few weeks, Catherine decides to leave, and take Hélène with her to be her maid until she is old enough to marry. Soon, they are off to the new world, but as they leave, Hélène meets a young girl, named Kateri Aubrey, who is half Mohauck and half French. She lives in New France, and is travelling with her father, a widower named Jean. The other Filles du Roi are interested in him, but he refuses to accept marriage. At first all is going as planned, but Catherine and most of the other Filles du Roi die during the voyage of Typhus, leaving Hélène alone in the world. They arrive in the new world, to discover what it will bring. Shortly after they arrive in New France, the boat brining the girls is almost destroyed by a fire. While Mousier Deçhamps rescues the other girls, he leaves Kateri trapped in her cabin, simply because she's a native. But Hélène and Jean Aubrey save her just in time. There is also a blessing for Hélène, an old family friend has come to live in Montréal and is running a hotel. Tante Barbe take Hélène in and offers her a position as a cook and a maid in the hotel. She accepts, and is greatful that Kateri and Jean live not far at all from the hotel. as the months pass, the bond between Kateri and Hélène grows, and strangely ,one with Mousier Aubrey. This is interrupted when Mousier Deçhamps askes Hélène to marry him. She refuses greatly, but Mousier Deçhamps does this multiple times, with every time being where there is an argument with Mousier Aubrey, or Mousier Deçhamps convincing Hélène to stop hanging out with Kateri, her closest friend. That winter, Hélène and Jean's. bond becomes closer together when she nurses him for a month due to smallpox that took away her family. Hélène is greatful when spring comes again (in April or Avril) One of her fellow Filles du Roi, that was travelling with her on the boat marries. But then, Jean takes Hélène aside for a talk, he askes her to marry him!!!! She says yes right away, because she did not realize until that moment that, she loves him. They marry and raise four healthy children.
This was the first Dear Canada book I read. I didn't think I would like it that much. Boy, was I wrong.Itwas amazing and got me into the whole series! I also read this right about the time we were studying New France in school. Surprisingly, there was no mention of the Filles du Roi whatsoever in the New France unit. It seems like everyone's more interested in the habitants and the courier de bois.THANKS FOR PUBLISHING THIS, DEAR CANADA! WE LOVE YOU!