Rating: 5/5

Can You Keep a Secret is possibly my favorite Kinsella standalone.

It follows the story of Emma, an ordinary, slightly ditzy girl (think Anna from Anna and the French Kiss) who accidentally spills all her secrets to a stranger on the plane. And that stranger later turns out to be her boss. 

In honor of this book—and because I absolutely suck at writing reviews for books I love, I am going to spill to you, strangers of the Internet, all of my secrets. Okay, not all, but five.

1. I used to be majorly obsessed with Seventeen magazine.  Back then, I begged my parents numerous times over the dinner table to buy me a subscription (all the savings!), but they always refused. In hindsight, that was probably a good thing because I soon got tired of all the high-definition pages of clothes, shoes, and make-up. The real sustenance was located in the back and only covered 4-5 pages. I'm proud to say that nowadays I blow my money on more worthy things, like badly-written YA novels that induce headaches.

2. 
That's a biggie.

3. I'm a huge fan of Taylor Swift, even though liking her is an extremely uncool thing these days. Her lyrics are prose spun into music, that's all the reason I need.

4. I sometimes think The Book Thief is better than the Harry Potter series. Then I make a pro-vs-con list in my head and all is right in the world once more.

5. I love Kinsella's work. A lot of people hate them and I get it. Her heroines are essentially recycled book to book. The love interest is usually American and a logical businessman compared to the scatterbrained MC. They're filled with first-world problems and limited character growth. The problems work themselves out most of the time and the MC and Mr. Businessman go home happy and schmooze.

But at the same time, they're also fun, compulsively readable, and keep me up reading til 2am on a school night because I can't stop flipping the pages. They remind me that reading is indeed a hobby and something I look forward to after a long day, unlike some books I could mention *cough*The Death Cure*cough* 

So the next time someone asks me who my favorite authors are, I'll say: "Stephen King, J. K Rowling, George R.R. Martin, Julie Kagawa, Markus Zusak, Meg Cabot, Sophie Kinsella—Yes, Sophie Kinsella."