Rating: 5/5

Personal Response
I enjoyed reading Heart of a Champion. It's one of the best books I have read in my lifetime. I can relate to this book because I have a great love for baseball. As I read on, the story kept getting more and more interesting.

Plot Summary
The main character in the story is Seth. His father, who loved golf, died when he was young and he doesn't remember much, if anything, of him. He was raised by his mother that has to do double duty and be the mother and father to Seth. Seth loves baseball, even more than his dad loved golf. One day Seth decided to go to Henry Ford park. While he was there he saw a father and his son. The father, Mr. Winter, and son, Jimmy, invited Seth to play some baseball with them. The three of them became great friends and would meet every weekend to play some ball together. Jimmy invites Seth to go to a MLB game with him. While they were there, Mr. Winter gets really drunk and starts yelling at other fans. Jimmy's mother and father get a divorce because of Mr. Winter's drinking problem. Jimmy and his mother move away and Seth is heartbroken that he just lost his best friend. Seth continues to play baseball and even plays jimmy once in the year, Seth's team loses. Jimmy and his mother move back to town. Seth and Jimmy catch up where they left off and are still great friends. Jimmy joins the baseball team for the last half of their freshman year. Jimmy and another kid on the team, Todd, do phenomenal. The next year Jimmy and Todd are on varsity and Seth is left to play on JV by himself. Seth kind of loses Jimmy as a friend because he is hanging out with Todd and his group of friends. Junior year baseball comes around and all three of the boys are on varsity. There team does great the whole year. After the last game of the regular season Jimmy, Todd, and a couple other guys decide to go to Huddart park and celebrate by drinking beer. Jimmy gets into a fatal car crash and dies with one game left to go in the season. The team plays the game for Jimmy and they win but end up losing in the first round of the playoffs.

Characterization
Seth Barham: The book introduces him when he is in the eighth grade. At the beginning of the book, Seth is a very shy, but by the end of the book he opens up to people and becomes confident in himself. He was shy in the beginning because his father died when he was young, but then he learned that his father loved him dearly and he left the grudge that he had.

Jimmy Winter: The book also introduces him in the eighth grade. Jimmy has a pretty good life with his father and mother. His dad is like a drill sergeant, and makes him do everything on the baseball field correctly or he has to do it again. Jimmy is pretty outspoken and likes to make new friends and meet new people. He isn't afraid to try something that might not be the best for him or his health, but he's going to have a good time doing it. I think the one thing that is holding him up from making more friends is his dad is a drunk and Jimmy always has to worry about him.

Recommendation:
I would recommend this book to someone who likes baseball. It has great character development and the plot is easy to understand. Ages thirteen through eighteen would be a suitable age for this book.