Rating: 2/5

I have read Constance O'banyon in my youth and cannot say that I remember much about her works. I only recall that she wrote a lot of native American stories. This book is the first of a series and reads a lot like Catherine Anderson's Comanche Moon. 

I drew the comparison not because I had the impression that one was copying the other. It is just there are only so many scenarios where the pairing of a native American hero and a "white-faced" heroine could work. In both books the native American is a leader of a tribe, driven by some kind of magic power, believed that a white woman would be their mate. The white woman in both stories, naturally were repulsed and refused to believe that their future was bound to this man with face paint and fought most annoyingly because the authors made them seem like they were throwing a hissy fits. Not that I think they should have just submitted and done whatever the men told them to do. I just had the impression that both women were a little too blind and acted very much like a shrew, blaming and accusing the heroes. Their antics tired me while I certainly understand that they were driven by fears and it was probably only natural for anyone to act that way. I don't know. I just get tired of shrewish women who wouldn't listen to reason or who couldn't make the best out of a situation very easily. 

My biggest problem with the book though, was not that Joanna annoyed me. That she did. But I think I have a bigger problem with the juvenile relationship development. Windhawk saw Joanna, and he fell in love (what?). He knew in an instant that she was THE ONE (what?). He could not explain to Joanna that he did not attack her wagon train because of his limited language skill but he could go on and on about other things (what?). He made Joanna have sex with him and even thought Joanna did not want to her virgin body could not say no (what?). Then he decided oh no I must have her heart so I wouldn't sleep with her until she gave her heart to me. (what?) And Joanna started feeling ignored: oh why is he not paying attention to me after he slept with me? (what?) Joanna kept waiting for him to pounce on her, which he did not so Joanna was relieved and disappointed (what?). Then Windhawk brought her horse back to her and somehow proved to her that her body needed him (what?) and in Joanna's head a lightbulb went on: Oh I love him (double what?). 

I cannot bear it. I don't mind if they started with insta-lust or fell in love early in the book, but something has to happen. They have to be allowed the opportunity to develop feelings for each other. There was none for either side. But of course they loved each other. The question is never about timing, it is about relationship development. If done well a reader can feel the connection in the first 20%. 

Alas in this book, this reader felt none of the connection, despite the prematurely proclaimed love from both sides. Also I must note that perhaps this "pre-destined" kind of stories don't work for me. I can work with "invisible connection" and all that, but "destiny" seems a little cheap and convenient. When a story involves native Americans it is often that the author would use a little mystical element. I cannot say that I have seen it done in a way which speaks to me. It always seems like the men are not sincere because they are just doing what they think destiny is telling them do and the women are always forced to live with the men's idea of what is right for them.