Rating: 4/5

Poets and Lovers
Review of the Arrow Books/Cornerstone Digital Kindle eBook edition (2009) of the original Hutchinson hardcover (1970)

High instincts, before which our mortal nature, 
Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised. - William Wordsworth from Ode to Immortality

This continues my 2022-23 binge read / re-read of Ruth Rendell (aka Barbara Vine and this is the 5th of her Chief Inspector Wexford series. A Guilty Thing Surprised involves the murder of Elizabeth Nightingale with the suspects being the various members of her &amp; her husband Quentin's extended household and that of her brother, Denys Villiers, who is an obsessive expert in the life and poetry of William Wordsworth.

  Villiers smiled a little, apparently at something in his own book. Aware as he was of the huge vanity of writers, Wexford was nevertheless unable to understand how one of them could actually laugh at something he had written himself.

Cover image for the original Hutchinson (UK) hardcover edition from 1970. Image sourced from Wikipedia.

The poetry aspect is actually a clue to the final solution which dawns upon Inspector Wexford towards the end. In the meantime there are plenty of suspicious goings on to investigate and explain. Was the marriage of the Nightingales actually as happy as it appeared? Why did Elizabeth and her brother seem to hate each other? Was the youthful gardener a possible secret lover of Elizabeth? Wexford and his faithful assistant Mike Burden have many trails to follow before the conclusion is reached. 

This was yet another excellent and unconventional mystery from Ruth Rendell and I am excited to continue this binge read for 2023. I have to try and source some of the non-Wexfords as well, as I have never previously read those. 

  One might say with Wilde that the good ended happily and the bad unhappily, for that is the meaning of fiction.

Trivia and Links
A Guilty Thing Surprised was adapted for the Ruth Rendell / Inspector Wexford Mysteries TV series (1987-2000) as Series 2, Episodes 1 to 3 in 1988 with actor George Baker as Inspector Wexford. You can watch the entire 3 episodes on YouTube here.

Read about Five Key Works by Ruth Rendell in The Guardian, May 2, 2015.