Rating: 4/5

Such a revolutionary work for its age. I feel thankful that Betty Friedan had the guts to publish this feminist manifesto and give voice to the dissatisfaction of so many women around her. Keep in mind The Feminine Mystique's publication date: now, it may seem obvious that women are so much more than placid housewives and subservient sex objects, but back in early twentieth century America, they still faced blatant sexism masked under messages about how to maintain a family. I still see these issues play out today, such as when my female friends and I worry about being "too emotional" or "not attractive/intelligent/interesting/etc." enough for a guy to text us back (both of these concerns = constructed by the patriarchy). Check out this cool quote on seeing through the feminine mystique:

"To face the problem is not to solve it. But once a woman faces it, as wmen are doing all over America without much help from the experts, once she asks herself 'What do I want to do?' she begins to find her own answers. Once she begins to see through the delusions of the feminine mystique - and realizes that neither her husband nor her children, nor the things in her house, nor sex, nor being like all the other women, can give her a self - she often finds the solution much easier than she anticipated."

Overall, my favorite message from The Feminine Mystique centers on not needing a man, boyfriend, or husband to feel complete. In essence, you have all the tools within you to complete yourself. In a society so bent on highlighting the merits of romantic love, I appreciate Friedan's focus on finding emotional fulfillment and creating satisfaction on one's own. I only take a star off because Friedan ignores intersectionality (i.e., acts as a white feminist) and trash talks gay people, which kinda hurt my feelings - and shows her ignorance. To end this review, one last quote I loved:

"When their mothers' fulfillment makes girls sure they want to be women, they will not have to 'beat themselves down' to be feminine; they can stretch and stretch until their own efforts will tell them who they are. They will not need the regard of a boy or man to feel alive. And when women do not need to live through their husbands and children, men will not fear the love and strength of a woman, nor need another's weakness to prove their own masculinity. They can finally see each other as they are. And this may be the next step in human evolution."