Rating: 3/5

Cargo of Eagles was the last novel Margery Allingham wrote, and she only got through part of it; her husband picked up where she left off and finished the book. He wasn’t the writer she was.

The story starts in classic Allingham style, with cryptic conversations and a mystery whose dimensions are unclear to the reader. Allingham doesn’t follow traditional murder-mystery patterns—somebody dies, somebody else figures out why and whodunit; often in the early chapters of her books, we can’t even see what it is we are intended to figure out. Vivid, original settings and characters take the place of the usual formula and keep the reader engaged. In this case it is a coastal village full of unfriendly locals and shadowy “tearaways”—vagabond, delinquent youngsters of the sort so prevalent in the 1960s. The village thrived on smuggling for centuries and has a tradition of discouraging attention from the outside in order to protect its criminal activities.

There is a rather milky young couple involved, an American anthropologist and a female doctor who has unexpectedly inherited a house in the village. The American has been encouraged to visit the place by Allingham’s aging detective, Albert Campion, and we get to see a bit more of his sidekick Lugg than we have in the preceding couple of novels. But they, along with his retired or about-to-retire colleagues in the CID and Intelligence, are all rather exhausted and apathetic. I loved the setting but wondered where the story was going.

Her husband’s contribution to the book didn’t help matters. It’s clear he had a more conventional mind than his wife, with less of a sense of the macabre and more crotchets. Over the course of the book the young hooligans come to be treated the way the elderly tended to view the hippies in the 1960s—as irresponsible druggies, weaklings, and overgrown children. I feel Allingham would have found more possibilities in them. 

The plot, too, starts to meander and is wrapped up in a Campion-explains-all scene that was a lazy and hole-riddled resolution. Campion for all his unconventional ways was always a rigidly ethical character, and it was disappointing to me to see him so blithely letting all sorts of criminal behavoir slide, as well as engaging in a bit of it himself. And an element of the story is introduced in that final reveal scene which was in no way hinted at throughout the book, something Allingham would never have allowed.

In all, it was a disappointing end to a wonderful run for one of my favorite mystery writers.