Rating: 1/5

It’s never a good sign when the book starts with an introduction explaining the book. Asprin admits he bit off more than he could chew when he made a deal with his publisher to write one short, light hearted book per year. Basically he was under pressure to do the thing he had agreed to do and freaked out and threw shit together just to meet his previously agreed upon deadline. 

I hate this one. The way Guido talks makes zero sense for someone who has a masters degree. I think it says somewhere he’s talked like that since a high school production of Guys and Dolls or something. Which, first of all, is stupid, and second of all, was the whole Mob in that production bc they all talk like that except Don Bruce, who’s gay and therefore wears lots of purple (?). 

The stupid plot in this one is that Queen Hemlock is trying to take over Klah and Skeeve gives a shit for some reason even though he doesn’t live there anymore and doesn’t seem too attached to it in any way except to say he’s from there if anyone asks. So he makes his team go try and fight her while he goes to Perv to try to track down Aahz, who left in the last book after Skeeve started acting like a douchebag. So Guido and Nunzio try to infiltrate the army or something and meanwhile Tananda gets half her hair fried off by Gleep, who is apparently secretly super smart and a bit of a sociopath? Definitely not crazy about that characterization. 

So after a whole book of not funny at all military humor, (bc who doesn’t pick up a fantasy humor book hoping for a satire of army life), the very last chapter has them all in the throne room and then Skeeve appears and the entire kingdom loses its shit “Ooh it’s the Great Skeeve! It’s the court magician!! Oooh!” He hasn’t been there in years; he’s not the court magician anymore. Did they not get a new one? I mean wtf. So then Hemlock tells Skeeve she’s going to abdicate unless he marries her. So? Who gives a shit? How is that Skeeve’s problem? More importantly, why is he making it everyone else’s problem??? If something awful was happening on Trollia, Chumley and Tananda would probably not even tell their precious little baby. Ugh. 

Reading these again and all in order makes the authors personal issues super obvious. He clearly struggled to write this one and I’m gonna assume a lot of it is similar to Phule’s Company. I’m not going to say he’s not a very good writer; IIRC that’s gonna be pretty transparent in the next book.