Essays in English History is one of those tributes to the joys of recycling, in this case a variety of essays, book reviews, and magazine articles covering modern English political history, mostly looking at figures from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

The most fun of these essays is the final one on Manchester in which he recollects the park wardens brushing the soot off the tree leaves, the business man Samuel Alexander sitting in the front row of the audience during concerts by the Halle orchestra reading the newspaper with a determined rustling of the pages during pieces of music that didn't interest him, the love lives of Lancastrians, as well as his father travelling once through London and not liking it at all.

As with Europe: Grandeur and Decline Taylor makes pointed judgements and you get a sense occasionally of how controversial his views could be, however a collection of recycled journalism probably doesn't convey the full range of his thinking and approach. Perhaps a full length book doesn't either.

I enjoyed his essay on Lloyd George and his lengthy piece on politics in the First World War. So much of the national myth about victory in World War II is caught up in Churchillmania that it is interesting to see a very different political environment of the first world war in which back room scheming pushed Asquith out of office and opened the door of Ten Downing Street to Lloyd George. There was also poignant enjoyment in reading his story about George VI worrying himself to death, the worried King during WWII asked Churchill what he should do if Churchill was to die, Churchill replied that Anthony Eden should then be appointed Prime Minister. His Majesty was reassured, but then a few days later he asked Churchill - 'but should I do if both you and Mr Eden are killed?' 

In the light of the vote in the UK to exit the EU I was powerfully struck by Taylor's contention that the revolution of 1688 really was glorious. Not because, as somebody who voted to remain, I too have no hope for the future beyond the House of Orange again landing a substantial invasion force on the south coast and overthrowing the government, but I heard a blogger - in this case somebody who pretends to be, or believes himself to be, or channels, or plays at being, the long dead Archbishop Cranmer (1489-1556) - on the radio defending voting to leave the EU on the basis of England being an Anglican country and so distinct in religion from the rest of Europe. Which is where it all came together with Taylor's comment about 1688 and all that. The Glorious Revolution was glorious if you were Anglican and particularly if you were part of the very small number of people who constituted the political nation. On the other hand if you were Catholic, then it would be another 141 years before you were permitted to become an equal member of British society. This struck me as curious coming from Taylor because he seems to me to be particularly aware of the role of the role of the Protestant groups who were excluded from complete participation British society - the non-conformists dissenters. 1688 wasn't particularly glorious for them either, for all that they may have been correct to be suspicious of the motivation behind James II's attempts to include them in British political life.

So what struck me was how remarkable and powerful our national myths can be, if even as sharp, even spiky, observer of modern European history such as Taylor can accept them uncritically. Then again perhaps he could envision just how terrifying a Francophile Stuart Catholic monarchy might have been with an oppressive regime of royal mistresses which would have differed so markedly from the royal mistresses of the Protestant Hanoverian dynasty. And also Britain would have had to endure the construction of its own imitation Versailles, one need only consider the fountains to realise just how frightful that might have been.