Rating: 3/5

A thought-provoking exploration of the dangers of the Harry Potter books (presenting witchcraft as positive and morality as subjective). The book makes many valid points, but it overestimates the dangers and overreacts to them. I know many fans of the Potter books, and to my knowledge none of them have delved into witchcraft or occultism. The book is repetitive, making the same basic points throughout the book, and giving different examples. The most helpful chapter is the one comparing magic in Rowling's Wizarding World to magic in Middle-Earth and Narnia.

The author summarizes the books by saying, "The novels actually are filled with potentially harmful messages exalting occultism and moral relativism."

Notes
The Potter books promote what the Bible condemns: witchcraft, sorcery, divination, fortune-telling, mediumship, spellcasting, potions, necromancy, astrology, numerology. Rowling argues that magic is a mere literary device and her books don't advocate "learning magic," but "she has taken great pains to ensure that the occult-related material in her volumes accurately reflects true occultism. In fact, up to one-third of the occultism in her series parallels information Rowling uncovered during her personal studies of witchcraft/magick." (interview on The Diane Rehm Show, 10/20/1999).

The Potter books present ambiguous or unbiblical morality, even by "good" characters: lying, cheating, stealing, taking revenge, disobeying rules, crude language, swearing. Kids and adults don't follow objective standards of right and wrong, but their own self-interests and subjective rationalizations. Kids and adults break rules, even their own.

Forward
Bible forbids magic: Deut 18:9-14; Gal 5:19-21; Rev 9:20-21; 18:23; 22:15; 2 Kings 9:22; 17:17; 21:6; 23:24; Acts 8:9-24; 16:16-18; 19:19; Isa 19:3; 47:9-15; 1 Chron 10:13-14; 2 Chron 33:6; Micah 5:12; Nahum 3:4-7; Lev 19:31; 20:6, 27; 1 Sam 28:7-19

Sorcery in a Stone: A Closer Look
Rowling: "Harry wants to get back at Dudley … [A]nd we readers want him to get back at Dudley. And, in the long run, trust me, he will."

Enter the Chamber: A Closer Look
Potter books don't contain true incantations, but do illustrate importance of spells to occultists, and significance that words play in casting spells.

Potter books include many elements of actual witchcraft and occultism (e.g., Hand of Glory).

Potter books go beyond using magic as a mere literary device to delving into it.

Potter books include divination and other forms of communication with the spirit world, including communicating with ghosts, magical creatures, and enchanted objects. The Bible condemns communication with any part of the spirit world besides God.

Children can become so enthralled with magic and wizardry that they seek it out in the real world. In 2000, the Pagan Federation had to appoint a new youth officer to deal with "a flood of inquiries" triggered by the Potter books.

Azkaban's Prisoner: A Closer Look
Bible never presents witchcraft positively. It presents spells, sorcery, divination, witches, witchcraft as "mere superstitions that do have a dark reality behind them."

Definitions of good and evil in Potter books aren't biblical definitions. In Potter books, both sides rely on same power source (magic), both sides are subjective in their discerning right from wrong, and both use similar acts to pursue their goals (occultism, lying, rule-breaking).

"Good" characters (e.g., Trelawney) engage in divination, fortune-telling, mediumship, palmistry, tea leaves, fire omens. Books also feature arithmancy, numerology, charms.Rowling's message is simple: If someone is "good" and he has good intentions, or if he is particularly clever, or exceptionally bright, or somehow more special than others, then he can break rules, lie and steal.The only characters that seem to care about following rules are evil ones like Dursleys, or mean characters like Snape and Filch.

Potter books contain negative depictions of disciplinarians and positive depictions of deceitfulness.

Goblet of Death: A Closer Look
Rowling's books, at the very least, will desensitize children to the dangers of occultism, which in turn may create in them a general sympathy toward a spiritually detrimental set of beliefs. For some children the Potter series may even spark a desire for genuine occult materials and paraphernalia.What Potter books teach
1. Disobedience isn't a very serious offense.
2. When rules/laws are broken, it's possible to find a way to get around punishment, by lying or using connections.
3. Obedience should be forsaken in favor of one's own desires.
4. Sometimes it's appropriate to deceive or conceal information, even from one's own spouse.

Potter books don't contain a battle between good and evil, but between horrific evil (Voldemort and his side) and lesser evil (Harry and "good" characters) "that only appears virtuous because it is so much less offensive and frightening than the greater evil. … Harry and all the other 'good' characters are simply using one set of sinful behaviors to defeat another set of sinful behaviors." The Bible teaches that we're to overcome evil with good (Rom 12:21).

The Enduring Battle: Good versus EvilMany occultists (especially witches) view magick as something that actually is quite natural, rather than supernatural. … magick is merely a way of harnessing natural forces yet to be discovered by science.Rowling has stated that she doesn't believe in the supernatural "wand waving sort of magic," but has never disowned other types of magick such as "natural" magic accepted by occultists.

The Harry Potter books might lead some children into the world of occultism since the series contains actual beliefs and practices associated with witchcraft and paganism, including: divination, astrology, numerology, familiars, pagan gods/goddesses, spellcasting, potions, necromancy (i.e., communication with the dead/ghosts), mediumship/channeling, crystal gazing, palmistry, charms, arithmancy and magick.The Enduring Battle: Choosing SidesClearly, the art of magic—i.e., seeking to bring about change in accordance with one's own will through various ceremonies, rites, rituals, spells or charms—is resoundingly condemned by Scripture.Beyond Fantasy: Tolkien, Lewis and Rowling
Tolkien's and Lewis' fantasy tales take place in mythical worlds, whereas Rowling's takes place in our world, with contemporary forms of occultism.

Rowling's books use a different definition of magic than Lewis' and Tolkien's.

Rowling's books promote a different concept of right and wrong than Lewis' and Tolkien's.

The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings are rooted in Tolkien's Christian faith. Tolkien's works are unabashedly Christian, unlike Rowling's.

In Tolkien, when a good character commits an evil deed, they suffer as a result, or must atone.

The "magic" in Tolkien's books isn't "the occult-based contemporary-pagan magic Rowling employs." Tolkien disliked the word "magic" and only used it because he couldn't find a better word. His "magic" doesn't include supernatural power, and isn't acquired by lore or spells; it's a natural ability given to certain characters (e.g., Elves). "Magical" objects receive their special qualities through "lore" which Tolkien likened to science and tech, and the objects are created in ways that conform to Middle-Earth's laws of nature.

In Tolkien, when non-magical people get too close to magic, there are drastic and negative consequences.

In Potter books, wizards are humans. In Tolkien, wizards are Maiar (angel-like beings) sent to assist Elves and Men. The powers of the Maiar and Valar are part of their nature, and aren't obtained through occultism.

In Tolkien, Iluvatar (God) oversees the battle between good and evil. In Rowling, there's no such being.

In Narnia, there's no religion that's directly associated with our world. In Potter books, there's a direct link to paganism and witchcraft.

The Witch in Narnia is based on old, widely accepted symbols of evil. In Potter books, witches and wizards are children who have much in common with readers of the books.

Narnia has no concept of "dark side" versus "light side" battle. In Potter books, there's a neutral "power" that has a light and dark side, and both sides draw upon that same "power."

In Narnia, the conflict is between two kinds of magic of different origins. Aslan's magic is good because it comes from the Emperor Beyond the Sea, who has legitimate authority over everything. The evil side's magic is evil because it comes from an illegitimate authority that has usurped power.

In Narnia, good characters don't overcome witchcraft by learning more witchcraft, but by becoming servants of Aslan, who conquers evil. Rowling's characters overcome evil by using the same magical power as Voldemort.

Potter books are completely dependent on magick. Lewis uses magic sparingly, in a highly stylized manner that doesn't connect with the real world.

Rowling's books are meant to entertain, whereas the Narnia books are meant to present the story of the Bible.

Lewis' and Tolkien's books treat morality and integrity as important. In Potter, morality is presented inconsistently, with muddled ethics. Misbehavior is condoned as long as the outcome is fun or rewarding.

Lessons Learned: Comments and Controversies
A lot of the "magick" in Potter books mirrors real occultism practiced in neopaganism and Wicca, which are contemporary religions, unlike "witchcraft" in fairy tales. Although Potter books don't present formal doctrines of contemporary witchcraft/Wicca, they glamorize occult practices.

Lessons Learned: Closing Thoughts
Good messages in Potter books
• Remain loyal to your friends
• Don't murder
• Share

Underlying lessons in Potter books
• Lying, stealing, cheating are not only acceptable, they can be fun.
• Astrology, numerology, casting spells, performing "magick" can be exciting
• Disobedience isn't very serious, unless you get caught.
• Being "special" means you deserve to escape punishment for your bad behavior.
• Rules are made to be broken.
• Revenge is acceptable.