Rating: 4/5

Hendrick Smith gives an intimately detailed description of his three year stint as the New York Times bureau chief in Moscow (1971-1974). He discusses Soviet (i.e. Russian--in the best sense of great Russian chauvanism) culture, politics, economics, etc. He does so by relating a steady stream of interviews and observations from a myriad of sources and settings, weaving in the hot button issues of that time period--Detente, the pseudo-Stalinesque oppression of culture during the Brezhnev years after the cultural thaw under Khrushchev, the quashing of the dissidents (including Solzhenitsyn), the economic doldrums of the 70s, the continuing effects of the crushing of the "Prague Spring" and the "Brezhnev Doctrine", the ideological cynicism in the party/the raft of privliges that attended rank in the party, the emigration of tens of thousands of Soviet Jews, and the rising materialism among the youth. All the while, he links these developments with contemporary goings-on in the US--Watergate, Nixon's impeachment, the Vietnam War, and the Church Commision. Yet he puts a human face on these geo-strategic issues, letting individuals tell their stories, and then weaving the whole into a more complete tapestry. 

If Smith had merely been content to report current events, this book would simply a very good historical acccount of the USSR in the early 1970s. However, he goes beyond the headlines, instead using them to springboard into deeper discussions of the whole sweep of Russian history, culture, politics and economy. For example, he traces the lack of democratic values in Russian society, and the Russian "comfort" with authoritarian rulers; drawing a line between the medieval tsars, Peter the Great, Nicholas II, Lenin, Stalin, and so on. In doing so, he isolates and dissects currents that been through Russian society for a millenium. It's interesting to note how, even though the book was published 31 years ago, it still rings true with events in contemporary Russian.