Ok...What I have found out from this book left me bewildered.

“Journalism professor Deborah Blum, who won a Pulitzer Prize for writing about primate research and researchers, has written that the work at the Language Research Center is “considered by some to be revolutionary.” Today Kanzi, Panbanisha, Mulika, and Panzee, all graduates of Savage-Rumbaugh’s School of Language Comprehension (a new student, Nyota, was born of Panbanisha in 1998), all comprehend more than 500 words and pronounce more than 150 words, and know that word order is vital to sentence meaning: “Feed your ball some tomato” is not the same thing as “Feed your tomato some ball.” They understand past and future verb tenses. They understand pronouns of possession such as “mine” and “yours.” (Remember Ai and her green feeding bowl.) They understand expressions relating to time, such as “now” or “later.” They understand qualifications of state such as “hot” and “cold.” They understand that one clause within a sentence can modify another portion of the same sentence, for example, “Get the ball that is outdoors, not the one that is here.” They can eavesdrop on conversations in which they are not involved, and understand them. Savage-Rumbaugh reports that they “easily participate in three- and four-way conversations that deal with the intentions, actions, and knowledge states” of others and understand narrative dialogue.”

And at the end, I realized that this book was this lawyer’s attempt to save these smart apes from ending up in a research institute where they will be tortured all in the name of the greater good. When I read this:

 “A judge of the Virginia Supreme Court in 1827 described the legal metamorphosis of a slave to free woman, legal thing to legal person, in almost religious terms. She “becomes a new creature, receives a new existence.” Legal personhood is the frame upon which we stretch fundamental immunities that block abuses of power, whether that power is rooted in precedent, policy, principle, or prejudice. Governments, legislatures, and judges can blind themselves to legal personhood and violate dignity-rights. But the lesson of the killing doctors of Hadamar, of the murderers of the White Rose, of the Nuremberg trials, of Eichmann in Jerusalem, and of the killers of Bosnia, Rwanda, and Kosovo is that even governments cannot make dignity-rights disappear. That is why no lawyer will argue that any human being could be subjected to the torments that the biomedical researchers plan for Kanzi, Panbanisha, Sherman, Tamuli, and Nyota.”

I went, OH NO, OH NO NO NO. NO NO NO, my heart, NO NO NO NO….NO NO NO NO NO….

The author, Steven Wise argues that in the past people justified slavery by saying that it was good for the economy. Now we all agree that is disgusting and horrifying. He argues that scientists who torture animals do the same thing. They justify something that maybe one day, after thousands and thousands of years will be seen as disgusting and horrifying, just a pathetic excuse. 

Wise warns us of the terrible injustice we are doing when we treat other beings as things…

“Whatever legal rights these apes may be entitled to spring from the complexities of their minds. Today they are legal Harveys, invisible to law, without personhood, lacking rights. We know what happens when humans are stripped of their legal personhood and dignity-rights. Australian aborigines, African slaves, Turkish Armenians, German Jews, Rwandan Tutsis and Burundian Hutus, and Kosovar Albanians fall victim to genocide. It can be no surprise that not only bonobos and chimpanzees but also thousands of other species of animals have been pushed into extinction or teeter on its brink. We do what we do to a Jerom because he can’t stop us. None of them can. We can only stop ourselves. Or some of us can try to stop the others. The entitlement of chimpanzees and bonobos to fundamental legal rights will mark a huge step toward stopping our unfettered abuse of them, just as human rights marked a milepost in stopping our abuse of each other.”

I know there is a war, but Putin couldn’t have appeared at a more inappropriate time. Climate change is real (don’t listen to Dr. P.) and animals are dying. As you can see Putin, dear, we had other more pressing problems, you needn’t have added your trifles.

Some quotes I liked:

“Critics of animal cognition offer occasional bromides intended to communicate just how wonderful animals are. For instance, the journalist Stephen Budiansky says that “an honest view of animal minds ought to lead us to a more profound respect for animals as unique beings in nature, worthy in their own right” and that “[t]he intelligence that every species displays is wonderful enough in itself; it is folly and anthropomorphism of the worst kind to insist that to be truly wonderful it must be the same as ours.” 

"Why should language be such a big deal? It has allowed humans to spread out over the planet and wreak large changes, but is that any more extraordinary than coral that build islands, earthworms that shape the landscape by building soil, or the photosynthesizing bacteria that first released corrosive oxygen into the atmosphere, an ecological catastrophe of its time?"

"Writing about issues of “human uniqueness, animal welfare, and the dignity—and even rights—of other species,” Daniel Povinelli and his colleagues have said that “separation is in the interest of all parties” and claim that “their research will actually uncover the unique qualities of chimps.” To what end? To gain “insight about the type of animals that are [an] appropriate model for specific research.” 

“But cognition is a very big deal because the fundamental legal rights of animals, the least porous barrier against oppression and abuse that humans have ever devised, depend on it. We are well within what National Geographic recently called the “Sixth Extinction” of life on earth. The first five were probably caused by climate changes or comets smacking into the planet. But the Sixth Extinction is being caused by what one scientist called “the exterminator species.” Us. My grandchildren may never see a chimpanzee or bonobo, for they are severely endangered. They are shot, eaten, kidnapped, jailed, vivisected, and deprived of habitat—not because we “respect” them or see them as “unique” or because we believe that they are “truly wonderful” but because we don’t. No one but a professor or a deep ecologist thinks that a language-using animal is not a bigger deal than island-building coral, soilbuilding earthworms, or photosynthesizing-bacteria.”

My conclusion after reading this book is that Homo sapiens ain’t that special, so we should stop eating all beings around us, cutting all trees, and reproducing as mad (I mean soon so many people on a dying planet will live in a dystopia like Atwood’s Madd Addam trilogy. Sorry no sorry. Somebody has to warn you.)