Rating: 3/5

For this week's Throwback Thursday, I took a trip back to a year in my youth, January of 1994. This book was published then, only garnering one edition, and it appears, went largely unnoticed.

I found it years ago, bent up and looking unhappy, in a free book box, and since I collect books like dragons collect treasure, I took it home and promptly stashed it away and forgot. Until...last week, when I looked at it, said, "oh, look it has a wolf on the cover", and decided to open its pages for the first time in gods knows how long (poor book).

The premise is simple: two young guys get back from their Rite of Passage, find their whole village killed by a band of vampiric thugs, and set out on the road to adventure and bro-dom. Along the way they take their trusty tamed wolf, meet a chick with a magic tapestry, and are helped by a kid with a curse/disability. They're fighting for the usual things, redemption, revenge, stuff like that.

Sound vaguely interesting?

Well, that's where you'd be half-right. This book is a 90s fantasy in all it's plot-driven glory. If you like 90s fantasy, even find it slightly fun, you might get an enjoyable couple days out of this one. It lacks a more modern character-driven approach, but hey, it's from a different time. That said, it also lacks some amount of originality. It's just a fantasy world where stuff happens and, hey, adventure! There's nothing wrong with that, if that's what you want (and that is what I wanted! It was like watching an action movie!)

What this book does do really well is keep you guessing. What does that tapestry mean, where are those strange symbols from, and just how does this Link business work anyway? Does this book answer all that and more? Yes! And it does it in an interesting way. 

It also has well-structured pacing. I found myself wanting to know what happened, not shying away from returning to it due to plot. The characters also seemed to stay true to (what we knew) of their selves...though sadly, aside from Magara (the chick), we get very few peeks into what is going on internally with everyone. And some of them were indeed stock, because the two main bros accumulate a (this is not a spoiler) war band to ride with them and go fight things. These guys are your typical lot: one likes to kill stuff, one is a failed wizard, one likes drink, one's a merchant, ect. I really wanted to get to know all of these guys a little better, but the pace of this story really didn't lend itself to that, and being plot-driven it would have been a hinderance in this case, I think.

So what about the end of the journey? Satisfying? Worth it? The ending wrapped everything up nicely, and explained a few things that were originally left open (that I wasn't sure the authors would get to, and was happy that they did).. There was some weirdness at the end that I guess I could sorta understand in context, and it left things open for further developments. Unfortunately, knowing this book was published in 1994, with no further developments, I guess this means one will never know! That said, I really would have liked to see the continuing development of things, both for this fantasy world and the characters. Due to all of the above, this book gets a solid 3-3.5 from me. It was an enjoyable action escape.