Rating: 5/5

"It is a good thing for a man of little education to read books of Quotations".---Winston Churchill
"Thou art slave to fate, chance, kings and desperate men".---John Donne, my favorite quotation at the moment
 Since Churchill regarded his time at Sandhurst military academy as a complete waste of time, he was right about a man or woman needing a book like this, and it only fit and proper that this quote is included here. I much prefer THE OXFORD DICTIONARY OF QUOTATIONS to the American BARLETT’S FAMILIAR QUOTATIONS precisely because of British eccentricity and unpredictability in picking just the right quote, not necessarily the most famous, to illustrate an illustrious figure or work of literature. From Tennessee Williams, and A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE, for example, we do not get "I have always relied on the kindness of strangers" but rather "Poker should not be played in a house with women!". The political philosophy of Sir Oswald Mosley, leader of the British Union of Fascists, is contained in a succinct letter the man himself wrote to THE TIMES. "Dear Sir: I am not not now nor have I ever been a man of the right. I started out on left of politics and now find myself at the center". Richard Nixon is not represented by "I am not a crook" but the unhinged Nixon of his farewell address to the White House staff: "This nation needs good farmers...plumbers". Through the OXFORD DICTIONARY OF QUOTATIONS we also learn the origin of phrases have become a permanent fixture of the English language: "He is among those who is of the has-been", and "He has stolen my thunder". Quotations from non-English sources are published first in the original language then translated. I took particular delight in the Frenchman turned atheist who exclaimed, "Weep, my children, for heaven is empty and you have no more Father!". Don't worry folks. If you came to this volume you in search of Shakespeare and the King James Bible you will find an entry for every play from the Bard (a personal favorite is "Goodness to the vile seems vile. Filth savor but themselves" from OTHELLO) and nearly every book of the KJV, including the last quote attributed to Jesus: "Because thou art neither cold nor hot but as it were lukewarm I shall spew ye from my mouth". (REVELATION). A dictionary of quotations for learning, laughing, and impressing friends and enemies with your vast self-education.