Rating: 2/5

I listened to audio version of this book and kept thinking I was missing chapters or I had somehow obtained the abridged version because the plot wasn't making any sense. So mid-way through the audio, I got the book and read it, and then started reading it again, NOT because I liked it, but because I have never read such a strangely constructed work of fiction. 

I am still at a loss. Was this a satire on British Imperialism? Was it meant to be a fantasy? I kept thinking there was going to be one of those ridiculous: "and then I woke up!" endings. The story is set in Shanghai where Christopher Banks lives with his parents in a British settlement, until he is mysteriously orphaned at the age of 9 and sent to live in England. The stilted fussy style of narrative also sounds like a satire of British writers: all of these incredibly long introductions and explanations, to wit: 

"I did not always regard it so; in fact, I had more or less forgotten it altogether when a few years ago, quite by chance, something happened which caused me not only to recall it again, but to appreciate for the first time the deeper implications of what I had witnessed that day." zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz

But the real sin of this book is that the protagonist is a selfish boring lunatic. After being raised in England, he becomes a famous detective and one day decides to return to Shanghaii to solve the kidnapping of his parents. It is now 1937 and the start the Japanese war with China (20+ years after the parents disappeared). Banks arrives in Shanghai and there is a general consensus at the British settlement that he is there not only to rescue his parents, but in doing so, to prevent any escalation in the war. There is never any question or explanation as to how the two are connected. He becomes convinced that his parents are being held captive in a house in the middle of the war zone, and proceeds to attempt to free them at whatever cost of Chinese and/or Japanese lives. It's nuttier than I can describe. And it was infuriating because I have so much respect for Ishiguro, but he must have been hallucinating when he wrote this.