Rating: 3/5

I arrived at ‘The Symposium’, by Plato, through Milan Kundera’s ‘The Unbearable Lightness of Being’. Kundera’s mega-hit fell a bit flat for me, but writing a piece that included an appreciation of androgyny, I was taken by his mention of Plato’s reference to a myth about hermaphrodism.

The excellent introduction, in this edition by Christopher Gill, gives the historical context of symposiums in Ancient Greece. The symposiums were a male prerogative for high-ranking individuals. The attendees would be regaled with music, dance, and the opportunity for pederasty, as young men would accept and offer affection, as the participants reclined, were fanned, ate grapes, and got inebriated. Inebriation oiled the wheels that loosened inhibitions, so participants were more likely to postulate and expound on a chosen theme. The theme of Plato’s Symposium was love, and we’re presented with seven speeches on the theme of love by the gathering. 

Some of the speeches were a little frivolous or highly speculative, others labyrinthine, though the language of ‘The Symposium’ is always accessible. One of the most notable is Pausanias’, which presents the case for older men having relationships with younger men, but not boys as is commonly supposed, the determiner being that they had passed through pubescence. He postulated that these homoerotic relationships had greater value than the heterosexual ones. After, Socrates relates how Diotima told him that men of a young age start with an attraction to beautiful bodies (think of youngsters theiving Playboy from the top shelf when the shopkeeper's back is turned), and then … well, they're satisfied with any ship in a storm! Gradually, this becomes a nobler quest for beautiful minds (I suspect many never reach this stage), and then an unquenchable desire for knowledge, which ultimately leads to a negation of the sexual imperative through Platonic idealism. Not that in your dotage sex is irrelevant, but it is of secondary importance to developing the intellect. 

It appears that Hugh Hefner was not a fan of Socratic philosophy.

However, it was the charming exposition of androgyny and love in Aristophanes’s speech that interested me the most. He expounded, not entirely tongue in cheek, that human beings were of three types: male, female, and hermaphrodite, and composed of two halves each with their own complete set of body parts, like a Janus figurine. They tried to scale the bastions of Mount Olympus in order to challenge the Gods. Zeus, in his fury, threw thunderbolts that split each in two. From that point onwards, each half was always seeking its corresponding half; a valid definition of searching for one’s soulmate. Clearly, the original male combinations were compelled to have homosexual relationships, likewise the female combinations, lesbian relationships; only the hermaphroditic pairing would be satisfied in a heterosexual partnership.

There are some lighthearted moments. We learn that hiccups can be purged by not just by holding one’s breath or gargling with water (dropping a key down one’s back or having someone frighten you), but by the nose being tickled by a feather.

I didn’t know that.

If one is easily offended by the misogyny or sexual conduct of Athenians, then ‘The Symposium’ is best avoided. Nearly two and a half thousand years ago, sexual practices were quite different. Indeed, it was only a hundred years ago that the treatment of women was unacceptable. If changes happen so rapidly then millennia entirely upends mores, morals, and sexual offense laws! What will they think of us in the year 4525? How vulgar and perverse was it that we actually participated in physical contact when having sex? Isn’t it more gracious and intensely erotic, like a J'naii in Star Trek, to form intimate relations with telepathy and a connection of minds?

A fascinating read. Recommended.