Rating: 1/5

I want to start out by saying that I love Ernest Hemingway. I think The Old Man and the Sea is one of the greatest books ever written, and I have not even read many of his best novels yet, like The Sun Also Rises and For Whom the Bell Tolls, so it's possible his work gets even better than what I've already experienced. That being said, I highly doubt any of his remaining fiction can get any worse than To Have and Have Not, which is a complete dumpster fire.

The novel tells the story of Harry Morgan, a fisherman who gets down on his luck and eventually starts smuggling human beings and liquor between Cuba and the Florida Keys. The main problem with To Have and Have Not, and it's an enormous one, is that the story is basically completely finished at page 150 (my edition is 219 pages, so I am referring to that length throughout this review). If Hemingway had taken the first 150 pages and glued onto them the last few pages of the book, which also deal with concluding the story from the first 150 pages, this would probably have been a 3.5 star book. The problem is that Hemingway didn't do that. The 70 or so pages between page 150 and the last few pages are filled with completely meaningless content.

I'm not even joking; it's 70 pages of random people getting drunk in bars every night, cheating on their wives, beating each other up, and then a random profiling of a bunch of different groups of people on different boats that happen to be parked at the same dock. None of it involves the main characters in the book, or the main storyline. It writes a lot like Hemingway was contracted to write a full length novel, but finding himself completely finished the story at the length of a novella added a bunch of random garbage onto the end to fulfill the length of a full novel and thus the terms of his contract.

On top of that, this is the most racist and misogynistic book I've ever read. There is even a Publisher's Note in my edition to warn the reader about this! The n-word is said in this book probably at least thirty times, there is heavy racism against people of colour, Asians, and Jewish people, many of whom are treated like animals in the story. Wives are cheated on, physically abused, and ordered around like they are sub-human servants. And as if all of that wasn't enough, the main character is also a complete a** hole, being not only a huge racist and misogynist but also a bully, bullying every person he comes into contact with over the course of the book. I don't even know what else to say. I'm so disappointed in Ernest Hemingway for this novel, for so many reasons. This is one of the ten worst books I have ever read, and might actually be in the top five.