Rating: 4/5

I like to write about what I call “postmodern” fantasy, a set of books joined very loosely by some philosophical underpinnings I try to read into them. But Delany’s Neveryon series is unambiguously capital-P Postmodern fantasy. Every chapter has an epigraph from Derrida, Foucalt, and their ilk, and the content is shot through with hints of Ideas and Themes. That’s kind of exciting, because postmodernism is great and anyone who holds that worldview is bound to produce fantasy that is at least interesting, if not enjoyable.

I’d been a bit hesitant to read Neveryon because of Delany’s reputation—that he might be doing interesting academic and SJW-approved fantasy, but apparently at the cost of a more direct and engaging narration. My fears on this front were largely dispelled pretty quickly. Perhaps Tales is less arcane than other of Delany’s books, but it is fairly grounded in its world. The narration is very materialistic, lingering on physical culture items like pots, boats, jewelry, and toys, particularly as they relate to characters’ work and its class and gender relations. It’s also pretty tightly connected to its characters, although it approaches them not so much as individuals but rather as cyphers for the cultural contexts they move through. It moves between this case-study level ethnography and more explicit philosophical discourse, but these things never supersede the characters they feature. It’s not a very psychological portrait, but it’s no less valid and fun to read for that. 

It’s funny that Delany self-identified this series as coming in the tradition of Conan and Leiber’s Sword and Sorcery. On one hand, it makes total sense. Those books, of course, are very much centered on the dichotomy between civilization and “barbarians,” whether as Conan carries one set of values into the power structure of the other, or as Fafhrd follows his yearning curiosity to understand the strange and exotic world of civilized society. 

Delany simply takes this as an opportunity to deconstruct that dichotomy as a postmodernist, reframing and exploring it until interesting thoughts emerge. It's not so much a deconstruction of Sword and Sorcery with the barbarian/civilization dichotomy as a central element of its critique as it is a deconstruction of civilization's origins with the genre setting as a convenient framework. I guess I’m a bit of a curmudgeon about this, on one hand, because while that’s an interesting question, I think that if exploring it is one’s goal, it’s better done through more academic means—history, anthropology, literary criticism, etc, (particularly since his sights seem to be more on the historical concept than the way it's framed in literature or the genre's tropes overall). But in this case I think it adds more than it detracts, by making the book feel thoughtful and careful to some extent (which is practically unheard of in S and S in my exploration so far), and more importantly by focusing on mundane events, people from all sorts of class roles. 

It avoids the pitfalls of too much plot and action by swinging really far in the opposite direction. Tales is, until the last 20 pages or so, a slice of life book with nary a hint of swords, much less sorcery. I found that really refreshing and would love to see something seated in between (Game of Thrones does this at times, as does The Witcher, but Delany shows how far you can push it without it losing interest). Presumably later entries in the series follow more on that last 20 pages, but either way this first entry shows Delany’s got a pretty enticing set of priorities for a fantasy author. The world still feels pretty amorphous, and what he builds throughout the novel is less a world with political scheming than a cypher about the economic and cultural context of the toy ball trade. 

As an SJW, Sword and Sorcery is usually a genre you have to read prepared to sigh and dock everything a star, at least, for racism and sexism, and generally leave with the sense that much of the enjoyment you got came in spite of the book’s true self. But with Delany, this is never really a concern. He’s a fantasy author doing feminism who actually *understands* feminism, on an academic level as well as a social one. It’s not just that female characters in all strata of society get the majority of the screentime, or that a woman (from a matriarchal culture that feels pretty genuinely badass if a bit much) is the most competent fighter in the book or even that it favors women’s work over fighting or political intrigue. Much of the content is explicitly expounding feminist ideas, including a whole creation myth that inverts the gender roles of the Christian story (God beats the second woman until her breasts fall off and her genitals start to fall off and leak pus). 

All that not to mention that the main male fighting pair (a la Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser) are not just in a bromance, but literal gay lovers into dominance play—something they’re quite prepare to admit in casual conversation, for some reason. On top of everything else it’s a pretty great fuck-you to the sexual politics of previous Sword and Sorcery novels. Just imagine how Howard would feel about this (and I’m sure there’s a ton of Conan fanfiction that makes this “sullying” of his legacy very explicit).