Rating: 1/5

The second book in the Switchers trilogy, this book begins a few months after the first one ended. Tess is glad Kevin survived by turning himself into a phoenix, but she's having second thoughts about his new form when he's captured by the zoo and sold to a private collector. With only a week before he's shipped to America, she has to think of a way to save him, fast. But Martin, a new Switcher she's discovered, is complicating her life. Martin wants her to become a vampire like him, or he'll make her his minion. The light of the phoenix battles with the allure of the vampire in Kate's mind, and the choice she makes will change all three.

More than anything, this book felt rushed and jumbled. Although the plot lines were fairly clear, events played out oddly. Tess finds out about vampire minions when Martin is taunting her about becoming one, not before. It was very hard to know what was true about vampires, as the author appears to have taken the shortcut of "every regular myth counts; don't ask me why."

It also irritated me that Tess continues to be so braindead about her choices as a Switcher. She can become anything, and she can't think of a way to escape a vampire except becoming one? How about a werewolf? How about an angel? How about something she makes up with anti-vampire properties?

And the choice at the end of the book had me spluttering with disbelief. Tess basically decides evil isn't her thing, but neither is good because it's too holy or somesuch. Because apparently it's better to be stuck in the middle. Though I will grant her that good as it was presented in this book was even less attractive than evil, as our poor phoenix Kevin seemed perfectly daft and happy that way. And the result of her choice annoyed me even more. The rule is, no switching after you turn 15... unless the author thinks it's a good idea. And having started the next book, I do realize what Martin ultimately chose, but it really, really should've been in here instead.

This is one of those cases where the first book was okay, but the sequels are making me regret my desire to complete any series I own. Read it if you want, but you'll likely be screaming at the pages in frustration. Not Recommended.