Rating: 3/5

"Patriotism was a reliable sentiment in the early 1900's. Teddy Roosevelt was President. The population customarily gathered in great numbers either out of doors for parades, public concerts, fish fries, political picnics, social outings, or indoors in meeting halls, vaudeville theatres, operas, ballrooms."

This relatively short novel is jam-packed with a myriad of characters – some fictional and some real-life individuals. It is a grand undertaking that introduces us to the events and people of early twentieth century America, of New York in particular. For any reader interested in a panoramic view of the times, Ragtime definitely delivers. Anyone that savors an in-depth character study may find this book lacking in that regard. In fact, several major characters are without names throughout. Instead, we meet Mother, Father, Younger Brother, and the boy. I had a hard time connecting with them; besides being nameless they were also remote and I felt detached from them emotionally. A handful of imaginary characters are given names, that of Tateh, Sarah, Coalhouse Walker Jr., and the poverty and injustices suffered by this group is shown in stark contrast to the affluence and social standing of those unnamed. I did find it quite interesting when a variety of prominent historical figures wandered into the plot to make an appearance or two. Harry Houdini, Henry Ford, Sigmund Freud, J.P. Morgan, Booker T. Washington, Emma Goldman and even the Archduke Franz Ferdinand to name a few are weaved into this story along with our fictional characters. At times the stories of the real and imaginary intersect in a curious manner. 

This was my second E.L. Doctorow work. I enjoyed it but perhaps not quite as much as my first, Homer and Langley. I think it was an excellent endeavor and was clearly well-researched. I learned a little bit about a lot of folks. It was a bit too sweeping in such few pages for my taste and at times it was confusing as the plot jumped around. What I found to be the most stimulating was the story of Coalhouse Walker, Jr. From ragtime musician to outlaw, he was undoubtedly the most fascinating of fictional characters here. An interchange between this man and Booker T. Washington was one of my favorites in the entire novel. 3.5 stars