Rating: 2/5

Not at all what it's sold as--this is just a bunch of strung-together simplistic stories of four women who have sex with a lot of rich and famous men, sometimes for money and other times not. There are also three "as told to" co-authors and all of it becomes a tossed-together mess in which many of the famous names are named.

There's no real storyline to this text--it's just divided into the four Hollywood women's sections, the first being very small and the last being the only true long-term hooker of the group. Each section has a set of short stories about experiences with different lovers. 

All four subjects seem to know each other and have sex with the same group of guys. Two of the women are sisters whose dad was a "softcore porn" director, one of the girls raped as an early teen by one of dad's porn stars, yet neither are really prostitutes and in the most real relationships as well has having the biggest drug addictions. All four subjects of the book are abusers of drinking and illegal drugs, which they claim comes along with having sex with random guys.

It's fun reading about what major names do in the bedroom. The biggest surprises were that Vanna White is outed as being sexually into women and she had a creep of a husband who matched her sexual openness. Timothy Hutton swung the other way, asking one of the women to join he and his male friend as they played together. Also that John Ritter's sexual appetite could not be appeased (being with one woman 11 hours total in one day alone doing the deed in all types of positions and locations!). Some guys come across as matching their playboy images (Jack Nicholson) or being surprisingly good (Gary Busey) while others come across as creepy (Sylvester Stallone) or not great lovers (Rod Stewart, Hugh Hefner) and one in particular is clearly disgusting (Warren Beatty, yuck).

The most ridiculous part is when co-author Joanne Parrent takes to the opening pages as an enraged feminist that men treat women as sex objects. It's all smoke and no fire, since these gals ask for it. They dress like sluts, flirt to draw men in, and drop to their knees as soon as the hundred-dollar bills come out. Each of them intentionally use their bodies to get material things from high-powered entertainment industry types. They have no problem accepting loads of cash, fashion, jewelry, cars, plane trips, limos, and more to be on call for their sugar daddys. The odd thing here though is that many of the situations mentioned aren't real prostitution at all--they're just hookups with new friends or real relationships.

The only woman who seems to dramatically change her life is the one who was raped and assaulted when young. She now admits she made bad choices, though she thought nothing of them at the time, and encouraged young women to avoid all that she chose. "In the past I never felt I could speak in terms of right and wrong, but today I can." 

The women in almost every situation are in control and choose to do this--so stop the preaching about how they are mistreated when they go along with it and don't complain due to the material things they get out of it. Honestly, the guys are just using the gals because the woman want to be "treated like princesses" with fancy hotel rooms, expensive dinners, and trips to Paris. To see this used as a way to slam men with money is offensive--they are just taking advantage of what's presented to them. The women typically come across as the dumb ones, and for good reason they end up in rehab or the poor house. It's their own fault if they never make love in Hollywood again.