Rating: 5/5

I’d never heard of Tom Sullivan until I stumbled on a blog post from Mike Calvo, CEO of Pneuma Solutions, in which he mentioned this book. Finding it enlightening, I’m glad I picked it up.

I like how Tom Sullivan opens the book with a scene in which his three-year-old daughter nearly drowns in the family’s swimming pool. He then assures us the child survived and takes us back to the beginning of his life.

I was drawn to his fascination with sounds as a child. A good example of this is how, at age five, after climbing the fence in his back yard and ending up in an alley, he found pieces of discarded glass and discovered the delightful sound they made when they shattered upon impact with the ground. I also liked the sound of breaking glass as a kid but never intentionally broke anything just to hear that sound.

Another part of the book I liked was when he talked about his experiences singing in nightclubs. An Italian owner of such an establishment once insisted he sing “O Solo Mio,” even though he didn’t know it and gave him the impression that if he didn’t sing the song, he’d lose life or limb, not to mention pay. He miraculously managed to learn the song between sets. This happened in the late 1960’s, and being a musician myself, I couldn’t help wondering if he was aware that Elvis Presley’s “It’s Now or Never” uses the same tune. That may not have occurred to him at the time, and that’s understandable.

As an aside, I aspired to be a famous singer and often wondered what would have happened if I’d chosen that career path. But after reading about Tom Sullivan’s family’s financial struggles after he made such a choice, I’m glad I took the road I did.

I also liked the speech Tom Sullivan imagined giving to clients and administrators at the Braille Institute in Los Angeles while walking on the beach with his guide dog. I was touched by his reluctance to give an inspirational talk to blind people when no one offered such inspiration to him and his sudden decision to do so after his guide dog was nearly killed by a passing vehicle.

I hope both blind and sighted people find this book entertaining and educational. It’s important that we all see what blind people hear.