Rating: 2/5

"It has been written that there is nothing in the world more savage than the American fighting man."

William W. Johnstone's Out of the Ashes was one very brutal and long diatribe. I picked this book up on impulse as I passed it on the shelf at the library. It seemed like a potentially good Dystopian Story - my latest craze. 

The world is completely and utterly destroyed by nuclear warfare and one man, Ben Raines, has what it takes to unite the people and fight for freedom in it's aftermath.

Sounds good huh? And it did deliver on several levels, but not where it counted and it was totally pulled asunder by the lengthy and preachy right-wing underscore to the story itself.

The first part of the book is taken up with the build up to the actual nuclear war which sees all the main players on the nuclear battlefield loose their heads completely and fire off every single nuclear warhead at every possible target and then some. Could this happen? I'd like to think not. At least not to this extraordinary length. It seemed like a bunch of toddlers spitting their dummies in unison. Hmmm.

It was OK, but lengthy, and unfortunately an indication of what was to come. We only get to see Ben, our protagonist, briefly in this first part of the book. I just didn't get the feeling that this set up the story adequately, or maybe it did and I just lost the message in all of the copious pages of twaddle.

The middle part of the book is the war and immediate aftermath. This is where your Dystopia fans will be happiest. Life is harsh and lonely and devastating. Gangs and looters abound and the baddies seem to make up most of the survivors. Cockroaches always survive a nuclear fall-out and all that. 

Ben survives, of course, but missed the actually war, waking up to an altered world and loneliness. This was nicely done, and perhaps the saving grace of the whole book. This and this alone, is why I bothered to read the book to fruition. If this hadn't have been so well put together, I don't think I would have bothered to wade through the rest of the lengthy and tedious spiel.

Part three is where Ben unites his rebel army and builds a type of utopia, albeit a strictly controlled and intensely law abiding one. They have a period of peace and well being, having made it through the worst world war in mankind's history, they then have to battle a civil one against the newly formed American Government. This is where it turns unbelievably brutal.

That's Brutal with a capital "B". 

Now I know war is not pretty, blah, blah, blah. But when so much effort is put in to describing it the way Johnstone has, I can't help feeling this author has an axe to grind. Everything about this book feels that way. From beginning to end I get the distinct impression that Johnstone wants us to listen and learn - or else.

I recently reviewed a book that left me wanting more. More of my principles challenged, more of my beliefs tested and more of my world changed. I think I may have got that in spades with Out of the Ashes. Too much so.

So, it's back to little old Fantasies and mildly Dystopic novels for me, but I will say one thing. If a book makes you think, really think for good or for bad, about what has been written, then it can't be all lacking, can it?

What do I give this lengthy and often at times, over the top description of a post apocalyptic life in America?

4/10: "Finished the book and it was OK" on the NBRS. I'm sorry, but even if this book did make me think, it was just too darn wordy and went on a round-a-bout speech-trip to Preachville for me.