Rating: 5/5

Nicholas Nickleby is the third novel by Charles Dickens, originally published as a serial from 1838 to 1839. This is actually considered by many to be Dickens' first masterpiece as it demonstrates the full scope of his promise as a novelist.

At the heart of this novel is the plight of Nicholas Nickleby when his father dies unexpectedly after losing all of his money in a poor investment forcing Nicholas and his mother and younger sister, Kate, to give up their comfortable lifestyle in Devonshire and travel to London to seek the aid of Nicholas Nickleby's uncle, Ralph Nickleby. However, Ralph Nickleby is a ruthless business man and has no desire to help his destitute family. In fact, he hates Nicholas at first sight as he reminds him of his deceased brother. He obtains a low-paying job for Nicholas in Yorkshire at a Dotheboys Hall in Yorkshire. His mother and sister are forced from their lodgings in the house of the kindly portrait painter, Miss LaCreevy, and into a cold and drafty house Ralph owns in the slum. Ralph Nickleby finds employment for Kate with a fashionable milliner, Madame Mantalini.

And so sets the stage for this engaging and sometimes humorous novel, sometimes with pathos and melodrama, but all culminating with riveting results. Of course, there is a cast of lively characters as the plot advances exploring the main themes and motifs in the novel. Again the theme throughout the novel focuses on the horrors of Yorkshire schools as well as the effects of money or the lack thereof. There is also the aspect of life translated to the theater in its many forms. As Nicholas Nickleby ponders as he contemplates his losses:

  ". . . for gold conjures up a mist about a man, more destructive of all his old senses and lulling to his feelings than the fumes of charcoal. . ."

'
This was a beautiful tale told as only Charles Dickens can. I am looking forward to continuing my reading of Charles Dickens classics in the order written, reading the books that I have missed thus far.