Rating: 3/5

Reading all these book by aid workers is teaching me that while aid workers are fantastic at being self-critical, they are horrible at writing coherent arguments. Basically, I think I agree with Rieff's thesis. Humanitarian agencies should intentionally limit their mandates. Stay neutral, bring direct material relief to anyone who needs it, negotiate with who you gotta negotiate in order to get food/medical aid where it's gotta go. Keep humanitarianism separate from human rights and politics and acknowledge how very limited the problem-solving scope of relief is. It is just that: relief. A bed for the night. The world's problems are political. They need political answers. But if you mix politics with relief you'll undermine both of them. 

"Let humanitarianism be humanitarianism. Let it save some lives, whatever the compromises it has to make along the way, and let it tend to the victims and remind that corner of the world that is lucky enough not to be in agony of the incalculable suffering, misery, and grief that literally billions of people feel every day of their lives. Is that really so little? ... There is nothing small or insufficient about what [humanitarians] do, except, that is, in the tragic human sense that all effort is insufficient, all glory transient, all solutions inadequate to the challenge, all aid insufficient to the need. ... but the things [humanitarianism] is nor being called upon to do,such as helping advance the cause of human rights, contributing to stoppign wars, and furthering social justice, are beyond its competence however one might wish it otherwise." (p.333)

Basically, in this reviewers opinion, leave "development" to the social movements and politics to the social justice/human rights activists &amp; community organizers/organized communtities. Or at least, that's the thinking I got from his book, but it was really all over the place. I don't know if this was what Rieff meant to say. I felt like he lacked a lot of critical theoretical background for a lot of his criticism, too. Overall, interesting, added something-- including a scathing takedown of the calls to war that emanate from humanitarian NGOs (Somalia, Bosnia, ...Libya?) and the ways those who want to wage war will often co-opt humanitarian emergencies (shout out to the ladies of Afghanistan!). Very pertinent but no lucid argument for any one thing in particular, no real summation of the vast amount of history he tries to cover and synthesize. Why did you write this book?

[Note a lot of other Goodreads reviewers got more out of this book than I did, and their reviews are worth reading just for the neat summaries of conclusions they drew.]