Rating: 5/5

The message that he is trying to give is that your brain is causing pain in your body due to repressed emotions and your pain will go away by understanding this. For this information, I offer 5 stars. The delivery of the information could be better though. It's not a very captivating read but if you're suffering from any kind of chronic pain, the readability of the book is certainly the least of your concerns. 

If you have any kind of pain such as back pain, neck pain, knee pain or migraines (or almost any pain) you must read this book! You'll be happy to know that he is not saying that the pain is imaginary or that you're faking it. The pain is absolutely real. It creates pain the same way your brain can give you a stomach ache when you're anxious.

I totally believe in the power of the brain. I know of people who have had pain disappear from reading this book. Years ago I had stomach problems which on hindsight I am certain were brain induced. I've also experienced vertigo but I was suspicious that my brain was experimenting with attempts at distracting me and it quickly disappeared. Even before reading this book, I had heard about Dr. Sarno and his books so I was fortunate to know this and it probably saved me from other unnecessary pain.

A lot of the book is an explanation of all of the ways the body can be effected by your brain. On the one hand, I found this rather boring and disappointing that this was such a big portion of the book. On the other hand, I realize that this is exactly what we need to know. If I ever experience symptoms in any of these areas I will be able to nip it in the bud. If he didn't cover all of these ailments, my brain would be able to find a new way to distract me without making me suspicious. In fact, before reading this book I thought I was developing arthritis. I had pain in my hands and I didn't know that this was one of the places that the brain creates pain. Now that I know, the pain is gone. 

In general I am a big skeptic about most things but in this case it all rings true for me. I don't have a problem with the lack of science to prove his theory. To me, the fact that it works for so many people is proof enough. I appreciate that he acknowledges that there are parts of the brain that no one understands. Just because we don't know exactly how it happens doesn't mean the solution doesn't work.

The only other thing that I wish he addressed is what the brain does with the repressed emotions once you have successfully stopped it from creating pain. Personally, I do transcendental meditation twice a day which I believe serves as a release but I wonder what others do.