Rating: 2/5

She dabbled in other types of story, but historical fiction was Karen Hesse's bread and butter. Her credibility in the genre skyrocketed after winning the 1998 Newbery Medal for Out of the Dust, and two years later she gave us Stowaway, a fictional journal based on a real travel companion to Captain James Cook during his first major voyage, in 1768. Eleven-year-old Nicholas Young sees little choice but to run away to the high seas. His father has forced him into servitude to a professional butcher who treats the boy cruelly, so Nicholas bribes a few sailors on the Endeavour to sneak him aboard for a years-long voyage. He hasn't the faintest idea how grueling it will turn out to be.

 "The best way to banish the darkest mood is to lose myself in a useful pursuit."

 —Stowaway, P. 166

 Searching the Southern Hemisphere for new conquests on behalf of King George III is a secret mission, but Nicholas doesn't care much either way. If the crew catches him on the Endeavour before the ship gets far from England, he may be returned home for punishment at the butcher's hands, so the men helping Nicholas do their best to conceal him. Once he reveals himself, Nicholas is assigned duties like any sailor, though Captain Cook's advisors bear him no goodwill. The ship cuts through rough waters toward Australia, dogged onshore by natives with gruesome tendencies. Will the Endeavour add new land to the king's wealth? Will the botanists onboard, including kindly Mr. Banks, find novel species to satisfy their curiosity? Nicholas looks forward to the adventure.

 In Polynesia, Nicholas makes friends with two natives, a man named Tupia and his servant Tarheto. They join the Endeavour's crew. Tarheto, who is Nicholas's age, proves to be an indispensable companion. The years ahead are filled with danger from sea, natives, predatory animals, and grotesque illness. Many crewmen die, but was the mission worth it? Three years at sea transforms Nicholas inside and out; it's a new boy who returns to England in July 1771. 

 "It's a wonder what the stomach will allow the mind to accept."

 —Stowaway, P. 263

 What is the best thing about this book? Nicholas sees his future in England as intolerable, so he risks his life to escape on the Endeavour, but he's not getting away with anything. Under Captain Cook he'll work harder than the butcher ever demanded; no easy route exists in life. I like the easy flow of Karen Hesse's writing, but the journal format of Stowaway can be tedious, the entries mundane. I'd consider rating this book two and a half stars, but Hesse has done better historical fiction. There's value here, though.