Rating: 5/5

Only one book has ever “changed my life” (god, if only things were so simple that a book could change your life!) and that is Joyce’s Ulysses, and that only in terms of my ideas of dedication and rigor. It certainly didn’t unearth profound aspects of my personality that until that point were latent, it didn’t give me any guiding path in life to tread, it didn’t suddenly instill value into things that I before considered to be without value. What it primarily did was to show me the results of dedication- not only on Joyce’s part, but on my part- that is, that if I dedicated myself to reading and rereading and understanding this at first baffling text, that the reward would be a thousand times the effort I put into it. That Joyce was kind enough, generous enough, to create a work so complex, that resonates on so many levels and in so many poetic and humorous and satiric and intellectual and dramatic tones; and most of all, best of all, that he demands that his reader work a fraction as hard as he did. Because he knew that what he possessed inside himself, if expressed correctly, was capable of bringing a shimmer of aesthetic recognition across the imagination unlike anything that had come before or after. There really is only literature before- and after-Joyce, no matter your opinions on Ulysses itself. It is the Theory of Relativity for the arts. It destroyed and absorbed everything that came before it and influenced everything that came after.

From what I know of Queneau’s life, it too was changed by Ulysses. (He considered it a “magical act”). His reckoning with Joyce came after his graduation from the Sorbonne with a degree in philosophy and mathematics, where one of his great influences was Hegel. Now, I don’t know much about Hegel’s Absolute Idealism but I do know that it was a somewhat optimistic view of how the mind comes into contact with nature, and that philosophical problems are brought to resolution by integrating contradictions into our practices, rather than eliminating them or seeking to answer things by some ultimate “conclusion”. In other words, a dialogue rather than a “solve-all” was at the heart of our thinking and perception. An obvious aspect of this is that nature and our participation in it are all part of an extremely lengthy (some might say “infinite” (I won’t)) process. The particulars of the universe are always coming into being by a process through which they are in a contradictory communication with what they relate to, come into contact with. I assure you all this babble is leading to something. I hope. What I’m attempting to say is that Ulysses represents the expression of an absorption and assimilation of all the facets of the history of literature, and with Ulysses the history of literature ends. That is to say it necessarily begins anew. This is not a review of Ulysses, and this won’t go on much longer, I promise.

So what does an extremely intelligent human being interested in writing literature after the reckoning with Joyce do? Joyce himself had no recourse but, after annihilating the novel, to annihilate language itself (that is, create it anew) with Finnegans Wake. But what do the rest of us do? We look at literature with new eyes, we look for where it can go now. I think that is exactly the point Queneau was making with Exercises In Style. It attempts an observation and notation of what exactly language can do with fiction post-Joyce. (Beckett did this too. Many people did this, are doing this. This is what postmodernism is all about, coming to terms with Joyce). However, in contrast to Beckett, Queneau's profundities are always masked in the language of the quotidian, the everyday, the comedic, the banal. An utterly banal scene is recounted 99 times, in 99 styles. In these 99 recitations of the same scene we begin finally to focus on the medium and not the message, or the Hegelian contradiction or dialogue between the medium and the message (or lack of message). In some ways, the really revolutionary aspect of Exercises In Style is that it is so not revolutionary- it retells a scene that any of us might observe on any given day- but that it poses questions about the fundamentals of our reading experience, and therefore our living experience.