Rating: 4/5

Everything has its opposite close beside it.

Why don't people write thrillers like Patricia Highsmith anymore? This, her first novel, boasts an iconic plot, gruelling tension, characters with psychological complexities, and plenty of intellect to balance out murderous actions. Plus, a psychopath. She's so good at the psychopaths.

I'm not surprised Alfred Hitchcock found this book worthy inspiration for his 1951 film. It's clever. Two men meet on a train journey. Guy, our 'hero', on his way to secure a divorce, makes the fatal error of sharing personal information with Bruno. He tells him he hates his wife. He gives names and details. Bruno shares that he wishes his father were dead, and suggests a plan for the "perfect murder": Bruno kills the wife, Guy kills the father, and &gt;pouf&lt; all their problems disappear. No one would be the wiser because the men are strangers and can't be connected.

Guy being normal, is repelled by Bruno and his switcheroo idea, and removes himself. The train journey ends. That's the last he'll see of that weirdo... right? Well, of course not, that would be boring. Murder is committed. Bruno is a nasty smell that just won't go away.

Highsmith's novel is haunted by concepts made famous by Robert Louis Stevenson's Jekyll and Hyde. The idea of opposites, good and evil, as naturally coexisting forces, is exemplified in the characters of Guy and Bruno, but also within Guy himself. How much threat is necessary to cause a basically 'good' person to commit murder? And, for that matter, is anyone 'basically good'?

Highsmith's clear prose paints a stylish picture of the time: train travel, omnipresent alcohol, glamorous women. There are also glimmers of homoeroticism, compulsion, wealth, and an innocent female love interest, which all feature in her later novel, The Talented Mr. Ripley. I found the ending, while not predictable and dappled with clever and logical twists, lost some of the power built in the first two thirds of the book. But I still enjoyed this classic thriller that gives new meaning to the old adage "don't talk to strangers". Just don't!

  He felt rather like two people, one of whom could create and feel in harmony with God when he created, and the other who could murder.