Rating: 3/5

Well... This was a bit of a dud. 

I don't know how to put this, but frankly this was irritating. I hate to say that when so many of my Goodreads buddies liked it, but boy I have a problem with the characters! 

I'm not saying it wasn't funny, I have yet to read a Heyer that wasn't. However, Judith will never know how many times I wanted to smack her. She was so inconsiderate, ungrateful and childish. Do I like ingrates? Is it funny when a character is childish enough to do the exact opposite of what they are told for their own benifit? Is it kind to just do what you want and not think about how what you do effects others? No, no and No! That said, in the beginning and end I liked Judith, but in the middle I just wanted her to grow up and not irritate me in the process. 

Worth, has anyone mentioned that for the whole book he appears to be the villein? It's hard for me to wrap my mind around Judith loving Worth because he was rather odious, likable, but still a toad. (In his place I'd probably have been the same) I understood him loving her, but not her, him. 

Maybe I was expecting too much. My book had a blurb on the inside which got my hopes up,  it said that Perigrine, Judith's brother goes missing and she has to turn to her guardian Worth, for help. So, naturally I was excepting some excitement. By page 213 nothing had hapended. I was beginning to think nothing would, but about fifty pages more brought me to that excitement, and by then I couldn't wait to be done with this book. It was a bit of an anticlimax because at no point was I in fear of Peregrine's life or Judith's. I just knew nothing would happen to them. So, yes I'm a bit disappointed. 

I couldn't decide what to rate this, four felt too high and two felt too low. So three it is. I'm not planning a reread of this anytime soon, and I don't recommend it as a first Heyer but, it was a fully fleshed novel with a complete ending. Just not for me.

G rating one or two swears, snuff taking and a stolen kiss. :) 

Did I mention I liked it? 

I do...

Sort of.