Rating: 5/5

A book of over eighty very entertaining and varied stories begins with some already appreciated by many in the West, like ‘The Tale of the Sands’, ‘The Food of Paradise’, and ‘The Blind Ones and the Matter of the Elephant’. Shah guides us through these, and the many unfamiliar tales which follow. He tells us that not all dervish stories are suitable for everyone, for all places, and for all times. As an example, ‘The Man Who Walked on Water’ provides great enjoyment and a superficial moral for those of us who read it in English; but, to be fully appreciated, it needs to be encountered in Arabic.

The book contains a story composed by one of the greatest Arabic poets, el-Mutannabi. ‘The Three Truths’ was, like others in his collection, to remain an oral legend for a thousand years, because the retelling needed to be in accordance with ‘the changes of the times’. By the time Shah compiled this collection, a thousand years since the poet’s death had elapsed, and the story finally appeared in print.

This is not the only reminder that the Eastern approach to storytelling is governed by what seem to us to be inexplicable rules. ‘The Lame Man and the Blind Man’, according to dervish lore, is only to be read after receiving definite instructions to do so. Alternately it can be read by those who have already studied ‘The Blind Ones and the Matter of the Elephant’. When you come to the penultimate story, make sure you leave yourself enough time to read the last one immediately afterwards, because ‘The Host and the Guests’ is one of the Sufi Tales which carry an embargo. In this case we are warned that it may not be studied in isolation.

I read the Kindle edition of this book twice before attempting this, admittedly inadequate, review. I thoroughly enjoyed all the stories, but make a plea not to ignore, or dismiss lightly, the more down-to-earth tales. Some of the stories I found most surprising and rewarding included ‘The Time, the Place and the People’, ‘Wisdom for Sale’ and ‘The Lamp Shop’