Rating: 4/5

#8 Crowner John historical mystery set in late 12th century Devon. A local tradesman falls over dead of an apparent apoplexy while riding his horse, in front of witnesses. But the man's widow insists that he was done to death by a witch's spell, the witch having been hired by her husband's arch enemy, who has been trying unsuccessfully to talk him into selling his lands off. A corn dolly effigy with a pin in its heart is found in the man's saddle bag, but even before that little artifact is discovered, the widow insists that Crowner John be notified to hold an inquest. Sir John thinks it's all a bunch of hogwash and denies her claim, and because the widow is a friend of his harpy-like wife Matilda, hears no end of complaint about it over the next few days. And when the widow's cousin Gilbert, a canon in one of the local churches, begins preaching against witchcraft and exhorting the church to actively stifle the "pagan ways" they've passively condoned by looking the other way, the whole city of Exeter gets stirred up, with several local "wise women" in danger of being condemned by the church or harmed by the townspeople. 

Crowner John is still reluctant to get involved, although his brother-in-law Richard de Revelle, the sheriff, has jumped on Gilbert's bandwagon. But when John's own mistress, Nesta--the proprietor of a local inn--comes under a cloud of suspicion, then he begins to feel an urgent need to get to the bottom of the original death, if only to show that the man was killed by very earthly means and thus dispel the furor in the town. 

A typical entry in the series, which I mostly enjoyed--certainly for the atmosphere and sense of time and place. Knight does a wonderful job of invoking the mores and culture of the times, as well as the sights, sounds and (often not so nice) smells. I have to admit though that sometimes the author tends to overuse certain words or phrases in description of his characters. For example, Crowner John, who is rather taciturn and crabby, often will "snap" or "bark" or "growl" when he's speaking. His brother-in-law, somewhat of a dandified popinjay, tends to "bray." At times it's enough to make me grit my teeth a bit--but certainly not enough of a problem to stop me from reading on in the series.