Rating: 5/5

I'm not sure why it took me so long to read William Tecumseh Sherman's Memoirs. They were outstanding from start to finish. Of course the bulk of the book deals with Sherman's experience during the Civil War, but the parts about his earlier and later life are equally fascinating. Thanks to his service in the military, Sherman was almost uniquely well-traveled. Before the Civil War, he spent significant time in many areas of the South, as well as in California (where he witnessed the Gold Rush) and the Midwest. To reach California, he once sailed around South America and other times crossed the Isthmus of Panama. For each of the places he visited, he gives the reader little vignettes that bring the past to life. 

His writing style is direct and cogent. Even though this is a long book, he doesn't waste words. One gets the sense that this was his personality in life as well. He was not a person who sought out arguments, but he was not afraid to speak his mind. He got along well with Ulysses S. Grant and Abraham Lincoln, among others, but notably clashed with Joseph Hooker and Secretary of War Edwin Stanton. For a book written barely a decade after the Civil War (though he added more at the beginning and the end for the second edition), he is notably candid about his opinion of people who were still living.

In terms of the Civil War content, I now understand why Sherman was an outstanding general. In the past I had the concept that Sherman merely rode on Grant's coattails. It seems to me now that they made a great team because Sherman, an immensely practical man, found a way to carry out Grant's strategic ideas. More than that, Sherman, as the war progressed, had brilliant strategic ideas of his own. It is clear that the March to the Sea, where Sherman cut off all communications with the rest of the Union forces and had his troops "bum" off the land, was completely his idea. Grant and the other officers in Washington vetoed his plans numerous times before he finally persuaded them to let him try. One of the strengths of the book which I haven't yet mentioned is that Sherman frequently quotes from his correspondence with various notables, including Grant, Henry W. Halleck, Stanton, and others. These ground the narrative in the time when it took place.

If any Civil War and history buffs need further persuasion, you must read Sherman's Memoirs!