Rating: 4/5

This book continues the strong showing from John Mortimer's prior Rumpole of the Bailey series of novels, although with a slightly different format. In Rumpole's Return, the eponymous main character is embroiled in one main case throughout the whole novel rather than each chapter being a standalone short story about a specific case. At the beginning of this book, Rumpole is in a very uneasy retirement in Florida with his son, daughter-in-law, and wife. The easy life chafes at him, to the point that when he reads a newspaper article involving the chambers of law where he spent his whole career, he uproots himself and disappears in the night to return to England and the career he walked away from too soon, leaving his wife behind in the process. She irritably (and understandably so) tracks him down and reunites with him, but mostly remains in the background as she has in the previous two novels. Rumpole's return is met with some resistance, as his position has already been filled in his absence by two new and younger barristers. The bulk of the plot is taken up by Rumpole's inserting himself back into the legal profession where he isn't particularly wanted and generally making a nuisance of himself, as is his tradition. Mixed with his penchant for light deviousness, Rumpole's razor-sharp mind and singular focus on law has returned with the dual purposes of restoring his reputation as a lawyer and forcing his way back into the spot he'd recently vacated upon his departure to Florida.

I've found all three of the Rumpole books so far to be a jolly, lighthearted look at some of the darker aspects of human nature, and it becomes clear the more I read that the main character is intended to be a bit of a nonconformist who sticks up for the little guy. I will admit, at first this didn't quite sink in because the author's idea of rebellion in Britain in the 1970s looks a little different than we'd recognize today in my home country. Rumpole's sarcasm and veneer of polite agreeableness initially masked his more "radical" views, as a fellow barrister describes him in this book. These radical views are things like "the police probably shouldn't frame people" and "ad hominem arguments shouldn't win cases," although he never gets to one that seemed pretty glaring to me: "judges should be impartial." Another one that some lip-service is done to, but which seems odd to even bring up since Rumpole violates this maxim in almost every chapter is "don't lead the witness by directly stating what you want him to say, verbatim when he is in the witness box." These last two were a little bit jarring for me as they don't seem to really flow well with the otherwise intricately-crafted plot, dialogue, and characters. This strange set of discrepancies as well as the way Mortimer has chosen to portray Mrs. Hilda Rumpole prevented this book from quite reaching the stratospheric 5-star rating the previous book earned. Hilda gets the short end of the stick from John Mortimer, there are no two ways about it. Perhaps this is a product of the decade in which this book was written, or cultural differences, or even simply that Mortimer felt her character felt more real due to his choice to make her a stereotype of the hectoring, cold, battle-axe of a wife. There doesn't really appear to be any affection from or for Hilda in this book, although there were glimmerings of this in the previous two. Rumpole at several points talks about how he has no freedom when she's around, and their relationship is what I would bafflingly describe as tolerant hatred. They are rude, petty, vindictive, inconsiderate, selfish, and dismissive of each other in almost every interaction. I know this is a common sitcom theme, and I would imagine in the '70s this was a much fresher take on a marital relationship, but it felt like a missed opportunity to provide some color and happiness to these tales. Mortimer has shown almost every major character to be fallible, and indeed this seems to be strongly-held view of his about the human existence in general. That being said, if Rumpole had perhaps one bright spot in his life outside the Bar, it might make him a more three-dimensional character. Ironically, he is perhaps the most static of all the recurring characters because he's so set in his ways (which he freely admits at times, solely to himself of course). This marriage trope didn't age particularly well in my eyes, and both parties cross some serious personal boundaries with the other in this book, lending some comedy to an already funny book. That being said, I feel as though a loving spousal relationship has ripe opportunity for the exact same comedic relief, and I'm a bit stumped as to why Mortimer chose to make this unpleasant dynamic a main and common thread through his books. There are some bits of dialogue that similarly aged poorly, but as this was written almost 50 years ago I've chosen not to focus on these.

This book, like the previous two, provides the reader with an interesting snapshot of a subject and time period with which I'm pretty unfamiliar. I like to find sectors of history I know very little about and explore them through fiction. While this may not provide the clear-eyed analysis of a history textbook, I find it more interesting as a way of capturing what citizens of these eras and places care about and what the prevailing attitudes and opinions of their day may have been. I recommend this to readers who like legal novels and British humor.