Rating: 2/5

Before accepting any critical judgments in this review, the reader should be advised that the reviewer reads very few short stories and only rarely picks up an anthology of such. The very fact that Orsinian Tales is such an anthology should signal something special with regard to my previously indicated preference. I picked up Orsinian Tales simply because of my respect for the author. Her fantasy work is extremely valuable and I was curious as to this anthology of more realistic stories, even though set in a fictional (apparently Eastern European) country.

To be sure, the approach of combining stories of medieval families with Cold War/ Police State families in the same small section of a countryside reminiscent of some parts of Poland, Belarus, Rumania, or another is an intriguing string upon which to string these beads of story ideas. One can also be certain that Ursula K. LeGuin’s deft hand at revealing what is truly human in her characters does not fail when she removes it from the land of fantasy. The shifting of time in what seems to be random directions also keeps one reading and guessing. We not only shift from time-to-time but from social class to social class—though the stories may predominantly focus on the peasant/proletarian class with a few exceptions.

Though I will share some terrific lines from the stories (and they are by no means exhaustive representations of the elegant writing), I found the collection to be generally depressing. Of course, by choosing such a gray, cold setting, I’m sure LeGuin intended this anthology to be depressing. I’m sure she saw the triumph of the human spirit in most, if not all, of the often ambiguous and unsatisfying “endings” of the stories. The endings are realistic. One has to make up one’s own mind how they are to go. Yet, they didn’t work for me at this time. Don’t get me wrong, sometimes, I can’t deal with the stories of W. Somerset Maugham—in spite of their power.

Indicative of the tone throughout the stories, the following description of a man’s wife should illustrate: “She can’t understand, he thought, because she lives inside, she’s always looking out the window but she never opens the door, she never goes outside….” (p. 72) That description is true both literally and figuratively for that character. And how sad, at least to me, it is! In another story, the whole history of Western Civilization is indicted and futility decried when one character asks: “’What would we do with freedom if we had it, Kosta? What has the West done with it? Eaten it. Put it in its belly. A great wondrous belly, that’s the West. With a wise head on top of it, a man’s head, with a man’s mind and eyes—but the rest all belly. He can’t walk any more. He sits at table eating, eating, thinking up machines to bring him more food, more food. Throwing food to the black and yellow rats under the table so they won’t gnaw down the walls around him.” (p. 133) In spite of the racist overtones at the end, the hopelessness seen even in freedom is an overarching cloud of emotional mist.

However, there is an interesting mix of destruction and hope in a poem or hymn which is quoted on p. 166: “’It is Thou in thy mercy that breakest down over our heads all we build, that we may see the sky: and so I do not complain.’” That is a strange and though-provoking cocktail of philosophy and faith. Yet, it seems organically true. Unfortunately, for me, that was as uplifting as these stories ever became. And it is on that particular personal bias, that I rate this volume lower than most people would.