Rating: 4/5

The ol' sudden trip back in time blends with baseball in this very entertaining tale by Darryl Brock, which spawned a sequel. Throwing the modern man back into an earlier age to see what happens hardly is new, from Mark Twain's "A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court" onward.

The Twain reference is appropriate, because the main character in "If I Never Get Back," Sam Fowler, does in fact meet a young Twain on a twain — er, train — after he's inexplicably transported from the late 1980s to 1869 while waiting for an Amtrak train. Fowler gets to hang with his hero and even plots with him in a get-rich-quick scheme involving a plundered grave.

But the bigger focus here, as evidenced by the bat on the book's cover, is baseball's early days. Fowler, a reporter in his "real" life, hooks up with the first real professional baseball team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, as they travel East and elsewhere taking on the best ball teams the country has to offer, even getting to play for the legendary club. The book is baseball heavy in spots, so fans will be more transfixed than those who are ho-hum about America's pastime. The game was far different then, and Brock makes sure that, through Fowler, we know how different. Brock sets up encounter after encounter with old-school rules, surprising narrator Fowler so often with the differences it's as though the author is rapidly going through a checklist of them. So that gets a little repetitious, but it also showcases one of the big strengths of this very fine tale: extraordinary research. Brock puts us there, amid the sights and smells and sounds, from the choking air of coal-fueled Cincinnati to the difficulties of getting to the good stuff through a woman's 1869 attire.

Yes, there's love here, as well, as Fowler puts the make on a teammate's lovely sister, who's involved in militant plots to free Ireland. Fowler is dogged by Irish gangsters from coast to coast, the Red Stockings keep on playing as their legend grows, and we're delightfully immersed in 1869-70 America, hip-deep. Brock takes us, in fact, from coast to coast, as the team plays as far east as New York and as far west as California. Peppering this stew is a spiritualist and, of course, Twain.

Along the way, Fowler "invents" the bunt, the scoreboard and the hamburger, and plays a little ditty called "Yellow Submarine" for his teammates. "If I Never Get Back" has lots of these delightful, fun touches, which put us right with Fowler as modern folk experiencing 1869 for the first time. Not everything comes together perfectly, and I could just as easily give this book three stars, but the baseball factor and the research give this one a boost upward.

Baseball fans could do a lot worse than reading "If I Never Get Back" as a spring pick-me-up to get them primed for the season.