Rating: 4/5

A Rebel At The Chalet School would probably be a tough book to enjoy if picked up on its lonesome - this is clearly the second half of a far longer novel, with themes, ideas and characters whose growth and development must be read in conjunction with the rest of The Chalet School And The Lintons. Without that, it plunges rather horrifyingly and abruptly into one of the worst 'pranks' that has ever been played on a mistress at the Chalet School. In context, however, it's quite a delightful read.

Continuing on the hijinks of the first half of the novel, Joyce Linton instigates her followers to act up during poor Miss Norman's supplementary French classes. It's an incident that draws such reprobation on her head that she must start to figure out just how she wants to conduct herself as a student in the School. Matters are complicated by her friendship with the increasingly bitter and possessive Thekla Von Stift, the one girl who seems immune to the powers of goodwill and friendship in the School. Mix that up with a Sale of Work and the Suppression of Bill, and there's plenty to be enjoyed in this slim volume.

The focus in this novel is clearly on the reformation of Joyce Linton, a spoilt little darling who must come to terms with her own ego and her mother's life-threatening illness. It's treated with Elinor M. Brent-Dyer's characteristic sensitivity and unusual insight into the mind of the schoolgirl. She's a credibly naughty and difficult child, and will break your heart a little in a moment when she wonders if perhaps she's just a terrible person with no hope for change. She has a pretty rough and melodramatic final lesson to learn (courtesy of Joey Bettany's Lazarus powers and bell-like voice), but hers is definitely a well-developed emotional journey.

Brent-Dyer excels, as always, at infusing the books with a welcome adult perspective, so that her mistresses don't just turn up as vague authority figures or cultural stereotypes (viz., the Mamzelles in Enid Blyton's school stories). We're given a little peek into the Chalet School staffroom, literally, but also in terms of Miss Norman's misery at failing to deal with Joyce and her antics, and the calm, sensible way in which Miss Wilson deals with finding Joyce, Thekla and Cornelia Flower out on the landing after lights-out.

Add to that an enchanting (if occasionally over-detailed) description of the School's Sale Of Work - the first to be converted into almost a fete, with its own fairy-tale theme - and Rebel is a lot of fun to read, if a little confusing as a standalone book.