Rating: 4/5

It is fortunate that Hobsbawm wrote this book as early as 1994, when the “fall of Communism” still appeared to be a world-shattering event, because, more than anything else, this is what he documents. I doubt that any historian, writing a “grand synthesis” of contemporary history today, would place so much emphasis on that event. It probably helps that Hobsbawm was himself a Marxist historian who had supported the USSR during its most “extreme” period – that of the leadership of Josef Stalin – and remained largely unregenerate even at this late date. 

Hobsbawm himself admitted that he is not really suited to a dispassionate analysis of contemporary history. His greatest contributions to the profession have been his work on 19th Century labor and social history. Nevertheless, he brings his not inconsiderable training and talents as a historian to the task and does provide a fascinatingly thorough analysis of the age. Having been a major advocate for a “Long Nineteenth Century,” analyzed from 1789 (the French Revolution) to 1914 (the outbreak of the First World War), he now extends this thesis to suggest a “Short Twentieth Century” which is bounded essentially by the lifespan of the Soviet Union. The analysis he provides is very strong on economic issues and geo-politics, and also should be credited for maintaining a far more global perspective than most histories written in the West. Hobsbawm never loses sight of the “rest of the world,” even when Europe appears to be taking center stage (as during the First World War and the Treaty of Versailles). Nearly every page contains fascinating facts and information, even when one does not agree with all of his conclusions.

I feel that some of the best discussion in this book concerns the inter-war period and the rise of international Communist and Fascist movements, which is largely the reason for the title “Age of Extremes.” While his work is synthetic and does not add anything to the study of these areas, it is extremely wide-ranging and informative and useful for someone trying to understand this period without a specialist background. As one would expect, there is a great deal of discussion of the history of the USSR, and while his predisposition is visible here, he does not flinch from describing gulags, purges, and famines where they contribute to the story. 

This book is worth reading for anyone preparing to teach a course concerned with any period of the twentieth century and a good “starter text” for new Graduate Students. It is probably too long and too biased for use with undergraduates, although sections could be carefully culled and added to reading packages. As I suggested at the outset, it is also a kind of time capsule from the mid-90s, demonstrating what seemed important about history at the time. I hope to have time one day to return to it myself, and see how well it has worn the test of decades.