I'm not sure how this book made it into the Reader's Digest Classics Library. My guess is Paul Crestwick IV curated the collection. While Robin Hood is a classic story, this is not a classic telling. There are a few kind of cool moments, like when Robin of Locksley's household is besieged by the sheriff and they fight their way out. Or when Robin Hood joins with his outlaw predecessor Will O' The Green for a battle with the sheriff's men. But the violent, detailed battles are the exception. Many of them end with the loser being tied up, Nancy Drew-like, without any real menace. Often, they're completely skipped over ("After a fierce battle..."). Rarely, do Robin and his men seem in any actual danger, which made me wonder why they didn't just ride forth and retake Nottingham and be done with it.

Let's see, what else? Tournaments! Over and over with the tournaments. Lots of fights that end cheerfully and leading to people joining the outlaw band. And disguises. Everybody's in disguise and everyone is fooled by disguises. Maid Marion is a horribly disappointingly one-dimensional character. Well, actually they all are. There's not really anything you will learn about these characters you didn't already know from the (far superior) Disney cartoon.

A frustrating and lazy narrative trick Crestwick uses is retroactively adding important details. e.g. "'Say, do you have a pie?' someone said. 'Why, yes,' said Little John, who had stolen a pie earlier." Or "Someone jumped out. Robin pulled out his bow, which he had earlier hidden in his cart." I call it "lazy" because a novelist does not have to think in real time. He could just have easily plugged that detail in a page earlier.

I read this because I'm reading everything in this set. (My grandmother gave them to me.) I read this one specifically because my daughter, who loves the cartoon, asked me to. "You should read it again," she said. "That's not going to happen," said I, who had earlier returned the book permanently to its shelf.