Rating: 3/5

I am a long time fan of Robert Hans van Gulik's Chinese Detective Judge Dee.
The author, a diplomat, scholar, musician, artist and mystery novel writer has much to recommend him. Many of his scholarly publications are or were 30 years ago considered definitive studies.
His scholarly works included topics from The Chinese lute, to Chinese sexual practices to Chinese art. He was a linguist and enough of an artist to illustrate his Judge Dee Books.

Judge Dee, was an actual Judge or to quote the sources: Ti Jen-chieh (c. 630-c. 700), magistrate and statesman of the T'ang court. Van Guik came to know of him via a second hand book relating later stories that had grown up around the crime solving skills and market place story teller-tales that had collected in the name of Judge Dee.

Von Gulik's first effort to translate the Chinese story into a more western version was a private edition. It became so popular that he would ultimately write 18 books in the series, including some short stories.

Part of the attraction of these books was the ongoing problem of bridging the Chinese tradition of judge/detective stories with western traditions. For example in the Chinese traditions:
Judges did much of their own investigations. It was believed that they could connect with the spiritual world in such a way that ghosts or spirits would be part of solving the crimes. Taken to extreme, it was believed that the judge could never be wrong, but a major part of his job was explaining to the people of the community how he had divined the answer. A judge who could not explain his solutions might find the locals willing to appeal overly aggressive judgments by rioting against the judge and killing him.

Many of the Judge Dee stories include plot-useful insights into the the non court life of Imperial Chinese, its culture and bureaucracy.

All of the above is missing in this book. It is mercifully short. In content this book lacks charm, or the Van Gulik magic. Too much of the text is given over to elaborate discussions of alternative theories and of course all of these are wrong. It is not too much of a spoiler to say that this is one case that Judge Dee never solves so much as bluffs.

Missing in this book are many of the loyal subordinates that were part of his inner circle of law enforcement officers. Sgt Hoong is present but only barely and mostly serving as a listening board for the ramblings of his normally heroic boss. Missing is anything specifically Chinese. The feel of the setting and of the story is generic, flat and non engaging.

For what is worth the title is a nice example of a MacGuffin. That is according to Merriam Webster: an object, event, or character in a film or story that serves to set and keep the plot in motion despite usually lacking intrinsic importance.

What this review is intended to convey is that: this is not the best of the Judge Dee series.
The entire series is not available in a Kindle version; this one could have been skipped.
Van Gulik is a better writer than he is in this book. Get the others.