Rating: 4/5

This is the third book in the Time Quintet series that started out with Meg, her brother Charles Wallace and their friend Calvin.

The third book starts with a massive time jump that almost disoriented me: the events here start 10 years after those of the last volume with Meg being married to Calvin and pregnant with their first child, Calvin being a scientist (and currently away in England), and the family has come together for a Thanksgiving dinner. Even Calvin's mother is there and when something peculiar happens and the family is informed that nuclear war has become a real possibility, it's Calvin's mother who tasks Charles Wallace with saving the future by giving him an old Irish rune (she doesn't actively know it).
In order to do that, he recites the rune, thereby conjuring a winged unicorn called Gaudior.
Together, they travel through time to certain moments the wind takes them to where Charles Walles merges with certain characters and experiences the moments in time through their eyes. 
It's about changing the past to ensure a peaceful future.

At first, I thought this book would be even more heavy-handed than in the previous volumes. However, it was soon clear that it was done to actually criticize people like the Puritans that would have killed a woman for a witch in their religious mania just because she was different and they, basically, were bored. So I didn't mind. It actually had a mythological feel to it by a certain point.

I certainly preferred this kind of quest to that of the previous book although we barely got to be with Meg or even Charles Wallce - it was more about the people Charles Wallce was "visiting" with Gaudior.

The writing and audio were both, once again, very good. The author and narrator are both very talented and therefore the books are always of high quality - what influences my rating the most are therefore the repsective adventures. But now I wonder how these 5 volumes will come together in the end. Many things Meg and her brother learnt in book 2 have become essential in this third after the first book lay the foundation of who (mostly) this was about ... but how will it all come together, especially after such a time jump?!