Rating: 4/5

This review contains no spoilers.

You know how sometimes a book will have a title that seems to have nothing to do with what actually happens? You'll read an action story with a penguin as the hero, for example, and the title of the book will be "Lion of the Desert". Kind of like the title of an old Police Squad! episode (and if you don't know what I'm talking about, you'd better go find recordings of that show to watch right away). Well, anyway, this book is nothing like that. The title is a certified match for the story. It was stated at least a half dozen times, and probably by three or maybe even four different characters. So if you're about ready to crack open this book but you're worried about whether or not you'll actually hear the title phrase, you can definitely relax!

As for the book itself, it's another terrific offering in this wonderful series. It's always a treat to return to the old brownstone on West 35th Street. Wolfe is in top form as he tackles a case that takes quite a few unexpected (even shocking) turns, and our intrepid narrator Archie Goodwin sparkles as our witty guide through the mayhem. Archie is an outstanding right-hand man, but the case is a tricky one, so Wolfe calls in all of his operatives this time. i always knew when I was a kid reading these books that it was serious business when the whole crew (Saul Panzer, Fred Durkin, Orrie Cather, and Johnny Keems) was summoned. Throw in frequent visits from the usual angry cops, Inspector Cramer and Sergeant Purley Stebbins, and the gang's all here.

I probably wouldn't recommend reading this one as your very first Nero Wolfe adventure, simply because there are several references throughout to some past cases, and you can have a stronger, more nostalgic reaction to those side comments if you've had a few of those stories under your belt already. And it seemed to me like many of the idiosyncracies of Wolfe's daily schedule were assumed to be known without explanation, but that could just be how we learn about them, anyway. It's been too long for me to recall. It's definitely a later book in the series (#27, apparently), though, so my suggestion is to work your way up to it.

As a mystery, I do think it didn't quite satisfy all my requirements for fair play. I like to have all the clues out there for me so I have a good chance of figuring things out for myself. That didn't exactly happen here, as some of the key revelations surface pretty late in the story. I don't feel like it was a strong detractor, but it is a yardstick I hold up to all the mysteries I read, and this one fell a little short. 

Another thing I have noticed as I've gotten older is that mysteries that were written in this time period (and I'll even include Agatha Christie's novels in this range) kind of gloss over the impact of the murders themselves. Honestly, I get it. You're reading a mystery for reasons other than exploring how realistically everybody responds to death. Getting into those details would certainly drag down the book and detract from the appeal of solving the crime. It's just something I'm more sensitive to as an older person, and the body count in this book is high enough that I noticed it perhaps a bit more strongly than normal.

But don't take my slight philosophical detour as a reason to not read this book or any of the others in this outstanding detective series. These books are some of the best in the business, and there are an enormous number of Nero Wolfe adventures out there for you to try. When you get to this one, you might as well read it. You'll be glad you did.