Rating: 5/5

Once in a while, it happens, that you suddenly look around and feel completely bewildered, like you're looking at everything for the first time, and all you can do is ask yourself, "how in hell did I get here?"

It's what happens sometimes to people who have lived a while, carried along by the tide of life, who put faith in certain constructs and coloured nicely within the lines, only to wake up and realize they had been kidding themselves.

This book is all about the self delusion of Frank and April Wheeler, owners of a lovely white house with a picture window on Revolutionary Road. They feel superior, they think they're above the 1950s conformity and the sellout of the American Dream. But... they're not. 

It seems no one is, except for John, the young man who occasionally leaves the asylum on a day pass. He sees things pretty clearly and doesn't censor himself, much to the horror of his aging parents.

Richard Yates' view of marriage and 1950s American life is incredibly bleak. He makes John Updike and Raymond Carver look positively hopeful, and in fact, they are. Those guys keep reaching out for connection, however imperfect, while Yates, on the other hand, identifies and captures the solitary experience unlike any other writer I've encountered. The simple act of a husband turning off his hearing aid as his wife, unaware, expresses her deepest pain, exemplifies how Yates sees us: alone.

It sounds depressing - and it is. But the artistry here exhilarated me. The absolute perfection of scenes: a roadside fight between husband and wife that results in a fist on metal, a wounded mistress whose breasts look like sad faces, a father trying to keep it together while small children pester him with the desire to "help" with an arduous task. It's nothing short of truth, a masterpiece.

Yates shows, with unflinching commitment, what happens when people look straight on at something, and how devastating that can be. It's terrifying to watch what we have built crumble around us. But I have to believe (and this is where I allow a crack of light to penetrate Yates' darkness) there can be something new and true built in its place.