Rating: 2/5

This epistolary novel is more of a travelogue and a social commentary than a story. There is no proper plot but only a loosely held storyline for Smollett to express his views and observations on the landscape and conditions of various parts of the United Kingdom, their cultures and customs, and their social norms. 

In this Expedition, one Mr. Mathew Bramble, a hypochondriac Welshman, leaves his native land to tour various parts of England and Scotland, accompanied by his hot-headed nephew, nervous niece, his maiden sister who is ever in the lookout for a husband, her lady's maid, and a few household servants. In mid-story, they are joined by a young pious man called Humphrey Clinker, to whom the title is dedicated. While thus journeying, the four family members and the lady's maid write to their friends, describing their adventures, the landscapes, and the conditions of the different parts they travel, their views and observations of the people, culture, and customs. And these letters unfold this rather singular story. 

Smollett's purpose in writing this Expedition is clear from the beginning. He hasn't taken the pen to write an ordinary story. Rather, he has armed himself with it to lash out at many quarters, exposing them to ridicule through his satire. The royals, the aristocrats, the statesmen, the parliament procedures, the press, the clergy, the literary men, and society women, no one has been able to escape the satirical power of his pen. This somewhat strong social commentary is at the core of the novel. However, satire is not his only motive. He also considered providing readers with a clear picture of the different landscapes, conditions, cultures, and customs of various parts of the Kingdom. With Mathew Bramble and company, Smollett takes us to many cities, including Gloucester, Bath, London, Scarborough, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and the Scottish Highlands, detailing how these places looked and the customs of the people therein in the 18th century, making this Expedition almost a historical travelogue. 

I did enjoy the cultural and conditional diversity of places and people. I also enjoyed the social commentary, although Smollett was a little too strong on women. However, as a story, the novel failed to meet my expectations.