Rating: 3/5

This review contains no spoilers (there really are none for this book).

I wrote a story last year and let it sit for a while. Then I went to my shelf of writing guides and pulled this one out to see if it could give me any thoughts on how to fine-tune my story to really make it work before I try to send it off for consideration. I found that it did give me some good inspiration for revision, but - interestingly - I don't feel like the story aligns very well with any of the 20 plots provided. I did find the breakdown of all these plots very insightful, however, and I can envision using this book as a helpful reference in future. 

My suggestion for how to use this book as an effective writing guide is to read it once and then refer back to the specific plots you might use for your own writing when it makes sense. If you don't have time to read the whole thing, I don't think it matters terribly. Reading the introductory chapters that precede the 20 master plots should also be sufficient, then you can just read the relevant chapters when necessary. 

My main complaint with the structure of this book is, ironically, one of its underlying strengths. For the most part, the chapters are laid out similarly so you have a good idea of how to build your stories to match that plot. Reading them all straight through, however, lends a sort of monotony to the read. I did, however, like the many relevant examples the author cited to clarify how each plot worked. 

My other issue was that some of the differences between the plots were pretty esoteric, and while the author did work hard to clarify the distinctions, it didn't always work for me. And by the end of the book, the last several plots felt like they were tacked on to reach 20. They definitely felt lighter and less helpful in terms of the "how to" instructions. I wondered at one point if they were bolted on to give the book a tad more heft.

Overall, this one could be helpful for writers who want to understand the mechanics of some great plots. Just strategize how you want to make use of it, and don't feel like you have to "over-read" it if your schedule doesn't permit it or if your interest starts to wane.