Rating: 5/5

If you've ever seen the television documentary, "Ancient Lives," you will know how thrilled I was to find the book upon which it was based, by John Romer.

Romer traces several hundred years of the history of a village now called Deir el Medine, which was located just over a ridge from the Valley of the Kings in ancient Egypt, on the west bank of the Nile from Thebes. There were no natural sources of food or even water nearby, so all its provisions were supplied by the Royal Vizier or the Priests of Amun at the temples across the river, because the sole purpose for its existence was to house the families who excavated, carved, and painted the tombs of the Pharaohs.

The village scribes kept meticulous records of tomb work, tools and supplies, who worked in which gangs (excavating, drafting, or painting), delivery of provisions, and even who accused whom of what in village disputes. Many records were found in offices right in the village, or sealed caches in the homes of later generations that moved down to the west bank of the Nile.

Therefore Romer can escort us through generations of several families, showing how they lived their daily lives, developed their skills, and passed on the creative torch to their sons. He correlates village history with historical events, demonstrating how the abandonment of the capital city by the Pharaohs (even though the city itself remained inhabited) affected provisions, government, and even policing of the area. We follow the main genealogical lines through prosperous times, through a long-standing feud between two families, strikes and periods of uncertain provisioning, a spell of starvation, lawlessness and tomb-robbing, and finally into a last renaissance before the village was abandoned after several hundred years of habitation.

We learn that Scribe Kenhirkhopeshef (who kept lists of dream interpretations and health spells as well as legal records) had a distinctive handwriting style, while a later scribe, Djutmose, had considerable authority in the government of Thebes, and was constantly feeling under the weather. 

We also become familiar with draftsmen and painters of exquisite skill, whose characteristic styles can be discerned in specific tombs over the centuries.

Those who saw the TV series will remember John Romer standing in front of tomb paintings, tracing lines and colours with gentle fingers, waxing poetic as he spoke of the style and beauty of the work. Or walking up the main village street, describing the evening feasts of the villagers as though they were distant cousins, who lived a full, vital, happy life only the day before yesterday. He spoke every name with lyrical affection.

Reading this book, which came before and inspired the TV series, we discover where this poetic lyricism came from. Dry words on paper spring to life, and we can hear Romer's soft voice, fondly bringing to life each villager's individual character, skills, and aspirations. We learn to love the people and their history almost as much as he does. And when the site is finally abandoned, its last inhabitants carting their worldly possessions on mules down to the new settlement on the west bank, we are the last to leave, casting reluctant glances over our shoulders as we climb the pass and at last lose sight of the place.

Fortunately, thanks to the archaeological work of a few scholars in the late 19th and 20th centuries -- and thanks most of all to Romer's loving exposition in the 1980s -- we are allowed to return again, and three hundred years of villagers resurrect before our eyes, living and loving, and creating their sacred masterpieces in the Valley of the Kings.