Whenever I read William Trevor's novels and stories, I'm never quite able to forget the presence of the author. Sometimes I can visualise him deciding what to include in a scenario, other times I imagine him deciding what to leave out, but he's always somewhere on the edge of my vision, tweaking the props of what I'm reading. I enjoy his mild and nostalgia-inducing presence very much.

In this book, he faded out of my vision almost completely, his name on the cover the only reminder that I was reading a William Trevor novel. That, and the era the story was set in, the 1970s, and the fact that the characters are steeped in the strong tea of an earlier time as his characters often are.

So, even as I was missing William Trevor's kindly presence, I was aware that there was someone tweaking the props of this story all the same. Little by little, I began to imagine that it was Mr Bird, even though he's not the narrator but only one of the characters. The narrator is one of those nameless third person omniscient narrators (usually a stand-in for the author), but the narrative voice sounded so much like Mr Bird that the two became indistinguishable for me. The fact that Mr Bird dies on the first page only made me more convinced that he was the narrator and that he was telling the story from his newly acquired omniscient position in the afterlife. I've often found the notion of an omniscient narrator a little mysterious in any case. Such a narrator sometimes has personal opinions but at the same time can see right into characters's minds. Mr Bird embodied all that puzzling quality. I imagined him hovering over the boarding-house residents, watching their public and private moments, and even allowing himself to be seen on odd occasions as a fluttering presence on the edge of a character's vision.

But he was more than just a fluttering presence. It gradually emerges that Mr Bird carefully selected each of the characters who were to play out this boarding-house story after he'd left it, odd as that might seem. Yes, Mr Bird, as the owner of the boarding-house of the title, hand-picked the residents who make up the cast of characters, and according to a particular design of his own. The few other incidental characters in the story are literally plucked out of the telephone directory by one of Mr Bird's boarding-house residents who likes writing anonymous letters. He of course was selected for just such nefarious skills. 

So the characters, chosen by Mr Bird and subliminally worked on via his words and actions while he was alive, gain an extra measure of freedom now that he's no longer around to tweak their emotions with his mild but manipulative comments. What will they do with this free will they have been granted? 

Well, not as much as they might hope or you might expect.. 
The script, you see, was written in advance by Mr Bird.