Rating: 4/5

Paul Bowles In The Spider's House

Paul Bowles (1910 -- 1999) was an American composer and writer who lived as an expatriate in Tangier beginning in 1947. Bowles' third novel takes its title from a verse in The Koran:

"The likeness of those who choose other patrons than Allah is as the likeness of the spider when she taketh unto herself a house, and lo! the frailest of all houses is the spider's house, if they but knew."

Unlike Bowles' famous novel, "The Sheltering Sky", which tells the story of lost, wandering Americans, "The Spider's House" has a strong political component. Most American readers will be unfamiliar with the background. The novel is set in Fez, Morocco, in 1954 and deals with the political upheaval against the French colonialists. In 1953, the French had replaced a Sultan who had resisted them and replaced him with a more pliant individual. In 1954, the independence party, the Istiqlal, led a rebellion against French rule. The rebellion was led by Moslems; but in Bowles' account it was less a religious than a nationalist rebellion with components which included communism.

Bowles' novel is subtle, perceptive, and complex but also difficult to follow. It discusses the confusing politics and manages as well to be highly introspective. The many characters in the book include religious Moslems, leaders of the Istiqlal, and expatriates from the United States and Britain. The group examines the relationships of these groups between themselves and with one another.

The two primary characters are John Stenham and Amar. Stenham is an American author who has resided in Morocco for many years. In many respects, Stenham, who had flirted with communism in his youth, is a figure similar to Bowles. Amar is a deeply religious Moslem adolescent who is illiterate but gifted with healing powers. A third important character is an American woman Polly (Lee) Burroughs, in her mid-20s who is a tourist in Morocco after a divorce from her French husband.

The organization and scope of the book wander. It opens in the middle of things with a highly confusing Prelude in which Stenham leaves a party with an escort provided by his host to return to his hotel under tense circumstance. This opening scene is not explained until mid-point in the book. The early chapters focus on Amar, on traditional Moslem practice in Fez, and on Amar's relationship to his parents and others. It tells a good detailed story with many portrayals of local conditions but initially seems detached from what follows. The middle chapters of the book shift abruptly to a hotel frequented by expatriates including Stenham, his British friends, and Lee. The book describes some of the thinking of each of the characters on Morocco and on the reasons for their stays in the country. A possibly romantic relationship begins to develop between Stenham and the haughty, rejecting Lee. In the final sections of the book Amar is brought together with the expatriate characters. The relationship between the characters proceeds against the background of increasing violence and danger to the expatriates as well as to the locals. Besides showing the war and its impact, Bowles has the characters attempt to communicate with one another about their radically differing views of life, religion, and the ongoing fighting.

The book does not hold together well as a novel, with its many divergent themes and sudden shifts in character and location. It remains highly thought-provoking and worthwhile. The writing and the many descriptive passages are often beautiful. The book explores the troubled nature of Morocco in overthrowing colonial rule and the causes for the rebellion. The strongest passages in the book are the sections in which the characters simply talk and try to understand each other and the many sections of introspective soliloquy. Young Amar wants to live a devout traditional Moslem life but sees change coming. Lee is an American liberal and an advocate of progressive causes and social change. Stenham's views are complex and closest to those of the author. He is a disillusioned communist and ex-liberal who was raised without religion. Stenham is moved by the simple piety he finds in the Moslem community and wants that community to continue in its faith, even though it is a faith he is unable to share. Stenham is unable to support either of the belligerents in the war, the French or the Istiqlal, but instead wants life to continue as it is and, as he sees it, as it had been since medieval times.

The book offers insight into the Moroccan rebellion. The book continues to have a topical relevance to events in the Middle East and elsewhere. There is a danger in pushing the historical parallels too far or too uncritically. As are Bowles' earlier novels, "The Spider's House" is basically a work of introspection and reflection by a skeptic and born outsider. It is a difficult, moving work. The novel is available in this paperback edition and in a collection of Bowles' first three novels published by the Library of America.

Robin Friedman