Rating: 5/5

Here I go again with an actual review of "Ladder of Years" by Anne Tyler after my recent reread. Five big, huge, deep star characters (there are FACES on the stars) for the sheer fabulosity that is the author. Her attention to detail, the dialogue, character development...it's all well above expectations. Some may feel that her plot action is sloooooow. I beg to differ! I completely differ! There is so much going on under the surface for the reader to ponder on and become involved with. I know I'm reading a great book when I say to myself, "Self, calm down, Delia is just a character in a book!"

As I mentioned earlier in my pre-review, Cordelia Grinstead is one of my favorite characters in a novel. She's right up there with Fleur Pillager from the Louise Erdrich "Love Medicine" series. These are remarkable, brave women, each in their own way. Delia's bravery is not as flashy or violent as Fleur's, but the courage to uproot from her shuttered, secure life in order to break away and grow as an individual is unparalleled. 

The opening of LOY is both hilarious and achingly sad at the same time. It is written as a newspaper article, describing Delia's departure from a family vacation at the beach. She simply walks away. Yet in the article, none of the family seem to know what she looks like. What color are her eyes? How tall is she? What was she wearing? Nobody seems to know. Apparently her entire family has not even SEEN their mother/sister/wife for decades! It is any wonder that she needs to get away and find herself? How many of us have either pondered such a move or perhaps day-dreamed about what would happen if we were to leave and start a completely opposite existence to the one we have? In LOY, we get to live out this fantasy without ever leaving the comfort of our own armchair.

I guess I'm gushing a bit! I won't go into all the plot points near the beginning causing Delia to step outside her Doctor's wife role. Suffice it to say, there's a bit of manly attention and not from her husband. She never gets too out of control but...

It must be this dizzy, damp, rumpled feeling as she rushed home from secret meetings; her telltale flushed cheeks, the used and smushed look of her lips...

There is a hilarious segment where Delia is serving roasted chicken to her family and mother-in-law Eleanor who is extremely frugal. Somehow Eleanor manages to increasingly complain about expense by stating that they are eating "roast squab", then "grilled pheasant", and finally "grilled peacock!" As usual, everyone feels that Delia is empty-headed, somehow not capable, or serious.

So she takes off in a van with a workman at the beach house, claiming she needs a ride, and somehow ends up in Bay Borough, a small town a ways off from Baltimore. 

When her family discovered she was gone they would be baffled.

My notes about the above... Fat chance! They won't even notice for quite a while. This book never gets old. It's so well-written!

Upon arrival in town in her swimsuit and husband Sam's bathrobe, Delia imagines herself in a whole new life/job. (This is very similar to Lucy in the beginning of "Saint Maybe." Please see my review for more info.) Delia later decides she will go by Miss Grinstead, but here are her thoughts after buying herself a serious looking dress rather than her usual frilly, baby doll clothes.

Here is the secretary, Miss X, speeding back to her office after lunch. Preparing to type up her notes for the board of directors.

Sure enough, Miss Grinstead gets a job as a lawyer's secretary in town and finds a room in a boarding house.

Here comes the executive secretary, returning from her lone meal to the solitude of her room. It wasn't a complaint, though, it was a boast. An exultation. 

She is expanding her self-sufficiency yet she is also sad and lonely. She's doing what she needs to do to become her own person.

The fact was, Delia was expendable. She was an extra. She had lived out her married life like a girl playing house, and always there's been a grown-up standing ready to take over-her sister or her husband or her father.

People from her life and a police officer do come to find Delia but, realizing that she wants to be where she is, they leave her there to her life. However, then a kitten enters her simple existence. She doesn't mean to keep "George" despite what Belle, her landlady says...

Not keep this little socky-paws? This dinky little pookums? Is it a prinky-nose. Is it a frowsy-head. Is it a fluffer-bunch?

Delia is reading Carson McCullers stories from the library. In "A Tree, a Rock, a Cloud", it's stated that people need to start by loving easier things such as the aforementioned. Then they can eventually work their way up to loving people. Maybe Miss Grinstead can work her way up from caring about acquaintances in Bay Borough, and then a kitten, and then who knows! Maybe people. Maybe even her own family?

There's only one way to solve the mystery of what happens to Delia Grinstead, Dee, or Miss Grinstead. You have no choice except to read Ladder of Years, one of Tyler's best!

I'll leave you with a quote from an elderly character who lives in one of those elder centers where they move you up floors as you become more infirm, the illest being on the top floor. This quote also explains the title.

I've always pictured life as one of those ladders you find on playground sliding boards-a short ladder of years where you climb higher and higher, and then, oops!, you fall over the edge and others move up behind you.