Rating: 5/5

This book is phenomenal. I was introduced Sowell by the writing in his book "Black rednecks, White Liberals" and while I have not read that book, this book was a great primer for me to Sowell's work, writing style and general tone. 

Sowell chronicles his experience as a parent of a late talking child, John. While John did not talk in complete sentences until he was about 4, he ended up eventually catching up on this verbal milestone and obtaining a computer science degree, working as a titan in his field. Interested in his child's development and eager to see if other families experienced this, he culled a cohort of families who did have children like John who were late in talking. 

He was able to informally make hypothesis about the possible etiology of late talking children. For example, he noted that many of the children in this cohort were male children, with family members with math or music backgrounds. Also many late talking children also too were potty trained late. He draws some conclusions and offers hope and to parents.

As someone who is not a parent, a parent of a late talking child no less, I read this book to become familiar to Sowell's writing style. I also am interested in child development and figured this book would be my "in" to get familiar with Sowell on a familiar playing field. I ended up falling in love with Sowell's writing style and wording choice and his general philosophy about children. As a pretty big Charlotte Mason fan, this book affirms Mason's view of personhood for children. Children are indeed people. People are indeed different. Mason and Sowell see eye to eye in this way. It is with great pleasure that I am convinced further of these truths and have a framework for advocating for children especially advocating for the best of our children's efforts (and being present enough to notice the best of our children's efforts). That is while a child may not be the most articulate and verbose, he may have skills that are unique and defend his development. 

In short, I would strongly recommend this to a parent of late talking parent as a form of encouragement.