Rating: 5/5

The last book in Lyonesse makes me happy as well as a bit unhappy, I am happy that I have read such an fantastic book and unhappy as the series ends here, if only we could have more of 

Aillas, constrained by a hundred heavy responsibilities, was somewhat more still and reflective than Dhrun. His status required that he mask his natural passion and intensity behind a face of polite indifference: to such an extent that the trait had become almost habitual. Similarly, he often used a mildness close upon diffidence to disguise his true boldness, which was almost an extravagance of bravado. His swordsmanship was superb; his wit danced and flickered with the same sure delicacy, coming in sudden flashes like sunlight bursting through the clouds. Such occasions transformed his face so that for a moment he seemed as youthful and jubilant as Dhrun himself.

This describes my favourite character in series in a succinct way, Vance has a gift of writing small but perfect descriptions about landscapes, personality traits and not to mention food 

For days wagons had been arriving from all directions, loaded with sacks, crocks and crates, tubs of pickled fish; racks dangling with sausages, hams and bacon; barrels of oil, wine, cider and ale; baskets laden with onions, turnips, cabbages, leeks; also parcels of ramp, parsley, sweet herbs and cress. Day and night the kitchens were active, with the stoves never allowed to go cold. In the service yard four ovens, constructed for the occasion, produced crusty loaves, saffron buns, fruit tarts; also sweet-cakes flavoured with currants, anise, honey and nuts, or even cinnamon, nutmeg and cloves. One of the ovens produced only pies and pasties, stuffed with beef and leeks, or spiced hare seethed in wine, or pork and onions, or pike with fennel, or carp in a swelter of dill, butter and mushrooms, or mutton with barley and thyme.

And who wouldn’t get hungry by reading such a wonderful description about food.

This book can be summed up in one line, it is about Madouc who wants to find her pedigree in this cruel world of Elder isles which is beautiful but has dangers hidden everywhere.

It is about Madouc’s coming of age as well as a tipping point in the history of Elder isles, where in things start getting more and more clearer. 

And Vance wonderfully resolves all the mysteries which we can remember and which we have forgotten sometimes, because this series is really an experience which is not to be missed.

Very highly recommended.