Rating: 5/5

Please ignore the bad reviews or the non-believers. They are just spreading hate and why are they trying to sway people from a system of health and eating that truly works. YOU CAN CHANGE YOUR LIFE. I am a real testimonial of someone who has tried parts of the diet and witnessed amazing results! Why would nasty people review a health and diet book they have not actually tried themselves?? Absolute madness! (I don't ever write reviews but I'm so mad with those who are attempting at putting people off this great book). 

 I have attempted say 40% of recommended diet and know that it works. i.e.. I just made simple changes, cut down on baddies like sugar, coffee, dairy and meat (but I still have bread and pasta) Started having 'green drinks' couple times a week and drinking wheatgrass. Eat more salads and fresh veg... Lots of Kale and Spinach, Cucumber, Broccoli, Garlic. I have not had a cold or flu in 4 years.... in fact all of my friends have noted that. Also I do not suffer acid reflux anymore... Which used to be one of my major gripes. Trust me if you follow even a portion of this diet like I have you will get raised energy levels and your immunity will strengthen, skin will clear a bit (wrinkles soften) and you will lose lots of weight. Weight falls too quickly... so much so that I had to start eating more nuts, seeds, lentils and natural oils to keep some weight on. This is coming from someone who had excess weight from my teens that I could never shake off. The 'biggy' is cutting out or cutting down on sugars which Dr Young recommends. Calling him a quack is unnecessary.. the man is a microbiologist. If he wanted he could easily go get the qualifications to be a so called 'Dr of medicine'. He might not be a 'real Dr' but I personally have friends who are qualified 'Dr's and they know nothing of nutrition and health. The real Quacks are those practising in the 'medical profession' who know nothing of holistic healing. My personal story is that I suffered quite chronically from acid reflux and my GP sent me to an ear,nose, throat specialist who in one appointment offered surgery! Then my GP offered an alternative of synthetic medication for the 'rest of my life', imagine the side effects from that? I was appalled... No thanks! There are other ways to heal myself. 

I can guarantee that this is an excellent book and I only wish that more people would try it and see for themselves. I used to suffer along with acid reflux from allergies, back ache, headaches, candida (thrush) and sometimes nasty infections... we all suffer from diff ailments in our lives. I have healed my immunity and not touched antibiotics in 4 years! I have not needed to. In all honesty I occasionally still suffer from allergies but no where near as bad as I used to. Also sometimes I get acid reflux when I've fallen 'off the wagon' and indulged in a heavy meal with wine. When I get home I have a 'green drink' to balance it out... The pain and discomfort is diminished quickly. Sometimes it helps 60-70% other times it clears 100% almost instantly. It all is dependant on how 'acidic' my body is. But hey I had problems all my life and nothing from the chemist or prescribed from the 'Dr' ever worked reliably.... until I discovered Dr Young. I thank the heavens that his research and knowledge was shared with me. Like I said it will CHANGE YOUR LIFE. Go for it and please ignore the haters! Peace and love to you xxxx