Rating: 4/5

In her introduction, Lisa Robertson describes the weather as “boredom utopic,” an ever-present entity to relish or blame depending on the season or amount of cloud. Weather is language’s default conversation topic, a way to facilitate or ease out of discussion, placeholder as well as binding commonality. Robertson combines the languages of cloud cover and quotidian existence in seven sections, each titled with a day of the week, another nod to weather’s relationship to mundanity. The “Wednesday” section enacts this pairing directly: a clause about the weather and an aphoristic meditation share the same sentence, adjoined with a semicolon. “A dull mist comes rolling from the west; this is our imaginary adulthood.” “A very wet day for it; we loathe and repeat and suckle our sentimentality.” This tactic reveals a symbiotic bond, parallel but inextricably related paths, or even a call-and-response relationship. 

For each day of the week, Robertson sets a new pattern in motion. In “Tuesday,” she repeats the phrase “Days heap upon us” countless times, each time followed by “Where is Christine?” or “Where is Jane?” She answers the question indirectly then gives a sentence about cloud cover: “All cloudy except a narrow opening at the top of the sky. All cloudy. All cloudy. All cloudy,” then repeat, the action of “Days heap upon us” enacted by the repetition of the phrase. And these sentences about cloud cover stress comparison (“Same as the last but darker at the top than the bottom”), each day compared to last, with barely noticeable change. And the names are particular, but they change too, Jane to Mary to Ti-Grace to Gloria to Shulamith. On first read, these names signified to me only a passage of time, faces changing, people around us different on different days, faces conflating. Then I looked up Shulamith, and realized Robertson is referencing Shulamith Firestone, notable Canadian-born feminist. So then “Gloria” is Gloria Steinem. “Ti-Grace” must be Ti-Grace Atkinson. Feminist figures from the mid/late 20th century. Days and clouds become unstoppable forces burying the efforts of these women, a change in the weather, but nothing of note.