Rating: 2/5

I’m not sure how many books of Beverley’s I’ve read – three or four including this one – but I always have the same reaction: dismay. I’ve read so many glowing reviews of her work, and I really enjoy traditional regency romances, so it seems weird to not enjoy her books. 

This one starts out with a promising device – the arranged marriage between two unwilling protagonists. I'll admit I like this device, as artificial as it is; I typically really enjoy the often-slow process of overcoming the various obstacles, getting to know each other, falling in love. As far as romance conventions go, it's miles ahead of a spy plot for allowing for real character development and relationship building, IMHO.

Also promising is the fact that both protagonists are clever, educated sorts, though he has taken pains to hide this since his school days. I like bookish protagonists, so I would expect that this story would have a great deal of appeal to me.

Why did I dislike this particular execution, then? Partly I think because the main characters were written very convincingly as unable to get along for the main part of the book. Every single conversation goes sour, every misunderstanding possible is taken, neither character is particularly admirable – she in her martyrdom and he in his obsession with her sexual purity. His frequent thoughts of thrashing or throttling her are given a forgiving explanation by a friend (that he’d like to get his hands on her some other way), but then when he thinks that she’s entertaining another man in her bedroom, he backhands her across the room, bruising her face. The heroine takes the blame for this, as she had previously tried to provoke him into breaking the engagement by suggesting that she’d had several lovers, but neither that nor his promises never to do it again exactly washed the sour taste from my mouth. 

Part of the problem, I realized at some point, was I never felt persuaded that despite the clashes that there was any hidden attraction, or any secret pining, or something to indicate that they even liked each other. Even a little bit. Or that at least they felt a little lust. There's the little "battles of wits," but even those felt more competitive than relationship-building. 

Anyway, quite close to the end, the protagonists are declaring their love for each other. I could put that in a spoiler thingie, but it’s a romance. The protagonists being in love by the end shouldn’t exactly come as a surprise. But the thing is, if I knew these people in real life, I would be surprised. The hero says something like “I think I fell in love you back when so and so happened,” and it felt like rewriting history. At that point, I was already mulling over how I would rate it. One star for lack of enjoyment? Three stars for it being not that badly written and maybe a case of it’s-not-you-it’s me?
 
One of the things that decided me was the way the subplot was resolved, which was absurd.  The villain has been murdered while trying to rape an actress friend (and former mistress of the hero). The protagonists and their friends decide to commit a felony so that his wealth can be inherited by a former student of the heroine’s, which would also basically force her never to testify against them regarding that murder. In the process, the heroine, a sheltered feminist schoolteacher decides she’s going to pretend to be a prostitute. The hero is opposed to her being in danger, but goes along with it, despite the fact that he clearly has issues with a lady transgressing her prescribed sexual boundaries. But it turns out, all of a sudden, it’s cute to be like a street prostitute, and there’s an ‘adorable’ scene where the group is seen by the Duke of Belcraven and the prime minister.  There was an obvious purpose in this part (reassuring that no matter how angry the hero gets there won’t be a repeat of the previous incident), but besides that it just filled me with disbelief.* Nothing seems consistent in terms of character, and all it did was make me wonder WTF happened here? It went from being an adequately realistic if depressing domestic romance to being an over-the-top farce. *Actually, even the obvious purpose of the argument scene filled me with disbelief. It seems hardly appropriate to take protectiveness-anger and equate it with feeling-sexually-betrayed anger, and then be all rosily confident that he'll never act out in the same way as he did before.

But my favourite line was the hero’s final praise to the heroine  “You’ve been like warm sun on frozen ground,” – after all the descriptions of her from his perspective have been about how chilly and prickly she is, and how bitter and resentful and resistant she’s been, how all the socializing she does is such a strain she collapses in tears, how she just barely makes any friends in the book, and none of the good things that happen to other people are because of her  - the cognitive dissonance made me laugh out loud. 

Final rating – one star for my actual reaction (didn’t like it) with a one-star bonus for the chuckle.