Rating: 5/5

Hell fire! Nothing to do? Have you a cold beer and a double banana moon pie. Slip your pistol under the seat, roll the window down and cruise through a hot Mississippi night in your dented pick-up.

Ants, bees, the bugs of summer, keyed-up guard dogs, coons, snakes, are all characters as vivid as the humans in this beautifully written novel. The major characters are inanimate: liquor and firearms.

Rambunctiousness is one thing, pure evil another.

There is a caste-system in this country. Those that have no vehicle are on the bottom rung, invisible. 

You get a view here of destitution so extreme that one family shown here has dropped through a crack and they live in another ( non driving ) dimension.

the view from a bench seat at 60 miles an hour is quite different from a muddy high-way shoulder among discarded beer cans miles from nothing.

All the men in this novel drink heavily even as they simultaneously piss it out the other end. Joe digs out a bullet from his own biceps, puts band-aids on his 4 bullet wounds, then goes out gambling. I have to admire that optimism.

The soul of this novel is the growing relationship between Joe, a 44 year old seasoned, hard working, hard fighting, hard drinking man who has seen the inside of the slammer more than once and Gary, a 15 year old painfully innocent and honest boy intent on improving his situation, who has never seen a toothbrush.

Sometimes it seemed that the boy didn't know a lot of things a boy his age should know. They'd been driving by the Rock Ridge Colored Church one day back in the spring and the boy had asked him who lived in that big white house.

I enjoyed the peripherals: the war veteran John Coleman and his gas station and general store, his itchy scalp where the shrapnel still lies and his unspoken desire to have had children.

You might think these walking wounded are out looking for a war to fight. They might fight each other over various grievances or money but I don't think they fight out of boredom or for no reason.

They reach their potential when they take on evil in the form of a selfish greedy snake-like daddy that shoplifts, murders, steals food from the mouths of his family, stinks like dead chickens and abuses children.

Like you another beer?