Rating: 4/5

Review
  

Strega Nona by Tomie dePaola is the first book in a classic children's literature series from the 1970s and 1980s. It was eventually made into a cartoon and several other children's merchandise, all fun and educational toys as kids grew up. I enjoyed the premise of the books but only read the first one, and maybe the second or third (can't remember!).

Strega Nona means "Grandma Witch," and she helps the townspeople with all their problems through her magical pasta pot. One day, she has to go away and leaves Big Anthony in charge. And even though he was told not to use the pot, he doesn't listen and causes all sorts of wacky situations.

These books were meant as little lessons for children. It all comes down to teaching the 4 to 8 range why it's important to listen, what harm can happen if you don't and how to always be honest and truthful. Valuable stuff... and when it's in a picture book format, it's quite strong.

Of all the picture books, these weren't my super-high favorite ones, but they were still very good. I liked the idea of a witch teaching children, but at the same time... if you want this to be a listen, did she have to be a witch? Couldn't she just have been a grandma with some magical powers? I suppose it's a good way to show that not all "witches" can be bad. But I bet kids learned to eat a lot of pasta from them!!!

  
    About Me
  

For those new to me or my reviews... here's the scoop: I read A LOT. I write A LOT. And now I blog A LOT. First the book review goes on Goodreads, and then I send it on over to my WordPress blog at https://thisismytruthnow.com, where you'll also find TV &amp; Film reviews, the revealing and introspective 365 Daily Challenge and lots of blogging about places I've visited all over the world. And you can find all my social media profiles to get the details on the who/what/when/where and my pictures. Leave a comment and let me know what you think. Vote in the poll and ratings. Thanks for stopping by. Note: All written content is my original creation and copyrighted to me, but the graphics and images were linked from other sites and belong to them. Many thanks to their original creators.