Rating: 3/5

Thomas Edward Lawrence was the second son of Thomas Robert Tighe Chapman and the governess he ran away with, Sarah Lawrence; although without prospect of a lawful union as the father was still married to the wife he had left behind, the couple adopted the surname Lawrence and went on to have five children, all boys. The family led a nomadic life, moving from Ireland to Wales, where TE was born at Tremadoc on 16 August 1888, to Scotland, to Normandy and finally to England.

As a youngster TE had many interests, being a zealous rubber of brasses by the age of nine, collecting pieces of pottery, enjoying photography, being a Sunday School teacher and a member of the Church Lads' Brigade. He attended Oxford City High School and Jesus College, Oxford, where he read history. He was undoubtedly an exceptional talent.

He had briefly joined the Royal Artillery before being bought out by his father within a matter of weeks of joining. At Oxford he was advised to submit a special thesis at final examination time and he chose as his subject 'The influence of the Crusades on the medieval military architecture of Europe'. And to assist in his preparation he decided to make a field expedition to Syria, alone and on foot. He wrote to Charles Doughty, of 'Arabia Deserta' fame, for advice and obtained, through Lord Curzon, Chancellor of the University, a letter of safe conduct for Turkish-controlled areas of the Middle East. His efforts eventually not only earned him a First Class Honours Degree but shaped his future career.

He became an archaeologist in the Sinai Desert before on the outbreak of World War I he joined the Military Intelligence unit and eventually found himself posted to Cairo where the British army were desperate for Arabic speaking officers. Promoted to captain he visited Mesopotamia where he was involved in getting the best possible surrender terms for British prisoners of war.

Thereafter he was heavily involved in Arabic politics and he made a life-long friend in Feisal Hussein, with whom he shared many adventures. It was not long thereafter that Lawrence of Oxford became known as Lawrence of Arabia. 

In July 1917 he planned the capture of Akaba, an action that changed dramatically the whole complexion of the war in the Middle East. For this he was awarded a Companionship of the Bath, for which he had to be promoted to Major. Then in January 1918 he was involved in the only conventional battle of his career, at Tafileh and for his part in the action he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order. Along with Feisal he seized Deraa, where he had earlier been captured and badly humiliated, and then marched on Damascus and at Tafas he caught up with a Turkish rearguard and ordered his men to take no prisoners; he was later said to have been revolted at his bloodthirstiness.

After it was all over he returned to England and had an audience with King George V for the presentation of his CB and DSO but he informed the King that he could not accept them because His Majesty's government had broken pledges to Feisal that he had given in the King's name. King George later recorded, 'There I was holding the box in my hand'!

He continued to dabble in Arabic politics before writing his account of the war in Arabia under the title 'Seven Pillars of Wisdom', the title of a pre-war novel that he had started but had then thrown away. In 1921 he returned to the Middle East as an advisor to Winston Churchill before tendering his resignation in July 1922.

He became an aircraftman, joined the army briefly, and assumed the surnames Shaw and Ross to avoid the limelight. He also leased Clouds Hill where he continued his writing career. And it was to writer Henry Williamson that he sent his final message, telegraphing the author to meet him at Clouds Hill for lunch later in the week but on his return journey, on his Brough motorcycle, he swerved to avoid to two youngsters on bicycles, lost control and was critically injured; he failed to gain consciousness and died six days later.

At his funeral there were tributes from all over the world, but, predictably, none from Turkey, where newspapers heralded the death of 'an infamous spy' who had once been the 'King of the Desert'!

In this relatively short biography J Anderson Black captures the very essence of the man and for the reader it does invite one to seek a more detailed study of this fascinating character's life.