Rating: 3/5

Rating: 3.5*

I don't read a lot of mysteries, but I had to read this for my university's book club. This is even more out of my norm, since it's not a modern thriller but more of a classic whodunnit, published before I was born.

The story is narrated by Qwilleran (not the only guy with an odd name), who takes on a job as an art reporter despite having a history of crime reporting (and no art knowledge whatsoever). But never fear, as his old job follows him to the new, with a death in the art world.

I found this to be quite a quick read. This is partly because the book is only 260 pages, but I think part of the reason is also that its spurred on a lot by dialogue, not laden down with too much detail. The characters were all very strange and often funny. That being said, it did take a while to get to the actual death that sets everything off. There was a lot of laying the foundation.

It helped that Qwilleran was new in town, as the reader could be introduced to the full cast of characters along with the narrator. It actually added some build up initially to allow the reader to guess who was going to die and why, but it eventually got a bit tedious for me.

The ending was unexpected, but it was also a bit disappointing, if that makes sense. I was guessing throughout who the murderer could be and what their motive was, and I kept switching between a few suspects. I didn't suspect who it turned out to be, which I suppose is a good thing, but the reasons were just a bit...dull. Also, someone crucial to the whole saga only gets introduced at the end, which I felt was a bit of a cheat, as it didn't give the reader even a chance to figure things out on their own.

The whole cat aspect was a funny little touch, with the cat in question actually helping to share some clues (but also some red herrings). I think anyone who has owned or loves cats will appreciate how Koko's personality was so ...feline. So regal. What a cat. The art critic who owns the cat was also odd, but also a bit cattish himself, preferring to be a recluse and having a contempt for others.

All in all, I'm glad I gave it a go, but I don't think I'll be switching to mysteries as my primary genre anytime soon. Good thing I'm making the club read sci-fi next!
  See this review in its natural environment, Dani Reviews Things.

You can find me on Twitter and Instagram.