Rating: 4/5

True Believer is a charming novel that definitely surprised me with both the writing style and the plot twists. The novel is written in such a way that is easy to read and is enjoyable. I really enjoyed seeing how the writer made LaVaughn’s writing change as LaVaughn changed. LaVaughn starts the novel with poor grammar and a rather naïve attitude. As the novel progresses and as LaVaughn experiences challenges and also grows in knowledge, her grammar improves, and she begins to question the things that had never been a question, such as her friendship with Myrtle and Annie or even beginning to look into faith. The writer allows for LaVaughn to express emotion as a normal fifteen year old girl would. She is not always rational, and sometimes her emotions take precedence over the truly important matters in life, such as school or family. This was incredibly relatable because I remember how much this was true for me at the age of fifteen. I love how much support LaVaughn ends up receiving from her friends, family, and teachers. She is truly being supported by the end of the novel, and as a reader, I truly want to see her succeed after traveling with her throughout the novel. Some parts of the novel I felt were perhaps a little strange. I think the writing style at the beginning of the book took some time for me to adjust to because it is so different from the norm. I did appreciate, though, how the book did not shy away from issues that truly face so many young people today like safety issues at school, not receiving proper education as college prep, the challenges of getting out of tough environments, and violence. Through these issues, the characters showed incredible strength. LaVaughn’s mother was a hardworking and fierce woman who was determined to make a better life for her daughter. LaVaughn was determined to go to college despite challenges that arose and the statistics she had against her. Truly, I found the courage and the hope these characters had to be inspiring. I really did enjoy this novel because of its honesty and simplicity. It is not a terribly difficult novel to read, and yet it contains some heavier topics. I would read True Believer again simply because I found the characters so relatable and charming.