Rating: 4/5

I bought this book in an antique store - published 1952 in the old style, wherein the actual cover, not just the jacket, is illustrated, the drawing wrapping around the front, spine &amp; back. Also there is an illustration at the beginning of each chapter. All were pen-and-ink style drawings that were done by the author.

It is the story of an early Texas Ranger. I found it to be in the style of Zane Grey with lots of action but some beautiful descriptive passages. It is in the era following the Civil War where there were lots of forays back and forth across the border by individuals and groups from Texas and Mexico. On both sides of the border, there is always hostility going on with the Apaches. The author introduces you to a plethora of characters, and it is quite a time before you can determine which are key players and which not, so your mind is full, trying to sort it out. The main character shows to be very human, and his horse Lagrimas shares in the importance of the role. 

Some quotes: "The gloaming sound of the work stock enfolded for the night, the footfalls, the dim voices, moving from fields to wisps of smoke from kitchen fires, the murmur of twilight, enlarged the loneliness by the tumbled wall." 

Meditating on the acceptance by the inhabitants of death and cruelty Martin compares Mexico to Texas; he muses: "...this is a sad and sorry country. Something holds it. It has got too much patience. It don't expect enough. In my country - say! - there is too much expecting and not enough patience." 

Describing a man, "...[he] stood by the branding fire. Martin knew he was patron the instant he saw him: authority stood written in the set of his head on his shoulders. It was a working authority, inherent in the stamp of the man, without pretension or solemnity." 

"The voice was loud. It carried some sound of the winds, the herds, the rocky canyons."

"He was not prepared for ... the steep fall of shade on the bluffs that walled it, for the sparkling river that watered it, for the loamy banks that nourished it, for the fields, gardens, orchards, groves, and houses that adorned it. Martin looked across the ravine, at the darkly timbered continuing wilderness of sierra, blue beyond blue, ridge beyond ridge, paling to the lost edge of the world; and he looked down again into the depth before him, upon the miniature, ordered cluster of white walls and bright greens and rich browns, upon Bavinuchi nestled along its clear water, certain of its haven in the shelter of the riven stone."