Rating: 3/5

I'll tell you one thing: Mary Bennet would Not Have Approved of this book.

I mention the third Bennet sister because Minerva Armitage, heroine of this book, is comparable to her. Both possess exacting moral standards and a tendency to preach without sensitivity to the situation or regard for the people around them. 

Where they differ lies in the fact that because Minerva's a main heroine, she gets to be ravishingly beautiful, with a more generously endowed chest (if it's explicitly mentioned in the book, that gives me license to mention it too) and admittedly, with a bit more likability than poor maligned Mary.

In the first half of the book, I was extremely amused by Minerva. It was fun to see a typical Regency beauty being rather holier-than-thou and preachy yet sweet enough to remain in the reader's good graces. One might say she has reason enough for her personality, having to take care of five sisters and two brothers alongside a rather negligent father and hypochondriac of a mother.

It was funny to see her in 'evil' London society where her morals and standards are so far removed, and how she reacts in the most awkward, wrongest way possible. Priggish and missish as she may be, it is a characterisation not often seen or handled well. In this case though, I thought it succeeded. I rooted for her because I was shown that the true heart of gold behind the prudish front existed. AND despite the fact she doesn't allow novels in her house. HORRORS. Granted, if she's seen her own father commit adultery, one would think she wouldn't be THAT shocked at Lady Godolphin's affair. Disappointed certainly but to shriek at it seems uncharacteristic when you consider that Minerva is supposed to be intelligent.

On the other hand, in the second half of the book where the girl finally admits that she's in love... hooboy. The prudish pragmatism, the backbone she has and her characterisation seems to all crumble into a litany of "Oh GOD THIS GUY will NEVER LOVE ME and I must marry another to save my family but NO...!" Losing your heart is one thing but losing your entire head is quite another. 

I suppose my main problem is the sudden sex. Yes, I get it. She thought he would die and she's desperately in love for the first time in her life. And yes, he was terribly drunk and also quite desperate. But she's been shown to be so moralistic and so firm in her principles that to see her suddenly decide to run to Sylvester's house to have One Last Fling with him is... jarring. The segue is abrupt and completely out of the blue, as if the author suddenly said, "Oh what the hell" and threw in a sensual if not graphic scene.

The love interest, Lord Sylvester Comfrey, is, to be frank, Your Typical Rake-Hero. Tall, handsome, experienced, urbane. Dialogue snarky enough to prick yourself on if you slide your finger along the sentences the wrong way. Kind enough to show a country girl how to behave in society although (probably, secretly) honouring her attempts to remain true to herself. Keeps denying he's attracted to a country miss because "she's not my type, NOES". Ends up fighting a duel over her honour because that's how Real Men rolled back in the day. Oh naturally I LIKED him - who wouldn't when you see him in action for his girl? - but honestly, we've seen his make before and doubtless we'll keep seeing his kind in future stories to come. Reformed rakes after all make for perfect romantic heroes.

Rev. Armitage is also quite a character, as a vicar more interested in the world than the divine and not exactly the best of men - manipulative half the time yet he DOES care for his family in his own way. If he were a landowner, one wouldn't blink too much at his actions. But since he's a vicar, his vices give him dimension and add unexpected depth when he DOES behave decently. It sets him in contrast with his daughter who acts more like a man of the cloth than he does. For that, I give Beaton props for his character.

It is in my opinion, because I know there will be those who disagree, that because the plot is nothing new, it is the cast of characters who make this stand out from the rest. And while I feel like shaking the main couple towards the end, it's not a bad thing. A reaction is better than complete apathy.

As for the story, it goes as follows: Girl must marry rich guy or her family will fall into debt. Girl meets Boy who teaches her how to act in proper society. Girl falls in love with Boy but believes he will never love her because she is far too naive/poor/whatever reason. Boy loves her anyway even though he denies it for as long as the Nile runs. Girl runs into trouble which Boy must extricate her from. Confessions of love ensue, combined with misunderstandings and finally a happy resolution.

Not exactly mindbogglingly groundbreaking. However, there IS an added thread to this plot by way of a bet being run by two rival groups of men. All of them arrange a "Make Her Love Us and Dump Her/Dishonour Her Horribly" scheme after Minerva deflates their ego with her overly blunt remarks. One feels no sympathy for any of the antagonists since most of them are rather flat without much charm or depth. (This is probably deliberate since you're supposed to be falling for Sylvester).

Oh, and there's a subplot about her younger sister, Annabelle and an unsuitable suitor, followed by the appearance of one Marquess of Brabington, the latter acting as a technical Deus ex machina of this story. The subplot takes focus away from the main story, rather like intermissions to allow for time to pass within the story (and probably also to make the book slightly thicker). It's not really annoying since you do see how ironically different Minerva and Annabelle's viewpoints are.

Beaton's writing is not Austen and to its advantage, it doesn't pretend to be. It doesn't have the subtlety of Heyer's descriptions - while you DO get the details of dresses and environments, it can feel a bit forced in. And whether you think this a pro or a con, it's not as graphic/vividly sexual as a Quinn or Kleypas or Laurens book. It's strength is in the tongue-in-cheek quality Beaton has developed. Sometimes through the dialogue, but mostly through the narrative, you can hear the author describe events, people and their motivations with a grin and a laugh. Lady Godolphin is a favourite target mainly because of how utterly ridiculous the character is. Thank you Colonel Brian for providing great shouts of laughter. There are also moments of genuine, passionate UST between the two main leads, my favourite being that scene by the lake. And I will admit, I did feel for Minerva when she succumbs to her 'He'll Never Love Me' blues. Sometimes, if not all her moments. 

Yet there are specific plot points that rather marred my enjoyment of the book, the main one being Sylvester shooting a bullet RIGHT INTO THE BARREL of the other gun. WHAT. I'm able to suspend my disbelief only so far. This goes BEYOND it. The transitions from scene to scene are also sometimes awkward and the ending honestly felt rather rushed. A last minute moment of dramatic tension also just didn't quite tally with the way the story was going i.e. that unnecessary misunderstanding that Dubois causes, making Minerva run immediately back to her family. It felt a bit like padding, really and added little to the story.

Overall, it's an okay romance novel. It takes a formula that's been done before and adds its own little twists and flavour. Sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't. I wouldn't call it pure fluff since there are dramatic moments in it, albeit without much suspense. Check it out if you're in the mood for a light, quick read to amuse yourself.