Rating: 1/5

I'm not sure I've ever been so happy to finish a book.

From what I understand The Riddle of the Sands is considered one of the first spy stories (at 1903), though the validity of that statement is easily debatable. Regardless, I'm glad to see spy stories have improved significantly. Remember in Moby Dick (unabridged) there are all those chapters about the history of whaling, and whaling boats, and the anatomy of a whale, and what parts can be used for food and candlemaking and whatever else? That's sort of what this was like, except not nearly as exciting. What Childers did here was detail the sea, the beach, the boat, the people, et al, ad nauseum. I considered putting my face on a lit stovetop as that seemed infinitely more exciting than puttering through this.

Carruthers is invited along on a boating holiday with Davies, and he's disappointed when he finds it's a mere sailing boat and not a freaking yacht or whatever. But whatever - Carruthers has no other life, so what the hey. After pages and pages and pages of some stuff that didn't seem the least bit important to me, Davies finally drops into conversation as almost an aside that Germans are considering some nasty plans in the area. Boys will be boys, so they go off (in their sailing boat) to save the day.

Or whatever. That's what I was able to pull out of all the other babble. This is a very British story, filled to the gills with a lot of "By Jove!"'s and "Old chap!"'s and who knows what else. I think it's great there seems to be so many people who really dig this book, or claim they dig it, but I am clearly not one of them. I did, however, make myself finish it, just in case I was missing anything. I don't think I was, but you be your own judge.

Side note: Childers was an Irish writer. I'm seriously beginning to think that I have a problem with Irish writers. I didn't think it was possible, but the books I most often mark at 1 or 2 stars wind up being written by an Irish. Except Dracula which I don't think counts since everyone thinks Bram Stoker is freaking Hungarian or something. Anyway, I'm waiting for the exception to this Irish-writers-suck phase. Certainly that can't be true.