Rating: 4/5

Huh. "Problem Play." Well, it's certainly problematic! 

Not his best, by far, in terms of dialogue, but really interesting when it comes to inverting traditional gender roles and casting doubt onto common tropes of romantic comedies.

I kind of think this is a more mature version of Two Gentlemen of Verona. 

(Spoilers for both plays)

In both you've got a crazily obsessed woman going after a man when she should have turned around and walked away.

Proteus has to be stopped from raping Silvia, yet Julia still wants him badly enough she faints when she thinks he might marry Silvia instead of her. 

Helen is so obsessed with Bertram that she goes to insane lengths (faking her death, bribery &amp; trickery, nearly getting the guy arrested for her murder, etc) to trap him into a marriage he clearly wants no part of. One could even make a case that she raped her husband, since she slept with him without his consent and against his stated wishes. 

And Bertram is a terrible guy, too - seducing a virgin and proposing marriage without any intention at all of of ever following through, then slut shaming her in front of the King &amp; their families when she reminds him of his proposal.

Why are either of these desirable matches? The modern mind boggles. 

In the earlier Two Gentlemen of Verona, this is all played straight and the audience is supposed to accept and applaud the couples' happily ever after. We're just supposed to overlook the scumbag's near rape of one of the women and be glad he's happily married off to the other.

But in the later All's Well that Ends Well, Shakespeare continually casts doubt onto this "happily ever after" ending. Bertram is recalcitrant until he's pinned in a corner and has to admit defeat and everyone, including the King, seems to doubt if there really IS a happy ending.

"All yet seems well, and if it end so meet, ..." There's a double uncertainty there. All seems well. If the ending is so fitting. Then in the epilogue there's "All is well ended if this suit be won, ... " Again, there's a telling if there. Has the suit been won? Is all well? Truly? 

It calls into question the traditional "let's end a play happily by marrying everyone off!" endings, and I really enjoyed that. It's not a "happily ever after" ending, but I found it a really satisfying one.