Rating: 4/5

Also listened to Out of the Silent Planet. Perelandra notes here. See The Tortured Planet here.

Preface: Lewis is clear that The Abolition of Man is the nonfiction version of That Hideous Strength.

Spoilers...

Ch. 1: Sale of College Property
1.1: marriage (1st sentence)
1.1: Donne dissertation
1.1: Jane's dreams/nightmares
1.2: Mark and inner ring thoughts
1.3: first person (Lewis the character)
1.3: Merlin first mentioned
1.4: NICE buying Merlin's Well
1.5: Swift essay :)
1.5: Jane's conversation with Dimbles about the Arthur legend

Ch. 2: Dinner with the Sub-Warden
2.1: claim that Ransom murdered Weston (interplanetary travel)
2.1: social/biological engineering
2.1: euphemisms written by Mark
2.1: old women of both sexes :)
2.1: experimental school
2.2: fearful Jane
2.4: Mark going to Belbury (NICE's Blood Transfusion Office); Jane going to St. Anne's

Ch. 3: Belbury and St. Anne's-on-the-Hill
3.1: Wither introduced (Deputy Director of NICE)
3.2: Hingest, Steele, Filostrato
3.2: Miss Hardcastle (the Fairy)
3.3: Jane's dreams (Tudor relatives—hereditary power of true visions); Miss Grace Ironwood
3.3: live/resurrected head
3.4: deserved vs. remedial punishment (NICE social control via police)
3.4: Hingest leaving NICE
3.5: call for Jane from Mrs. Dimble

Ch. 4: The Liquidation of Anachronisms
4.1: Dimbles turned out of their home by NICE
4.2: Jane's dream of a fight
4.3: Rev. Straik's Xn language (every knee bow at name of Jesus, saints inherit earth, resurrection happening now)
4.4: Inner Ring
4.4: murder of Hingest discussed
4.5: Jane realizes her dream had come true (4.2); she just wants to be left alone
4.6: Mark begins negative sociological evaluation based on prejudice, not experience/sight
4.6: Mark and Jane speaking past each other
4.7: disturbance among the Bracton Fellows

Ch. 5: Elasticity
5.1: Mark's talk with Fairy; desire to remain in the inner ring
5.2: ongoing difficulty getting clarity on Mark's job
5.3: Jane and the Dennistons (Arthur and Camilla) discuss Mr./Mrs. Fisher-King; Sura (Christian mystic who said a seer would come)
5.3: Jane's dislike of patriarchy (offended by the thought of asking Mark's permission to join the order at St. Anne's)

Ch. 6: Fog
6.1: Mark loses offer but gets a lesser one
6.1: Jane dreams more [Frost]; Mark publishes journalism articles
6.2: Mark drinking in the library; engineering disturbances and writing about it beforehand (criminal behavior)
6.4: two versions of Mark's articles; inner ring
6.5: Jane's dream [Merlin]

Ch. 7: The Pendragon
7.1: Jane at St. Anne's; picture of Frost; meets Fisher King [Ransom] and is "unmade"
7.2: Ransom wants Jane to ask Mark to leave the NICE
7.2: Jane confesses that she doesn't love Mark; Ransom discusses marriage, mentions obedience, and dismisses a certain kind of equality
7.2: bigness and smallness as "masters" [eldils] approached (and Jane sent away)
7.3: 4 Janes; riot at train station [planned]
7.4: Jane arrested and interrogated/tortured by Fairy
7.4: Jane released and driven to St. Anne's

Ch. 8: Moonlight at Belbury
8.1: Fairy and Wither discuss Jane before seeing the Head
8.2: Jane wants to read Mansfield Park and Shakespeare's sonnets
8.2: Mr. Bultitude (bear)
8.3: Mark gets in trouble for not wanting Jane to come to Belbury; inner ring; Filostrato speaks of being free from Nature; references to the Head (Alcasan, not Jules)
8.3: canaglia; Straik compares the Head to the resurrection of Jesus; conquering nature; prepping to see the Head

Ch. 9: The Saracen's Head
9.1: Jane tells her dream about Merlin's meeting the Head
9.2: Mark unnerved by the encounter wit the Head; his "Modern" education; Fairy tries to force Mark to bring Jane to Belbury; odd encounter with Wither
9.3: Jane gets some history of Ransom (Marks and Venus trips) from McPhee; Jane asks if eldils are huge (told that's not the point); Ransom identified as the Pendragon of Logres
9.4: council to discuss the Head; concern about new Belbury power joining with old Bragdon Wood power
9.5: Merlin connected to Atlantean Magic; modern scientists despaired of knowing objective truth; stifling the gag reflex; limits as a mercy—don't shake them off

Ch. 10: The Conquered City
10.1: Mark threatened by Wither and Fairy to be framed for Hingest's murder (and accused of being rude for disagreeing with them); more pressure to bring Jane
10.2: Mark leaves Belbury (and sees Wither's ghost again); families leaving Edgestow; looking for Jane
10.3: Dimble tells Mark about Jane's torture, but he refuses to tell Mark where she is, and Mark leaves
10.4: company at St. Anne's makes plans to take Merlin (Jane has had another dream)
10.4: Dimble knows the Great Tongue (first language)

Ch. 11: Battle Begun
11.1: Jane and other search for Merlin
11.2: Belbury folks discuss Mark's/Jane's importance; a strange crash and cackle
11.3: Mark in Belbury prison; inner ring memory; Frost enters, and Mark is horrified

Christmas?

Ch. 12: Wet and Windy Night
12.1: search for Merlin continues
12.2: Wither receives report of the missing Merlin
12.3: St. Anne's search party spots Merlin on a horse
12.4: Frost interrogates Mark, mentions macrobes, and claims mass education is impossible; Mark threatened with death if he's not admitted to the inner ring; Frost receives a message and leaves in a hurry
12.5: reference to Barfield
12.5: a wild-looking man arrives at St. Anne's
12.6: a man arrives at Belbury, unconscious at first
12.7: Mark realizes he's on Jane's side and undergoes a spiritual battle; language of desire's disenchanting the universe

Ch. 13: They have pulled down Deep Heaven on their Heads
13.1: Ransom faces the Druid [Merlin] and answers his questions, causing Merlin to kneel
13.2: Wither and Frost discuss Mark
13.3: Ransom introduces Merlin to the company as a member
13.4: Christmas prophecy; longaevi
13.4: Dimbles discuss Merlin
13.5: Ransom talks with Merlin, who thinks that the soul has not completely gone out of the wood and water; Ransom's plan is neither magic nor war (nor mere prayers); celestial powers must intervene through a good man (but not too good)—Merlin
13.5: references to "the Hideous Strength" (Tower of Babel)
13.5: no Christian princes left
13.5: by going to Mars and disturbing the gods, NICE has pulled down Deep Heaven upon their heads

Ch. 14: "Real Life is Meeting"
14.1: Frost tells Mark that true objectivity is subjective; Mark is put in a different room; Frost tries to kill human reactions, but Mark is attracted to the "Normal"; Mark taken to a bedroom with the patient, who begins to speak in English
14.2: Jane has a strange dream about a giantess and dwarves
14.3: NICE captures Mr. Bultitude
14.4: Mark converses with the patient but without understanding
14.5: Ransom speaks to Jane about her dream; he distinguishes male from masculine; says that Jane must become a Christian; Ransom will present Merlin to the masters
14.5: Ivy's husband might be the Belbury patient
14.6: Jane has a powerful spiritual experience, and spiritual enemies are unsuccessful in ruining it for her

Ch. 15: The Descent of the Gods
15.1: Mercury arrives at St. Anne's and has an effect on everyone's language; then Venus arrives, then Mars, then Saturn, then Jupiter/Jove; Merlin receives powers and is dropped off at Belbury
15.2: a new priest [Merlin?] gets the Belbury patient to speak; Wither and Frost kneel and kiss his hand
15.3: Wither and Frost discuss the previous situation; Merlin, the patient, and Wither go to see the Head; Frost and Mark go to the Objective Room
15.4: in the Objective Room, Frost orders Mark to desecrate a cross (to rid himself of Christian superstition—the final test before full initiation and objectivity); Mark refuses; the others enter
15.4: Jane had abandoned Christianity, fairies, and Santa Claus as a child; Mark had never believed in them; influence of Christianity on England
15.5: Jules (NICE Director) and others meet the priest, "Dr. Ambrosius" [Merlin]

Ch. 16: Banquet at Belbury
16.1: linguistic chaos at the banquet; Jules shot by Fairy, who is also shot; a tiger, wolf, snake, gorilla, and elephant contribute to the chaos
16.2: 16.1 called "the curse of Babel"
16.2: Mr. Maggs is not the tramp
16.2: Mr. Bultitude and Mr. Maggs imprisoned; Merlin kills animals and frees prisoners
16.2: Maggs head to St. Anne's; tramp escapes
16.3: Merlin wakes Mark and sends him to St. Anne's; Mark sees a light in the sky
16.4: Wither contemplates the loss; wrong assumption about what powers could pass through the moon's sphere; Wither, Straik, and Filostrato worship the Head, which demands another head; Filostrato is decapitated; Wither kills Straik; a bear kills Wither
16.5: Feverstone, controlled by a power, involuntarily drives a car off the road
16.6: Frost, acting as if without intention, finds the carnage in the Objective Room and burns everything, including himself.

Ch. 17: Venus at St. Anne's
17.1: Mark prepares to visit St. Anne's
17.2: St. Anne's ladies dress for dinner; talk of Ransom's return to Perelandra; they're aware of a disturbance in the distance
17.3: Feverstone returns to Edgestowe and dies
17.4: dinner at St. Anne's; Ransom is to return to Perelandra; the Arthur story is mostly true; Britain is haunted by Logres; 80th Pendragon is about to be appointed; McPhee and "seems"; Mr. Bultitude returns
17.4: Arthur : Mordred :: Milton : Cromwell
17.5: Curry is spared—views it as providential
17.6: animals find mates (Venus over St. Anne's)—decent (fitting), although McPhee is disturbed by it all; Ransom is about to depart with Perelandra; comment about being appropriately in the middle—between angels and animals [makes the presence of all the animals make more sense]; more, but not less; Ransom tells Jane she will dream no more—have children instead
17.7: Mark despairs of keeping Jane, but Perelandra/Venus ushers him into a room
17.8: Jane wonders if Mark will every want her again, and she goes to meet him (seeing that he's in the bedroom)