Rating: 5/5

A very informative, revealing and well-researched book. The bibliography begs for much further reading.

I was particularly perplexed with the European multi-level complexity within the zeal for the Crusades. With the worldy greed for the wealth in the holy land, it didn’t take long for one to see that the principal mission of the Crusades (to liberate Jerusalem from Muslim control) vs. lust, greed are in constant conflict: glory or wealth. Adding to this complexity is the need and subsequent fear on the part of the respective European monarchs (who are related to one another) to keep their respective kingdoms, which included maintaining their royal lines within the dictates of that time, and within Christian dictates/favor, at home while simultaneously trying to fulfill the Pope’s principal mission of Crusades. Both the social and Christian dictates did not afford women (save King Richard’s mother) status nor influence at the time – women were a means to an end. Finally, when one observes the interpersonal differences, inclinations of the respective European kings, the rivalries imposed on the respective Crusader armies as socially imposed by their respective rulers (Kings and the Pope), the interpersonal complexities make for an interesting mix, against the backdrop of the principal mission of the Crusades.

Juxaposed within this complicated complexity, is the life and more pious, but not without its own violence, of Saladin, the Muslim ruler. Upon Saladin’s conquering Jerusalem peacefully in 1187, Saladin allowed Christian pilgrims to come into the city and worship as they would (page 88), for both religious and strategic reasons. Given the slaughter afforded to the population of Jerusalem in the First Crusade in 1099, I wonder if the Christians would have been mindful, let alone have considered the same courtesy to anyone different than themselves . However, that consideration brings me back full circle to the pivotal point and mindset of Papal Rome and Europe insofar as to the principal purpose of the Crusades: to liberate Jerusalem from anyone of a different culture and religion beyond its/their brand of Christianity. Further reading in particular, begs why the Christians, and subsequently, the Crusaders have an unclear, yet acute problem with the Jews. Ironically, Christianity comes out the Jewish tradition; what is the pivotal problem (beyond obvious differences) between the Christians and the Jews?

Finally, what struck me about the book, but again, reinforces the former points, is the favorable slant toward Saladin versus what is outlined and displayed as the Crusaders’ greed and intrigue, cloaked in the principal mission of the Crusades. However again, this slant, reinforces the intent and perspective as to what the Crusades meant respectively to Christians and Muslims. I also appreciate the broader definition –which bears further reading- on Jihad (page 137), which provides a crucial difference between Christian and Muslim: Jihad involves the struggle of the Muslim to keep the central goal in the battle for Jerusalem, as it is central to Muslim tradition. However, a Muslim IS to also wage war against “sinful inclinations” i.e., greed, lustful nature etc. These seemed reserved from the Muslim side, bur outright on the Christian/Crusader side, and at all levels. 

Where are you (really) in any endeavor you undertake? What really takes precedence, and why?