Rating: 4/5

I expected the title of this book was just a nice-sounding, generic phrase. How amazed I am to now understand it as the key to increasing depth of happiness in marriage. 

By Love Refined beautifully lays out how love really is the center of a good marriage--only, this is not love as the world expects. In short, clear, profound letters, Mrs. von Hildebrand gently expounds to the young bride "Julie" (and thus to us, her readers) how self-sacrificing love sees the beloved for his true self and thus dares all, endures all, gives all, and so also receives all. 

Her central image is the "Tabor Vision," a way of relating the intensity of early, "in love" love to the Transfiguration of Christ before his disciples on Mount Tabor. She asserts that the one who is in love sees the truest revelation of the beloved's self. That such "in love" feelings will fade is inevitable. What the lover must do is remember the vision and live according to it. When his habits annoy you, when he seems distant, when life is full of drudgery, remember that this is not reality. That ecstatic vision of love is the reality. Though it is often hidden, the secret to happiness in marriage is to bring it constantly to mind and to act in accord with it, rather than reacting to the mundane appearances of day-in-day-out life. 

This does not mean ignoring the reality of problems and trying to live in some imaginary dream world. Mrs. von Hildebrand speaks often of determining the proper "theme" for a given time. The theme might be relaxation or joy or frustration or any hundred other things. What is important is perceiving the theme (or perhaps helping craft it) and acting accordingly for that moment. There is a time to address concerns or irritations with one's husband, but not at moments when either or both of you are exhausted, distracted, or upset. 

What I liked most about this book, I think, is that it not only offered wise, Christian marriage advice, but that it gently teaches about the very nature of true love. So gentle is the teaching, in fact, that I cannot really point to any one thing that I had not already known and believed before I read the book. Yet, so profound is the teaching that I feel I have a completely new vision of love lived out in the Christian life. 

For those wise enough to have become disillusioned with the world's mantra that marriage is all about love, this book will help you turn the tables on the world. Yes, marriage is all about love. But, oh, poor selfish world, you do not understand at all what love is. Read this book and begin to turn love inside out: It is not about your joy but the joy of your beloved. Which, paradoxically, will bring you far more joy than you could ever have expected.