Rating: 4/5

Quotable:

After graduation Maisie decides to go to library school – a safe, cozy, useful career. And she’s always loved to read, ever since she’d curled up on the scratchy window-seat cushion in Brearley’s Lower School library, alternately reading and staring out at the pewter-gray East River rolling past Eighty-third Street, until her eyes glazed and she drifted into dreams. She especially loved to lose herself in books when her own life pressed in on her.

[P]art of what made living in her family so tense was behaviors typical of alcoholics or abusers, behaviors like denial and masking feelings and responding in inappropriate ways.

Loving to read and feeling womblike safety among books, she was seduced by the cozy security that a career as a librarian seemed to offer.

Pam knew herself well enough to know that she simply didn’t have the energy or divided focus to sustain another being. And she was honest enough to admit it even in a circle of many motherhood choosing friends. “The need to be alone” is how she defined what she craved and what she could not give up for children. “That’s the part of parenting that made it not an option.” She knew she needed “some incredibly nourishing time without responsibilities” for her personal passions and pursuits, “gardening, meditating, art.” “Not everyone has that need,” she allowed, but admitted, “I know that about myself – it would be folly.” She’d watched the round-the-clock duty of friends with their kids and accepted her own limitations. 

Being devoted aunts has let both Emma and Tess experience motherhood at one step removed; perhaps the pleasures have been diluted but so have the pains. 

“In turning fifty,” says Tess, “I feel like I’m really an adult. It’s all been a practice round until now.”

Reading and the love of books is one of such pleasure that has comforted them since they curled up on the cozy window seats of Brearley’s Lower School library and lost themselves in a novel or let nonfiction expand their world. Virtually everyone I interviewed about her fondest memories of the school recalled this private yet sphere-widening pleasure, and cited reading as a lifetime and psyche-charger today. For Maisie, reading was a healing and soothing childhood escape from a highly adult-centered household; now she enriches her marriage by attending a book group with her husband. Judith unwinds after a long day’s juggling by reading a few pages of Emma before she goes to sleep (she’s reread the novel at least twenty times), and Jill read every book extant on divorce to keep her sane when her own marriage came undone.

For someone who rejected the housewife role, keeping my own environment pleasant has become more important.