Rating: 4/5

"Bad Blood" is not the best book on the Menendez case; another, published around the same time, "Blood Brothers: The Inside Story Of The Menenedez Murders" by Ron Soble and John Johnson is the superior out of the two. Still, it does provide something of a inside look at the Menendez family dynamic but the court details are sketchy at best.

We may never know why Lyle and Erik Menendez murdered their parents. I have always believed that the case was far more complex than the prosecution in both murder trials (the first one ended in hung juries) made it out to be. Jose Menendez was a powerful executive in Hollywood who was hated and feared by many but at the same time, had a strange respect (often common in the entertainment industry) due to his wealth and power. Kitty Menendez was a former beauty queen who grew up in home where domestic violence and neglect was part of the norm. As a result, their children grew up in a household of wealth and privilege but lacking the love, nurturing and protection that they desperately needed. Faced with their father's domineering ways and trying to live up to his impossible expectations, the brothers' rage and pain exploded. Kitty, dependent, mentally unstable and unhappy, refused to leave the situation despite the chaos and turned the other way while her sons were mistreated. The sexual abuse allegations may never be proven, but it is possible and while I don't know if it was a direct factor in the killings, and the Menendez family was not normal by any means.

The book ends with the result of the first trial, which ended in deadlocked juries and has no updates.

***Spoilers***Convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to life without parole in their second trial, the brothers are serving their sentences in separate prisons. Due to a law that has recently been passed, the brothers can file an appeal based on the fact that during their second murder trial, their defense counsel was not permitted to produce documentation, witnesses and and experts to corroborate the brothers' story of abuse as was done in their first trial.