Rating: 2/5

This book is a real mess, but at least it wasn't obnoxiously so (as the first in the series was). It's a bit of a problem that it's tied as tightly to the first as it is. You can probably read this one without the first, but you'd miss quite a bit of the characterization.

Part of my trouble is that I didn't really like either main character. Beth was beyond merely prickly and was outright self-destructive. Worse, she was a very well-drawn example of a smart person being their own worst enemy through unchallenged assumptions and arrogance. This is compounded by Lucien being the same with his own unchallenged assumptions and arrogance. Which made their relationship hard to take as you could see how well suited they'd be if they could get over their mutual stupidity. I saw a lot of this in college where smart people would become the dumbest versions of themselves because their egos got in their way. So good characterization, but not exactly in a good cause.

I had only minor issues with the plot, such as it was. Well, okay, at one point I nearly DNF'd the book because of a contrivance that was just stupid and the last little adventure was both unnecessary and unnecessarily complicated. Oh, and completely out of character for all involved. So I guess the plot was problematic, but since it was a giant step up from the first book, it felt less dire, I suppose.

Oh, and while I didn't have a problem with the weird feminist break in this novel, Beverley made some odd choices here that may cause others problems. I call it a break because Beth spends most of the novel being a proto-feminist in a nearly anachronistic way. Beverley tries to support it by bringing in some of the more outspoken feminists of the day, particularly Mary Wolstencraft. Personally, I think Beth is more modern than is supported, but the real problem comes with plot elements that has Beth backtracking a bit and eventually taking a stance that is something of a betrayal of those ideals when she so readily forgives Lucien hitting her in a moment of extreme distress. Beverley does build support for this being an extreme and singular instance and I buy that explanation as much as Beth does. But for an audience keyed to the feminist message engaged by the rest of the novel and with a world view that seeks out and emphasizes the brutality of men, this recognition of Lucien's duress and his own abhorrence of losing control like that will see her forgiveness as weakness and want to put her in the nearest women's shelter. So invoking feminist principles anachronistically works against specific events in the book in a way that will cause an emotional backlash from those engaged in those modern principles. I can't think this was a good idea.

Anyway, the book was okay, but there was nothing that really engaged me beyond wanting to get to the next in the series. The couple plot stupidities and the ludicrous final adventure dropped me from charity enough to put this in the two-star "it's okay" final category.

A note about Steamy: There's a couple explicit sex scenes, but one is with the mistress, Blanche. I actually liked her and liked where the relationships ended up. We saw in the previous book how Lucien's relationship with her was more caring than loving and I thought Beverley did a good job showing how their move to a non-sexual friendship could work out for both in an interesting way. And I particularly liked seeing Beth drawn into that by becoming friends with Blanche in the end. It reinforced Beth's understanding and acceptance of Lucien's love in the same way that forgiving his violent outburst does. She knows what happened, but also knows that what is is real and powerful and can rely on that.