Rating: 5/5

Heartfelt Tribute to A Lost Friend

Perspective is everything. Light My Fire is Ray Manzarek’s perspective. Jim Morrison is an icon and will always be an icon. There are those who knew Morrison as a person and Manzarek is in a unique position to relate the story of The Doors, and to avoid having to answer the same question for the rest of your life “what was Jim like?” 

Manzarek and Morrison were UCLA film students who started The Doors. Light My Fire takes us through Manzarek’s early years in Chicago, and concentrates his focus on the development and history of The Doors. Manzarek is a natural raconteur and while he relates some familiar tales there are some new tales about him and Morrison, it is obvious that the friendship that he and Morrison had at the creation of The Doors still exists and Ray is able to voice that affection. Manzarek also keeps the involved in the story and gives a great sense of time, place, and people involved in The Doors story. Manzarek also takes the time to explain how he worked up the original Doors songs with Morrison and it’s clear that he enjoys teaching and talking about this aspect of The Doors, and it is interesting and not too technical even for someone who has no musical training (like me).

Manzarek reveals himself as an epicurean and his reminiscences about having a lunch at the Lucky U or Olivia’s (both UCLA film school and early Doors hangouts) will make you feel as if you’re there, like the rest of the book Manzarek has a great sense of the time and is able to render the atmosphere as to make you feel as if you’re there.

Manzarek’s narrative is thoroughly informed by hindsight, and the viewpoints close to his heart. Manzarek does indulge himself in paying back old debts with harsh criticisms of certain people both well known and not so well known. He also avoids the shortcomings of other Doors books that the narrative falls off when Morrison exit’s the scene. 

Interestingly, Manzarek’s stint in the army before moving to L.A., which was included in an earlier edition of the book is excluded from this edition.

Since Light My Fire was first published this is my third time reading it and I still find the stories entertaining and full of information. Whether you’re a long time fan of The Doors or a newbie wanting to get into The Doors Ray’s first hand account is one of the books you want to have in your collection.