Rating: 5/5

AN EXCELLENT SUMMARY OF MOST ASPECTS OF VEGETARIANISM

Suzanne Havala is a registered dietitian and nutrition consultant, as well as the author of 'Becoming Vegetarian: The Complete Guide to Adopting a Healthy Vegetarian Diet,' 'Shopping for Health: A Nutritionist's Aisle-By-Aisle Guide to Smart, Low-Fat Choices at the Supermarket,' 'Being Vegetarian For Dummies,' etc.

She notes humorously, "Dogs do it. Deer do it. Even Chipmunks and raccoons do it. They all produce milk for their babies. Cows do it too. So do humans. Fifty percent of them, anyway. But dogs don't drink chipmunk's milk. And deer don't drink raccoon's milk. That's because milk is species specific... So how on earth did people start drinking milk from cows? Even adult cows don't drink cow's milk." (Pg. 43)

She observes, "Some scientists think that vitamin B12 deficiency is rare in vegans, and others think that it's there but is being disguised or underreported... Take the conservative approach on this one. It's easy to find reliable sources of vitamin B12, such as fortified soymilk and rice milk, fortified breakfast cereals, or even a vitamin tablet." (Pg. 65)

She admits, "scientists found that children eating a near-vegan diet grew more slowly than American children eating a standard, Western meat-and-milk-containing diet... children attained full adult stature eventually, but they took longer to get there... So it's possible that American vegan children may grow more slowly than other children... the difference may be associated with health benefits to children eating a healthful vegan diet." (Pg. 106) She also reports, "Among some vegetarians, there seems to be a hierarchy of vegetarianism. The lacto ovo vegetarians are very pedestrian. They're beginners. They haven't evolved yet to the ethically pure vegan ideal... The lacto ovo veggies think the fish eaters haven't gone far enough, and the vegans think the lacto ovo vegetarians are falling short. Not everyone is judgmental, but many are. In addition to being involved with their own diets, they're also policing everyone else's plates." (Pg. 174)

She states frankly, "Realistically, it's nearly impossible to be consistently vegan in this culture. Most, if not all, vegans do eat or use animal products at some time or even regularly, even if they aren't doing it knowingly. It's just that it's too difficult to function in this society without taking some chances that an item contains an animal product... You may go to a salon... and find that the hairdresser uses a shampoo or conditioner that contains animal proteins... Most vegans simply do the best that they can and do not knowingly use animal products." (Pg. 181)

This book is filled with information, and will be of great value to vegetarians, or to those simply wanting to know more about it.