Rating: 5/5

That was the most breath taking ending I have ever read. I can't believe it's all over…

Along the coast of Jamaica Emma lives with her Aunt, Uncle and Daniel. She has been an orphan since she was too little to remember. Though her family cares for her, there isn't much love lost between them. So when they tell her what they have decided Emma is surprised to say the least that her Aunt and Uncle have excepted a proposal of marriage for her. She's only met her intended a few times, but she knows he's handsome, likable and rich. 

So, feeling there is nothing else to do she marries him as if in a dream, only to wake up in a nightmare. She has married the Devil himself in Oliver Foy.

Sometimes he fools her, and she almost believes that he wants to change. Then he breaks out into a worse monster than before. Daniel warns her, that the night of the great tropical storm she must watch for her life.

That's when everything changes, and the Adventure begins. 

That night Emma runs away with Daniel, her father figure on his beautiful sail/steam boat where they go diving for numerous things. They become fugitives, hunted and searched for. When things cool down and Emma plays the part of a Coolie woman, talking pigeon English when she must speak. (Emma is Sooo funny!) 

But this sweet dream, that Emma wishes could last forever, ends suddenly in a horrific storm and Daniel proves to be true friend to the end. 

 Now Emma is in far greater danger of living a masquerade that she can not hide long. Unless she can end it all, she will be uncovered and never find happiness again. 

Love, Love Loved this book! 
  What
 could be better than Murder, Treasure, Hidden Identities, Masked Feelings all set along the shimmering Jamaican coast and England? And Emma, she was Perfect! No, not the goodies-two-shoes type perfect but the Human Perfect. She had moments of panic, fear, and joy. I couldn't help but love her! 
There are a few swears and minimal violence seen by reader. But marital rape Is obviously in it as well as wife beating. Thankfully, Oliver Foy is only in the first third so after that the ominous cloud created by his presence is lifted. All though it has all these elements, none of it is glorified or described in detail, it just goes black. PG-13 

Some other books that I feel are just as good, Golden Urchin, ( which Was better believe it or not), Trade Wind and Lord of the Far Island. All of these belong on my Grab-During-Fire shelf.