Rating: 5/5

This is one of the first collections of teaching stories by the author that I encountered close to 40 years ago. Rereading it now, I sense the same sort of jolt of surprise, an upending of assumptions based on cultural conditioning, habits of thought. I feel like I'm breathing some air of an unusual sense of truth, beginning again to notice the human potential for a much wider, finer perspective and for the taste of a deeply hidden, interconnected reality. In the depth of he ocean of these stories there seems to be layers of riches beyond compare. I've spent most of my life safely on the shore.

Here are some of my re-familarizing impressions. Experiential themes are woven in a subtle and intuitive manner throughout the work. One theme is the difficult psychological blocks to even approaching this teaching and it's teachers in a useful, acceptable manner. The overall tone of this theme is perhaps set in one of the early stories, one of my favorites — The Tale of the Sands. In this multi-meaning filled allegory a stream is approaching a desert, which will soak it up or at best create a stagnant marsh. The stream, like our accumulated identity habits and assumptions, is reasonably reluctant to give itself up in vaporish form so that the wind might carry it across the sands, where it would become a mountain stream again. The sands have seen it all before and eventually persuade the stream to let its essential self move on.
Necessity seems an essential nudge for letting go or at least setting aside one's fool's gold, in order to acquire new or buried sense organs.

Much of the "learning how to learn analogies" emphasize the in-the-world, experiential requirements of this teaching method, An example is the story of the Greedy Sons, which
illustrates a designer and his design for overcoming a common psychological impediment to this sort of learning capacity. A father leaves land to his sons, with the suggestion that gold is buried there, somewhere. After exhausting their greedy search for a few years, the sons become successful farmers from the habit of tilling the soil in the search.

One story that has cleared up some confusion in my mind and promises more insight to follow if I allow it to work its way into the texture of my life — is the Tale of the Three Domains. All these tales seem designed to be entertaining and possibly have a nourishment for those ready and open to a further transformational effect. One saying of this teaching might be relevant — taste and you will know.