Rating: 5/5

Seeing how I have known the story of the first Ember book for so long, I was a little nervous about whether or not I'd like the rest of the series now that I'm finally getting around to them. Thankfully, I did enjoy this second book. It was interesting to see these people who have lived underground for generations (and didn't even know they were underground) come to the surface and discover what it's like to have a blue sky, moving air, and changes in seasons. I especially enjoyed Lina and Doon's sense of wonder at things we in real life see as mundane. It had to be hard for the author to find ways to describe everyday objects from the perspective of people who have never seen them before without just taking the easy road and telling the reader what it was. She pulled it off well. I also appreciate that, for once, the Goodreads synopsis did not spoil the story, especially the fact that the people of Ember discover other humans above ground who actually survived the Disaster. This was a fun twist because it was not what I thought would happen. 

I loved some of the new characters (like Maddy) and loathed some others (which was intended by the author), and of course still loved Lina and Doon. I thought the author did a good job developing our two main characters as they interacted with the new world. They were still themselves as well as retaining realistic teenage characteristics, but grew and changed into better people. There were actually fairly few characters who didn't grow and change in some way, even if some individuals grew less than others. 

Along with the twist I mentioned above, there were one or two other twists that I didn't expect but enjoyed. I can be pretty good at guessing story twists ahead of time so when I don't guess one that's fun for me. 

The few things I didn't like about this story were pretty minor. They were mostly related to one obnoxious child I wanted to shove over a cliff 😛 but he was actually learning lessons and getting a little more tolerable by the very end, so that wasn't too bad. One reason I tend to not like dystopian is because it can be pretty sad, if not outright depressing to see the world "ending" or having already "ended" (I put that in quotes since someone always survives in order for there to be stories about it so it only ever "ends" to a certain extent.) Like Maddy, I'd rather see something beginning than ending. While there was a little touch of that sadness in this story, the author did a good job simply using it to teach the characters (and possibly the readers) a necessary lesson and then refocusing on the other elements of the story, so I was okay with that. 

Overall, I really enjoyed reading this book to the point I actually read it very quickly (at least for me :P). I loved the ending, and look forward to the rest of the story. 

Content Advisory:

Violence: Mrs. Murdow tells Lina that when people realized there was a way to leave the dying city of Ember, they basically panicked. Some people fell down stairs and got trampled to death in the rush to get out. The mayor and some of his employees fell into the river and drowned. Mrs. Murdow implies that it was terrible to watch and she'll never forget it, but doesn't get detailed about it. 

A little boy who is generally very rude gets annoyed with Lina for existing and pushes her so hard she nearly falls down. She pushes him back, but not as hard. 

There are threats of violence through much of the story as tensions between the people of Ember and the people of Sparks increase. One individual in particular encourages the people of Ember to take revenge of the people of Sparks, going so far as to tell them to use weapons like rocks and metal rods if their demands are not met. To give an example of how to use the weapons, this individual slashes violently at a bush and some trees until he accidentally hits a baby bird that flops on the ground, injured. He almost finished the bird off, but is stopped before he can and kicks the limp body aside. The people of Sparks, in return for the Emberite's refusal to do as they are told, threaten them with something referred to simply as "The Weapon."

A little boy, in a fit of anger, imagines that "The Weapon" may be some sort of bomb and then imagines/wishes that he could use this supposed bomb to blow up individuals he doesn't like and the hotel in which the people of Ember are staying. Fire is mentioned but there are no are no other details to his imaginings.

A man angrily pulls Doon backwards off of the town fountain so he lands on his back on the ground and then has to scramble to get up.

A riot breaks out in the town plaza in which there is shouting and some of the people of Ember throw rocks at the town hall, breaking windows. Doon is distressed to see some of the people of Sparks running and hiding like they think they will be hurt too, and realizes that this is indeed a possibility. 

Later, tensions increase even more and some of the people of Ember approach the town hall with their rocks and metal rods. One of the leaders of Sparks tries to push the leader of the group of "warriors" and gets hit in the arm with a rod in response. He then brings out "The Weapon" which turns out to be a machine gun, aims it at the people of Ember, then turns it on, however, someone changes the aim so the bullets go into the air, hitting buildings and breaking windows instead of hitting people. The weapon then blows up, knocking down one of the leaders of the town, setting fire to a large tree and the town hall. The fire spreads to other parts of the town putting many people in danger. Miraculously, no one gets killed during this whole thing and only a few are injured. It is said that the town leader who was knocked down by the explosion had to go to the down doctor because his arm was nearly blown off. (No details.) He is later wheeled around on a stretcher and has a bandage on his arm and his eye. 

Mention of a little boy's feet being burned from getting too close to the fire and having to sit with them in a bucket of cold water. 

Sexual/Romance: One teenage girl (who is a friend of Lina, but remains a minor character) shifts her romantic interests easily. She starts the story wearing a black scarf in mourning for her boyfriend who didn't make it out of Ember, but quickly develops interest in another boy and becomes fiercely loyal to him instead. Her crush on the boy is only hinted at and never reciprocated. It is never indicated that the boy even notices her since he only ever treats all the people of Ember the same.

Spiritual/Worldviews: Maddy briefly mentions that she doesn't believe humanity (or life in general) will ever be wiped off the face of the earth forever. She believes that whatever sparked life to begin with will spark it again even if everything and everyone died off for a little bit. She keeps this comment vague and does not specify what exactly she thinks sparked life and does not reference any specific real world belief system.

Other: 

Though they start out generous, the people of Sparks start to become selfish and refuse to feed the people of Ember enough for them to have enough energy to do the work they're required to do in order to live in the town. Though some Emberites request more food politely, some become rude and demanding, thus causing anger between the people groups.

The aforementioned rude little boy never receives any discipline from his parental figure for his behavior, though it is clear to everyone around him that he shouldn't be behaving like that and that his behavior hurts others. He does, however, experience some natural consequences for his actions.

In a fit of anger, someone throws two crates-worth of tomatoes at a building and then blames it on someone else, refusing to tell the truth even when that other person is treated badly because of the lie. 

The people of Sparks say mean, resentful things about the people of Ember behind their backs and then to their faces. Some of the leaders of the workers even become verbally abusive to the Emberites working under them, treating them as if they are lazy or stupid even though the Emberites are doing the best they know how to do. 

Doon once or twice lets his anger get control of him and yells at someone only to regret it because it makes things worse.

Someone uses mud to write hostile things about the people of Ember on the plaza and on the wall of the hotel. Someone also dumps a bunch of mud, garbage, and leaves in the hotel which causes the people of Ember to get terrible, itchy rashes after they clean it up. It turns out that the person who did these things  was one of Ember's own people who was intentionally trying to increase hostilities so he could lead an army and get glory for himself in the war he intentionally tried to start. 

Caspar is generally not nice to anyone he meets on the road and makes enemies easily. He carries a whip with him which he readily uses to scare off any perceived threat even if the person wasn't actually doing anything bad. He refuses to share food with one starving roamer even though Lina and Maddy both try to convince him to give the man just a little bit. (Note: The starving man acts strangely because he's weak and sick. Particularly young readers may find him frightening even though he's only briefly on the page.) Caspar, Maddy, and Lina wake up after a night's sleep to find that the starving man stole the food he needed from them and dumped dirt and feces on the rest of their supplies as revenge for Caspar's treatment of him.

Because this is a dystopian series, it is repeated that the modern world was destroyed in some sort of disaster many years ago. Lina learns that the Disaster was a combination of events: several plagues and then some wars caused by leaders of the separate nations. 

At first, Lina is excited to go see one of the cities that was destroyed during the Disaster because she has hopes for it as a home for the people of Ember, but when she learns of how so many people were killed, the place becomes frightening for her. She imagines that she still sees the flames and hears people's terrified screams, as if the terrible things that happened there are like a shadow that still hangs over the city. This results in her never actually entering the city. The worst of the actual destruction that she sees are a crumbled highway bridge as well as seeing crumbled buildings from a distance.