In December, 1141, the wheel has spun again, and this time left Stephen on the throne, if shakily. He begins shoring up his lead by gathering ecclesiastical and worldly authorities together to support him. This means that Abbot Radulfus has to go first, to (another!) legatine council, and then Hugh Beringar has to go off to a meeting of sheriffs, barons, etc...with the chance that he won't be confirmed in his post, which (you'll recall if you've read the earlier books) he inherited rather irregularly.

In the meantime, the parish of Holy Cross (comprising the Foregate and the rural areas out of town) has lost its beloved priest, Father Adam, aged before his time (he was only sixty), by worry for his fallible parishioners. His death leaves many people bereaved, but most especially Cynric the Verger, a taciturn but kindly man. Cynric eulogizes him succinctly: "A sad,kind man,...a tired man with a soft spot for sinners." Others may condescend toward Father Adam for his want of learning, but his parishioners loved him for his compassion.

It's the want of that same compassion that causes such hatred for his successor. There's no doubt that the young man is talented and learned; but he's sadly lacking in that 'charity' that is 'the greatest of these'. Some translations translate this term as 'love', but that's not quite an adequate translation. The English term 'love' is too broadwinged. What's meant here is familial love: merciful and generous; which doesn't despair of anyone, and doesn't put forth perfection as a minimum criterion for acceptance. 

Thinking it over, Father Ailnoth might very well have had a long, successful career if he'd stayed in royal courts, putting his learning to the service of Church and State, and not meddling in the affairs of ordinary sinners. There are some people who are lacking, not only in bedside manner, but even in the kind of generosity which can forgive "even unto seventy times seven". These people should NEVER be hired as spiritual counselors. And once the original mistake was made, Abbot Radulfus should have seen sooner that Father Ailnoth was completely unsuited to the job. Any man who would refuse to attend (and christen) a dying newborn because he won't interrupt his own prayers, and THEN refuse the dead child burial in sanctified ground because the child died before being christened is CLEARLY not suited to the job of parish priest.

But before a recognition and correction of the mistake can be completed, Father Ailnoth ends up dead. There is no shortage of possible suspects. Many people were infuriated by Father Ailnoth's scrupulously cruel behavior. So the investigation has to be very careful, especially since most of the people in the parish have no intention of betraying any member of their community who might have been pushed too far.

One of the things I've always liked about Hugh Beringar is that he has always respected community solidarity (indeed, even when it becomes a significant hindrance to his official duties, he's always recognized that, in the long run, it makes his job easier). So when people refuse to implicate others, he quite rightly respects their right to remain silent, and seeks information by other means. His sergeants and deputy aren't quite as understanding in that regard: which causes people to be all the more worried by the chance that he won't be confirmed in office. 

The obvious suspect is cleared almost immediately, but, because he is a fugitive as a result of the schisms in the land, he's often inaccessible for questioning. Brother Cadfael finds himself acting as an intermediary, asking questions and relaying answers to the authorities. The Church often takes this role in the troublous times. It's not quite a matter of the Church not having a dog in the races. The Church hierarchy has strong familial and social ties with the secular authorities, and several churches, monasteries, etc have already proved not very secure sanctuaries when the fire arrows start flying. Bur when looking for a 'disinterested' emissary, people tend to turn to the church.