Rating: 4/5

Well thank the Lord for bulk buying, that's all I can say. A few weeks ago I bought three Ian McEwan volumes. Two books of his short stories and this very short novel or maybe it is a novella. Anyway whatever it is, it was wonderful. Having just finished 'First Love,Last Rites'(FLLR) and been nauseated by the whole sickness of the themes I was very wary of reading anything else by him but as i had bought the three books and as i have always lived by that creed of when you fall off a bike get right back on it again or you might lose your nerve I reclambered on the McEwan cycle. Am really pleased I did.

This is a really unsettling and chilling story of obsession and blindness. It is not book which expunges the grossness of 'FLLR' for it still very much is dealing with the dark and hideous side of sexuality flipped over into weirdness but it leads you along in a horribly powerless state. The two main characters, Colin and Mary, living in an oddly unclear relationship are holidaying together in the unnamed but clearly recognizable Venice. Their time is spent ambling, getting lost, getting frustrated and then rejuvenating themselves in initially indolent and unthinking love making but then, after encountering the oddly sinister Robert and his wife Caroline, their love-making becomes something of power and wonder to them both.

The story is of their seeming hypnotic fascination, rather like rabbits in headlights, with the aforesaid Robert. Like a clever piece of camerawork McEwan keeps drawing your attention to hands and arms which grip or lead or hold for unnecessarily lengthening times. He doesn't draw out the significance but it punctuates the narrative like a mantra and I found myself beginning to cringe and squirm.

The story starts understated and the boredom of the lovers at the beginning infects the reader but in just the same way their gradual discoveries and realizations also affect. Mary's nightmare and the affect of her understanding its cause are brilliantly thrown at the reader. From that moment, for me, the story gathered a horrible inevitability and I began expect horror and looked for it everywhere. It hung over the story and weighed it down. I did not know what to expect but something was coming. McEwan brilliantly unsettled and unnerved me and all done with beautiful language but very little explicit scene painting.