Rating: 4/5

The Space Beagle , sounds familiar, Darwin's ship was called HMS Beagle, in the unknown distant future as a warp engine (or something equivalent ) speeds the craft a "Starship" through the outer edge of the uncharted region of the Milky Way spiral galaxy between it and our neighbor the quite stupendous Andromeda star group a big brother to our own. The vastness chills the weak heart, cold, uncaring and perpetually bleak dark night, the lack of illumination f0r the only little spots (stars) showing of isolated lights shine in the massive universe. The Earth spaceship is huge , on board around 1,ooo all male, bickering egotistical scientists, diligent astronomers , sharp engineers , loyal physicians, fearless soldiers and one Nexialist, what you don't known what that is? For shame ! ... I must confess was ignorant of the term too until reading this book. Now the main character is Dr. Elliott Grosvenor the Nexialist...still want to know, okay, okay, a general inquirer, and studier of all sciences, not a specialist but a great, brilliant thinker in combining every department. Since other lesser specialists have many in their associations , he's alone , looks unimportant , insignificant and indeed invisible, our Mr. Grosvenor is just a cry in the wilderness as they say but the illusion is shattered when the aliens show up. The Director Morton, very scientific type name, leads, becomes a friend, Gregory Kent chief chemist isn't, not even close. The non- human types, Anabis, a gigantic entity or humongous blob in the eternal space, as he's expanding forever , soon leaving in his wake its destruction the lifeless Andromeda Galaxy, and soon to destroy our own dear galaxy next, the Rim, bird- like creatures on a desolate planet spreading dreams to the crew of the Space Beagle driving them insane, if they're lucky only, the blood -thirsty creature IxtL enters the ship and using the fleshy human bodies as nests, for their unborn eggs, yuck, Coeurl an enormous cat variety of beast , never satisfied always hungry in a devastated world caused by him and his fellow horrific species, not a paradise now. Four short stories put together by the writer to make a novel in 1950 , this space opera has those many, alien monsters to satisfy any science fiction aficionado and gives joy and amusement, it maybe a bit old-fashioned today but the charm reveals itself to every believer, I am one of those. A.E. van Vogt not too well a recognized name today , but yesteryear he was a giant in this interesting genre and those , the lucky seekers of truth in that category.... are ardent fans. ..P.S. if you think you've seen this before, you have ...in Star Trek, Forbidden Planet, 2001 a Space Odyssey, etc. The proverb there is nothing new under the Sun is a fact.