Rating: 4/5

Where can you go after writing Hamlet? Only into the bitterest depths of irony and nihilism, apparently. All’s Well That Ends Well is part of the problem play trilogy that followed soon after the Danish Prince’s demise and Malvolio’s humiliation, and it appears on the surface to be less twisted than both Troilus and Cressida and Measure for Measure. But don’t be fooled. Shakespeare plays one of his greatest tricks on the audience here, achieving something difficult and deeply unsatisfying, which probably explains this play’s lack of staging popularity. 

See, we like Helena. Shakespeare wins our sympathy for her early and often, but he also has her fall in love with Bertram, one of the shallowest d-bags the Bard has to offer. Harold Bloom points out that nearly all Shakespeare’s women marry beneath themselves, but the Helena-Bertram coupling might be the most egregious in the canon. Even so, why is this such a problem for the audience? Well, the plot focuses almost entirely on Helena’s pursuit of Bertram via means elaborate and occasionally of questionable ethics (but we don’t care because we like Helena!), and we can’t help but root for her success. Yet—and here’s the trick—this success wins her the shittiest prize ever, someone that will make her life miserable. I’m not exaggerating. Bertram wants nothing to do with Helena and tells her as much at regular interval. He’s a hopelessly immature, warmongering slut, hanging around with the scoundrel Parolles, who manages to be more relatable (if not likable) than Bertram following his acceptance of public disgrace and dispossession. But we’ve probably all had a friend like Helena, someone whose “imagination / Carries no favour in’t but Bertram’s”, who falls for someone we can’t stand. Such is life, such is love. 

And it’s worse. Helena knows that Bertram is bad news: 

“But, O strange men!
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cozen’d thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night; so lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away.”

And yet she keeps holding on to that belief: all’s well that ends well. Ah, but who else can believe it? So bitter, Shakespeare!