Rating: 2/5

Well you get two books for the price of one with this author! Two short stories, the first one is called "SOMEONE INNOCENT" and it's the story of a naive young girl (Gillie) who has no family (neither has the girl in the second book) and at her school reunion she meets up with a girl who is quite a bit older than her and she doesn't really know her, but she offers her £300 to come along and be a companion to her disabled husband, he was in the war (1st possibly??). She accepts as she has no money to pay for her digs and none to survive on. She arrives at a stately home and discovers that there are minimum staff and she doesn't even like this Rita woman, and her husband is just as cold. Then one night Rita is found murdered in her bedroom by the bedtime drink Gillie had served her. The police are looking at Gillie for this murder. Fortunately she does have a few friends amongst the staff. I think it's meant to be a romance book but it falls down on the storyline, the protoganist Rita and the coolness of the disabled war veteran her husband. And it is quite strange to see the way the police worked back in the days of no hi-tech to help them!

The second book is called "THEATRE PAST" or something like that I've deleted the book on my kindle now, and tells the tale of yet another young girl who has no family but the ageing french actress who brought her up, she is rather a character but not exactly a nice one, everyone who circles around her is wary as she can ditch you at the turn of a coin, but she pays well. She is renting the house of a friend from france but he is beginning to regret this now as she was not supposed to alter anything in the house but she certainly disregarded that. Then one day she goes to bed and doesn't wake up, died by poison. Now this young woman called Margot is friendly with a doctor lad that the actress also helped raise, Denis who is penniless like Margot and the french actress called Zoffy is totally against Denis and says he is planning to kill her, so when the police are called they immediately look for Denis as the murderer. But are they right...