Rating: 5/5

5+ stars (9/10 hearts). Wow. This little book was such a surprise… a GOOD surprise. Some of you might remember me saying Frederick Douglass was my hero. Well, Booker T. Washington usurped him. This man is SUCH an inspiration! 

This story begins in c. 1860 (1-2 years after Washington’s birth) and continues until 1900. It tells the story of his rise from being an unknown slave buried in a little planation in Virginia, to the head of the Tuskegee Institute, a college in Alabama that was entirely built and furnished by the scholars. It also tells about Washington’s character and life.

If I tried to explain how amazing this story was, I would tell it all and ruin it for you. Suffice it to say this man had an incredible life—and he built it all by himself. Unlike Frederick Douglass, who was taken under people's wing, shoved into limelight, and highly respected, Booker Washington built himself. This young man, being freed as a young child, began working in a coal mine and taught himself to read the number 18. After this, he determined to learn to read and talked his stepfather into letting him go to school if he worked doubly hard morning and evening. When he was in his teens, he heard of Hampton Institute, a boarding school for black people, and determined to join. The boy walked from West Virginia to Hampton and won a position in the school by asking to work as a janitor to pay for his lessons and then proving himself to be a hardworking and thorough sweeper. At the school, he underwent privation, worked during his holidays, and had to earn his own things. As a young man, he went to Alabama to teach school in a small village where there was no school. And thus Tuskegee Institute was born—the school where scholars slept in tents in winter while waiting for rooms, took turns having the coffee mug for a day, and held an umbrella over the preacher to keep him dry as he spoke in the chapel… and depended on generous strangers to pay for the school. 

I could not begin to explain everything this book offers. But I would like to touch on some things that really struck me… such as the history of Tuskegee Institute. It reminds me very much of George Muller’s Bristol orphanages. The lessons to be learned from the patience, hard work, and dedication of those scholars and teachers are humbling and motivating. I was blown away by those young people and their hard work. 

Also, Booker Washington’s comments on racism, slavery, black people, and white people were so worth reading. His magnanimity and common sense is refreshing and eyeopening. He does not whitewash the racism, clearly retelling his many experiences, such as the one where the Indian was allowed into the hotel but he wasn’t because how his race. It’s eyeopening, again, to see the way he was treated, especially when compared with Douglass, to see the way things changed between them. His comments on speech is almost exactly what 
  Basic Principles of Speech
 says and I loved that. Also, his writing is amazing—clear and concise, with a thread of dry humour. 

And finally Washington’s character is hugely inspiring and motivating. The diligence, cheerfulness, patience, calm of this man is amazing. The way he handled money issues, unkindness, difficulties in life… I just was so humbled and encouraged. I can’t copy Chapter XV here, or I would. It was phenomenal. 

I cannot recommend this book strongly enough. Just go read it. It might even make it into my 10/10-heart books. 

A Favourite Quote: I believe that any man’s life will be filled with constant, unexpected encouragements of this kind if he makes up his mind to do his level best each day of his life—that is, tries to make each day reach as nearly as possible the high-water mark of pure, unselfish, useful living. I pity the man, black or white, who has never experienced the joy and satisfaction that come to one by reason of an effort to assist in making some one else more useful and more happy.
A Favourite Humorous Quote: I am not quite sure of the exact place or exact date of my birth, but at any rate I suspect I must have been born somewhere and at some time.