Rating: 5/5

I really enjoyed reading this because of Elmore Leonard's effortless narrative style of writing. He blends in his dialogue so seamlessly with the descriptive prose that it is easy to imagine what's happening as if it's right in front of you. This novel would make a perfect Quentin Tarantino film. PRONTO was a refreshing change after reading a long line of romance novels. The key players in this novel were:

1. The Bookie aka Harry Arno aka John Harold Arnaud: 66 yr old war veteran:

2. The Cowboy aka US Deputy Marshall Raylan Givens: 40 yr old about to be divorced father of 2 sons:

3. The Mobster aka Jumbo Jimmy Capotorto: 60something yr old leader of the Miami Italian mob:

4. The Hitman/Enforcer aka Tomasino Bonatito aka Tommy Bucks: 30something yr old Sicilian immigrant who loves to dress up like real life '50's mobster Frank Costello. Tommy is also called the Zip because that's the term the Italian-Americans in the mob used to describe those fresh from the homeland:

5. The Meathead aka Nicky Testa aka Mr. Macho: Jimmy Capo's 20something yr old bodyguard who is hunky to look at but is as dumb as rocks yet thinks he can take out both the cowboy and the hitman:

6. The Girlfriend aka Joyce Patton: Harry's 40 yr old ex stripper lady love who seems willing to do anything for him:

7. The Expatriate aka Robert Gee: an African-American expatriate former Vietnam vet who meets Harry in Rapallo and starts working for him:

8. The Cop: Sergeant Torres: a Miami PD officer who is friends with Harry but is not corrupt. 

9. The Fed aka Special Agent McCormick: the guy who wants to pin a RICO indictment on Jimmy Capo and will do whatever it takes to get it. McCormick doesn't seem to have much scruples. 

10. The Mistress aka Gloria: Jimmy Capo's 20something blonde bunny who is hired to satisfy his many manly needs ( and the one sex scene with Jumbo and Gloria made me want to puke ! ):

PRONTO was filled with dry humour, lots of bad guys, a small time criminal protagonist called Harry Arno ( aka John Harold Arnaud ) and a U.S Deputy Marshall sent to bring Harry back to Miami. This novel is filled with crime and the kind of humour one can find in a Tarantino film. The novel opens with 66 yr old Harry, who is the Miami bookie that works for the local mob boss Jumbo Jimmy Capotorto. Harry was enjoying his life with his 40 yr old ex-stripper girlfriend Joyce and had already planned for his retirement in Rapallo Italy where he had leased a villa and some orange groves. He was a two bit criminal but he wasn't an evil guy. Harry's troubles start when a federal agent called McCormick decides to use him as bait to reel in the bigger catch: to pin a RICO indictment on Jimmy Capo. According to McCormick's plan ( which seemed to circumvent a lot of legal technicalities ) the feds would get a small time con man who was already in trouble with the law, to assist them in making Harry squeal on Jimmy. McCormick got this guy Kenneth to lie to Jimmy and tell him that Harry was stealing from him. That would make Jimmy put out a hit on Harry and allow the feds to make a deal with Harry: if Harry agreed to sell out Jimmy then the feds would offer him witness protection. I felt kinda sorry for poor old Harry. The guy had just been rhapsodizing about his beautiful retirement villa in Rapallo and now he had the feds and the mob after him ! The actual villain of the story was Jimmy Capo's hitman/enforcer called Tomasino Bitonti aka Tommy Bucks.

Tommy Bucks was the classic old school type mobster one would see on black and white movies. He dressed only in suave suits and liked to copy the style of real life '50's mobster Frank Costello. Tommy was also called "The Zip", because he had only been in the US for about 10 years, from Sicily. Tommy had bigger goals though. He wanted to be put in charge of Harry's bookie business after he took out the latter and then he hoped to take out Jumbo Jimmy. The other key player among the criminals was the 20 something year old meathead called Nicky Testa. Nicky aka Mr. Macho only liked to lift weights, admire his muscles and worked as Jimmy's personal bodyguard. Jimmy had a 20 something yr old mistress called Gloria who appeared to be a dumb bimbo but revealed her mercenary craftiness in the end when she sided with Tommy Bucks over Jimmy. Harry's troubles were added to after he shot a guy who was sent by Jimmy to kill him. After he was released on bond, Harry had the added stress of an old "friend" following him. This newcomer was the other main character US Marshall Raylan Givens. Raylan had an old score to settle with Harry because the latter had escaped his custody about 10 yrs before. This time Raylan was not going to let Harry get away again.

Harry was smarter than everyone thought and he managed to escape once more and this time he used a passport in his real name to go to Rapallo in Italy, where he had his villa. Raylan knew where Harry would be going, based on an old story that the latter had told him. Harry would have only had to contend with Raylan coming after him, had he not called Joyce and asked her to come meet him. Tommy Bucks had her followed to the travel agent's office ( yeah, the book is that old ) and got the guy to reveal her flight plans. Now poor Harry has both Raylan and Tommy coming after him ! And Joyce is in the middle not even knowing that hell will soon break loose. I loved reading the way the scenes would shift quickly from one group of characters to another and especially how the author would get right into the inner musings of a character's mind. A lot of these character's inner thoughts were funny as hell although Harry's ( the protagonist ) were more bittersweet. Harry was at a major crossroads in his life and discovered, after arriving in Rapallo and spending time there, that he wasn't going to be happy there. He missed Miami and missed all the habitual things that were part of his old life. Harry also has a bit of an obsession with the poet Ezra Pound because he had met the latter in Rapallo when he ( Harry ) had been a 20 yr old soldier. He'd also met Ezra once many years later but they never spoke the second time. The author focused a bit on Harry's obsession with Pound's complex poetry and the fact that Harry couldn't understand any of it yet he was able to recite verses from memory. I took a lot of time trying to figure out the significance of this and was able to come up with the following: Ezra P was the only internationally famous American Harry had ever met and his memory had been that of an impressionable 20 yr old so it's elevated to the second most significant event in his life. Harry could also be one of those folks who love deciphering puzzles and Pound's poetry has been known to be a literary puzzle for readers. Or, maybe it's simply because Harry envied Pound's ability to live life an adventurous expatriate existence and share the same house with both his wife and mistress. There might be some symbolism somewhere and I'm still thinking about it because I hate to have unanswered questions after I've read a book. 

In Rapallo, there were lots of twists and tension with everybody looking for Harry and using Joyce as bait. Raylan had come to Rapallo on his personal time since the Feds had decided ( duh ???? ) to not bother extraditing Harry since their plans to go after Jimmy Capo had changed. Sergeant Torres had told Raylan that McCormick had gotten Kenneth the hoodlum to lie and set up Harry. This sort of changed Raylan's attitude to Harry and the US Marshall soon found himself having to intervene to protect both Harry and Joyce. The irony about all this was that Harry had really been stealing from Jimmy Capo all these years but no one had known ( Harry was that good of a small time thief ). In Rapallo, Tommy Bucks and Nicky Testa arrived and are helped by Tommy Italian pals. It is funny that Tommy even finds the time to have several rounds of quickie sex with a prostitute named Rosanna. Harry soon started to unravel a bit due to the stress. He starts to drink again and eat unhealthy food but he has Raylan and the expatriate bodyguard Robert Gee to protect him. In a series of horrible events, Robert is taken captive, Raylan sends Harry and Joyce back to Miami but is unable to save Robert from being killed by Tommy Bucks. This was a horrible scene and I really felt sad for poor Robert. The guy had been through Vietnam, had worked as a mercenary soldier of fortune in Africa and Arabia and was now planning on returning home to Texas when Tommy kills him. Up to this point I had found Tommy was kinda cool ( evil but cool ). After this point, he is just evil. 

Back in Miami, there is a major power struggle happening in the mob. Tommy wants to take over from Jimmy, Nicky wants to kill Tommy and take his job and Gloria the bimbo is watching like a piranha waiting to see which of the 3 men she should pin her future penis polishing hopes upon. There's also a major twist because the sexual chemistry that had been brewing between Raylan and Joyce in Rapallo heats up and explodes into passion. Joyce decides to leave Harry for Raylan. The Marshall warns Tommy about trying to kill Harry again and gives the hitman 24 hours to leave Miami and never return. Tommy thinks he is bluffing and then there's a showdown in a restaurant where Raylan ends up killing Tommy. This scene was portrayed at the very beginning of the first episode of the first season of Justified. The TV series began where this book ends. It's in the following clip:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2RjVA...

Meanwhile, the meathead Nicky Testa loses his temper with Jumbo Jimmy who wants to go visit Butterfly World. Nicky shoots Jimmy while the latter is naked and shaving. The novel ends with Harry and Torres talking about Joyce's departure with Raylan and how Gloria is cosying up to Nicky and how McCormick has new plans in place for the Miami mob...