Rating: 5/5

“I’m going to read nothing but Homer + Homeric literature—and history 540-1200 AD until I finish my novel.” – F. Scott Fitzgerald, May 1924

That little novel of F. Scott Fitzgerald’s turned out to be The Great Gatsby.

What is so special about Homer? What makes this tale carry through the ages?

According to Matthew Arnold, the Homeric Style has four characteristics:
1)	Rapidity
2)	Directness of Thought
3)	Plainness of Diction
4)	Nobleness

Every chapter has a tremendous amount of action in it. There aren’t any characters going on and on for pages about their feelings nor does the prose get bogged down with endless descriptions of the landscape, history, or needless explanations of religion, politics, or education. 

Essentially, The Iliad is one big soap opera. All of the people are somehow related or know each other or their father knows their father. The point of focus for the narration also shifts—one minute it can be on the Argives, the next it might be in Olympus with the gods, then the next it might be with Priam or Hector on the Trojan side.

When F. Scott Fitzgerald designed his education program, The College of One, he heavily featured Homer in the Poetry section. He wanted students to read a variety of different translations.

So, of course, that is exactly what I did. I read The Iliad as translated by Robert Fagles, and the version recommended by Fitzgearld, the Iliad of Homer translated by Lang, Leaf, and Myers. Both translations have their positives. While Fagles can be clearer, the Lang/Leaf/Myers version had an extremely short summary before each chapter (which I find very helpful to orient myself), and it had stronger quotes.

The Iliad is one of those books where every time it is reread, something new can be gleaned—it can yield up another secret, a new discovery. 

But I might be biased, because, after all, I am Lisa of Troy.

The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent):
Hardcover Text – $53.80 (the Lang/Leaf/Myers) from Biblio 
Softcover Text - $25.80 (The Iliad and The Odyssey translated by Fagle) on eBay
Electronic Text – $13.99 on my Kindle
Audiobook – Audible – 1 credit (Audible Premium Plus Annual – 24 Credits Membership Plan $229.50 or roughly $9.56 per credit)

Connect With Me!
Blog Threads BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango