Rating: 5/5

Well constructed

I was able to procure an original copy of this book from the library (published in 1966). The book was in very good condition. Given this particular copy was close to 60 years old, it's obvious not many people had checked this book out of the library. I'm sure most people feel this story is pure fantasy.

The author John G Fuller, was a New England based author of nonfiction books which focused on extraterrestrials and the supernatural. He wrote another title "Incident at Exeter" (another New Hampshire UFO sighting(s)).

This volume includes an introduction written by Dr Benjamin Simon. Dr Simon was a practicing psychiatrist in the Boston area in the early 1960s. Simon was at the peak of his career when he saw the Hills. He was recommended to the Hills from another psychiatrist the Hills had been seeing to deal with the Hills anxiety over a close encounter which occurred in the White Mountains in the Fall of 1961.

This introduction by Dr Simon is very telling. Neither the Hills nor Dr Simon wanted publicity from this story. Apparently, a reporter got wind of this story from a church meeting the Hills attended. Reports of close encounters were very popular at the time and people were encouraged to talk about them. After the story was reported (probably by the Boston Globe), the Hills wanted to get their story told accurately. It was at this point they contacted John Fuller.

Dr Simon's participation in this book is only in critical oversight of the medical data. From Simon's final paragraph referring to the author John G Fuller: 
  I have no doubt given him sleepless nights and many moments of despair. I am sure there have been times when he felt I was taking the life of his child; but he has always taken my criticism with good grace and has managed to remove the objectionable or restore the missing in a manner which would be acceptable to me, so that even I, who have lived through much of it, find the book good reading indeed.

 I was very much into the details of this story. 

After some rumination, I have come to the conclusion that the sighting may have been real but the encounter, if it happened, could not have transpired in the way reported by Betty and Barney Hill under hypnosis.

What did Betty and Barney Hill report? Barney kept his eyes closed during the entire abduction but Betty willed herself awake and interacted with the aliens. The dialog related by Betty Hill just doesn't seem plausible to me. The encounter is very happenstance. In other words it was not planned by the aliens. The Hills were not selected because of their mixed marriage but because they were the only car out that late at night in the White Mountains.

Let's say that the aliens communicated by telepathy. The meaning of things between humans and these aliens on basic things would be accurate, especially in regards to time. Betty states under hypnosis that the aliens had no concept of time nor what age was. Time is a universal constant in the universe. Betty describes a probe during her exam that entered her umbilicus which the alien said was a pregnancy test. I personally believe that the Greys have been visiting Earth for hundreds if not thousands of years and possibly longer. Given all of that time and their ability to communicate with man, they would know that a probe of the umbilicus would be fruitless. Given the Greys advanced technology, I also find it implausible that their space craft would have windows and if they did, they wouldn't need struts to act as structural supports. Also, their technology would allow them to perform an exam without needles and probes. The only samples they would need to probe for would be special cells such as eggs. Betty Hill was infertile.

All the other stuff although possible such as the aliens walking down the road at night without lights, the dog hiding under the seat of the car, etc seem contrary to logic. For example, as opposed to no light, I would think there would be a blinding light which would cause Betty and Barney to avert their eyes. The dog would be barking. All dogs, especially little dogs bark because of fear aggression.

I'm happy I read this book. I felt it was well put together. I especially appreciated the transcripts of the hypnosis sessions of Betty and Barney Hill with Dr Simon.