Rating: 2/5

i was tempted to rate this lower but i think that would be mostly because it didn’t meet my expectations, which would be mostly unfair. i was hoping for a bit more sociological exploration into why certain foods are considered taboo or disgusting, but this book left much to be desired in that capacity. schwabe was a veterinarian and this reads i guess exactly how you would expect a veterinarian to write: like a textbook, and with little sociological imagination. 
don’t get me wrong, the premise of this book is incredibly interesting, there were some interesting bits, and i was ready to open my mind, but there is little discussion of the reasoning behind why we eat the food that we eat (or don’t eat the food that we don’t eat). e.g., i think it’s really important to explore the difference between unusual food that is eaten out of necessity and unusual food that is eaten as a symbol of wealth (delicacy). schwabe also has little tolerance for religious and cultural reasons for avoiding certain foods. instead, he lumps all food avoidance together as flat out ignorance and close minded-ness. 
additionally, schwabe’s thesis claims that we need to become more open minded about the food we eat because eating animal products that we don’t typically eat will be the solution to future food shortages. he doesn’t really explain what these supposed future food shortages are, or how exactly eating unusual food that is hard to procure will increase food security. in fact, there is little consideration for the sustainability of eating the food that schwabe thinks we should all be eating. for instance, i live in montana. i have never tried oysters, or lobster, or a lot of seafood, not because i’m disgusted by it, not because i would never consider eating it, but because it is not easy to get where i live (especially fresh). i bought some ground beef (which schwabe absolutely detests because it’s such low quality food) at the farmers market this weekend, that was grass fed and finished here within 1 hour of where i live, using sustainable and regenerative practices, but schwabe would rather i eat shark or foie gras. 
the entire tone of the book is authoritative, and looks down on the rest of us Americans who are too ignorant too try unmentionable cuisine. schwabe on the other hand, is an enlightened being who is better than the rest of us because he actually does like to eat cow eyeballs and iguana. 
even as a cookbook, “unmentionable cuisine” is not great. the recipes are not very detailed, which again schwabe explains with disdain that the truly adventurous cook shouldn’t need measurements. or apparently more detailed explanations of how to procure unusual animal products where you live or how to butcher whole animals in your home. this book would have also greatly benefited from the inclusion of pictures. the amount of times that i put down this book to look up a picture of what schwabe was talking about made me glad that i read this in 2026 in the age of cell phones, rather than when it was originally published. 
this book has an interesting concept, i don’t think it was well executed. i think it also is pretty wildly out of date at this point, as food is ever evolving and a lot has changed in the past almost 50 years.