Rating: 2/5

For a change, I couldn't connect with the hero, despite all the checkboxes being ticked. 

Layne is adopted and has wonderful parents, but has been searching for her birth mother for 8 years. So when she finally locates Mattie on a ranch, she goes there with a lot of trepidation, to find out who she is. When she arrives, she plays along Mattie's requirement and gets herself hired as a ranch hand of sorts, so she can live on the ranch and get to know Mattie better. 

Mattie is the partner of the H, Creed Dawson, a "big, ugly brute" (Layne's words, not mine, albeit spoken with affection). But this is a theme that runs through the story and ultimately made it unpalatable for me. There was too much emphasis on looks. On how pretty Layne was and how large and brutal Creed looked. Here is how he confesses his feelings at the end:

“The first time I saw you, I was staggered. But I also saw the way you looked at me—the way all women have looked at me, even the plain fat ones—recoiling a little, fascinated a little.”
 
And I'm sorry to say that I recoiled at that so much that the rest of the already tottering story fell apart for me. "...even the plain fat ones"? I understand this book was written in 1984. But still, not all readers of the story are going to be paragons of beauty. In fact, it is a safe bet to say many of them will be the plain fat ones. 

In one fell swoop, my dear Ms Dailey, you lost me. 

Beauty and the beast is one of my favourite tropes, not because one person in the duo is "ugly" or scarred but because it means I can look forward to a lot of healing and acceptance. The healing wasn't there. Creed was a jerk, there was no grovelling to redeem him at the end, and it seemed like Layne was making all the sacrifices. When Mattie throws her out of the house after the Big Revelation, she sends for Creed, meets him in a cafe, and lets him know that she might be carrying his child. Creed's reaction of disgusted disbelief, and the fact that for two months after that he didn't even so much as call her up or write to her, was enough for me to write him off. And when he finally arrives at her house and throws out a proposal of sorts, that they should get married because no woman has had his child (REALLY??!!), she realises he is "too proud" to say aloud that he loves her. So she is the first to confess - and of course then we have the happily-ever-after

Janet Dailey has always been a bit of hit-or-miss with me. This one's a miss.