Rating: 5/5

I loved this book as much as the first. The series is doing a good job of coming full circle both in the storyline and for the characters. I like that in this installment of the series, Wynn and Elizabeth were finally working together as a team rather than as individuals like they seemed to do in the second and third books. Whether or not they were together when events and calamities took place, they handled things as if they were both there to garner wisdom from. This was especially evident in Elizabeth's character. She grew a lot since that second book following the first year of her and Wynn's lives together. She grew stronger and more confident in any situation, whether they lived in a small town or out in the middle of the wilderness, she seemed to keep her wits about her whereas the old Elizabeth had the tendency to just wait for Wynn to fix things. I feel like her character has made a lot of good progress throughout the series.

I'm not exactly sure that Wynn is growing as much. However that might be because we don't see a first person perspective from him in the series. Everything is from Elizabeth's perspective or written about them both as unit. To a certain degree, it's a little sad that we readers don't get to experience Wynn's adventures with him. While we wouldn't be as interested to see him fix up a burn victim's leg, I'm certain many would have enjoyed reading his thoughts on Elizabeth and their neighbors. It would have been interesting to see the moments when he was worried and the instances when he was proud of her.

On the whole, the series has been pretty excellent. I like seeing in this book how God brought about giving Wynn and Elizabeth a child and how they adjusted, not just to one, but two new homes and destinations.

As a small note, I found that this book made me extremely thankful for God's providence in my life. Reading how Elizabeth and the Indians managed after the fire made me all the more grateful for the small things that God does to cloth and feed my family. I find myself very thankful for the oatmeal we eat at breakfast after reading about cornmeal gruel Elizabeth made.