Rating: 5/5

If you buy the latest Jilly Cooper instead of this you WILL go to hell!

This one languished on my bookshelf for the best part of a year as I was too scared to pick it up &amp; start it. What held me back is what will probably put a lot of other potential readers off trying it - the boring old "I'm no good at maths" argument. Although my maths education is probably little above average (a good O Level and a terrible A Level, after which I rallied somewhat to obtain a reasonable HNC maths module) it's //very// many years out of use and it's all I can do to add two numbers up in my head. Given that this book is about a problem that flummoxed the best mathematical minds in the world for over 350 years you'd be forgiven for putting this back on the shelf and choosing something a little simpler. Well, don't even try that... 

YOU DON'T NEED ANY MATHS TO READ THIS! 

What Singh has done here is to present a hugely complex subject in a hugely entertaining way. The search for the answer to Fermat's riddle reads like a detective story and not a matehematical treatise and it includes a truly absorbing potted history of the development of maths over the years and, from Pythagoras to Fermat to Godel to Wiles, each part has a fascinating human side to it. 

Budding mathematicians needn't feel left out as the mechanics of the maths is also included, but it's treated in a gentle way: each step of the problem (and it's solution) is described in a simplified (but certainly not dumbed down) manner and some simple exercises are included in several short appendices. However, take heart! There are several places where elements of the maths are obviously too complex for us mortals and Singh is not afraid to say soo and then gloss over them completely. That may be a disappointment to some, but it's not at all unreasonable in my opinion. 

All in all, the net result is a book that is sensitive to its readers, intelligent, interesting and important. It's literally unputdownable and it had the added bonus of tricking me into thinking that I'm a little cleverer than I really am. 

I notice there's an inevitable Wills and Kate bio on the bestseller list at the moment. Put your hard earned cash into Andrew Morton's pockets or read something that will make you feel like a genius. The choice is yours.