Rating: 2/5

With a large cast of characters, the story is about love tangles with everyone paired up with the 'wrong' person. Most of the action takes place in Bath, a place I particularly enjoy reading about in Heyer's books. She makes it sound like such fun there, without the tiresome formality of London. 

The story starts off with the Earl of Spenborough's funeral. His estates goes to a cousin, since his only daughter, Serena, cannot inherit. But she does inherit a fortune, kept in trust for her with the Marquis of Rotherham to whom Serena was once betrothed and now she must have his permission to get married to anyone at all! Serena sets up house with the widow of the deceased, Fanny, who is very close to Serena but is not as reckless or outspoken as she is. After a while, they grew bored of living quietly and moved to Bath, where the formidable grandmother (Mrs Floore) of Emily, an acquaintance of Serena, lives. Starts several romantic tangles with Gerard (Rotherham's nephew and ward), Ned Goring (Mrs Floore's business partner) and Major Hector Kirkby (Serena's old boyfriend and current fiance).

Now, I started off absolutely disliking Rotherham right from the beginning. He is obviously abusive to Serena, even when she is still upset about her father's death and the extra blow of having her money in Rotherham's hands cannot have been pleasant to her. Even though he claims he hates it as much as she does, he doesn't lift a finger to do anything about it. As the book progressed, the man became even worse. He offers marriage to a sixteen year old to revenge himself on Serena, sexually assaults her and scares her to death in a bid to make her put an end to the engagement. Of course, he himself could not do so since he is a 'gentleman'. Errr, what? Nothing he does during the course of the book makes him a gentleman! He is also harsh on his wards, and treats practically everyone he meets with contempt. Worse, he has no positive qualities unless you count wealth and a title as positives.

I liked Serena at first because she is independent and outspoken and does not like being cosseted by anyone. But I quickly lost sympathy for her when she took Emily to task, concerned only about telling her how good Rotherham is. Really? If you want to be abused, that's your own problem, but when you start screaming at 16 year old kids about how terrible they are and how an abuser is really nice, that's where your story is consigned to the dust bin! 

I had trouble believing in Serena's and Rotherham's 'love'. "I love to fight with my partner" is not really a shared interest. But beyond that, I really could not see why on earth Serena even liked Rotherham enough to marry him. I'll just assume it's to get her inheritance and be a Marchioness as no one could possibly love that man.

This book starkly depicts a woman's position in Regency society and is not sugarcoated. Fanny is the most perceptive of all the characters and she was my favourite, especially when she explains how girls are browbeaten by their parents and society and expected to confirm, and not every girl has the courage or resources to stand up to all this. She also hints at how young girls like Emily are despised for their lack of intellect and awareness but they are precisely bred that way by their families in order to fit into society. It's all very well to dismiss of Emily as insipid and boring, but if she was anything else, she would be quickly shunned by society and not being a heiress like Serena, would have no life or future. Damned if you do, damned if you don't! I absolutely adored Fanny and her perspicacity. 

The side characters are really well drawn and the story was well-written. I found Fanny's romance far more interesting. There were a few pairs left unexplored, which should have been done. Serena and Rotherham might have been the heroine and hero of the book, but the minor characters stole the show. 

I am giving this only 2 stars not because I hated the book, but because I absolutely loathed Rotherham and I resent that he was depicted as someone worth marrying. 

Edited to add:

If you want to read a more coherent critique of Rotherham, check out this excellent article on Tor.