Rating: 3/5

This story posed a bugger of a ratings quandary for yours truly. 

While reading it I was bouncing around between everything from a bountiful 5 star rating for pure quality of writing, hefty historical detail and superbly drawn characters, all the way south to a skimpy 2 star for less than engaging plotting, iceberg-like pacing and noticeable lack of emotional resonance. Finally, in my best impression of Solomon, I settled on a solid, if not quite ebullient, 3 stars based on the fact that I was deeply impressed with many aspects of the book. I just didn't “enjoy” it enough to go above that. 

That said, before I get into specifics of the book, I do recommend this book to fans of classic literature, naval adventures and historical fiction because the literary quality is certainly there. O'Brian knows his stuff. 

I'm going to forego a thorough plot synopisis since some many other reviews have checked that box so admirably. Therefore, I thought I would just give my impression of a few aspects of the book that really impressed me and those that left me less than enthused. 

I'M IMPRESSED:

On the impressive side, the novel's historical detail is outstanding. Everything from music, to food, to medicine, to science, to clothing, to social interactions within the various class systems, to military life on board a naval vessel during the Napoleonic Wars are described in extraordinary and wonderful detail. O'Brian makes you feel as if you are truly looking through a time machine into an earlier period. In addition, while this is only my subjective opinion, I got the feeling that the social attitudes and inner disposition of the main characters rang very true for the period.

High, high marks for authenticity. 

Also very kudo-worthy is the quality of O’Brian’s prose. The story, though written in the latter half of the 20th century, has the elegant, polished feel of “classic” literature that brings to mind Dickens and Austen. Lush yet controlled and very easy on the eye. I found the writing to be perfectly in sync with the subject matter being described. 

Finally, I was also very impressed with the two main characters of Jack Aubrey and Steve Maturin. They were fully-fleshed in three dimensions and drawn with a tremendous amount of nuance so that you saw you could really get to known them. They certainly have the potential to become characters that will stay with you for a long time.

LESS THAN THRILLED:

Unfortunately, there was one important aspect of the book that I didn't love and it really hampered my reading experience. Basically, I never found myself truly pulled into the narrative or engaged with the plot. At least not as much as I would have liked. It is possible that the tone of the prose, which is deliberately understated, was part of the issue for me. Without that connection, everything just seemed too dry which dampened my enjoyment of the book as a whole. Still, I liked the book and intend to read the next volume in the series because I know if I get pulled into the narrative by the characters, the rest of the story would be much more enjoyable and could become a very special series.

3.0 stars. Recommended.