Rating: 2/5

This is an unapologetically difficult book and so is often dense and frustrating. The author has intriguing ideas about the nature of art, music and the existence of silence. The uniqueness of the book is in how Cage plays with structure in his essays and changes the way the narrative is presented to control how the reader perceives his ideas. The idea is similar to a performer controlling how an audience hears the music they are making. There's a definite sense of play here as language is manipulated in ways I have never seen before, but the presentation does not always enhance the reader's involvement with what the text is saying. Most of his big musical ideas come out in the early articles. His academic writing is very dense and assumes a high level of musical knowledge from his audience. He also loves long, meandering sentences with lots of technical terms. I found that most articles were good for about ten pages at a time. Sometimes this was due to the time necessary for processing dense ideas but mostly it was about as much exacting concentration as I was willing to give intentionally frustrating passages.
	His stories are both sprinkled throughout the book and presented in concentrated form in one of his later essays. These are usually interesting chunks usually set up as jokes with a punchline. Also, his cues in a 45 minute lecture as to when to cough or make random gestures make the otherwise dense text entertaining. The format of this lecture is amusing, but the text which constitutes it feels like an afterthought and is full of rambling and confusing passages that seem to contain little worth rummaging around for. The only one that I full skipped over was “Where are we going” which has stories chopped up so that four different ones are going at the same time. This technique is meant to simulate the confusion of having to listen to 4 readers at the same time. Like many pieces in the book, it is a nice idea but not pleasant to read. 
	This is obviously an important and influential book but not one that everyone needs to read. Most of the big ideas in it were summarized quite nicely and understandably in David Byrne's “How Music Works”. Only major Cage fans need to go farther than that.