Rating: 4/5

I found this in a random place in my school's reference room and jumped on it - English language books are difficult to find here unless they're well known classics, and sci-fi books are among the rarest to come across, so I was excited. I was especially excited to see it was a Clarke book I had discovered as I've previously read 2 of his books, Childhood's End and Rendezvous with Rama, and enjoyed both.

A couple comments on these previous encounters: Rama was seriously lacking in characterization, being primarily occupied with the exploration and understanding of the encountered craft and, through it, with what would be necessitated by deep space travel - I found this fascinating and so enjoyed reading it, but it didn't exactly touch my sensibilities. Childhood's End was a mix: it had fascinating ideas and characters who, although they weren't explored or revealed as much as they would have been under other authors' pens, were more real than Rama's. But it was... spooky: a collective memory for a species, haunted by the ghosts, specters, monsters of its future? And the reason for that haunting? I think maybe it was spooky because it showed a destruction, which in most stories would be a reason for fear and hatred, and yet, here we were to celebrate that destruction for the new birth it would allow - humanity as phoenix? and yet not, as the being birthed was so unlike, so truly alien, and had lost so much of what we would call human. It was humanity xed. This one left me with chills for a bit, but overall, I thought it was both a good example and an excellent member of the sci-fi genre.

These were both books that I had generally positive feelings about, but which were also so very different from each other that I didn't know what to expect from Against the Fall of Night, though I thought with a title like that, there must be some reward within. Clarke still isn't strong on characterization here, although his characters are distinct people. But they are neither mythological figures nor the well-developed actors of many modern works. As before, the ideas, the actions, the thoughts of future and past and their confusion with one another, these take center stage. It is described in places as a mystery novel, and I would agree with this in a way, although, in setting itself up in this fashion it is exploring the nature of humanity, its innate curiousity and desire to know, and asking who we would be if we were to lose this - in stagnation could we still be human? could we continue or would we wither away and die to our last member? But Clarke is showing us that this is indeed an innate trait, though often it is quelled, submerged in fear, and fear is often encouraged by tradition without knowledge of truth. In one way it is similar to Childhood's End, and that is in placing its trust for the future of humanity in children, or at least in youth. It is saying that youth is the time when curiousity trumps fear and tradition, to reach beyond the known into the possible or even into what we thought was impossible, and in this innate, ultimately unquellable curiousity, humanity has its hope. 

In the end I am in complete disagreement with the materialist foundation of Clarke's philosophies, however, I enjoy his writing and find his explorations fascinating and inspiring. Against the Fall of Night is my favorite example of these so far.