Rating: 4/5

Revised Review

From the introduction by Philip Gourevitch:

"The pilot was called, as he had been from birth, James Horowitz. The writer called himself James Salter. He was handsome, and he had style. He lived in Europe. His prose announced itself with a high modernist elegance. He made language spare and lush all at once—strong feelings made stronger by abbreviation, intense physicality haunted by a whiff of metaphysics: for everything that is described, even more is evoked.

These books all have the flickering hyper-vividness of cinema, the atmospherics, the jump-cut acuity, and that swift, skimming telegraphic emotion that gives a sense of immense depth to surfaces. Of course Salter achieves his effects without using anything more than any other writer—just words on paper—and so he makes other writers take notice and wonder how he does it."

Amen. 

My admiration for James Salter’s craft only increased after reading this collection of short stories. Especially relevant is when Gourevitch notes: “These books all have the flickering hyper-vividness of cinema, the atmospherics, the jump-cut acuity, and that swift, skimming telegraphic emotion that gives a sense of immense depth to surfaces."

I’m currently reading a collection of Salter’s letters and was surprised to discover that his involvement with the film business was deeper than I first believed. In addition to directing a film in 1969 (Three with Sam Waterston), Salter wrote a number of screenplays for movies that actually got produced, including Downhill Racer with Robert Redford and Gene Hackman. So the comparison to film is apt. Salter's short stories are among the best examples of their type. In his short stories the language is spare, elegant but capable of such depth. They are, indeed, hyper-vivid and resemble film at its best. I finish one wishing to know more about these perplexed people, to hear more of their story but in a flash it is over. You are left to reflect on the story and what, exactly, Salter is trying to say.

Four and a half stars.