Rating: 4/5

I do have to thank On The Southern Literary Trail for leading me to read books that might not have occurred to me so readily to add to my list. Porter is an author I've been aware of but have not thought of in a long time. Now I can happily say that I have read a good sampling of her stories and have a feeling for the power of her writing.

Her settings vary from the American South to the Mexico of revolutionary days and multiple other places in the United States. Her characters are often poor and powerless, occasionally more prosperous, but they all seem to have an emptiness within that they are working to fill. There is also occasionally some brutality in her stories...in the way people treat each other, in peoples' fears and memories, but there is also love though it is usually understated. No one gushes over with emotion in these stories though the emotion is there.

Perhaps my favorite is "The Jilting of Granny Weatherall", a story I wish I could write. I also particularly appreciated "The Cracked Looking-Glass" and "Theft". One of my favorite segments is from this last story:

 She remembered how she had never locked a door in 
 her life, on some principle of rejection in her that made
 her uncomfortable in the ownership of things, and her
 paradoxical boast before the warnings of her friends, that
 she had never lost a penny by theft; and she had been
 pleased with the bleak humility of this concrete example
 designed to illustrate and justify a certain fixed,
 otherwise baseless and general faith which ordered the
 movements of her life without regard to her will in the
 matter.
 In this moment she felt that she had been robbed of an
 enormous number of valuable things, whether material or
 intangible: things lost or broken by her own fault, 
 things she had forgotten and left in houses when she moved: 
 books borrowed from her and not returned, journeys she had
 planned and not made, words she had waited to hear spoken 
 to her and had not heard, and the words she had meant to 
 answer with; bitter alternatives and intolerable substitutes
 worse than nothing, and yet inescapable: the long patient 
 suffering of dying friendships and the dark inexplicable
 death of love---all that she had had, and all that she had
 missed, were lost together, and were twice lost in this
 landslide of remembered losses. (pp 89-90)

There was only one story in this collection of ten that I did not care for and I believe I will seek out more of Porter's work to read, starting with the 50 year old paperback of additional short stories I found in my own apartment...apparently a remainder of a college course, partly read.