Rating: 5/5

“Christ in Concrete” is a remarkable little find. Written nearly eighty years ago, but with nary an out-of-date-reference or any contrivance or corniness, it reads with dynamism and literate flight that would not seem out of place in the present day. All rings with authenticity of direct cultural and lifeblood experience. The story is of socio-economic, class and cultural struggle. It doesn’t take much to guess that this account originates from Donato’s own experiences as worker and family member. The brutality of labour struggle though America’s depression years is portrayed, I believe, without an iota of propagandistic or didactic posturing. I get the definite sense the descriptions are based on actual events as experienced, if not close accounts. And terrible and relentless are the conditions the people must endure indeed! At the outset of the novel the father of a large family and many of his co-workers are buried in the rubble of a sub-standard structure. The well-being of a score of children is immediately threatened as there is no social safety net. All the social institutions, government, business and religion come under fire, but refuse responsibility. Injury and loss continue throughout the book, but it is not merely a rote list of misfortunes. 

 This novel is actually very and proudly lyrical throughout. There is joy and pride in the face of irreparable tragedy. The wellspring of this is the working-class Italian cultural origins of the author and his family. The minutiae of passion both amongst the men, women and children is as detailed as the descriptions of the technique of the artisanry. I liked and identified with it on so many levels. I even find that that the writing has interesting characteristics, almost avant-garde. Description seems to float upon the page demanding that the reader fill in detail from their imagination with a humanistic commonality (where otherwise, because of cultural distinctiveness, the brain would pause to conjecture). It causes a disjunction where one is reading what must be foreign colloquialism with familiarity. The flow changes abruptly sometimes to poetic and sensory technique, but there is no dawdling in the narrative. Nothing is included that isn’t essential.

 The inevitable comparisons would be to socially-conscious writers of the time, such as Lillian Hellman or John Steinbeck, but there is little bending, posturing or allegorical ornamentation to make a point. Donato does not have to reach very far to draw on his inspirational resources and though there is emotional passion it is never affected. Intensely passionate, scathing, yet loving. I wonder how Donato managed to find the time to pull this off. Being a manual labourer for years myself I know how much extreme labour taxes one’s ability to do much else in one’s life. Truly the work of a literary genius, pretty much unheralded anymore. I want to find out more about this guy, but I’ve the feeling that this would be his masterpiece. If it isn’t the only one, even if it is, this guy, in my opinion, is one of the greatest novelists unjustly forgotten.