Rating: 2/5

(I would put a spoiler alert, but honestly if you read any other books in this genre or just have common sense you could see everything that would happen.)

Recently, I've been way to into classical/regency romances especially by Georgette Heyer. This time I decided to try a different author and was hugely disappointed. Truly a terrible read! And I'm telling you I have read some pretty trashy novels; but at least they were in a tiny bit satisfying. In this book, everything was cheap and cliched; something I, myself, could even write. 

*Summary* 
Smart bookish Alethea comes from the country to visit her aunt and experience London. Her upbringing is very unique as her father treated her as he treated his sons in that he gave her a superb education. She immediately clashes with those avoid her, namely, her aunt, cousin, Lydia, as they have very different world-views. While her aunt and Lydia view marriage as a contract and a way to gain a higher status, Alethea wants to marry for love. One of greatest flirts and dandies, Sir James Devenish, notes that Alethea, instead of flirting back at him as most females of the ton do, has a particular repugnance towards him. He then vows to make her his next flirt. 

*Critique*
The author put way too much emphases on how unique and smart Alethea was, thus making the whole work feel fake. To her credit, she obviously did her research and included famous authors and historical trivia, but some times she went over the top to show just how bookish Alethea was. This made her feel somewhat a try-hard. 

Next let's talk about the two main couples. I just don't understand why Vivyan even liked Lydia before she changed a bit. In fact, he, himself, doesn't even know. I think it's more of a crazy infatuation than love. Also, Lydia falls in love with the first guy who is sincere about his complements! No the first guy who she THINKS is sincere. Other than that, what about them made a good match? Even if you like someone doesn't mean you should get married. You need a similar world-view and same direction. Next, Alethea and Devenish hardly know each other! At the very end of the book, she's still unsure if his 'affections' if they could even be called that; are sincere. Devenish is meant to be a complex layered character but it really didn't feel that way. It was more of a I show this side to the world but really I have an unknown side that you somehow brought out. And for some reason, you're not boring even though in the very recent past, I would've been bored to death just being the company with somewhat like you. Yes, Alethea absolutely should've asked "After you caught me, will you abandon me?" Yes. Yes. He probably will, if not physically, mentally. I just don't see the layers.

Furthermore, Devenish made too drastic a change. One moment he's the greatest flirt of the ton and the next he's sincere and wanting to marry Alethea. It was just too sudden for me. Alethea's love story is the trope of "I don't want to like you, but I somehow do". (WHyyYYY?) I think the thunderstorm section was meant to somehow bridge the gap of hate and love, but it truly didn't accomplish that purpose. All that happened was he rescued her and they hugged each other in a sibling way to comfort her in a thunderstorm (not even an exaggeration). To me, all that kept me going was to warn everyone against the book and perhaps a tiny bit of hope it would provide a satisfying ending. Nope. Disappointment. Though the ending was, admittedly, the best part, it couldn't save the sinking ship. The ending was cheap, expected, and not even written well. 

Other classical/regency romances are a thousand times better. Even by modern authors! Save your time (even though this was a short read) and try Heyer's "The Grand Sophie" or Austen's "Emma". Both I have read recently and am quite pleased with. If you are new to this genre or just want an easier read try Julianne Donaldson's "Blackmoore" and "Edenbrooke." Sorry for reading this terribly-written rant, but it was very refreshing.