Rating: 5/5

Hagar is the protagonist of The Stone Angel by Canadian writer Margaret Laurence. Hagar was born in 1886 and is now 90 years old, living with her only living son, Marvin, and his wife Doris. This book is essentially Hagar reflecting on her life and recalling pivotal moments and the decisions she has made along the way. This is done via Hagar’s POV, which adds intimacy to this story. By the end, the reader will have no doubts what Hagar is ‘all about’. (Or don’t Canadians say ‘aboot’?).

I’ll try and describe Hagar in a few choice words: Opinionated, grumpy, direct, unhappy, large, unfriendly, judgmental. I think she would have been a handful to be around. Of course, using single words provides only superficial understanding. The author is so good here, as she shoves various nuances our way involving some not so 'black and white' situations, as we embark on a journey of Hagar’s life. But to be honest – I didn’t really like her, not when I first met her anyway.

It's clear Marvin and Doris want to put Hagar into a Nursing Home. As you could well imagine, Hagar is not too pleased. Laurence gives the reader a chance to pause and be sympathetic to Hagar here (first person helps), but we also can be sympathetic towards Marvin and Doris. She’s forgetful and certainly not well. I didn’t like Doris very much, I must say – and I think she often, quite intentionally, put Marvin in difficult situations. She also foisted an annoying clergyman onto Hagar at the most inopportune times, much to the annoyance of the old lady. That would’ve been way too much to bear.

Some of the memories told include Hagar’s childhood – her mother died early, and her father was from Scottish gentry, quite rich when he immigrated to Canada. Unfortunately, he didn’t leave Hagar any money when he died. There are some painful memories involving her brothers as well. Bram is another character we meet – this guy was Hagar’s husband. Here we have another individual we can get our choppers into and dislike with a passion. I didn’t like him one bit, he was stingy with his time, money, and emotions. His marriage to Hagar was miserable. 

The question that kept going through my mind was, would Hagar have been happier if she married a better man, someone more generous? Or was her abrasive manner partly, or fully responsible for the miserable life she seemed to have lived? I think a bit of both – but if one really thinks about it – no matter how dislikable Bram was, I wonder if Hagar would have found a more emotionally giving man? I really doubt it – I think Hagar would have presented a dreadful first impression.

We come across other family members, such as her other son John and old school ‘friends’. People she meets in hospital and a couple of strangers who happen to fall into her orbit. Laurence’s spare prose provides very profound understanding of Hagar and her world, particularly on an emotional level. 

I felt sorry for Hagar, and this book wrapped me up in abject sadness. I life not lived, or hardly lived. Our choices – this story provided me with some opportunities to reflect on my own decisions, good and disastrous, and the impact these decisions had on my life, but also (and more importantly) on the lives of others – many dear to me. 

Only a good book can make one visit corners of one’s mind and heart to places we don’t really want to go.

Hagar did make me laugh sometimes. Her descriptions of others – although always harsh - were often funny (to me). She had an eye for flowers, which made me scurry to Google and see what a particular flower looks like. I am a flower dumbo.

I would like to thank my buddy-reader Lisa for enhancing this experience many times over. Lisa prods and pokes me; she asks me questions about things I wouldn’t normally think about – and I am finally understanding metaphors and symbolism. And how to spot the little buggers. I can’t be lazy reading with Lisa – and that’s good. She also has this quiet way of making fun, I like that too.

Lisa's review can be found here: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

All in all, brilliant.

5 Stars