Rating: 4/5

Umberto Eco, Italian novelist and intellectual, dies aged 84
in: http://www.theguardian.com/books/2016...

---

You don’t have to be a psychologist, or a psychoanalyst, grappling with the sense of dreams, or any behavior, emotion, act, whatever, typical of your fellow man; or of yourself. The search for meaning can be extended to any text, or image, or set of symbols. Or signs. 

Take the so-recent case of this ongoing “operation” within USA territory: “Jade Helm 15”. A military training scheduled for two months in 10 states. Voices have been raised up trying to find the MEANING for this unprecedented event. Adding to civilian concerns (security, stress on the elder population…) some* have seen “beyond” the symbols involved. 

  

  

  
 

  

Many are those getting worried, despite all the positive messages being displayed on the media. Like: “it will be good for the economy….all blank ammunition being used…no explosives…”. 

What interpretations for those symbols used? For those “arm-bands” which “define” the operation?

Some are defending these almost apocalyptic scenarios of an “economic collapse” pending and similarities to Hitler’s time: martial law is upcoming. Others predict guns confiscation, and the UN stepping in. Some see “occult meanings”. But yet, those occult meanings are not told. You’ve got to decipher it. Some see Texas threatened. Others are suspicious about the concomitant movement of the Russian Navy Armada “Liberation Exercise” into the Gulf of Mexico.
...

  

  

Are these people exaggerating? OVERINTERPRETING the signs? What is the real meaning (if any) for the above mentioned operation? Just drills?
...
...

  

  

The book at stake has three essays by Umberto Eco that deal with those questions (suggested previously): are there limits to interpretation? What are the authors’ intentions? Can over-reading be pinpointed/identified? Is it interpretation a finite (terminable) process or, otherwise, an interminable one?

“In 1957 J. M. Castillet wrote a book entitled La hora del lector (The time of the reader). He was a prophet, indeed. In 1962 I wrote my Opera aperta. In that book I advocated the active role of the interpreter in the reading of texts endowed with aesthetic value.”
Eco’s position may be summed up in some lines.

(1) There is a dialectics between the rights of the reader/interpreter and the rights of the texts. But paramount: is the ACTIVE ROLE of the interpreter (check on the prophetic work of 1957 “La hora del lector”, by J. M. Castillet; and Opera aperta by Eco, in 1962). As Todorov said: “the author brings words” the “reader brings sense”. The problem arises when the sense is occult, you may wonder. 

-What was the “original intention” of the author? That would be equivalent to say: if you find the “original intention” than your interpretation is “valid”. Maybe.

(2) Historically (regarding Western Thought), Eco sees major determinants in the interpretation “démarche”. First and foremost the Greek Rationalism. Very much like the search for the Logic. “Knowledge [search for the Truth] meant understanding the causes”. 

But in the West we also had Irrationalism (see Goethe, Nietzsche…). Jung said that the Divine Image at a certain point became “too familiar” and lost its mystery. “The truth is something we have been living with from the beginning of time, except we have forgotten it”.

But then we had, also, the Hermetic Tradition. That may hinder the interpretation process, if it postulates “everything is secret, hermetic”. How do you get the “gnosis” (Knowledge)? And not, simply, the “aisthesis” (perception) or the “doxa” (opinion)? 

Eco satirizes within this vein about “The syndrome of the secret”, as a heritage of these Gnostic and Hermetic traditions. It’s almost funny reading about the examples given by Eco on the Bible misinterpretation, and especially in the case of Jack the Ripper; one who “needed Medical care”. 

(3) So, reader (and interpreter) you’re kind of demolished by these prior lines. Eco nevertheless, points some guidelines as a way out: the real reader is one who understands that the text secret is its “emptiness”. [-are you boggled??]

The best attitude, when interpreting, would be that of the slave (not the master’s one). Therefore: “Let us first rank with the slave”. “The message can mean everything”. 

(4) The Eco’s essay on “over interpretation” is, again, a source of smiles. Pardon me.

He ponders at length on the work of Rossetti who claimed Dante to be a Freemason, a Templar etc. That essay offers some principles of Hermetic Semiosis, that may help anyone trying to understand the limits within which a reasonable interpretation may occur. Otherwise, you’re over interpreting. Beware of The Followers of the Veil: Eco has seen those in “the Bacon-Shakespeare controversy”, but also in Rabelais, Joyce and Virgil.

  

  

(true, Borges' hand)

  
 

As a personal note I would like to say that this Eco view (establishing some limits to the interpretation) does not coincide with the Borges’ view. Namely, on his definition of a classic. ” A classic is “as if in its pages all was deliberate fatal, deep and like cosmos and CAPABLE OF ENDLESS INTERPRETATIONS”. [Check on the “I king”: the 64 hexagrams allow for MANY MEANINGS].

(5) Finally, and away from this book.

 In 2011, a propos his book “The Prague Cemetery”, Eco was interviewed at his home, midst the thousands of books that compose his personal library. He complained about a (“stupid”) reviewer of the book saying something like: if you keep saying all is a forgery (check on the Protocols of Sion) there is no truth at all [“since you’re showing everything is false there’s no longer a truth”]. Eco, slightly infuriated, took a (drastic?) example to make his point: if you tell me this is a forgery of the Gioconda (Mona Lisa) painting, it doesn’t mean there isn’t a true one; “YOU HAVE TO ASSUME” there’s a true one in the Louvre (Museum). 

True, truth is something we assume exists. Our (slave-readers) démarche is to find it.

Someday, maybe, I will comment on the essays by Rorty and the others. 

 Thus far: TRULY excellent, Eco. 

Meanwhile, I can hardly wait for August. Then, Jade Helmet Helm in full swing. And the Prophets of Doom, what about them?

I assure you something, things, then, will take a NEW MEANING.

  

  

*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CRB05...

 UPDATE
Jade Helm 15 is past; no martial law or FEMA camp implemented; Texas still holding. ERGO: OVERINTERPRETATION.

-Really?