Rating: 4/5

I debated giving this book 5 stars, as I felt the messages it carried were supremely important in an era of fast (and fake) news, endless and instantaneously accessible TikTok videos, and a self-centred "now" that has almost completely forgotten the vast history that preceded it, even a worse pandemic than Covid just 100 years before (an invisible demarcation on the geological timescale - it is, effectively, our "now", only we've somehow become blind to even that).

While this book was, plot-wise, an indefinite and somewhat unsatisfying grey zone, I found the rest of it (after it got to speed) rather good and of great social and emotional import, covering topics that I have rarely seen covered, especially in the middle grade age range.

One of the (if not THE) central theme is 14 year old Clare's relationships to her guardians, great aunts Anne and Susan (78 and 81 years of age). Apart from Mrs. Hedges, a housekeeper who comes in to cook and clean for part of the day, there is no one else in the vast, draughty, disintegrating 19-room Victorian mansion. It is filled with the past - Clare's great great grandfather's anthropological acquistions and vast records of expeditions around the world (and, in particular, (Papua) New Guinea, to meet an untouched lost tribe), her great great grandmother's trunks of exceedingly fine antique clothing and accessories, and furniture predating even her great Aunts, who had grown up in the house and were educated in its own school room by a governess, before they, in turn, stuffed more books and scholarship into the overflowing library. 

Orphaned Clare has assumed a more mature role in her family as a result of her eccentric, Oxford-educated spinster aunts being completely in the dark over decimalised currency (this story takes place in the 1970s) and showing no head for practical household affairs. The aunts are, in spite of this, incredible ladies of erudition, worthy of much respect, and with engaging and lively personalities I immediately loved. Clare does too, and fears the impending end of the aunt's existence here on earth. 

Clare clings to the past, wise beyond her years in this regard, and understands the immense importance of personal and familial history. Which is odd in a 14 year old, leading to some great conversations, especially with Maureen, the somewhat vapid, workaday lodger Clare takes in to fund necessary repairs to the roofing and gutters, and also Cousin Margaret ("You make her sound as if she's a disease!", "She might be."). Maureen is a marvellous source of comic relief, but not exclusively - she is also used to demonstrate xenophobia and the underlying causes of it very aptly, when another lodger of colour and advanced education joins the home.
 John said sadly, "I'm afraid Miss Cooper doesn't like me."
"No," said Clare, "it's that she doesn't know how to arrange you in her mind. You know how Librarians put books under History or Poetry or Gardening? She doesn't know where to put you, so she's in a fuss." Having said that, she was amazed. How do I know that? Maureen's nearly thirty. But it's true.
"You may be right," said John. "I've interfered with her social perspectives."
"I wish you wouldn't use words like that."
"Sorry. I've upset her cataloguing system."
"That's better, I suppose."
"I'm a book about electrical engineering, but written in blank verse."
"Actually," said Clare, "she feels you're probably cleverer than she is, and you're a man, so that puts you in one kind of order, but then you're black, and foreign, so that puts you in another, which gets her all muddled."
"You are a very odd girl - did you know that?"
"Yes."
"You don't need to look as if you'd done something wrong. Personally I think people are better if they are odd. Your aunts are odd, too. You're rather like them, in fact."
"Am I?" said Clare, delighted. "Honestly?"
"Of course. You have the same way of going to the middle of things. Not bothering about pretences."

The other big theme is, and I suppose this could be viewed as a mild and vague spoiler, that you can't go back in time and put things right or undo 'progress', which may not ultimately be bad in and of itself (penicillin and maternal and infant mortality rates come to mind), but has certainly been abrupt and damaging wherever the Empire spread, even when it was, truthfully, done with as many or more good intentions than exploitational ones. Many people nowadays choose to see such things as all bad, and for very good reasons I readily sympathise with and which give me the horrors. But it is vital, vital, vital to remember that people are not all bad. Aunt Susan says it so well in the last few pages:
...(Clare) "Why am I benevolent?"
"Finding people kind."
"Aren't they?"
"Individually, yes," said Aunt Susan. "Collectively, seldom." 
We need to remember this before we attack others and assign motivations to them without intimately knowing them individually. NOTHING IS BLACK OR WHITE. NOTHING. GROUP THINK IS BAD. It's been said before. Needs to be repeated, often.
..."What you need, you will find you already have to hand - of that I've not the slightest doubt. You are a listener. It is only those who have never listened who find themselves in trouble eventually."
"Why?"
"Because it is extremely dull," said Aunt Susan tartly, "to grow old with nothing inside your head but your own voice. Tedious, to put it mildly." emphasis mine

Another key theme is that of 'cultural disintegration', a term I had never heard before but which makes perfect, tragic sense. This book doesn't take the all-or-nothing extreme views we find fashionable to take today, mercifully, and instead leaves room for realistic hope and reflection and of cultures coming back to reclaim and revalue both what was taken from them and what they willingly gave up of their own volition in the process of assimilation with 'the modern world'. I had never thought of that. It's not blaming the victims - it is very important to differentiate this - but by placing some complicity, some responsibility on them, you also empower the people to assert themselves, to define themselves (rather than being defined by those external to them), to envisage their peoplehood and to have pride in it once more. To write for themselves a future of their own making, one that encompasses the cultural facets they had forgotten and missed, and one that includes their own agenda going forward. Every 'people' is owed the right to define themselves, and to create new customs and traditions, and to take up those which still have a place within their culture today, as decided by them.

I realise my review is going to come off as preachy, but this book really didn't. One of my constant irritation with new books coming out today, unless Margaret Atwood wrote them, is that most of them are really pounding an attractive drum beat loudly that we all want to rush and join along with. And that beat is one of self-righteousness, and reckless self-confidence. It's the sound of a pendulum swinging wildly to the left, which is where I am, I must say, but like a wrecking ball and too quickly. This is GROUP THINK, even well-intentioned group think, and it's always so vital to keep yourselves rooted in the LONG HISTORY of humanity that lead us here before you start knocking things down you'll (collectively) later wish you hadn't. TREAD SOFTLY. Make sure progress really is measured and weighed and not overly hasty - we need real, sensitive progress. A scalpel, not a sledgehammer. We'll probably still make mistakes (again, see human history again, and again, and again - there is nothing new under the sun, as it says in Ecclesiastes. "It's all been done," sang The Bare Naked Ladies, a band name built on the innocence of giggling youth that would never be permitted nowadays! Take care you don't become the Puritans people you despise!)

Again, the book isn't preachy - I am. But I really liked it for providing a sensitive, well-rounded view on several crucial social commentaries that arguably need to be reexamined, or at least remembered and noticed, in a world that currently values Candy Crush Saga and Netflix and can't get it's head out of its own bottom long enough to ask, "Wait, have we been here before?!" (Yes. You have. Read about it, or be doomed to repeat it, you puffed up, self-assured twits!). ;)

A few miscellaneous parts of the story I found dated and highly amusing:

- the art teacher smokes while she wanders between desks, offering feedback on works in progress, and gesturing with the cigarette while she does so. (This I cannot even envisage! Ha!)

- Clare goes to the doctor, and reluctantly confesses that she isn't sleeping very well at all, "sometimes hears things that aren't there", and "sees things that aren't there". The doctor checks her ears and eyes and advises her to do some light reading and relaxation. "I expect it's stress from exams," he dismisses. (Did schizophrenia not get diagnosed in the 1970s?! Was there no follow up questions? "Are you hearing voices? What do they say to you?", for example! "Is there a family history of mental health problems?", or "Here's the number for a psychologist in the area,.." Nope!).

- (the description of the London Zoo just further cemented my hatred of animals in captivity).