Rating: 5/5

What an engaging and also very much thought provoking folktale adaptation! I love both Julia Alvarez' text and Fabian Negrin's colourful and descriptive accompanying illustrations, although I do have to admit, that the depictions of the Ciguapas with their backwards facing feet took some getting used to for me, as at first glance, the Ciguapas definitely seemed (at least to and for my eyes) as though they were walking on strangely malformed legs, but nevertheless, the entire concept of the Ciguapas having backwards feet as a safety measure to avoid discovery is both enchanting and ingenious.

Now when I was reading The Secret Footprints for the very first time, I immediately thought that the legend of a group of hidden creatures, living in seclusion on Hispaniola (and very shy and fearful of humans) could be somewhat related to the displacement (and often resulting genocide) of the native populations of Hispaniola during the European conquest. And when I checked the author's note, it states that a sizable number of individuals actually do in fact and indeed believe this horrible and inhumane, evil time to be the origin of this tale, of The Secret Footprints. And truly, this does not only make perfect sense to me, I have actually always much tended to believe (at least as an adult) that many if not most folktales about hidden and secret peoples likely have at least part of their origin in historical and/or pre-historical conquests, incidents of one group or groups of people being overtaken and subjugated by other group(s).

But be that as it may, in my opinion, a further and interesting twist regarding the Secret Footprints is that Guapa's insatiable curiosity does not have negative consequences for either her or the Ciguapas as a group, as a whole. For Guapa not only makes friends with the little boy's family, but the queen of the Ciguapas is forced to admit that some humans can be kind (and it is amazing what sharing some delicious food can do for community spirit, communication and understanding). And when one then remembers what so often happens due to curiosity in many folk and fairy tales, one realises just how delightfully different, how much of a novelty the Secret Footprints truly and really is. Because let's face it, usually, curiosity ends in often horrible disasters for the curious (like the countless European folktales of individuals spying on fairies and being blinded for their audacity, or curiosity causing the previously helpful wee folk to disappear forever). And in many folktales, even if curiosity does not kill the proverbial cat, curiosity is nevertheless more often than not punished, and punished severely. Guapa's curiosity though, not only has no negative consequences, it actually seems to result in understanding between humans and ciguapas, it leads to increased harmony all around.
 
And finally, but importantly for me personally, with The Secret Footprints it was and remains wonderful and yes very special to see Guapa (a curious and inquisitive little girl Ciguapa) not being punished for this, and actually even receiving ample praise; laudably and fortunately, the pursuit of knowledge by a girl is actually seen as something inherently positive. Because once again, when one thinks of the many folktales where curiosity is punished, the curious are more often than not women or girls. And I have also read quite a large number of novels, especially 18th and 19th century social satires, where curiosity is often described not only as negative, but as a particularly and vile female vice. And if one then equates female curiosity to and with a striving for knowledge and education, basically it is unfortunately rather sadly true that very many traditional folktales do continuously and constantly negate and punish women who seek knowledge. And fact that this does not occur in The Secret Footprints, it makes this shining little gem of a picture book folktale adaptation not only a perennial personal favourite for me, but a folktale to be shared with and appreciated by women and girls in particular (although this is also truly a tale for everyone).