Rating: 4/5

The story of Regan, a hotel heiress who finds herself the target of a madman, and Alec, a detective tasked to be her bodyguard as his last assignment before leaving the department to join the FBI.

Neither of them is happy about their situation at first, but they know it's necessary. They like each other, so spending time together isn't as bad as they feared, and they get to know each other pretty well after some time passes and while the investigation is in progress.

Regan is a genuinely nice person, and Alec is sweet and charming, and their initial attraction becomes something more substantial, but they know there probably isn't a future for them since he'll be leaving soon.

Soon, the police apprehend who they believe is the culprit, and although Alec isn't convinced, his assignment is over so he says his goodbyes to Regan and starts preparations to leave. Regan, who has realized that she's in love with him, is heartbroken, but keeps her feelings to herself.

Life returns to normal for her and she is taking part in a marathon with her best friends, when the madman, who was not the man in custody, starts hunting her through the woods. Fortunately, Alec, who hadn't stopped investigating, realizes she's still in danger and runs to her rescue, well aware that he's in love with her and having already made up his mind to pursue her.

They both end up saving each other's lives, narrowly escaping death, and the madman and his motives are finally revealed - he and his psycho wife who got paralyzed in an accident that Regan's brother was also involved in, were obsessed with getting revenge on him, but turned their attention on her instead after finding their family picture in a newspaper.

All's well that ends well, and Alec and Regan start building a life together, happily ever after.

Engaging story with likable characters and an interesting mystery. I am looking forward to reading some of the side character's stories, especially Aiden's, but that won't be for a few books yet. Next comes another Buchanan brother's story in Slow Burn.

Previous book reviews:
✦ Killjoy (Buchanan-Renard #3)
✦ Mercy (Buchanan-Renard #2)
✦ Heartbreaker (Buchanan-Renard #1)