Rating: 5/5

I read this a long time ago but didn't do a review. This is the book that made me put Daphne Clair on auto buy. It was an excellent romance with believable characters and a totally unexpected twist at the end. It's very very emotional.

Before reading my review, I give fair warning that it has a lot of spoilers and in fairness to the story, it should be read without having everything revealed. The climax is true turning point and to know it in advance would diminish the power of the story. It really is that good.

Surprisingly, especially for its time, a lot of it is told in the Hero's POV. The couple meet when the H is invited to the 21st birthday party of the heroine. Her father is his boss and as an up and coming junior partner at the firm, he feels obligated to go. The father makes no bones about doing a bit of match-making but the couple resists at first. They form pre-conceived notions about each other, and try on a kind of power struggle. The H thinks the heroine is a baby femme fatale and wants to teach her a lesson, while the heroine wants to try and see if her wiles will work on an older man.

They continue this way for a bit but they are actually attracted to each other and progress to a more conventional dating relationship, however neither one is sure of the feelings of the other. They get married and have a surprisingly good marriage. The heroine is an efficient housewife and perfect hostess for her ambitious husband. And, While the readers know that the heroine has fallen in love with her husband, it's still a bit ambiguous how he feels about her. A few incidents show that she is still unsure of her husband despite his seeming devotion.

SPOILERS

The heroine gets pregnant and is just so ecstatically happy, she is blooming. All goes swimmingly until she has a miscarriage. She then falls into a very deep depression that no one can seem to get her out off, including her husband. Her father, fed up with her moping ways, tries to force her out of her mood and a flaming row ensures. It's revealed that the heroine had teenage pregnancy and her father forced her to give the child away. The hero is shocked but tries to understand and support his wife. This is the cathartic scene, so raw and heartbreaking. 

 Pierce suspects that Trista is depressed since she was forced to give away the child of her childhood sweetheart, her true love. He tries to find the ex-boyfriend hoping he can resolve some issues with the wife so she can move on and get over her depression. He convinces the ex to come to their home and speak to his wife. The H drives away to give them some privacy. When he returns the ex and his wife are both gone. It's the first time the reader sees how affected the H is by his wife's desertion. However he thinks he is doing the right thing for her and that this is what she really wants so he does not pursue her. Some months pass and Pierce just has to know how Trista is so he calls the ex, only to find out that she never left with him. The ex admits that they spoke a bit then he left. He also has no idea where she could have gone. 

Pierce then desperately tries to find her. When he does, he finally confesses his love for her and they have their HEA.