Rating: 3/5

RE Dark Dream - This is an odd one. There is not a big passionate romance here. In fact the 22 yr old h and widower 31 yr old H act more like an old married couple than new lovers. In part this can be explained by the fact that they have known each other for all their lives. The respective families are very close, good friends and the H is not by any means the usual HP Lady buffet sampler. In fact, he has only been with his first wife and the h, and DC does a good job of making that assertion believable by the way his character is presented. 

The h is a virgin, of course. She has been pretty monogamous as well, she has been saving herself for another young man, which she has been dating since high school. She has no real career ambitions, her ambition is to be a wife, but more importantly she wants kids - badly. DC doesn't present her as a desperate baby seeker though, she presents the h's desire for motherhood as more of an alternative career path. 

I liked the way the h's desire for the mum career was handled, the h wasn't bad at earning a living - she had risen steadily in her chosen profession, she just wasn't that interested in a career. She determined pretty early on that she wanted kids and a husband and her choices are based on that goal, but she isn't just looking for a meal ticket and a baby daddy, she really is a true domestic engineer and all her hobbies are in the homemaking/nurturing direction. 

DC gives enough feeling to the background of how the h was raised to really understand why the h would find a lot of satisfaction in the motherhood/homemaker role and she doesn't minimize or maximize the desire for it. This h simply has a strong maternal instinct and she wants to express it. It is isn't really a conscious avocation for the h, but it does explain partly why her marriage comes about in a really bizarre sort of way and why it leaves a lot of room for doubt about the depth of the H and h's love but NOT their commitment to the marriage - they both compromised on the love issue and settled for lukewarm with understanding and compatible sex, I think. 

The book opens with the h dozing under a tree in anticipation of her long term boyfriend returning from college and they can start their lives together. She wakes to a kiss, but it isn't the boyfriend. It is the H kissing her, which leads to some embarrassment on the h's part, cause she was getting into it. They chat for a bit and the h avows her love for the boyfriend to put the H off kissing her some more. 

They return to the h's family home to find the boyfriend there - with his new fiancee. The h is gobsmacked and is about to make a huge scene when the H jumps in with the announcement that he and the h have just firmed up their engagement. The h does what all good HP h's do when confronted with a situation they can't run away from, she faints. 

Upon recovery, she is too embarrassed to deny the H's assertion and so in between sheer outrage that her long time love has dumped her pretty harshly, she is also overwhelmed with family congratulations and her father is tactfully trying not to mention the H's first wife and sticking his foot in it. The h agrees to let the engagement stand for a bit, but the H did wildly love his first wife and so the h assumes that he wants a reliable source of sex and a mum for his son who is currently being cared for by the H's mum during the week and the H on weekends. 

To be fair the H does tell the h he loves her, but it is the most banal declaration of love in all of HPlandia and the h is too busy nursing her heartbreak to really think all that much about it. The h and H do have a bit of courtship and the h keeps having to talk herself out of some serious (very valid IMO) doubts about marrying the H. The h first thinks that marrying the H would be a bad idea because there isn't any passionate love, but she was in love and it did not work out so she thinks a practical marriage might be better. 

(At this point my inner seekrit romantic was screaming, "Don't commit to this, run as fast as you can and find some wild passion!" - but no one was listening, most especially the h.)

 Then the h realizes that sexual heat can't keep a marriage going for the long haul, and while she does feel a big physical pull for the H, she also wonders if she would feel that with other men, now that she can feel free to experiment - if she weren't engaged. But between her natural compassion for the H's sadness over the loss of his first wife, his motherless son, plus her long term friendship with the H and his really good tactics of turning her arguments around to make her feel that she is wrong to have doubts, she is subtly manipulated into following through with the marriage.

They marry, the h realizes she really did not really love the boyfriend, (plus his family finally convinces her that he never felt the same way as she did and a girl has her pride,) and the sex is great. The honeymoon is perfect, tho the sex is all closed door and there is also the only mention of using the bathroom and morning breath in all of HPLandia. 

I bought the good sex part, mostly cause the h was very passionate in nature and the H had been without for YEARS. The h and H fall into an effortless routine of domesticity and child rearing. The h quits her job and is enjoying the nesting process and the H seems to be fairly happy. 

The one big bone of contention is that the h wants a baby and the H puts her off. He says it is because he wants time to be with her, but as the story progresses, it becomes clear that the H probably intends to never have kids with her. 

He is adamant that she take birth control and it is really clear that pregnancy is NOT on his agenda. The h tries to argue her side of wanting a bigger family, but the H turns it around on her by claiming she is using him as a respectable stud service. ( I though that was bit ironic, considering he was using her as a sexual outlet and homemaker.) 

Then the inevitable happens, the little son runs away after an argument with the h, he is missing and everyone is searching for him. Since he is four, this is a pretty big deal. When he finally is found, the h forgets her pill in all the excitement and the stress relief coitus gets her up the duff. 

She tells the H and he explodes. He is NOT a happy camper. He distances himself from her and when they try for the physical connection, he finds he is impotent. The h feels completely demoralized and the thought occurs to her that he doesn't really want kids with her, he just wanted a replacement wife and mum for his son, but she ultimately got what she really wanted, so she is prepared to make the best of it. 

The H starts having nightmares and the h assumes it is about his first wife, who died in childbirth from an aneurysm. The h feels that she has been too free in confessing her love for the H, so she tries to keep it contained and give him extra attention as her ladies' magazine say the biggest danger is that a hubby will feel neglected during the pregnancy. The H finally confesses he isn't dreaming of his first wife, he is dreaming of losing her. 

The h takes the situation in hand and makes the H acknowledge that his subconscious fears of another death after birth is driving his inability to raise the flag - so to speak. As soon as the conscious connection between his fear of death and the limp noodleness is made, the H has a miraculous recovery and the tower of power is pumping out full wattage as the H avers that he loves the h just as much as he loved his first wife. The ending is a christening party scene for the new daughter of the H and h, with promises of a power ride later and HEA.

This is a good story and a lot of deeper issues are present that you don't see in HPLandia too often. I did not buy that the H and h were really in wild, passionate love and I did feel the h was a second choice - but the h obviously wanted what she had and so I respected her secondary status as a wife and lover because she really wanted the mum badge more. 

 This story is an interesting statement by DC about what a woman's freedom to choose really means and for the time, this book provoked a lot of thoughts about what the feminism movement is really about. 

I find it really ironic that Western society in most places took 30 years to acknowledge that the women's movement means women get to choose whatever options suit them, be it a career or domestic engineer with mumness, and DC was pretty purposely interpreting that idear in a time when the women's movement was usually about the freedom to have a career, delay marriage and find a material place in the world. 

On the other hand, when I visit HPLandia I want wild passion and grand dramatic gestures of undying intense love, not an in-depth study of Western culture mores. I did not get any wild romance here, and that makes this book a great cultural study and a good story of the compromises a woman makes to achieve her goals, but really poor in the actual romance department-- so I have some lingering feelings of dissatisfaction every time I read this book.