Rating: 5/5

Each story ends in tragedy, excepting the last one which is hilarious in comparison. They are independent from one another with only a street address in common.

Frimme's story has a tragic ending - his adopted daughter Rachele dies. He remembers his youth and his good deeds that got him to write a contract with God on a small stone. He continued to live his life in wholesome way, thinking himself and Rochelle protected by the contract. God tests his faith when Rachelle dies and Frimme fails miserably.

Rochelle dies unexpectedly from a sickness. Frimme renounces God and decides to no longer live a pious life. He uses the synagogue's bonds to buy the tenement where he spent his earlier years. He treats the tenents harshly and his fortune grows steadily until he owns a tenement empire. He tries to return to God, but his soul is already corrupted and he dies of a heart attack.

Marta Maria was a promising soprano who chose to leave singing behind after getting married. Years of abuse from her sickly husband meant that she would never return to the concert hall. That is, until she brings a street singer under her wing. She plans to take him to the top. Unfortunately, he is a drunkard and violent with his wife and baby. He forgets where Marta lives, so their plans are dashed.

Scuggs is the super at 55 Dropsie Avenue. One of the tenents demands that he fix the heating unit for her 10-year-old niece's bath. The girl will bring about his demise and nobody will defend him because of his awful attitude to all the tenents. He falls prey to her Lolita-like charms. When she poisons his dog and steals his money box, he tries to assault her. All the tenents side with the girl. When the police arrives, Scuggs kills himself.

The last story has so many Hebrew words that I can't keep up. It's also the funniest so far with more adultery that can fit on one page. Several families are going to be affected this summer, some for the better, others for the worse. It's a good ending for this comic.

The vacationers are a new breed of tenents that spend summer away from home, either in the Cookalein, a hotel-like establishment that doesn't provide any food, or more well-off resorts to hook up with rich people.

Goldie and Bennie want to find rich partners. They hide their poor status a bit too well and find each other instead. When it's revealed that they're both poor, it ends in a bit of rape. Luck smiles on them a they each find rich partners after this, though.

Other couples use this opportunity to cheat on their partners or catch their cheating significant others. Disfunctional families galore among these people, but damn funny.