Rating: 5/5

There's a review down there somewhere, I promise.

Comic book project explanation:

I've decided to reread all my Superman and Batman comics. Time will tell if I actually pull this off, and I expect it will take a year or two. When I get to one where a trade paperback came out for the story, I'll post a review on here and also catch everyone up on what happened between the books. I feel it's a service the Goodreads community desperately needs, and I shall not shirk my duty!

I collected for a few months in sixth grade in late 1989 through early 1990 when Santa Claus gave me some, but allowance money being tight, and a love for the video game arcade setting in, I didn't stick with it. But I got back into it around 1994, got several back issues, and the long and short of it is that I have everything from somewhere in 1992 through sometime in 2000 when Lex Luthor was running for president. (I understand he wins, but I think I quit collecting before those issues came out, and I don't think I even read those since I was away at college, and was just getting them because I always had. Sad day.) I also have a few other comic books from the 80's and early 90's that I picked up here and there (this particular miniseries being part of that), and I'll be happy to educate you on those as well.

Before The Man of Steel miniseries:

DC rebooted everything around 1986 which is when this story came out and started everything fresh in the "Modern Age" of comics, but more on that later. I have about a dozen Superman titles from the "Bronze Age" that I picked up at some comic book convention. They're mostly stand alone stories that featured villains I like such as Mongul. I also wanted a few old Lex Luthor stories, and I must say I prefer the modern age Lex to the one before that. Bronze Age Luthor was more of a mad scientist with a ridiculous green and purple war suit which I've never been a fan of.

  

This is too gay even for me.

It was indestructible (except for the time Superman punched a hole straight through it, but Lex was fucking with Supe's brain via some psychic rod that planted false memories in his head). Lex also lived on an island in the Atlantic nobody could find which was really a giant meteor from planet Lexor that Luthor lived on from time to time but accidentally blew up in a battle with Superman, killing every inhabitant including his wife and son. He blames Superman for this, but it was really a joint effort and more Lex's fault if you ask me. This causes him to hate Superman even more, but the best is the story which explains why Lex hates Superman at all.

  

Yep, you guessed it. Lex and Superboy were BFF's in Smallville, and Lex was even working on something that would make Supes immune to the effects of Kryptonite when something went drastically wrong, and Superman, trying to put it out, accidentally blew a bunch of chemicals on Lex's head which caused him to lose all his hair. Hell hath no fury like a Luthor scalped.

The reboot did away with all that nonsense as well as a lot of Superman's powers. He used to be able to operate in space (in the reboot he still requires oxygen so can only chill in space for as long as he can hold his breath), and he could even fly to the center of the universe to take care of matters. Not the galaxy, the universe. It didn't take him long to get there either. His Supervision could see things in other galaxies from Earth, and he also had some telepathic thing going on, though I think it might've been Supergirl who facilitated those. The reboot also rewrote his history and relationships with several characters, but first...

...a few words from our sponsors:

As silly as some of the Bronze Age stories got, I found some of the advertisements even more amusing. Some of it's due to historical reasons. Remember when OJ Simpson was so adored that kids wanted his autograph?

  

Or when Bill Cosby saying "if you can't send you" didn't have a sinister connotation?

  

American Red Cross, indeed. This was a plea to harems across America; the "send money" bit was just a distraction, for he sure didn't need it.

And I'm not sure why Batman (and several other superheroes) ever bothered to learn how to fight when they could neutralize any threat with some Hostess Twinkies.

  

And just what the fuck is up with this retarded kid?

  

And while I support the following ad wholeheartedly, I bet the likes of it haven't been seen in a comic book in nearly 40 years.

  

(We now pause to give Pierce time to fight off the temptation to air his gun control debate views which nobody here is interested in reading...)

OK, I'm back, and I think it's time for the...

REVIEW:

This is the beginning of it all, my favorite DC Comics era. I'm sure it's my favorite because it's what I grew up with, but it's quite possible this era actually is the best. Stuff before the Modern Age was sillier, and while I enjoyed reading some of those, I'm glad I'm caught up to this part now. What little I've seen of the latest reboots which happened in 2011 and then again just a year or two ago has not impressed me. Perhaps I'm too old for the new stuff. I could also be too conservative; a lot of stuff in comics now lean a lot further left than they used to. But the 90's... great stuff.

This story covers a 10 year span from the time Superman is 18 until he's 28 or so, excluding the prologue which shows him leaving Krypton as a baby. It undorkifies Clark which is cool. I loved dorky Clark in the movies, and some of his bumbling antics in the comics are funny, but normal Clark is better. This also sets up his relationship with Lois Lane. Turns out he's smitten with her from the start, though it'll be a few years before they start dating and a few more before they marry... but I'm getting ahead of myself. They just meet and start working together in this story.

I really enjoyed the third segment where Superman goes to Gotham to nab Batman and turn him in to the police. Batman totally pwns Supes, but not in a fist fight which would've been stupid. Let's just say Superman learns that his way isn't the only way to do things, and that his way might not work as well in Gotham where a more subtle yet grittier approach is needed.

Lex Luthor is still a genius, but not the maniacal mad scientist of yesteryear, and he and Superman weren't childhood friends. Here he's a business man who manages to skirt the law and has almost everybody fooled into thinking he's on the up and up with everything. Superman learns otherwise pretty quickly and keeps his eye on Luthor, but he can never prove anything when bad things happen even though he knows Luthor is behind it. This Luthor is so much more fun to hate than that silly purple and green thing.

As for supervillains, the only one we get to see is Bizarro. At least the first one. There will be another one later if I recall. But I'm cool with there being no big, superpower baddies in this miniseries, and it being set up the way it was. It gives us everything we need to proceed into the real action starting in the Superman titles of which there were only three at that point, one of them being brand new:

  

But I'm getting ahead of myself again. I don't even remember what happens in it. 

If you're a fan of Superman in the modern age comics, then this story is perfect for starting off.

Next checkpoint: Superman #39 (linked below)

Other Superman reviews:

Superman #39
Krisis of the Krimson Kryptonite
Panic in the Sky
The Death of Superman
World without a Superman
The Return of Superman
Bizarro's World
The Fall of Metropolis
Superman/Doomsday: Hunter/Prey
Superman: Zero Hour
The Death of Clark Kent
The Trial of Superman
The Bottle City
Superman: The Wedding and Beyond
Superman: Transformed!
Action Comics #736 (pending)
Superman Red/Superman Blue (pending)