Rating: 4/5

While Robbins is quite prolific to say the least, he only has a handful of horror titles to his credit, but boy are they fun! Prank Night is set in a small, Oregon town (Cemetery Grove) and most of the action takes place in the weeks leading up to Halloween. Our main protagonist, Ben, starts off the novel returning to his home town after about a decade to visit his mother. As a child, Ben's alcoholic mother abused him and their relationship has been, lets say, strained since. Ben now works as a reporter in Portland, but writes horror novels on the side, with two published so far. 

Robbins gives us a tour of the townies here as Robbins renews some old acquaintances, most importantly, his old buddy who is now the Police Chief, and his old flame Nadine, who quickly tells Ben that she is now divorced. Meanwhile, there is something stalking the town and people are dying. At first, the cops blame it on a bear, but the killings are awful strange, with a hole seemingly drilled into the foreheads of the victims and their 'life force' sucked out. Ben, seeing a killer story emerging, starts digging around and finds out that over 70 years ago, something similar haunted the town, then deemed the 'brain eater', and it killed several people around Halloween in just the same way...

A fun creature feature to be sure, although the 'monster' could have been developed more. Impervious to bullets, it seems the only weakness it possesses is water, but I will say no more on this to avoid spoilers.  At first, the monster seems to be an alien, but later, we learn it seems to be an extradimensional being that has some connection to the leading family of the town; it arises from its cocoon occasionally to feed and then slumbers for decades. While OTT to be sure, Robbins paces the story well and fleshes out some good townie characters that give the story some life. None of the novels by Robbins I have read would win any writing awards, but if you like horror pulp, you should really enjoy his work. 4 monsters!!