Rating: 1/5

This misstep from the author of "Some Will Not Die" is hard for me to explain. Either that book's excellence was a fluke, or this book's inadequacy was. I have no evidence either way at this writing about the balance of Budrys's body of work, but I can speak for the problems with this book.

Laurent Michaelmas is a secret master of the universe. Posing as a lowlyhighfalutin reporter, he uses Domino, an AI he developed from a voice mail system (beware Google Voice!), to influence world events. Domino and Michaelmas converse in mutters inaudible to the rest of the world, and since Domino has hooks into most of the world's important computer systems, Michaelmas's every utterance can nudge the world in whatever direction he likes.

When an astronaut who suffers an accident that should have been fatal (according to Michaelmas and Domino) is inconveniently alive instead, our intrepid hero smells a zombie rat and decides to find out what is behind this sad state of affairs. Disregarding the interests of the astronaut's wife, who Michaelmas decides ought rightly to have been his widow, he discovers a secret alien conspiracy which is trying to decide if humans are intelligent.

Here's how the aliens go about determining this in a radio communication with Michaelmas:

"What is A?" they ask. "Pi r squared," replies Michaelmas.

Where do I start? "A" doesn't have to mean the area of a circle, or any area. Also, if you are communicating via radio, you understand the sinusoid, and therefore the circle. Also, bullshit!

Later in the questioning, they ask Michaelmas if he would eat one of his own limbs if he were starving. I'd like to see that question on OKCupid, because it belongs on a dating site about as much as it makes sense in even the most ghetto of Turing tests. Seriously, what the hell?

Alas, this exchange is of a piece with the idiocy of the whole book. Nothing makes sense. Nothing connects to anything.

The only way I could make a coherent whole of this narrative was to decide that Michaelmas was a delusional lunatic. Domino doesn't exist; Michaelmas doesn't control anything. The protagonist who is muttering to himself like a nut is in fact a nut, and the only real consequence in the whole book is that the people he kills remain dead.

This story, while self-consistent and fully explanatory of the otherwise bizarre events in the novel, is inherently unsatisfying, and I strongly doubt it's what the author intended.

I would give this one a pass.