Rating: 3/5

‘The Sight’ is a story of magic and ancient prophecies, of men and beasts, of evil and those resisting it, of spirits and beliefs. But above all of that, it’s a story of one small tight-knit wolf pack. Larka and her brother Fell are born to Palla and Huttser, the alpha pair of a small pack of wolves, but from the very beginning, their lives are in danger. Vicious she-wolf Morgra that possesses the mysterious Sight had united the packs of Balkar and strives for a dominion above all – and she has her own plans for the two wolf pups. However, Larka also holds the power of the Sight – and she and Fell have a destiny of their own. 

I have a lot of mixed emotions about this book. It’s a multi-layered story that touches on many topics and explores the characters to their very limits, and while I adored some aspects of it, some of them left me annoyed or frustrated. To start with the upsides, the family dynamics in the story were absolutely marvelous. Larka is the main hero of ‘The Sight’, but her journey would’ve been impossible without her family, and even though there is a smidgen of romance in the story, it takes a backseat next to the family bonds. In the center of it there is a trio of young wolves – Larka, her brother Fell, and their adopted brother Kar. Like that of all siblings, their relationship is not always an easy one, as Fell is often jealous of the attention Larka gets because of her Sight, which prompts him to become reckless and hot-headed, and Kar often feels overshadowed by his strong-willed friends. But ever since they were pups, they made a promise to take care of each other, and even though life tore them apart, they still manage to find a way back to each other, through hardships both physical and mental. 
 
In fact, it’s Kar who quickly became my favourite, even though he doesn’t have as much page time as Larka or Fell. Compared to the siblings, Kar is physically the weakest - not as strong as Fell or as heroic as Larka, and he is submissive by nature, but he is also sensible and smart and loyal, and his ability to keep his head makes him more likeable to me than Fell's temper and snappiness and Larka's mood swings and tendency to blame herself. And even though Kar isn’t the bravest wolf around, he stands fast with his friends when it matters the most, saving Larka's life at least three times throughout the story. There is only a hint of romance between him and Larka, but what we get is the sweetest, because the bond between them born from puphood friendship is so strong. 

However, it’s Palla and Huttser who completely won me over as characters and as a couple. It’s unusual to see the hero’s parents given this much attention in the story, yet they not only play an important role in Larka’s life and take part in the ultimate battle against Morgra, but also develop their own plotline, and they really grew on me throughout the book. Palla and Huttser are not a perfect couple, and they fight bitterly and suffer a nasty break-up after losing their whole pack and one of their children, but eventually, their bonds and loyalty to each other turn out to be so strong that they still defend each other no matter what. To me, a truly awe-inspiring moment came when Slavka’s rebels forced Palla and Huttser to fight each other, claiming that the loser will be killed quickly, but the winner would be tortured – and both Palla and Huttser fought with ferocity, driven by love and desire to spare their mate the suffering of long death. 

Unfortunately, I can’t say that the rest of Palla and Huttser’s pack were developed with the same care – mostly because they don’t survive for long. We had Khaz and Kipcha as a strong beta couple, old nursemaid Brassa harbouring her own secrets, and cowardly omega Bran who turned out to be braver than everyone thought him to be. All of them had potential, but they ultimately were killed off before they could play any major role in the story. I understand the necessity of their fate being dictated by the plot, but that makes me feel as if these characters were wasted.

The plot of the story is truly captivating, though I have certain issues with the pacing. Even though it escalates quickly after the beginning, and there are plenty of deaths so no character is truly safe, there are also long and drawn-out chapters devoted to building up Larka’s relationships or her training with the Sight that honestly felt like a bore. However, once the action starts in the earnest and pace picks up, the story absorbs you completely. The mystical elements of it were certainly the best part, and I find that the prophecies and legends interwoven into the plot lend it a delightfully eerie atmosphere. Spiritual world blends with the world of living through the powers of the Sight, and seeing them manifest is always awe-inspiring. With Larka exploring her abilities, we learn more and more about the Sight as she travels on the wings of birds and sees future and past in the water – but when Morgra uses the Sight and calls on the Searchers, we actually witness for the first time what I thought would be impossible even with the power of the Sight, calling spectres of the dead to fight the living. The massacre at Kosov, while ruthless, was a turning point in the story, and the fact that Larka had to go into the lands of dead to call them off was truly thrilling. And yet even though supernatural is an integral part of the wolves’ world, sometimes it’s questioned and even challenged, and I appreciate that David Clement-Davies allows a variety of interpretations when it comes to the mystic elements. For example, I still don’t have a clear answer as to what exactly happened with Fell when he was supposedly possessed by Wolfbane. Both Larka and Morgra say that Wolfbane is just a name in a story, so it's most likely that Fell was brainwashed by Morgra, fed on her lies and hate and pain, and all of that combined with trauma till he couldn't remember anything of his old life... But then, Tsarr did see a ghostly grey wolf near Fell - so does it actually mean that Fell was truly possessed?

For me the story really shined not only due to the plot, but also because of the villains Larka and her family had to face. Morgra was especially fascinating to me as a character. She’s not entirely unsympathetic, as she was denied her place in the pack and cast out for something that was only partly her fault, but eventually, it was Morgra’s choice to use her Sight for her own gain and to become feared once she realized that she’s not going to be loved. Morgra is using superstition and fear of myths to manipulate the Balkar and scare them into obedience, but it’s unclear whether she believes in the legends herself or not. She dismisses the myth of Wolfbane, yet continues to use his name when it benefits her, and I rather like this development. The same prophecy that dictates Larka’s fate also determines Morgra’s destiny, but she twists its words and finds a way around it. Sometimes Morgra may seem to be over-the-top cliche villain who is destined to be evil, but her PoV shows her to be a truly manipulative and crafty mastermind, and that's why I love reading her chapters.

But what I find especially interesting is that even those who oppose Morgra are not automatically portrayed as heroic and righteous. Slavka is a strong-willed she-wolf leading the rebellion against Morgra who managed to unite the free wolves into the Greater Pack. Her goal to fight Morgra and create a better future for the others is just, but in doing so she employs methods that are beyond harsh. Slavka executes strict ‘if you’re not with us, you are against us’ policy as she forces wolves to join the Greater Pack against their will, forbids religion and all spiritual practices and executes any who dares oppose her with cruelty that can make Morgra jealous – just ask Palla and Huttser. I’m not sure if Slavka wished it or not, but she cultivated such a strong cult of the leader in her pack that she established order that’s almost as bad as Morgra’s. At least Slavka was able to realize her wrongs in the end and amend them, and that’s the difference between her and Morgra.

Tsarr and Skart are also among those who fight against Morgra, though the means they chose to do so are vastly different from Slavka’s: while Slavka relies on planning and strength in numbers, denying anything supernatural, Tsarr also possesses the Sight, and so he and his companion Skart take it upon themselves to educate Larka about her gift and direct her on the path destined for her. The characters of Tsarr and Skart left me conflicted, because even though they were never portrayed in negative light like Slavka, I didn’t exactly trust them. It’s true that they didn’t have any interior motives regarding Larka, but they were so focused on fulfilling the prophecy that they ignored anything that they viewed as negligible. At one point, it’s revealed that Skart had been watching after Larka’s pack for a long time, but never showed himself or interfered, justifying it by the fact that Larka wasn’t ready to be taught yet. However, just a little help and a warning could have saved Bran and prevented Kar and Fell from being separated from their family, sparing the whole pack a lot of pain and suffering. And the fact that Skart chose not to act when the calamities befalling Larka’s family weren’t affecting the prophecy makes it very difficult for me to actually like him or Tsarr.

Sadly, wolf mythology in ‘The Sight’ turned out to be a real disappointment for me. David Clement-Davies had obviously worked hard on the world-building, coming up with the terminology the wolves use and the laws and customs by which the packs operate, and I have no complaints about it. However, I have complaints about the way it was delivered to the readers – namely, info dumps. I actually love getting information about the world’s history and lore, so normally I don't mind info dumps and don't get it when people complain about them; however, in ‘The Sight’ they were done really clumsily, either as random facts put into the middle of unrelated scenes or as the characters asking each other things they are supposed to know already. And the mythology itself didn’t impress me, either, as it drew heavily on Bible and Christian scripture. Usually, I don’t mind some allegories to existing religions, as similar themes can be found in many different mythologies and folklores all over the globe. However, in ‘The Sight’ we get legends and fables that copy the Bible to a detail, except being modified to fit into the wolves’ world, including the fall of Lucifer, the curse of Cain and Jesus's sacrifice. I like books that make me think, but in this case I felt that David Clement-Davies either dived too deep into philosophy that had nothing to do with the story or that he didn’t have enough imagination to create his own lore.

There were other issues that stopped me from fully enjoying the story, though they were not deal-breakers. For example, I was annoyed that the ravens were portrayed negatively, being associated with evil Wolfbane and well as serving as Morgra’s spies – and while it’s interesting to see the trend of wolf packs being allies with ravens broken in this manner, I’m still slightly peeved that 'scavengers' are portrayed as wicked again. But what made me more than a little angry is the way ‘The Sight’ painted humans as inheritably evil. At first, I assumed that the very perspective of wolves who view all humans as cruel and evil was subjective, and that the conflict between them lies in the simple fact that while wolves think it their right to take down whatever prey they can, humans also have valid reasons to hunt down predators who steal from their herds… except that later in Larka’s vision it’s the whole human civilization and the constant advance of its cities on nature that are revealed to be the ultimate threat that’s going to destroy the wild world. Maybe the message on environmental problems is an important one, but I don’t enjoy being beaten over the head with it. In this context, Larka ‘adopting’ the human child, Bran, was a concept that had a lot of potential, but eventually, Bran simply tagged along with the wolves, playing a role in fulfilling the prophecy but not changing the way wolves actually see humans. It also irked me how the narration kept constantly switching between referring to the human child as 'it' and 'him', sometimes even in the span of two paragraphs. At first I sought a hidden meaning to this, thinking that maybe such a technique is used to reflect the views of different characters, like if Morgra and Slavka referred to Bran as 'it' while Larka used 'him', but the narration did it completely randomly!

Overall, while ‘The Sight’ had a cast of three-dimensional characters and expertly handled some difficult moral themes, too many things dampened my enjoyment of the story, resulting in it receiving only 3 stars – which is quite a low rating by my standards.