Rating: 4/5

As a long time reader of the New Yorker, it’s always a treat to read collections of articles and essays by members of their writing staff. And Calvin Trillin is one of my favorites from that staff. Trillin is well known for writing about food, but I prefer the articles that showcase his reporting skills. “Killings,” which was originally published in 1984, has been reissued and expanded and is a valuable assemblage of his reporting about individual murders. He takes a unique vantage point in these narratives - there is no search for the killer and there is minimal description of violence. Instead, Trillin is interested in writing about America. Focusing on a killing in a community allows him to do precisely that - write about a specific locale and the people who inhabit it. As he says in the book’s introduction, “These stories are meant to be more about how Americans live than about how some of them die … Their appeal was that they were about specific humans, and I chose to tell them, of course , because they sounded interesting.” The articles collected here range across America and examine a wide variety of motives for murder and how the social mores of a community can affect what they see as justice.

John McPhee (another favorite New Yorker writer) describes in his memorable article “Structure” how difficult and perplexing it can be to decide at what point to begin an article. But like McPhee, Trillin knows exactly where to begin and end each story and doesn’t adhere to a strictly linear manner of describing the events. Telling the story in any other sequence than he does would rob it of some of it’s power and poignancy.

While there is enough detail in each story to satisfy true crime devotees, what really makes this collection stand out is Trillin’s reporting and writing style, the insight and empathy he brings to each story, and the remarkable manner in which brings individual people and places to life. 

Thank you to Random House and NetGalley for an advance copy of this book.