Rating: 4/5

There is something different about The Last Light of the Sun compared to Kay’s other historical fantasy books that is hard to properly describe. It leaves the impression of having read a dark fairytale: the more dreamlike, ethereal aspects of the story being the most memorable. At least, that is how I seem to think about or remember it a while after completion.

The setting is inspired by the British Isles during the Viking raids, under the reign of Alfred the Great — his equivalent in this story being the king Aeldred. One of my favourite threads was about the rebuilding of a nation: how it grew from just a small outpost with a handful of fleeing men into a feared, stable, and educated state under Aeldred’s guidance and rule. The Erling culture is based on the Viking people and the other major groups include the Anglycn and the Cyngael, the Anglo-Saxon and Welsh equivalents. 

The setting isn’t as vibrantly alive and involved in the story as some of Kay’s other historical-based works, but it has some of the best incorporations of fantastical, otherworldly, and supernatural elements I’ve read. This includes the large haunted forests where ancient, bestial gods reside, and the fae folk, with hidden pools of moonlight associated with their presence. There is a fleeting, elusive quality to them, where the characters remain unsure whether their experiences with these mythic elements were actually real, something conveyed wonderfully in the tone of the writing. 

The novel follows a varied cast of characters in different locations as they seek to fulfil what they imagine to be their destinies. The central perspective characters include Alun ap Owyn, a Cyngael prince who seeks revenge on the Erling, Bern Thorkellson, the son of an infamous raider who joins an elite group of Erling mercenaries, and some of Aeldred’s children, among others. While each of their journeys was compelling on the whole, I find the characters in this book less memorable than in some of Kay’s other works. They are distinct, have recognizable personalities, and are well fleshed-out, but aren’t close to being as outstanding as some others, probably due to me not being as emotionally invested in them as I have been with the ones featured in other works set in this same world. After reading the book, I find it relatively harder to recall the minor characters, although how the overall story plays out — the slow building of each character’s arc and how they intertwine near the end was really well-done.

A major theme explored throughout the book is the rise of so-called civilization from previous lives of wilderness and constant danger, exemplified by Aledred’s establishment of his nation and increasing education and knowledge and stability by introducing effective governance and standardization. There is even a reference to the manuscripts of a prominent character in the Sarantine Mosaic being read by King Aeldred. Also explored is the resulting rise of the Jaddite religion, the worship of the Sun God Jad — this world’s analogue of Christianity. There is a particular homogeneity that results from this shift, and much of the novel, such as with the wilder Erling culture and their worship of the Norse-equivalent gods as well as the Cyngael people and their fae folk, is steeped in the sorrow of the older, mythic aspects of their societies being slowly phased out by the encroachment of supposed civilization and their emphasis on the Jaddite religion. The Cyngael Jaddite cleric Ceinon functions as an excellent representation of this widespread movement. The inevitability of these changes marks the story with a darker, mournful atmosphere to complement these themes. There are others too, such as the complicated lessons of legacy and fatherhood, in Bern Thorkellson’s character journey. 

I really enjoyed this novel, and it only rises in my estimation as I think more on it after reading. It has a small but noticeably different tonal shift compared to the other books set in the same world, and the incorporation of the divine and supernatural elements were excellent. The conclusions to all the character arcs and the plot were fitting and emotionally engaging, although they might seem a little too perfectly wrapped up by the end, adding the fairytale feel to the novel. However, due to my decreased emotional investment in these character stories and the relative reduction in overall memorability, I would rank this a tad below some of Kay’s other historical fantasy books, but this is still a fantastically woven and compelling tale that is definitely worth reading.