Rating: 3/5

A well-written survey of the “Hundred Years War” between England and France, primarily through the eyes of the nobility of the respective dominions, specifically focusing on the schism between the respective primary royal houses of each, the Valois and the Plantagenets. If the general reader is familiar at all about this conflict, it is likely through Shakesphere’s “Henry V”, the play or the films (or the film representation of the play by Kenneth Brannaugh). This book recounts the broader history that informs Henry’s invasion of France, and his famed victory at Agincourt, as well as extend the history to after Henry's victory there, and his untimely death in a later campaign in France, and to those that followed him, including the short campaigns of Joan of Arc, and the conclusion of the conflict. 

	The war itself is a mess, and less of a “war” as we’ve come to know it, but more of a series of small English invasions on France, where they often accomplish little but terrorize/brutalize the peasantry of those lands. France itself seems to have been much more developed than England, not only in wealth, but in infrastructure, though not all (or much) of it was well-defended, which provided an ample list of targets for the English armies to sack and hold ransom. Further, though we say “France” and “England” these conflicts are closer to mafia-like warfare, where the sovereign of England, raises an army of a few thousand (at most) men and commits civil crimes to extract concessions, or to uphold familial territories. Very little of “national interests” can be discerned by the actions of the various English kings. 

In fact, as those who have read/watched Henry V know, much of these conflicts amount to the arcanum of inheritance, specifically whether this or that inheritor abides by the Salic law of the older Frankish/Germanic dominions. The war ultimately seems to end when the amount of resources spent by the Plantagenet house has become so great that it begins to threaten the sovereigns own grip on his domestic lands, incurring the risk of a parliament or other “lesser” stakeholders gaining a foothold on the decision making of the realm (this would actually occur a few hundred years later, although with the successor house to the Plantegnants, the Tudors. 

Great book, quick intro text, that’ll get you started on the subject. Easy to read and remember broad strokes (and some detail) based on the organization of the text, with each chapter focusing more-or-less on the reign of a specific sovereign, capstonned in the beginning by an introductory chapter and a concluding chapter on the end of the conflict. Recommended.