Rating: 4/5

I read this book right after I read Lord of the Flies. I didn't intend them as thematic bookends but they did drive home the unpleasant truth of how shitty people can be to each other with little provocation in the right conditions. Rae Yang is unsparingly honest in her memoir of growing up in China in the 50's and 60's. She was a child of High Ranking Cadres and later became a Red Guard who participated in or witnessed attacks on the elderly, the killing of pets, the vandalization of homes and gardens and the beating death of a man who was quite possibly mentally ill. She later became an Educated Youth who volunteered to work at a farm in the Great Northern Wilderness, and spent five years there toiling away like so many others for a Party that she increasingly realized had forgotten about her. 

If I have a complaint, it's that Yang uses italics to differentiate what she was feeling or experiencing at the time from her present self. I didn't have a problem with that, but I did have trouble occasionally separating things that actually happened from things that she imagined. That is a minor complaint though, as I loved her narrative architecture. She opens the book with a story about a pig farm she is stationed at in the country as an Educated Youth, and casually mentions a coat her Mother sent her. Then she returns to the story of her family and childhood and all that led up to her being at that farm, and what her mother went through to get that coat for her. At this point, you feel like you have in a small part lived the story, and now know her Mother so the coat mentioned briefly in the beginning is now a very meaningful object. Brilliant writing. 

...but not an easy read. The stories in it are heart-wrenching, including the story of Yang's grandmother Nainai, the beautiful woman on the cover. There were times when I kept reading this book because I didn't want to quit, but I wanted it to be over, yet I also had to find out what happened next (if any of that makes sense.) But it's a completely worthwhile read and an invaluable document of that period in Chinese history that is largely glossed over there and barely known here. I can see why Yang felt compelled to write it.