Rating: 1/5

Stop right now! Before you read this book, I must warn you! The back of the book is a LIE! All of that "they must rely on their wits, the strength that comes from family ties, and the bounty of nature to survive" is all a crock of baloney. Complete fabrication. They're stranded with enough supplies to start a small colony. Guns &amp; timber from the shipwreck I could understand, but butter, livestock, tools, *blacksmith* tools, fishing hooks, needle, thread, extra clothes, enough seeds to start a garden if not a farm, and a complete working boat with a CANNON!?! Not to mention an island so hospitable it has salt for preserving, cotton, flax, rubber, and an overabundance of game. It would be more surprising, if they all died. Not to mention, that every chapter reads like a how-to-book. I can almost hear the conversation with the publisher.

Publisher: Johann, no one wants to read this how-to-manual. It's boring. And there are dozens more just like it. It's needs something extra, a hook, some zing.
Johann: But this is useful!
Publisher: I know, put it on a desert island! Forced to rely on their wits alone! They'll have to do everything with the bounty of nature. No modern tools!
Johann: No! How can I do that?
Publisher: They'll love it! Go on.
Johann: Fine.
Ten days later
Publisher: What is this?
Johann: You said put it on a desert island. They're on a desert island.
Publisher: But you gave them everything! Where's the hardship? Where's the people starving? Where's the adventure?
Johann: This is adventure! It's hard work to start a village! They work hard in almost every chapter, plus I added games and parables for the little children.
Publisher: Fine, fine, but I can't guarantee that anyone will buy it.

Seriously, if you want a cute story about people starting a colony on a desert island (with all the necessary tools) go for it. Personally, I think it reads like a how-to-manual, but if you like that, then this book is for you. I'm not saying it's poorly written, or that it's not a cute little story, but it's not the adventure it's made out to be. Hell it doesn't even have much of a plot. So if you're looking for an island adventure book, find a different one.