Rating: 4/5

They crossed the Georgian Bridge and parked near the arched footbridges leading to the labyrinth. It was quiet here – no farmers shouting out their vegetables, and no engines rumbled – so their footsteps on stone, and the fifth step of Emil’s cane, echoed before them. They walked in perpetual shadow. Faces peered through slits in yellowed lace curtains, and some pensioners came out on their stoops to watch Emil and Leonek pass. In place of engines, there was the quiet murmur of water smacking stone. Cats in windowsills kept track of them.

1948, in the Eastern Bloc, a young Inspector Emil Brod, fresh from the academy has joined the Militia’s Homicide section. He is shunned and abused by the other detectives, finally to be assigned the case of a songwriter, Janus Crowder, found beaten to death in his apartment, that has been ransacked. He tries to interview the building supervisor, Alekander Tudor, who found the body and is notably nervous. No luck with the neighbours, a family from Eastern Poland who fled there when that part of the country became Belarus. In vain he arranges to get a motor vehicle to speak to the widow, Lena Hanic, who lives in a grand house in the countryside. When the body of Aleksander Tudor is brought from the canal Brod suspects the murders might be politically motivated. 

The Bridge of Sighs is the first of five novels based in the Eastern Bloc, each spanning a different decade. Author Olen Steinhauer paints a vivid picture of daily life in the capital, three years after the war ended: Russians soldiers on the streets, women queuing to fill bottles and buckets with water from spigots, food consisting of bread and cabbage soup, drinking brandy, smoking rough black Russian cigarettes, women in black sleeping in doorways while they search for missing husbands.

There are flashbacks to the early years of the war when young Brod stayed with his grandparents in the south, the family giving shelter to Romanian Jews, while his parents went to the front and perished. His late teens in Helsinki where he went seal hunting in the Arctic to earn money. Against this background is an emerging love story and police procedural.

A little slow at first but a worthy read, with references to Dostoyevsky’s “The Brothers Karamazov”, the title is taken from a description of Venice from a crew on the seal hunt.

The Croat described the walk from his friend’s palazzo to a canal that was overlooked, high up, by a covered bridge that connected two stone walls. The doomed, he told them. They crossed here to their way to the prisons. They call it the Bridge of Sighs ...at the end of that short walk across the bridge, his life would be lived behind a stone wall. Behind iron bars. He would live and die in the dark.