Rating: 5/5

In a broad sense, this is the story of Mary Bell, a child serial killer who before her capture strangled two young boys.

As such the story is somewhat disturbing.

But beyond the story of Mary's crime is also the story of an inept legal justice system that was and, to some extent, still is ill-equipped to deal with children who kill.

When an adult kills, it's much easier to assign blame. Surely, an adult has the ability to distinguish right from wrong, to fully comprehend and appreciate the finality of death, and has sufficient control over their impulses. But a child of eleven? Can even the brightest and most psychologically healthy children really appreciate the permanence of death, understand the difference between right and wrong, and exert the same control over their emotions that we feel an adult should have?

Sereny's book (the second she wrote on Mary Bell's story) addresses the nature of evil and what motivates someone, in this case a child, to murder. It also begs us to consider whether monsters are born or if they are made. And perhaps even more importantly, does one have to be a monster to commit a monstrous crime. It also addresses the inadequacies of a criminal justice system that is set up to deal with adults. She seems to feel that what happened to Mary is almost as horrendous as what happened to her victims.

Some thoughts...

Sereny believes that Mary Bell was sexually abused at the hands of her mother who, a prostitute herself and according to Mary, sold her for sex from the ages of 5-8. Interestingly, other than being interviewed by a handful of psychiatrists who Mary refused to speak with, Mary received no significant psychological counseling/evaluation. According to Sereny, in the UK at the time, the prosecution/courts didn't care why she committed the murders, only that she committed them. Even after her incarceration, little effort was made to help Mary understand not only the significance of what she had done, but explore why she had done it in the first place.

Whether the claims of sexual abuse were true or not, no one involved in Mary's case throughout the years doubts the complicated psychological dynamic that existed between the two women. The mother was a drama queen who exploited Mary at every turn for financial gain. She was also arguably a headcase herself who to her dying day refused to tell Mary who her real father was...(I have my own suspicions based on the book, namely her own father, but that's just my best guess.)

Mary Bell's accomplice received very different treatment before, during, and after the trial. Sereny suggests that beyond actual culpability, there were many psychological factors at play that may have biased the courts, media, and jury against Mary and in favor of her accomplice, who was ultimately found not guilty. For example, the accomplice came from a supportive (and relatively normal) family. And while older than Mary, her demeanor in public was more fragile and nervous. Whereas Mary seemed more hardened. Sereny who attended the trial seems to think that opinions were formed about these girls based more on their appearance and their behavior in court and less on the facts. 

I thought this was an interesting observation on many levels.

The description of Mary's time while being detained at an all boys institution first then later at women's prison at only sixteen is priceless all on its own. I've read several other accounts of life while being incarcerated and it is extremely fascinating from the incidence of drug abuse (often via prescribed drugs), to the cultural norms that develop inside these same-sex societies, to the relationships and hierarchies that form. For example, Mary ultimately becomes a "butch," who according to her are women who adopt the more masculine dominant role. She admits to pleasuring well over 200 women sexually (the pleaser yet importanty to them psychologically never the pleased), but later refuses to acknowledge it as sex. In her words, it simply is fulfilling a need that while sexual extends way beyond sexuality. Her descriptions of women she loved and the complexity of those relationships given that once released she was most definitely heterosexual are quite compelling and thought-provoking. It reminds me of the observation that animal will engage in homosexual relationships, particularly in situations when there are insufficient partners of the opposite sex available. This alone makes an argument for the continuum of sexuality and its normalcy and naturalness.

Also, the book, though probably not intentionally, brings up the issue of memory. Sereny seems to feel it is important for Mary Bell to both remember and admit to what happened, if not for the book, for her own healing. Except, I think we now understand the tenuous nature of memories. Our brains are capable of changing memories over time so that in the end what really happened and what we remember are two completely different things. In that sense, I think so many years later, it's unwise to take Mary's memories as the equivalence of truth or to feel remembering what we want her to remember will somehow free her. I'm not sure she is capable of telling us what really happened (even if she tells us what we want to hear), not now after so many years.

Finally, the book itself and the fact that ultimately Mary Bell did receive money for her story is not only controversial, but hard to swallow. I can see that there are arguments on both sides, but difficult arguments all the same.

Like many books that tell a murder's story, this book seems overly sympathetic with the killer, at times minimizing the heinousness of the crime and the pain and suffering of the victims and their families. I always feel that this is unfortunate, but ultimately unavoidable. 

So while a true crime book, this is much more than a true crime book as the crime really is not the focus (or not the entire focus), although its relevance is central to the discussion.