Rating: 5/5

Got this book on the very next day my government declared a country wide quarantine. It was quite a blessing if I may say.

Doesn’t really count as a full read from page to page, but already got around the subjects I was interested in and got to learn about others that were secondary. Everything in this book is equally important information, mind you, but to each person, their own priorities.

There are other Survival books, albeit more specialized, like Bushcraft 101 or those about flora. This one aims to be The Ultimate Guide and covers a lot: The Essentials to bring with you, Strategies to adopt (psychological and perception), Climate and Terrain to adapt, Food including what not to eat and how to cook, Camp Craft and tools, Reading Signs when you’re camped, want to be rescued or are On the Move; Health and its obligatory first aid procedures, Survival at Sea, Rescue etiquette, Urban Survival and self defense methods and finally Disasters, from natural to nuclear.

Its a big book. There are pocket alternatives, but buy those at your own risk. I’d say having these 700 pages in your bug-out bag its not wasted space. Remember to practice some of these things while you’re safe, so you can be readier when you’re not. Although once again, check your priorities. If you’re in village or near natural parks and SHTF, learning the camp stuff should be the first thing; if you’re in an Urban Environment, adapt to that one instead. Its all about the resource management and keep you and your tribe safe.

Everyone making fun of the toilet paper buying - me too, I do like to make light of things – however, assuming one is not hoarding and taking it Smeagol style, ending up having three times more paper than the food you can wipe, maybe you should be doing the same. People are realizing they have to stay at home, many are at higher risk by going outside. Families are used to buy just the necessary, so stock is manageable. Now they have to be as self sufficient as possible, and have to buy extra, not only to reduce risk of exposure but also to avoid clogging the supermarket or wait in endless lines. Markets and shelves have to adapt to the new reality. Much of the “panic buying” its simply a derogatory term for the mass prepping people need to do. Very careful with being condescending about those, or you might be the next beggar.

We’re all preppers now.

Which means, if you don’t have this book yet, its one of the most worthy investments you can make. You not only learn something for the betterment of those you love, but also those around you, starting with staying at home, reading.

Stay safe out there.