Rating: 4/5

Sir Gareth Ludlow is on his way to propose to Lady Hester Theale, a spinster of nearly thirty. He doesn't love her, his heart belongs to his late fiance, but he esteems and respects Hester. Most importantly, he wants to free her from her horrible family. Hester is of the opinion that Gareth's first fiance was a little too headstrong and spoiled for him and he deserves someone better. She secretly holds a tendre for him but isn't sure she can marry without love. Along the way, Sir Gareth discovers a teenage runaway, Amanda "Smith," a spoiled, headstrong girl who gets herself into one major scrape after another. What is there to do but bring her along to Lady Hester? There, Hester's family forms the most erroneous opinions of both Garry and Amanda, causing even more commotion, leading Gary on a wild goose chase. Will he ever find Amanda? Will he discover who she really is and make her return home? Will Hester agree to marry him?

I enjoyed this book much more on the reread. It's still not my favorite but knowing the ending really helped my enjoyment. Hester is hardly in the story at all. She disappears in the beginning and reappears towards the end. I wish there was more development of her story because I liked her. It was nice to see how she grew. I liked Gary for his chivalry and his sense of humor. If I were Hester I would have married him out of convenience. I still think Amanda is ditzy and annoying, but she adds a lot of humor to the story. She's downright crazy in her ideas she steals from trashy novels, yet she's so innocent, she doesn't realize what she's doing or why it's wrong. I did not like her character development at all. Just as she becomes more sensible, she still has moments of insanity. I actively disliked how she became around Neil. I found him abusive and frighting. I liked Hildebrand much better. 

If I had my way, Amanda would have her Season under the sponsorship of Lady Hester. She needs to marry someone more like Garry who can handle her with sensitivity and humor. I see her reconnecting with Hildebrand when they're both more mature. I think they could be a fun couple.