Rating: 5/5

I took a drive yesterday to La Foce, the estate where Iris Origo lived deep in the most stereotypically beautiful part of the Tuscan countryside. So lush and peaceful is it (cypress trees, vineyards and rolling wheat fields) that it's hard to imagine, now, that this was the scene of the dramatic events she narrates in this amazing and dispassionate war diary, which covers the crucial years of 1943–44.

This was the period when Mussolini was ousted, the Germans marched in, and Italy became a shifting battleground between Allied and Axis powers. But while Origo follows these developments as best she can, from radio reports and official rumour (and, eventually, by looking out of the window), what this book really shows is the effect of these things for people on the ground: the daily struggles, the interpersonal strains, the anxieties, personal dangers and fluctuating emotions of living through a war.

Iris and her marchese husband were major landowners in the Val d'Orcia (their estate comprised fifty-seven different farms across an area of seven thousand acres); they had more resources than most for helping people through these times, and they used them to the utmost. Actually, what they achieved here is nothing short of heroic, though her account of it is undemonstrative and understated.

Escaped POWs were sheltered in her home; she fed bands of partisans hiding in the woods, and met them for secret councils; and all the time she was looking after some thirty refugee children from northern Italy, alongside her own one-year-old and newborn baby. And the fame of the Origos' estate spread: bedraggled South Africans and Canadians who had walked for weeks on foot across enemy lines would appear at their door, clutching a piece of paper on which was written only ‘La Foce’.

German officials, who are shooting such ‘subversives’ around the country, are increasingly suspicious of the Origos – although with individual soldiers it's a different story. Some are civilised and polite (including many who ‘refuse to talk war or politics: “No, we're not political blokes,” they say’), but others are officious and violent.

I hear a lorry drive up and some of these same German troops come tramping, fully armed, into the garden. They do not look attractive. I go up to them, not without some inner apprehension, and ask them what they want. But the answer is unexpected: ‘Please—wouldn't the children sing for us?’ The children sing O Tannenbaum and Stille Nacht (which they learned last Christmas)—and tears come into the men's eyes. ‘Die Heimat—it takes us back to die Heimat!’ So they climb into their lorry and drive away.

Such incidents lead her inexorably to the humanistic core of the diary, which she tries to spell out in the introduction, written on publication in 1947:

I have become chary of generalisations about countries and nations; I believe in individuals, and in the relationship of individuals to one another.

Origo writes wonderfully, with a clear eye for detail but no trace of melodrama – she is calm, precise, measured, and deeply sympathetic, somewhat in the mode of Vera Brittain. Like all the best testaments of war, its personal details add up to something hugely powerful about the perenniality of human values in times when they seem thin on the ground. Fascinating, beautiful, moving.