Rating: 5/5

Re-read 14/11/2018

This time around, I managed to find the error that eluded me the first time: there was a spot where Miss Jennings hadn't been corrected for Miss Jolliffe.

I have to admit that the first few chapters really annoyed me. Here was perfect Miss Verity Jolliffe, happy to let her family walk all over her and her concerns, effectively treating her as an unpaid servant instead of a valued member of her family. I did however appreciate how easily she could read Gabriel Sherrington and could tell when he was being disingenuous, since she was so accustomed to her family's manipulations.

Then I slowly fell for her, and how Gabriel imagined her. Despite initially wooing Verity with a high degree of calculation, I loved that over the time that they spent together, he slowly came to see her beauty, her true and constant heart, as well as her uncomplicated and honest nature. She really was someone who strove to see the good in people, and it took a great deal before she questioned it. If she was naive, she was still the sweeter for being able to see the kindness and wanting to soothe the hurt in those she cared the most.

I guess that it was hard for me to understand why Verity fell so quickly for Gabriel (and on reflection, I think that it was because she had been a spinster for so long, any positive attention would've been enough to turn her feelings into love). But I still maintain that it was a beautifully written story, and there were some excellent touches through it all. Maybe her relations might've been painted in too broad a brush (as were some of Gabriel's), but I loved how Gabriel treated his household staff, and reduced them to happy tears (honestly, that was the cutest scene!).

In the end, it was still a solid read, and I enjoyed it as much this time as I had the first time I read it.

---

*SQUEEEEAAAAAAL* That was the best!!! I have never read such a beautifully written clean romance - and if I have, I may have to re-read it!

"Fallen Angel" features two of the most interesting characters I've ever read.

On the one hand, we have the alpha male, Gabriel. You know? The one who has been given such looks, money and honoured title, he should be in want for nothing... except that he actually isn't the true son of the late Lord Sherington, which has therefore earnt disdain from the Rainsford side of the family. Also, beneath his quick-fire temper and stern expectations, there was actually a pretty decent heart beating there (in particular the scene where he met his motley crew of household staff for the first time. I laughed myself silly to the point where I think my husband thought me perhaps gone in the head).

Then, we have Verity. Presented to readers as a mouse of a woman to begin with, her intelligence, honesty and warmth towards those most deserving was a delight to behold. I was glad for her when she finally found her voice!

I LOVED that this book focused on their courtship - as unconventional as it was! - rather than just solely their physical attraction. Instead of the usual flowers, jewellery, etc, there's a lot of shared confidences, meaningful gifts, and the lovely idea of just wanting to share your thoughts and moments with the person that you loved the most.

I honestly could not think of a single negative thing about this book whatsoever, and if I could, I probably would've overlooked them for the sheer wonderful feelings I took away from this book.