I read these books, and ask myself – are men really this stupid? Or are we, women, underestimating them?

Maybe women cheat in the same ways, and nobody is writing about that?
I am constantly staggered by stupid decisions fiction characters make when it comes to the nefarious “other women”. It baffles me. Sure, I have seen cheating in real life, but somehow I see those cheaters as people with a bit more purpose. Yes, there are those who get in to a mid life crises and paint themselves in to a cliché, but things like in this book….could they really happen? Could people really be this blind? If yes, wow. What a sorry species we are.
I don’t know. All I can say is that it was a neither here nor there romantic suspense story with a dash of murder mystery thrown in. The only thing that stood out theme wise was the hero’s emotional cheating at the beginning of the book.
He married a very young heroine and being more than ten years older himself he got huffy over the fact that she was immature. When I say immature, I really mean, he was mad over the fact that she did not want to drone on about his work all day long.
So, he got hooked up with an old girlfriend who was also a boring lawyer and decided to talk with her. At some point they got emotionally entangled and the heroine found out. She divorced the hero, and he did not contest the divorce. Why? Because he thought their love was to passionate. He was better off with somebody who was not delighted with “childish” things and who knew about his job. Naturally, as soon as he was divorced he decided to marry the OW with whom he was calm and collected. No fighting, no raised voices.

This would all be fine and dandy if not for the following facts:
a)	You throw away love for peace and quiet? Really? Ok, well, to each his own. Maybe I could have forgiven that.
b)	You stay with and marry a person you know you only marginally care about? You start a marriage even thou you know you will be thinking about somebody else the whole time? How is that fair to anybody?
c)	You are against compromising with somebody that does not listen to you. You can in no way forgive this person for not having the same interest as you. You also can not stand the fact that that person is immature. Yet you are able to compromise with somebody else on a very important fact of life – children. The hero had small issues with the heroine’s interests and that basically broke up their marriage. Yet he very much wanted children but was perfectly ok with the OW being opposed to having them? Heck, he even agreed to not have them – no fuss – even thou he wished to be a father more than anything. How is this normal?

As I said…are people really this stupid? If anybody was immature in this story, it was the hero with his constant “brain, not heart” (bad) choices.
I am unsure what was the sore thumb in this story – the murder drama or the fidelity drama. The fidelity drama poked me in the eye in so many ways I was completely unable to focus on the other plots. On the other hand the mystery was completely swallowed by the relationship hubbub. What was I left with? Inadequacy on all levels. Not that I was expecting a literary classic, but still, I needed more. More logic, or more facts, or plain old MORE of a flow to the story.

All in all - Not a very good read.