Rating: 4/5

The Boarding-House is the third novel William Trevor published in 1965. The craft of a master storyteller is evident in this unsettling novel. Trevor cleverly juxtaposed sinister and comic elements in this story about eight residents in a rooming house after the death of its owner, Mr. Bird.

The Boarding House is a rundown red brick building located in the south-western suburbs of London built during Victorian times. Mr. Bird selects ‘solitary spirits’, lonely folks like himself who have neither family nor personal ties. A quirky crew of five men and three women spend evenings watching TV and drinking cocoa together. This seems pretty cozy on the surface but lodged within the personal history of each character are eccentricities, aspirations, and insecurities that threaten their co-existence. Mr. Bird dies when the novel begins and life at The Boarding House will never be the same again. The Boarding House is willed to two dubious residents who hate each other’s guts but are compelled to work together while straining to achieve their personal agenda.

As the story unfolds, an omniscient narrator takes us into the interior life of each resident and we become acquainted with their anxiety over the future of The Boarding House and its impact on them. The strength of Trevor’s writing lies in the insight he offers into the motivation of each resident – his or her unique preoccupation, hopes, and fears. Their quests include a desire to be freed of the past, to be loved or married, to be successful in courtship, to be sexually titillated, to extort money, to avoid harassment at work, and to appear to be useful to others. Some of the scrapes and faux pas the characters get themselves into are laughable in cringe-worthy ways. The petty fights and arguments among the residents contribute lighter comic moments.

However, an unmistakable streak of malevolence can be detected in a few of the residents, including Mr. Bird himself, which lent this story a disturbing edge. The residents perceive Mr. Bird as a kindly father figure, yet the omniscient narrator let on that Mr. Bird was laughing when he was making out his will. A subtle cruelty underlies Mr. Bird’s decisions as he knows full well the consequences that will befall the residents. In fact, they continue to feel the stronghold of his presence and pay the price of his audacious plan with respect to The Boarding House. 

I marveled at Trevor’s revelation of the impulses that drive human behavior. It was discomforting to discern the dark side of human nature. Noble intentions can innocuously turn ignoble. The Boarding-House has a fascinating tapestry woven from threads of contrasting hues: ominous dark, comic light, brooding grays. For an early work, it is compelling piece of dark comedy.