Rating: 1/5

When I saw this novel had accolades from Stephen King I figured it was going to be really awesome. I was wrong. Really wrong. I am not quite sure WHY the accolades from an author such as King but there we go.

Slob has the promise of being a really good read, it's about a nearly 500 lb sick, demented killer who preys on human beings to fulfil an insatiable need to hunt, harm and kill his targets. 

Jack Eichord is the detective that is hunting down this monster of a killer through the streets and sewers of the city before more people lose their lives. Jack's character was one of the few positives in this book, he was a great character, we get to see his human side and his work persona and both are great, sadly the rest of the book does not make up for this.

It's a extremely wordy book. Far too much so and totally not necessary. We have chapters where we experience the streams of brain blurb flowing from our killer, his flashback memories including his time killing in Vietnam in the VC, his love of hunting down the enemy and so on and so forth. A very long-winded journey to sharing with us his need to kill. 

Please enjoy a small example of the wordiness that spoils this book so much.

  And then the words come. A river of noise and a flood of information of data a damn ocean of input that you are suddenly awash in, all this raw verbiage lapping at the shores of your mind, saturating your thoughts, a tidal wave of talk assails you and the actor is never off the mark with the words. First the word. The word is always right, apt, mesmerising, in character, convincing, captivating, so flattering to you, custom-designed to lull you, stimulate you, make you forget the simple reality of this frightening spectre suddenly inserting itself into your life, always reasoned, impenetrable in it's logic unwavering, so certain that you will respond like so, and perhaps a gentle physical pat from this behemoth, guiding you, nudging you, HANDLING you are the stream of words hits you and you drown in the linguistic undertow of this powerful and evil intellect.

Oh I drowned that's for sure, this book is full of long paragraphs that just meander around word after word but do nothing to impart a sense of storyline or plot. Sometimes in books being in the mind of the killer is interesting, but in this book it just went on and on, and it's mostly quite boring really.

The killer has had a horrendous childhood as most serial killers have, the book is graphic with it's kill scenes and descriptions. The killer has no mercy on his victims, he's a killing machine.

The book also switches from the first person to the third and back again many times, but it's all over the place and does not make sense, it takes you a while to adjust to which voice you are hearing again.

This has been republished as was released years ago, I think being up against some modern day crime and serial killer novels this is miles away from being that good, or that readable. I was simply drowning in a constant stream of vomited words and lack of punctuation to help you take a breath when suffering it.

It's boring reading with so many meaningless words that are there just for the sake of it, they don't add to the overall storyline one bit.

I read one paragraph which was 10 lines of constant words with one comma and one full stop for the entire thing. I think some editing and punctuation and paragraphs added to this book would help a bit.

In summary:

Overall I just did not like it and I was looking forward to reading it, but it basically an over-worded book that has a few gory scenes in it, the flashbacks to Vietnam and being inside his head with all the waffle that goes on in there just had me constantly wanting to stop reading it. I survived until the end but this is not a book I enjoyed at all. It needs more focus on the plot development and less on the use of every unusual word in the dictionary that most readers are not familiar with.

::~~~~~~:::::~~~~~:::::~~~~~:::::~~~~~~::

Thanks so much for reading my review!
I hope you enjoyed it, if you did I’d be delighted if you leave me a “like” and I love to read your comments. If you’d like to connect you can follow me or please send me a friend request.

If you are an Author or Publisher and you’d like me to consider reading and reviewing your book(s) please just message me.