Rating: 4/5

For a time, Philip Guston's work ran parallel to the abstract expressionists. He painted what some called abstract impressionism. It seems here that Scott Bradfield created the impressionist book of post-modern hyper-realism, collapsing the psychological novel, the bildungsroman, the novel of ideas, the road novel and the meta-novel into one exquisite, heartbreaking and unsettling paradox. It probes into the problems of postmodernity with high lucidity and intelligence, but reads, nearly, as a standard narrative, using its lacunae to great effect. 

Narrated by a different Philip, the novel begins with a Badlands-esque road trip, but instead of two lovers we have Philip and his mother, a dazzling presence, equally unsettled and unsettling in her role as enabler. Taking the perspective of Philip's interior the book presents itself as the site of unsettled reality. Philip, our unreliable narrator, is presented as a precocious eight-year old. His intelligence and range are outside the standard domain of eight-year old precocity and he seems more a medium for the deeper essay of the author's play. Within the confines of literalism, Philip as a preciocious eight-year-old would be pursuing subjects equal to the emotional range of a thirty-year-old, let alone the intellectual range-- which isn't to say such a child couldn't exist, it's part of the book's undertaking to make it plausible if not immediately realistic. This is one of the places the author has given the reader to question the tenacity of its narrator, but also to create a sense of simultaneity.

The specific type of simultaneity here is a form of expression, as parts of Philip may be autobiographical, the quality of thought is what comes through as authentic. Philip is the agent that allows the author to pursue a limitless fictional universe, a place where that Dostoyeskian question (Is everything permissable?) can be explored. The truth of the particular form of this character may or may not arise from biographical facts from within the author's own life. It is the interest required to make Philip's world elegant in its duality and the capacity to plumb a character that is this intellectually disturbing, as an avatar for moral and perceptual relativism where light is the only true constant, that makes the book. It is the sadness imparted in unexpected way of Philip's condition, the inherent brokenness, that made this book great.