Rating: 4/5

When you read DP you have to be prepared: very often her heroine suffer from traumatic experiences that involves a lot of pain and suffering, both emotional and physical.
Here is an example.
There's a heroine who is a model, beautiful and sunny and a hero who is a brooding not very handsome man, very self-conscious about his looks.
There's a very unstable, jealous stalker and scheming younger brother who's jealous of his brother and acts like the heroine is his girlfriends.
The hero and the heroine share a night of passion (not even a night actually, they have sex only once)
but the evil brother's lies keep them apart, and when the heroine goes to the hero to tell him she's pregnant, he refuses to listen to her and treats her very badly.
She leaves, has an accident, loses her baby and is scarred and crippled.
Thank god the evil brother dies, and the hero finds out the truth: he's shattered and ashamed and decides to help the heroine to heal.
The book has a very high level angst and I'm so very happy because lately I haven't found many books interesting or angsty, and I'm not ashamed to say that I struggle to remember some of them.
The hero is a no alpha hero, he's self conscious about his looks (that I find difficult to understand, since he's very tall and has a very good body, so ok, maybe his face is not classical handsome but anyway some men can be charming without classical features), he has few experiences with women and he's not good in bed, but anyway he's not a bad guy and he's in love with the heroine.
His evil brother (that we are very happy died in the accident) made him believe that the heroine was only leading him on and that she told him she didn't enjoy sex with him, so he retaliated by being cruel to her.
The heroine is hurt in the beginning, and very resentful, but she recovers her health and looks and she understands that both she and the hero was deceived by his EB.
 I like the book very much, I liked how the hero and the heroine learn to make love, and how they learn to communicate.
There are still misunderstandings until the end of the book, because the hero thinks he must set the heroine free to pursue her career as a model and the heroine thinks he's rejecting her, but eventually they have their HEA.
This is one of DP's best book-in my opinion, of course.
No om/ow, no cheating, hero and heroine in love from the start, only BM. 
And the book is all about them, no mystery or gangster or special op or other things that fill her more recent books (I that I find boring)