Rating: 1/5

Although this biography appears on at least 1oo GR lists including Best Book on Rock and Roll, Best Celebrity Biography, Best Biography and Best Music Biography I am not even sure that it really counts as a biography all. It is an intense paean of praise to a vanished god? hero? mentor? idol? fetish? by Danny Sugerman and let's be honest Jerry Hopkins might have strung the words together but without Sugerman there would be no book. The fact that it is so intensely Sugerman's book means that it can't be a proper biography, never mind a consideration of the Doors, the music and their times.

Poor old Danny Sugerman how could he be anything else than the blind obsessive, almost creepy, devotee of Morrison and The Doors. Any 12 year old working for such a group today would be taken into child custody almost immediately. What were his parents thinking? It is not surprising he became the Doors manager at 17 nor that spent a great deal of his adult life trying, and failing, by wearing his hair in the same style, to look like Morrison. But what was he to do with his life after becoming manager at 17? Life was always going to be downhill after that because you know you're going to be known for your association with genius. Brian Epstein solved the problem by abusing drink and drugs and dying young(ish).

I am not a great fan of artists biographies, what is important about them is the work they produce. You need to listen to their music, read their poems or novels, look at their pictures. There is a certain fascination in learning why someone like Morrison goes in a few years from being too shy to sing facing an audience to happily facing an audience and waving his slong about. But in the end it is only the music within the context of its time that matters.

It is thus their music, and the importance their music was thought to have in the context of what was going on in the 1960's that make the Morrison and the Doors as well as other artists from that time interesting. But you won't understand that by reading books like this. You need to read things like 'Slouching Towards Jerusalem' by Joan Didion and maybe also searching out the source of her book's title and trying to understand what Yeats was saying.

Finally I repeat again that we know, and read too much about the lives of painters, musicians and authors. It is frightening how many people read biographies of Byron yet never crack the cover of Don Juan. Byron, like Morrison, was another fat boy who starved himself to beauty and the adoration of his fans. Would Morrison be remembered without that photo? would the music be enough if the only picture was of him fat and bearded?