Rating: 3/5

Being familiar with Alice Dalgliesh, I picked up this book recently at a book sale for a school that was closing. I noted it was a Caldecott winner as well. We read it in the week preceding Thanksgiving alongside several other books about the "first" Thanksgiving. 

I think it's fair to say that it clearly shows it's age with respect to language, depictions of native peoples (two illustrations - front cover and the first Thanksgiving at the end), cultural sensitivity, and historical accuracy. It's in no way a 21st century understanding of these events. However, I do think that for it's time (published in 1954) it was a more progressive account of the events than a lot of children's literature, and even after reading a lot of modern accounts, there are things I liked here better than others. 

The book itself is written as a fictional account of real people aboard the Mayflower and focuses primarily (approx the first 2/3 of the book) on their experiences and struggles. There are a few mentions of native peoples which clearly indicate the uncertainty into which the Pilgrims were traveling and also an account (historical accuracy?) of an encounter before the Pilgrims landed at their final location. I do think there is value in reading it, and unlike a lot of other accounts it at least mentions (without context of course) Squanto's knowledge of the English language was because "he had been taken to England on a ship." (For context and some balance I recommend Squanto's Journey by Joseph Bruchac). It doesn't make the relationship between the native Wampanoag and the Pilgrims sound like it was without distrust and fear and it acknowledges that eventually the peace established was not kept (although of course does not mention why). 

One thing that frustrated me is that this is a fictional account of an historical event which means the line between what actually happened, what is fiction, and what is historical/cultural inaccuracy but assumed to be fact is severely blurred. Researching the first Thanksgiving does help children parse out these differences, but even historians have disagreements regarding how the events actually occurred or how they should be portrayed. 

I would say overall, this book is better than a lot of other children's accounts of the first Thanksgiving but it needs some editing as you read it (as a starting point I substituted Wampanoag people or native peoples for "Indians" throughout), and it's problems are similar to those of other accounts, even modern ones. As long as this book inspires conversation about Thanksgiving and is read within a broader context, I think it can work well. But it is a jumping off point, not an end in itself.