Rating: 5/5

Seventh in the “Man-Kzin Wars” series springing from the “Ringworld” series (read those first, I keep saying). This one has three stories, with the usual blessing of Mr. Niven. 

The first, “The Colonel’s Tiger,” by Hal Colebatch, Australian writer and poet and regular contributor to this series, is initially set in India, 1878, when the pelt of what turns out to be a Kzin is discovered; for me it indicated that contact between Kzinti and humans happened a lot earlier than I had anticipated. There are also references to it in the “contemporary” scenarios.

The second, a novella, “A Darker Geometry,” by Mark O. Martin and Gregory Benford, has a complex plot with the (well, initially, anyhow) main characters being Bruno Takamaga, a sort of Terminal Man/Cyborg who is part mainframe computer, part just ordinary Joe; and Carol, the captain of the ship “Sun-Tu,” and also Bruno’s lover. They’re on their way to Wunderland with a secret cargo of substances from the Tree of Life which – oops, not gonna give that away. At any rate, they run into a number of Kzinti warships, the main one being captained by Rrowl-Captain. They are eager to battle the humans, called “Monkeys” by the Kzin. But this battle is interfered with by another ship with a couple of Pierson’s Puppeteers at the helm. The Puppeteers are sort of the henchmen of the Outsiders, what my old philosophy teacher John Donne, S.J., used to refer to as consisting mostly of “pure being” or “Matter Incognito.” They are sentient and are from “the other side of the space-time divide,” and see their mission as the gathering of observational data and intervening amongst the various races in the universe, to sort of “even the playing field” if they see one or another race as having too much of an advantage. In this context, then, we are presented with the back-story of how humans received the hyperdrive capacity. Along the way we see an instance of human and Kzin joining forces to battle a destructive sub-species of the Outsiders, and we also have occasional glimpses into the communications among the Outsiders themselves, interesting but hard to get through. I realize that none of this will make any sense whatsoever if you aren’t already familiar with the Ringworld novels or the previous Man-Kzin Wars stories, but I’d put this one at the top of the list as far as integrating many of the previous story threads and characters.

“Prisoner of War” is a short story by Paul Chafe, Canadian author who has, I found out, also written the only full-length novel in the “Man-Kzin Wars” series, “Destiny’s Forge.” In this tale, a Kzin, Fleet Commander, is the only Kzin survivor of a battle with humans. His interrogator is Christopher Long, mostly because he’s the only one on board the human ship who is fluent in the Hero’s Tongue, a sort of high Kzinti dialect. This is merely the setup, for this story has more of a philosophical bent, as we go inside the mind/values/motivations of the Kzinti. Without giving too much away, it is agreed by both parties that the Kzin manner of battle is aggressive attack without backup strategies, almost guaranteeing losses every time. Long finds out that this orientation to warfare reflects an underlying conquering and subjugating motivation. In contrast, the Kzin informs Long that the Kzinti see human warfare as oriented towards extinction of enemies and points out many such events in human history. The conclusions of both human and Kzin participants in the interrogation are intriguing but you’ll have to read ‘em for yourself. Also, the ultimate conclusions regarding how human and Kzin can co-exist are somewhat of a surprise and made me wonder how the future books in this series could come about. Well, I saw this as an extremely well-written story, which helps the reader understand the Kzin mind a lot more.