Rating: 2/5

Re Legally Bound - This one may well be the lowest ranked book in all of HPlandia which puzzled me for a bit because it has all the hallmarks of a angsty-emo trainwreck, and for those of us who like our HPangst, this should be a front runner. 

It isn't--and I have read this book more than a few times in an effort to figure out exactly why. What I keep coming back to is that every time I finish this book I don't feel an HEA. I don't particularly hate this book (not like Smoke in the Wind - I can --and have-- ranted for days about that one, to my very perverse enjoyment), but when I finish reading this I always feel like the whole story was just rather sordid --not a romance at all.

The plot is that h and H were married, she was fairly youngish, 19 or so, and he was around 10 years older. He was establishing his business (some vague conglomeration) and she went out all the time. Her complaint was he was never home but always working, and his was that she was always out having a social life. One night while he was working and she was out, the babysitter got distracted and their daughter drowned. 

He blamed her, she blamed herself and they grew so far apart, she finally left him, took back her maiden name and got her own life. He buys the company she works for and then gets her to be his secretary. She has a guy she is dating but no sex, he has a girlfriend he has slept with and she is also a client. 

 They fight continuously and he is nasty and she immaturely childish. He frequently makes out with his girlfriend in his office in front of her, yet transfers her boyfriend, (whom she told she would marry,) to another city, when he catches them kissing in her's.

Then he rapes her on a weekend workathon, they spend the night together and have a second congress that was more cooperative on her part. He leaves her in the morning to go to his girlfriend and she takes the handbrake off his Alpha Romeo and lets it wreck into a garden wall. 

He threatens her about it and they fight, but she stupidly sticks around and doesn't quit her job and move --for no good reason that I could tell, they are still married - he isn't going to have her arrested for her Waiting to Exhale moment- and he can't really make her pay for the car because legally she is entitled to part of his money, but her behavior (plus his) devolves even more when she figures out she is preggers. 

He forces her back as his wife, continues seeing his girlfriend and she goes from Sally Wentworth fiesty crazy revenge woman to neurotic doormat Penny Jordan introvert - then the girlfriend shows up to reiterate her position in the H's life. The H questions the h about it later, but she blows him off, then they spend a few days together - as the H is concerned she is becoming a recluse- and they fight some more, he tells her he is leaving for business and she should go live with her parents. (Somehow over the course of this plot, the h goes from independent career woman to infantilized dependent who needs to be sent home to mummy and daddy after a bad week at summer camp.)

The h is crying and has a big drama and she confesses she lurves him and vice versa. We then get the big explanation paragraphs where he says he has always loved her etc, and then he says what is possibly the most idiotic explanation for why his adultery should be excused in all of HPlandia ( I will quote it here so we can all share the brain bleach)....

"So you kept visiting Rosalind instead,' she accused in reproachful accents. `But only for business reasons,' he impressed decisively. `Having had no business experience at all before her father died, she hadn't a clue how to run the company, and on most occasions it was only in an advisory capacity that I spent time with her.'

 She was silent for a time, and then . . . `Although you have slept with her, haven't you?' she probed hesitantly, wistfully. The other girl could not have made the claims she had without at least some basis of truth in them, surely!

 Lane exhaled heavily and, half turning towards her, brushed the back of his hand down her cheek, in a tender gesture. 

`No, I've never slept with Rosalind,' he denied. His sensuous mouth slanted crookedly. `I may have gone to bed with her, but I've never had the slightest desire to sleep with her.' 

Jenna's eyes clouded pensively. `Is there a difference?' `To me there is,' he nodded resolutely. 

`Going to bed with someone is merely a means for gaining a brief feeling of satisfaction, a moment's passion ... but to my mind, sleeping with someone,'

 pausing, he bent to kiss her meaningfully,

 `is wanting to remain after the love-making, to hold them in your arms while you sleep, and the pleasure of knowing they'll be there in the morning. And that desire I've only ever experienced with you, my love...." 

Sorry folks, I had to do it ( I am willing to share my Captain Morgan and triple fudge cookies tho) - so while he was "mostly" visiting the girlfriend for business after the h moved back in and only inserted body parts occasionally, all is well cause he did not really WANT to actually sleep the whole night with her. 

Well-- that whole explanation is probably one of the reasons this book doesn't work, not even as a so-bad-it-is-cultic trainwreck. The cardinal error in introducing and having scenes with the OW is also made in this one. 

 When you are having the OW confrontation, it is imperative that she not be shown to have every statement she makes about her relationship with the H to be true - and it is direly urgent that she not be right in assuming that she would be a better h for the H than the ACTUAL h. 

In this one, it is fairly obvious that the girlfriend/OW really IS a better match for the H - and she knows it, the nominal h knows it -- and more importantly -- the reader knows it, so it just negates all the wrecky drama of the book. 

 Basically the immature h is stuck with a disinterestedly antagonistic H because she is preggers and the whole situation is what was just in the book editorially approved outline. 

It isn't a good match with the H and h, it isn't true love, it is a depressing reminder of the fifties HPlandia rules that pregnancy equals being stuck in marriage (make the best of it for the baby's sake, dontcha know) with a non-compatible partner - it makes the reader hopeful that another plot point can be the h miscarries, (we've still got 20 pages left in the book,) so that the H and his REAL h can have their HEA. 

That is the other problem with the book, while reading it you can almost see the book outline, and the child's death doesn't really have a lot of impact - it is a plot point to get to outline part 2 in the story. 

Technically it is a pretty strong book in terms of progression, but the H and h are so unlikable and the devolution of the h is so sadly pathetic that any real angst is drowned in the faint distaste of watching a couple who really should not be together forced into an ending to finish an outline for an extremely disheartening and rather sordid story.