Rating: 5/5

Feb 7, 845pm ~~ Review asap. Incredible book, want to savor it a bit.

Feb 10, 210pm ~~ I am catching up this year with the stack of Ivan Doig's titles I have had for a couple of years. After Mountain Time, which was a surprise DNF for me, I was hoping for better from Prairie Nocturne and I certainly got it.

With this 2003 book Doig returned to familiar country and characters that had roles in some of his earlier work. I think a person could read this book without having first read Doig's Montana Trilogy, but it certainly helped me to be familiar with some of the names of characters and know a little of their history going into this book.

In 1924, Susan Duff, who grew up on a homestead in the Scotch Heaven homestead area of Montana, lives in Helena giving singing lessons to young society ladies. One night after her final pupil of the day, Susan climbs to the upper level of her house to work on two projects: a half-finished operetta based on the woman's suffragist movement in Montana, and her diary. 

But someone interrupts her solitude. Someone who has opened the front door of her house with a key and is climbing the steps to her work room. Who is it? Wes Williamson, son of the man who wanted Susan's father's land for her entire life, not to mention every other piece of land in the territory. What is he doing there? With his own key?! Why didn't she change the locks back when their secret affair ended?!

But Wes is not in the house to try and re-ignite a relationship (at least not right at first). He says he has 'the pupil of a lifetime' for her. But who could it be? Not one of his daughters, surely? Susan is very suspicious, especially after hearing that part of Wes's plan is for Susan to live at her old homestead and teach this mysterious pupil there. Why the need for extreme privacy, even secrecy? What exactly is going on here?

Well, it turns out that the pupil Wes has for Susan is Montgomery (Monty) Rathbun, longtime 'choreboy' of the Double W, the Williamson family empire. Whenever Wes visits Montana from his home in New York, Monty acts as his chauffeur. Monty has lived at the Double W since he was a boy, when his father got a cowboy job there after retiring from the Army. Monty's mother did the ranch laundry and Monty has been there ever since, it is the only home he remembers, except for flashes of memories of the cavalry fort where his father had been posted. Monty has had about the best life he could expect for a Black man in his circumstance in those days. 

And now Wes wants to Monty to give him voice lessons. Why?

Right off the bat, you know that certain things are going to happen, and they mostly do. But you also hope like all heck that certain other things might happen. Do they? Is there courage enough in the people involved to follow the road ahead of them? Or will Society and its foolishness create more obstacles than anyone can conquer?

And again, why does Wes care so much about this project of his all of a sudden? Does he just want to get Susan back into his life? Or is there some other dark secret from the past driving him? 

I thought this book was stunning and unforgettable. I highly recommend it.