Rating: 5/5

Random Family is one of those rare books that I feel sad to have finished. There were many days when I only read 10 or 15 pages, just so that I could put off saying goodbye to the subjects of the story I'd grown so close to for a little while longer. This book sat on my desk at home for nearly a year before i ever picked it up, just because I didn't know what to expect from it. Now that I have turned its final page, I know that I will cherish the time I spent reading it for the rest of my life. 
 Perhaps more than any of the young people profiled in this book, Coco's story is the most engrossing. With each page, the reader shares her struggles, her hopes and her disappointments. The reader hopes that she will get through each difficult situation and that maybe she can finally get ahead but, as the book progresses, even cautious optimism seems foolish. Coco and her family can only hope to get by. 
 What gives this book most strength is the amount of time -over a decade- that Adrian Nicole Leblanc spent with the family. This allows the reader to observe each of the story's subjects experiencing the joys and optimism of their youth. Over the next decade, the harshness of their poverty steals their hope. Life becomes a constant battle to get by, to have a place to stay, to find enough food. The struggle changes them immensely, and they lose pieces of their person-hood. In their youth, Coco and Jessica could distract themselves from their problems by dressing cute and smiling as boys complimented them when they passed by on the street. However, the intrusion of adulthood and the burden of impossible to meet responsibilities eventually made even those small reprieves meaningless to them. 
 The young men in the story, Boy George..Ceasar..Frankie..Rocco..Wishbone, struggle against traditional conceptions of masculinity. They rebel against the humiliations of being unable to be providers, and they are each punished for the inadequacy poverty has forced upon them. 
 Leblanc perfectly captures all of the complicated dynamics that motivate each of the young people. The result is something between Sister Souljah's The Coldest Winter Ever and Jacob Riis's How the Other Half Lives. As a writer and a journalism student, this book has inspired me more than any non-fiction I've ever read, and I will never be the same.