Rating: 5/5

What to say? It’s classic book on gender studies, sexuality and sociology of 80s America. 

Raewyn packed the book to the brim with insightful commentary of social conditions regarding gender and sexuality. Also commented thoroughly and in many ways through our chapters about forming of ones personality through societal dominant conventions and how media reflect aspects of social conventions regarding dynamics between sexes. 

It’s a really important book in its genre and very well research, honestly, strongly argued account on limited perceptions of personhood that many societal conventions and capitalism places upon us as people. 
Reading it in 2022 I was astounded how much things were relevant to things like queer culture, challenge of creating inclusive way of informing heteronormative parts of society about need for more nuance outlook on one’s gender and more. It acknowledges the intersectional nature of presented topics. 

What surprised me at first was how much you can learn about sociology, psychoanalysis, past literature on sexuality, identity and stuff, through Raewyn’s citations of books that shaped culture. She also discussed their content relevancy, missteps in terms of scientific credibility and from what background such positions come from. 
Making references for example, references to Freud on his part in popularising psychoanalysis really interesting. Also important, paving the way for the reader as you progress through chapters that contain more complex and interconnected topics, dilemmas, explanations on different branches of societal mechanics of assimilating one as a kid with cultural norms (well... at least from white American perspective). It really shines with index, citations, titles of books and explanation of content of them, at times serving both as reflection on current times of Raewyn and point of critique. 

Index of publications, books, articles that were used in each chapter show up at the end of each big chapter (there are also smaller chapters within.) Each big chapter illustrates a specific topic or branch of interest in Raewyn’s book. The index is gets very long and professionally composed for people that want search and dive deeper into things author refers to or uses in her argumentation. Which is a good aspect, intuitively implemented. 

Very interesting position. Would read again for sure. Classic sociological, gender studies position. 
Also Raewyn is an author and scientist that created the term ‘hegemonic masculinity’. It’s one of the discussed topics at core of this work and in her later publication “masculinities”. Cool. 

I highly recommend it. 

*read on Kindle Paperwhite 4