Rating: 1/5

As a TV character once said, I’ve lost the will to scold. 
 

(Temporarily, of course. I can always muster some effort to talk smack. This book knows what it did, and I’m fighting back.)

There must be two editions of this book - the one Nastya and I buddy read and the one everyone else did. Because you gotta be kidding me, right? Because the only good thing I can say about it is that despite seeming endless it actually managed to reach the finish line right when I was losing hope that I’d ever see the last page.

This supposedly beloved classic simply exhausted me via terminally annoyed irritation. 

It’s so disjointed both in plot and narrative style, like a poorly done surrealist ”exquisite corpse” where a bicycle ends up with rabbit legs and a flowerpot for a head. And no, I’m not talking about anachronisms and author interjections - I actually got a kick out of it. It’s the total lack of consistency in characterization and tone. The parts of the story are not as much loosely connected as haphazardly thrown together, dull and tedious with occasional clashing in tone unfunny comic relief here and there. And don’t get me started on pacing, the jarringly stop-and-go bumpiness of it. Major events happen off-page, recapped by other characters; we learn of deaths and quests and battles in a few sentences of stilted dialogue that sound rather like a middle school book report or “what I did on my summer vacation” essay style. 

 ‘Just read Malory’s La Morte d’Arthur to learn more’, White often suggests almost tongue-in-cheek, and I really wish I had done that instead.

The characters are not much better. Most characterization is flat, and the ones that initially stand out - Arthur/Wart and Lancelot - really become unrecognizable later on, as though written by completely different people. Losing idealism and falling prey to human weakness is fine, but it really shouldn’t read like our characters were replaced by fairy changelings somewhere between different chapters. Also, reading a tortured love triangle for the majority of the book became incredibly tedious very quickly. And I wonder if women hurt White in any way given how cruelly they are written. 
 
These tortured lovebirds need to disappear off page pronto.

The tangents about the politics and human nature were somewhat interesting but there was enough of them for a decent size essay and not for a 600-plus page book. And slowly but surely I went from being somewhat amused by simplistic and charming whimsy of the first novel (the reason, I suspect, many readers love this book - since they have the fond childhood memories of the first part, The Sword in the Stone) to progressive irritation to finally dejected resolution to finish it despite pervasive confused boredom. And even that relatively charming first part kept me wondering who it was aimed at, kids or adults, with its odd combination of childlike cuteness and very simple themes (basically “war is not good” and “might doesn't equal right” - things you’d want to teach quite young kids about) jarring with occasional inclusion of quite adult content.

   “I have been thinking," said Arthur, "about Might and Right. I don't think things ought to be done because you are able to do them. I think they should be done because you ought to do them.”

Now, I do get the points and the messages that White, with varying success, was trying to make (and it’s hard not to get them when he constantly interrupts whatever little of the story there is to lecture us and critique Arthurian legends), so that’s not the issue. I get the “why” that he’s addressing; I just can’t stand *how* he chooses to get us there. 

(Now, even in my frustration I’m happy to admit that the very last chapter of the book was alright in its melancholic contemplation, even if it had to rely on a few paragraphs explaining to the reader what the book was about 🙄. I just wish I didn’t have to suffer through 600 pages of this doorstopper to get there. Seriously, it was basically an essay summarizing the book and I should have only read that since by that point I’ve had enough of summarizing).

   “Looking back at his life, it seemed to him that he had been struggling all the time to dam a flood, which, whenever he had checked it, had broken through at a new place, setting him his work to do again. It was the flood of Force Majeur. During the earliest days before his marriage he had tried to match its strength with strength—in his battles against the Gaelic confederation—only to find that two wrongs did not make a right. But he had crushed the feudal dream of war successfully. Then, with his Round Table, he had tried to harness Tyranny in lesser forms, so that its power might be used for useful ends. He had sent out the men of might to rescue the oppressed and to straighten evil—to put down the individual might of barons, just as he had put down the might of kings. They had done so—until, in the course of time, the ends had been achieved, but the force had remained upon his hands unchastened. So he had sought for a new channel, had sent them out on God's business, searching for the Holy Grail. That too had been a failure, because those who had achieved the Quest had become perfect and been lost to the world, while those who had failed in it had soon returned no better. At last he had sought to make a map of force, as it were, to bind it down by laws. He had tried to codify the evil uses of might by individuals, so that he might set bounds to them by the impersonal justice of the state. He had been prepared to sacrifice his wife and his best friend, to the impersonality of Justice. And then, even as the might of the individual seemed to have been curbed, the Principle of Might had sprung up behind him in another shape—in the shape of collective might, of banded ferocity, of numerous armies insusceptible to individual laws. He had bound the might of units, only to find that it was assumed by pluralities. He had conquered murder, to be faced with war. There were no Laws for that.”

Anyway, that’s it. It’s over, and I accept that I’ve read a defective version of this beloved classic, and no dare in the world can make me suffer through this again. Even my book masochism has reached its limits.

A sad lone star. 🤦‍♀️ 

——————

Also posted on my blog.