Rating: 5/5

Long before William Jefferson Clinton, another child prodigy Southern Democratic/republican President lead his country to prosperity and expansion amidst sex ridden scandal and recriminations. Bubba Bill even duplicated his name-sake's penchant for financial scandal. But I don't want to belabor the this comparison. After all, before Jefferson, we had another cash poor expansion minded patrician named Julius Caesar who founded another similar kind of republican empire. 

The thing is, so much has been written about Jefferson's life and its every nuance has been so well analysed and then specialized that it is sometimes hard for the general reader to get an overview about one of our most gifted presidents through all of the noise. This 10 year old college textbook is still the best introduction to one of the most fascinating men in history. 

The book moves steadily through the eight periods of Jefferson's life: His childhood with the loss of his father in adolescence; his education and early years as a land speculator's lawyer; his early legislative efforts in the house of burgess; his reluctant efforts at the Continental Congress followed by his controversial revolutionary governorship; his romantic times as ambassador to France; his time as Washington's Secretary of State; His Presidency; and the two or so decades of his life after his Presidency. Randall offers tantalizing tidbits not often covered in other biographies. For example, Jefferson was a land speculator's lawyer who used legal devices to tie up lands for no money. Also, while we know he moved the Virginia Capitol to Richmond, less well known is his disgrace for "running away" during Benedict Arnold's invasion of Virginia during the Revolutionary War. 

The biographer remembers to cover other important personages like the Marquis the Lafayette, George Wyeth, Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, Alexander Hamilton, Aaron Burr and John Adams. He lists Jefferson's proteges, Madison, Monroe, and Quincy Adams (the next three Presidents). Often, he looks at these lives using Jefferson's own words from his over 27000 pieces of correspondence. The work is scholarly enough that you feel that the author read every piece of that correspondence, but thankfully this book has none of the stuffy prose endemic to that type of scholarship. 

Nor does the writer ever forget to cover Mr. Jefferson's loves. His wife Martha (or Patty) who died after child birth; his lover Maria Hadfield Cosway. And he convinced me that Jefferson did not have an affair with Sally Hemings his slave, because she would have been too young and he just was not there during the conception of her children. 

The book. of course, covers major events, like Jefferson's general dislike of the edited version of his Declaration of Independence. The Louisiana Purchase and Lewis and Clark Expedition during his Presidency (Merriweather Lewis was his cousin). But, more importantly, the book spends time looking at Jefferson's world in a way that Jefferson himself might have looked at it. His description of Jefferson's trip through the south of France and North Italy---to steal Piedmont rice, no less---reads like a romantic travelogue written by Jefferson. 

The book adroitly and quite succinctly covers early party politics by describing the battle between Federalists lead first by Adams and then Chief Justice John Marshall, and Jefferson's and Madison's Democrats. I never understood that part of American political history until I read this book. Ironically, while Jefferson's ideology "won" during his time, his views of states rights and small government were ultimately defeated by his admirer Abraham Lincoln. 

In the end, Jefferson the architect/philosopher/viticulturalist (our first Robert Parker!)/inventor/naturalist and bad accountant comes across as a multi-layered and conflicted person (albeit a Patrician born to high office) like many people. He was a principaled intellectual who knew he had to compromise to achieve his goals. Like with Slavery, while he fought against it almost his whole life, he kept slaves until he died, emancipating but a few. 

Mr. Randall's biography is the perfect balance between the breathless worship of Joseph Ellis' "The American Sphinx" and muck raking bodice ripper of Fawn Mackay Brodie's "An Intimate History". It is breezy without being as low-caloric as David McCullough's "John Adams". Throughout, the author uses journalistic devices like foreshadowing and headlining that occasionally comes across as repetitive. 

My biggest gripe about the book is that it spent far too little time talking about arguably Jefferson's greatest period, his presidency and his legacy. There is maybe three or four chapters near the end. After the huge build up to this point, I would have like to read more about his Presidency and its aftermath. Perhaps the author ran out of space. 

Perhaps the author became so imbued with Jefferson's life that he took on Jefferson's attitude. In the end, Jefferson listed in his own epitaph as his accomplishments, the Declaration, the University of Virginia, and his family. He didn't think it important enough to mention that he was elected and served two terms as the President of the United States of America, a country he helped to found.