Rating: 4/5

Thinking of how to review this little novel is beginning to take me longer than reading it so let’s just do this. Like a radio station with a dodgy signal sometimes this book is sharp and clear and beautiful and sometimes it’s vague and mushy and hard to hear. Many pages I wanted to turn into wallpaper and paper my house with, so I could read them again when I gazed into the mid-distance looking for inspiration, but others were just blah blah blah about tiresome rich people in Peru in the 18th century. Enough about neurotic actresses and their sycophants! So what you get is potted biographies of three people who got killed when the famous bridge collapsed. You might say it’s an examination of any random death. What is the meaning of it? What is God up to? A humble monk investigates the incident and compiles a massive book. (Okay he can’t be that humble then.) His idea was to prove that God knew what he was doing when he either broke the bridge deliberately or passively allowed the last threads to fray (it was a rope bridge). The concept that the municipality of Lima should have instituted regular bridge inspections and it was their gross negligence in not doing that was the obvious reason for the tragedy is bizarrely not addressed, even though, clearly, that would have got God off the hook. The priest did not have to go rootling around in the lives of these victims to figure if they in some way deserved to die. 

Fans of this book quote the last sentence which is about there being a bridge between the living and the dead and the bridge is made of love. But I thought that was the worst bit. It made me feel a bit sick. Maybe I’m a fan of the parts the real fans of this book think are the worst bits!

Well, it’s an oddity and it’s worth your time. 3.5 stars rounded up because I don’t wanna plunge to my death from a frayed rope bridge in Lima, Peru on Friday, July 20th, 1714 or any other day. And so far I haven’t.

This kind of thing.

****

Uncle Pio came of a good Castilian house, illegitimately. At the age of ten he ran away to Madrid from his father’s hacienda and was pursued without diligence. He lived ever after by his wits. He possessed the six attributes of the adventurer – a memory for names and faces, with the aptitude for altering his own; the gift of tongue; inexhaustible invention; secrecy; the talent for falling into conversation with strangers; and that freedom from conscience that springs from a contempt for the dozing rich he prayed upon. From ten to fifteen he distributed handbills for merchants, held horses, and ran confidential errands. From fifteen to twenty he trained bears and snakes for travelling circuses; he cooked and mixed punches; he hung about the entries of the more expensive taverns and whispered information into the travellers’ ears – sometimes nothing more dubious than that a certain noble house was reduced to selling its plate and could this dispense with the omission of a silversmith. He was attached to all the theatres in town and could applaud like ten. He spread slanders at so much a slander. He sold rumours about crop and about the value of land.