Rating: 5/5

A REPORT FROM TYSON’S PRISON RELEASE TO THE HOLYFIELD FIGHTS

Sports journalist Richard Hoffer wrote in the first chapter of this 1998 book, “Mike Tyson was … in the Indiana Youth Center… He’d been there for three years, doing famous time for raping Desiree Washington, an eighteen-year-old contestant in the 1991 Miss Black America pageant… But now, the only athlete ever to have been imprisoned in the heat of his career was about to step from behind those walls… Even before his crime, he’d been a strange melding of melodrama and malevolence, more a presence than an athlete… Three years in prison, while he stewed in bitterness, might even have made him dangerous in ways beyond his previous flamboyance… He had been stubbornly unrepentant in prison… One open question was, what was he worth?... He was already 28 years old on the day he was freed, and nobody knew if he could still fight. By most reviews, he had already been fading by the time he went to jail. His aura of invincibility… in his youth, had become a clunking … artificial apparatus. He’d been beaten by James ‘Buster’ Douglas … in 1990… Still… he was the most exciting heavyweight in the world.” (Pg. 11-13)

He continues, “Religion was a wild card, though; [his old promoter Don] King had overseen Tyson’s conversion from Catholicism to his own Baptist religion… and news that Tyson had converted again, to Islam, was not exactly a confirmation of the status quo… King, all the time insisting that Tyson would return to the fold and it would be business as usual, seemed more nervous about Tyson’s religious conversion than the possibility of a managerial change.” (Pg. 16) He first went to a mosque upon his release: “Tyson was joined in the mosque by Muhammad Ali himself… ‘[Tyson] showed great respect and concern for his brother Ali.’ … If a statement had been made, it was hard to find it in the day’s hullabaloo.” (Pg. 18)

He observes, “a knockout answers the question, beyond a doubt, of who won. And there is the pure spectacle of it. Nobody wants to see somebody get hurt, not badly, anyway, but everybody enjoys the sight of a man collapsing… to the floor of the ring… Mike Tyson’s growing fortune was made possible by his ability to generate a calamitous event… Tyson’s 15 knockouts in 1985 made for some pretty vivid footage… Heavyweight boxing was in horrible condition at this point, so the [video] tapes of this concussive little monster began exciting interest… Tyson has moved into the special category of fighter, the knockout artist.” (Pg. 148-149)

He continues, “Strictly speaking, of course, it is barbaric, the lust for such disaster. We shouldn’t really speak of it. It’s of another, more primitive time. But, produced colorfully enough, the heavyweight fight with its contract for concussion remains hugely popular, and how do you explain that?.. Maybe it’s just one of those ceremonies of finality in an ambivalent culture, a chance to see something decided in a ritualized and explosive way, no compromise, for once in their---and our---lives. Maybe this is what Tyson pledged every time he entered the ring…. Maybe what he offered, in his elemental way, was an abnormal clarity.” (Pg. 158)

Of the conclusion of the second Holyfield fight, he recounts, “Tyson… had the best flurries of the night. He had lost the first two rounds on everybody’s cards, but here he was, more fiercely controlled than before, throwing combinations, even. There was no question, through two minutes of the round, that he was winning it. What happens next becomes the best evidence that higher powers were, for this evening, directing fate… Tyson with no more than 40 seconds left in the round, rested his head on Holyfield’s right shoulder and… sought out Holyfield’s ear… his chin sliding up Holyfield’s neck, until he tastes cartilage. He bit mightily, a crunching, eyes-closed chomp. There was only a small lapse before Holyfield realized what had happened… Holyfield … turned and went to his corner. And Tyson sprang at him from behind, pushing him two-handed. His insanity was evidently one hundred percent… This would become a milestone in defeat against which all future unhingings could be measured. A man, in his worst hour of need, had simply tapped out, been empty, come up with nothing, gone crazy.” (Pg. 251-253)

He concludes after Tyson’s later press conference, “Tyson begging for his job back not what was called for. Nor would it be effective; contrition may be a powerful force, but there were now economic arguments weighing against Tyson. The ugliness of the fight, and the postfight hysteria that closed down portions of the MGM casino for several hours, was a black eye for Las Vegas tourism and a hit to the bottom line… The real message was plain: The Hilton and its casino brethren did not want to be associated with this type of entertainment.” (Pg. 259-260)

This detailed (and sometimes perhaps a bit prolix) book will interest those wanting to know more about Tyson’s late career.