Rating: 4/5

ICE STATION by Matthew Reilly

Synopsis /

Antarctica is the last unconquered continent, a murderous expanse of howling winds, blinding whiteouts and deadly crevasses. On one edge of Antarctica is Wilkes Station. Beneath Wilkes Station is the gate to hell itself...

A team of U.S. divers, exploring three thousand feet beneath the ice shelf has vanished. Sending out an SOS, Wilkes draws a rapid deployment team of Marines-and someone else...

First comes a horrific firefight. Then comes a plunge into a drowning pool filled with killer whales. Next comes the hard part, as a handful of survivors begin an electrifying, red-hot, non-stop battle of survival across the continent and against wave after wave of elite military assassins-who've all come for one thing: a secret buried deep beneath the ice...

My Thoughts /

More action than a Die Hard movie!!

Antarctica, on average, is the coldest, driest, and windiest continent. Most of it is a polar desert (despite all its ice, Antarctica is classified as a desert because so little moisture falls from the sky), where there has been no rainfall for approximately two million years, yet 80% of the world’s freshwater reserves are stored there. In 1959, 12 countries with scientists stationed in and around Antarctica signed an agreement that "Antarctica shall continue forever to be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and shall not become the scene or object of international discord". Since then, more than 38 countries have signed what is now known as the Antarctic Treaty.

Right from the first page, this is a high speed turbulent thrill ride. The book’s pace is frenetic, so much so that I found myself really not caring that the story line is, well, unlikely and more than a little farfetched. But what the hell, throw caution to the wind and just enjoy! Storyline aside, the characters were strong and engaging, likeable and at times made you laugh out loud. There are definitely some cringe worthy moments (oh just get over yourself – leave your cynicism locked away - and just enjoy it for what it is – a really fun entertaining read!) Trigger Warning: This book has it all – carnage, slaughter, gun violence, crossbows, magneto-grappling-hooks (what the), killer whales, cute seals, a sassy teenage girl, scientists, bad as marines, hovercrafts and, spaceships????. This story is all about entertainment, and while it doesn’t leave a lasting impact, it does provide a getaway into an exciting military-based adventure that could rival any action movie (John McClane is a kitten compared to Shane Schofield!). Now I don’t know how on earth there could possibly be another book – Schofield has more lives than a cat and he would have used up every single one of them during this story!! That aside I really enjoyed the writer’s story telling style – although totally unbelievable – it still nonetheless drew you in and kept your attention page after page. While Schofield was a most unbelievable hero one of his most endearing qualities was, he was likeable and you were rooting for him in every scenario. I will definitely read the next book when I find myself wanting some fun unrealistic shoot-em-up non-stop action!