Rating: 5/5

Wow, where do I even begin to start?! Fantastic! Brilliant! Dazzling! Glamorous! Scandalous! Delicious! Sinful! Glistening! Fabulous! A masterpiece if I may say so (and I do may)! Are there even words that are enough to describe this book?

I am taken by storm with this book, this whirlwind of a novel. This classic! I found out about this particular book as I found a part of it as a serial in a Swedish magazine from the 80s, Veckorevyn, and it didn't even take me a page to get me hooked on it! A few sentences and I was already in love, but it was obvious that the magazine had shorted it down remarkably much, so I went out on a hunt to track this book down and buy it, and so after having spent the bigger part of this month together with my 1986 edition of this book, I can finally spew my love for it all over the Internet and this Goodreads book-(data)base!

At first I was surprised to find that this book took place in the 20s and forward, and not in the 80s as I had supposed. BUT, that was quickly changed to the admiration and adoration I have now for this book. The writing style was immaculate, the scandalous and sexually depictive, yet glamorous and intriguing, glittering story and history of this family and these two sisters, Angela du Beaumond and Kiki Devlin, was beyond anything I have ever read before! I am one hundred percent honest when I say that this has already become one of my all time favorite books, I fell in love with these two sisters and the family dynamic, the story of this troubled yet loving and caring family, who all love each other but life's obstacles makes the roses' thorns more prominent than its beautiful scent and lush colors of love.

I was surprised by how much sex there was in this book, which I have found out was very common in the golden decade of the 80s (my favorite decade), and I absolutely loved it! Adored it! It had a sense of 'Dynasty" of it (though I have only seen a few bits of this show), but BETTER! This is far from a B-soap opera or a Harlequin-binding, not even close to the diminishing and condescending title of the genre "lady-filth" or whatever you may call it. This is a work of art, a masterpiece, a proof of literary and poetic mastery, a hard-work that is deserving of standing ovations I dare say. TODAY TOO! We need a resurrection of reading this book with today's younger generation(s). I think it would be very giving and healthy and overall beneficial for the youth of today to read something like this, especially this particular book, for it would in my opinion offer a mental and intellectual stimulation I feel (and fear) that we have a major lack of in today's digital and careless society. This book has, but is not limited, to the following; sex and sexual enocunters and intrigues (we all know that that sells like butter!), poetic descriptions and detailed plots and conversations, several side-intrigues and turning points, many turn of events and surprising twists (that we also know is appreciated today, right?), romance and darkness, success and excess, sisterhood and spite, hate and love, glamour and scandal, filth and glitter... All of this forms this daring read, that oozes excess and not to say the least an excess of the author's, June Flaum Singer's, literary talents!

I am in awe of this book, I am amazed, breathtaken! 

Art does not attract to all, I know that now (especially when viewing the surprisingly low average-rating this book has recieved on here, a sad 3.39 stars, while many soulless and imbecil [and remember, opinions are still allowed to keep and share!] and generationally correct books strike to the higher ranges between the numbers 4 and 5 stars!), but I do hope more people get to lay their eyes on this book, read about it, get their interests caught in its web of diamond necklaces and see-through lingeries, and get to read this book. For I state, that this book, is a marvelous book, and it must not step out of time. Not in this time, where intellectual and literary stimuli is a necessity, now more than ever! 

Ms/Mrs June Flaum Singer, THANK YOU for this beautiful and admirable book! I admire you now, and I cannot wait to throw myself inot all of your books from now on! &lt;3 &lt;3 &lt;3 &lt;3

With love, a new reader, Tim, xx