Rating: 3/5

Until the recent blockbuster comic book movies convinced sports fans that men in tights who were not pro wrestlers could be cool, we comics geeks hid our books like family secrets. But the days of proudly admitting readership might be at an end, because The Science of Superheroes deals a blow to comic book credibility that not even $100 million in opening weekend box office receipts can heal: while superheroes may be cool, many of their powers are scientifically unsound.

Authors Lois Gresh and Robert Weinberg, both lauded science fiction writers, deconstruct the powers of such iconic heroes as Spider-Man, Superman, the Hulk, and the Flash and conclude that, well, they're a load of bunk.

Let's discuss Spider-Man and Superman, the flagship heroes of Marvel and DC, respectively, and among the most well-known fictional characters in the world. Peter Parker, a dweeby science student, was bitten by a radioactive spider, giving him the proportional strength, speed, and agility of the arachnid. The problem? Spiders are not particularly fast, agile, or strong. 

"Spiders move quickly, but are not noted as being particularly fast for their size," Gresh and Weinberg write. "Anything with eight legs can only move so fast without tripping over itself... [and] spiders have never been noted for their great strength." Also, spiders "scurry about on the ground or on their webs but are not noted for their grace and balance." The most disappointing news? Not all spiders can climb walls, so depending on what kind of spider bit him, Spider-Man wouldn’t be able to scale buildings like, well, a spider. And let's not even discuss the improbability of Spidey’s vaunted spider sense.

Superman is even more impossible. Over the decades, many explanations have been given for the Man of Steel's incredible strength, the most lasting of which is that his native planet Krypton's gravitational field was much stronger than that of Earth's. As a being built to withstand that gravity, Superman is able to overcome Earth's weaker gravity and lift the comparatively lighter objects on Earth quite easily.

But there’s a little problem here, too. "The force necessary to lift an object on a planet is equal to the mass of the planet multiplied by the gravitational force present on that planet," the authors write. "Thus, a human who could lift 100 kg on Earth could lift 600 kg on the moon, which has one-sixth the gravity of Earth. Which would imply that for Superman to be 1,000 times stronger on Earth than he is on Krypton, Krypton would have to be 1,000 times as massive as the Earth." 

And there's the rub: a planet that size simply could not exist. Even if it could there would be the small matters of how a creature could withstand the incredible gravitational pressure (hint: it couldn’t) and ludicrous speed necessary to achieve escape velocity to launch infant Kal-El on his journey to begin with (1/30th the speed of light, to be exact). I'm as crushed as you are, believe me.

The only failed chapter in this fascinating and easily digested book is the one on the mutant X-Men. It begins with a recap of the comic book's major characters and story arcs, moves into a discussion of evolution, and then wastes time refuting the ridiculous arguments supporting creationism. It ends without ever discussing this fundamental question: could evolution produce a man who shoots ruby lasers from his eyes (Cyclops), a woman who controls weather (Storm), or a man who turns to ice (Iceman). I'm going to step out on a limb and answer no to those questions, but it would have made for an entertaining read.