Rating: 4/5

It strikes me that many of the readers who have commented on this book may have misunderstood Farley Mowat’s intention. Yes, these are stories of astonishing courage and resourcefulness in the face of overwhelming adversity. Of individual heartbreak and family tragedy. Of the amazing feats of Inuit adaptability, the lengths that the peoples of the arctic have gone to survive and even thrive in such harsh conditions. The stoicism of self-sacrifice, willingly going to “The Snow Walker” in order to save the lives of other family members. Yes, all of that is here in these stories and Mowat is among the best of story tellers.
But that’s not the real story Mowat is telling us here. The real story is the devastation that the invasion of their land and culture by Europeans has wrought upon the peoples of the arctic. The “gifts” of the white man: his guns, his economics, his whiskey, his diseases, even his religion. The guns that helped to decimate the herds of caribou that formerly sustained the people. The trader economics that transformed a sustainable hunter economy into a fur trapper economy and then abandoned the trappers to starvation when the fur market disappeared. The whiskey that addled the brains and destroyed the health of one of the hardiest, most competent, most resourceful people on earth. The diseases that wiped out entire communities and left the people dependent on medical care that never arrived in the far-flung settlements. The religion that robbed a people of their spiritual unity with the land and the natural world in favor of a set of foreign rules and restrictions on a lifestyle that had sustained them for many centuries.
No, these are not just stories of heroism; these are angry stories. And reading them feels like a kick in the gut. I applaud them, but for entirely different reasons from those expressed by most readers. Farley Mowat knew exactly what he was about. Regrettably, the damage has been done, the Inuit can never return to the life they formerly led. The best we can hope for is that some belated effort can be made to help the remaining arctic people to salvage some small part of their remarkable heritage.