Rating: 2/5

John Neihardt's classic is a problematic read to be sure. On the one hand, Neihardt was a sympathetic interlocutor who elicited a fascinating account from an extraordinary man who lived through several major episodes in late-19th-century history. On the other hand, his poetic pretensions led him to rearrange and dress up that testimony, adorning it with his own mediocre neo-Romantic insight, and altogether distorting the historical and cultural record. 

Readers of Black Elk Speaks may be surprised to look up key episodes in the volume in the raw transcripts of their conversations, only to find that they were entirely invented by Neihardt. 

Now, on the one hand, I have a certain amount of sympathy for Neihardt, who worked very hard in order to preserve and present a document of great power and importance. He was writing at a time when it was still widely believed that the Lakota were a "primitive people," "savage," and "uncivilized," and he labored to find an audience for their experience, with considerable success in the long run. 

That may explain his transformation of the plain-spoken style of the transcript into a somewhat maudlin kind of free verse, seeming to my eyes to be modeled after Goethe's "Sorrows of Young Werther" or the American transcendentalists. 

But it does not excuse some of Neihardt's wholesale inventions - especially his deep distortions of Black Elk's "Great Vision," which altogether inverted the sense and meaning of the experience, coercing it into a frame that Neihardt apparently found more congenial to his sentiments. 

I wrote at length about this particular problem on my blog, here: 
http://mesocosm.net/2012/12/11/black-...

The testimony itself is wondrous and invaluable, and I refer the interested reader to DeMallie's "The Sixth Grandfather" instead of "Black Elk Speaks." "The Sixth Grandfather" consists of the annotated publication of the transcripts of Black Elk's conversations with Neihardt, and presents his perspective in a much more accurate way.

Update: I would now assert with confidence that Neihardt's actual source for Black Elk's supposed "cosmic vision" was Cicero. From his "Dream of Scipio": 

"See! the universe is linked together in nine circles or rather spheres; one of which is that of the heavens, the outermost of all, which embraces all the other spheres, the supreme deity, which keeps in and holds together all the others; and to this are attached those everlasting orbits of the stars. "