Rating: 4/5

In L. Frank Baum: Creator of Oz, Katharine M. Rogers combines a traditional biography with deep analyses of Baum's works, including books, poems, plays, and films. In fact, Baum wrote a staggering 55 novels, 83 short stories and at least 42 scripts, and Rogers essentially provides Cliff's Notes—plot summaries followed by analyses and conclusions—for what feels like all of them. The back-to-back reviews are overwhelming, especially when Rogers covers the latter years, when Baum is especially prolific and writing overlapping stories with similar characters and themes. But she offers smart analyses and I kept turning the pages to see where her thoughts would lead. 

Baum's life story is a very American journey, migrating from 19th-century New England to the Midwest as he tries his hand at many vocations. At age 44, he lands on the career that becomes his legacy. Money troubles haunt him, initially through failed enterprise and later by spending outside his means. In 1911 he lists his assets as two suits of clothing, a five-year-old typewriter, and 11 second-hand reference books. (Fortunately, his wife Maud, a well-known feminist and suffragist, kept most family assets and incomes in her name and bank account, so when Baum files for bankruptcy, the family income remains secure.)

I'm a fan of Oz (like everybody), and Rogers' examination of that series of books is more interesting than the unfamiliar titles. Her interpretation of his works' declining quality, something any child will recognize if she reads the Oz series from start to finish, is enlightening. Frank initially adhered to self-imposed rules for children's literature: no romance, no condescending language, no helpless females; always promote life lessons and pose philosophical questions. But then Baum's first title, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900), is adapted into a wise-cracking, slapstick musical revue (1901) that widely veers from Baum's storyline. It tours for eight years and breaks box-office expectations. This financial windfall inspires Baum to eschew his earlier dictums and spend the rest of his life trying to replicate the play's success by pandering to the lowest common denominator. Many of Baum's subsequent Oz books lean less on philosophical queries and deliver romantic entanglements and helpless females. The work suffers for it. No book after The Wonderful Wizard matches its success. 

In a thoroughly heartbreaking (and, sadly, very American) ending, Baum's health problems caused him debilitating pain, but he delays scheduling surgery until he earns enough to afford it. Even after receiving a new royalty payment, Baum has to ask to borrow $350 from his publisher "in order to secure a first-class doctor, nurse, and hospital room." The last words he spoke were to his wife on his deathbed and he references the desert landscape from the Oz series: "Now we can cross the Shifting Sands."