Rating: 5/5

I Hate English is a realistic fiction book that tells the story of a little girl, Mei Mei, who is resisting learning to speak in English because she favors her native language of Chinese. The book tells the story of how Mei Mei is great at arithmetic, but struggles to learn English. It shows her thinking through how letters in English "fight" with each other (such as t and r in the work trip) and Mei Mei is not excited about trying to distinguish the sounds here. A teacher, Ms. Nancy, shows up to work with Mei Mei and it is this relationship that causes Mei Mei to want to speak more English. Throughout the book, it is obvious that Mei Mei might be able to speak more English than she lets on, and she is consciously choosing to speak Chinese. Ms. Nancy explains to Mei Mei that in America, most things happen in English and she needs to be able to ask for things in English and understand conversations. In the end, Mei Mei talks for 22 minutes straight in English, showing her growth as an English Language Learner. I believe this book could be used as a read aloud in grades K-3, though it would be great for an English Language Learner in 4th or 5th grade as well.

Because there are so many English Language Learners in our classrooms today (quite a few in my own classroom currently) I think this book would be great for a read aloud closer to the beginning of the school year to facilitate conversation about differences in students and the ability to see the viewpoints of others. At that point in the year, there will most likely be several students learning English for the first time, and (if it is a younger grade level) students who already speak English that do not quite understand why their new peers either do not understand them or do not speak very much. I think a hugely important point in the book is that Mei Mei often chooses NOT to speak for fear of struggling, and this is a very common characteristic of English Language Learners. Having this as a read aloud could spark discussion amongst class members about how they can be helpful and show leadership to those who might need a little more help starting out. It could also be a comfort to those learning English that they are not the only ones, and that their teachers (with the example of Ms. Nancy in the book) are there to help them and not make learning English more difficult for them.

Another way I can think of to use this book in the classroom would be, specifically in grades K-1, a way for students to do some type of expressive writing. Students in Kindergarten are supposed to be able to do opinion writing, and I think that after hearing this book as a read aloud, students could be given the task of going to their tables and writing/drawing about how they would feel if they were Mei Mei. (in a brand new place with a new language) I'm sure students would have strong opinions about this and it would be a great way for those who are not ELL's to see the viewpoint of those who are, and those who are ELL's could know that they are not alone. Students could then have the option to share their writing or drawing with table mates or the entire class and this could lead to more discussion about the fears students may face in coming to school or the fears some may have about learning English.

This book is a WOW book to me because I see students going through this every day! Through tutoring and teaching full time, I see that there are many students who really struggle to feel that they can even speak aloud for fear of being laughed at or for not knowing how to properly express their thoughts. This would be a phenomenal book to read aloud to further classroom community and to help students really better understand this viewpoint. I think that this text is beautifully written and I especially like how it always takes note of HOW Mei Mei says her words. (English or Chinese) This would be a great book to revisit later in the semester as well, to see how students feelings may have changes or gotten better when it comes to speaking English or speaking aloud.