Rating: 5/5

*happy sigh*

This book was so good. There is a magical quality about the first half, it's shrouded in a haze of summer and childlike simplicity. 

The Willowby's and Barshinskey's lives mingled ever since that perfect summer of 1904, and what people were like when they were little, it what they were like when they become big. Each family has three children, and both families find something fascinating in the other. 

We have the adventurous Sophie Willowby and the quiet home-body Daisy May Barshinskey who ever since the first night they met have been friends through thick and thin. And they stay that way, even when they don't understand each other. 

Galina Barshinskey was from beginning to end an undisciplined child, likable in moments and horrible in most others. Instead of likable I shout really say I felt sorry for her, because she didn't realize what she was doing, at least she didn't see what was wrong with it. She acted partly from selfishness and partly from fear of living like her family had. 

Edwin Willowby had me gripping my seat, terrified that he'd go and do something stupid. I don't know if I like him or not, he's someone I just don't get. Weak, that's what he was. 

One thing I've just got to say, and I'll echo Sophie, "My God, Lillian, sometimes I hate you, really hate you!" I actually disliked Lillian far more than that vixen Galina. Lillian was a foolishly proud, stuck up brat who didn't really care about or love anyone, all she cared about was "What would everyone SAY?!" The woman didn't care about how anyone felt, it was all her. She was so self righteous that she made me wish I could just give her one, well timed smack on the head. It's a shame Ivan didn't do it for me, I'd have cheered him on. 

Which reminds me, I really liked Ivan I wish we could have seen more of him. I think he was often blinded by a dream, a dream that had a tidy, sweet smelling house with a princess there to look after him. In fact, his dream was the life he never had but got to see the Willowby's living. Somehow, I don't think he'd have been happy with that life, though. Ivan Barshinskey was irresistible, he was a stubborn imp as a child and all grown up he wasn't much different, except that a war and a hard childhood messed him up a bit. 

 My one, irritation, I wish Diane Pearson hadn't made the ending so bitter sweet. Why did she have to say Ivan never told Sophie he loved her? One line was all I needed, I could leave the rest. And then we have Edwin. He was so, infuriating! Nearly as bad as Lillian, what would it have taken for the author to say he gave up his dancing girl dream and become happy with his good, sweet wife? It would have taken the same amount of space as it did for her to tell us he never did! So, everyone gets what they want, and none of them are happy. Well, maybe somewhat. But still...

PG-13 Several rapes, not graphic, a murder and mild swearing, anywhere from Ds, Hs and Bs. One character is a whore and we see quite a bit of her.