Rating: 4/5

Empire Express by David Haward Blain is a monumental feat. This praise is fitting for a book whose pages contain the story of building such a monumental feat as the first intercontinental railroad. Meticulously researched and well-written, this tome is a must-read for anyone interested in railroads, American history, Congressional corruption, the Gilded Age, and the treatment of Native Americans in service of the goal of manifest destiny.

Like a locomotive starting from a dead stop and picking up speed until it reaches a crescendo, Bain's writing starts out somewhat timid, as if the author thought he bit off more than he could chew. Throughout the course of the book, however, Bain's writing becomes stronger and more compelling. This was no doubt aided by what was assuredly a massive volume of research that he performed over the course of years. Much of Bain's source material seems to consist of the letters and telegrams that the Central Pacific and Union Pacific executives sent to each other over the course of some 30 years. This correspondence is illuminating, as it shows the intrigue present at such a high level of American business, with the stakes so exorbitantly high. It also reveals the extent of the corruption that these railroad bigwigs wrought upon the American people in their quest to unite the East and West coasts of the country. Moreover, these letters reveal that the completion of this unbroken railroad was no sure bet. Labor shortages, conflict with Native American tribes, and shoddy financing seemed poised to bring the whole empire crashing down. Yet Bain shows that these challenges, though towering, did not break the resolve of those who wanted the railroads connected.

Other reviewers no doubt delve more into these aspects of the book, so I will henceforth contain myself to explaining why I gave this book four stars and not five. For the first 200 or so pages, I was floored by the author. Bain seemed to write with an urgency that matched that of Asa Whitney and Theodore Judah, the two pioneers of the East-West railroad lines that he writes so glowingly about in the first part of the book. Their vision, as well as their thwarted pleading to build the railroad, were remarkably compelling and devastating, respectively. Once Judah got his early support of the eventual Central Pacific clique, the narrative seemed to roll forward with even more steam. But when Bain dove into the nitty-gritty of the financing aspect of the operation, as well as some of the shifty shenanigans out East in the Union Pacific boardroom, he lost me for a bit. Bain would have benefited the general reader more had he spent less time explaining the complicated maneuvering of Collis Huntington in Washington or Dr. Thomas Durant in New York. These were no doubt important aspects of the story, but the level of detail was too high for the general reader.

These long explanations made the book too long. At 711 pages of text, anyone without a deep interest in railroads or the American West may be found snoozing in the middle third of the book. Bain could have had in me a captivated audience for the entire book if it was about half as long (350 pages or so), and I think I am not alone in saying this.

The end of the book, however, was just as compelling as the beginning. The race to meet the rails somewhere in Utah, the subsequent celebrations, and even the resulting congressional inquiries were expertly rendered by Bain. This book, though at times frustrating because of its deep dives into the mundanities of railroad financing and board-room intrigue, was nonetheless a masterpiece. I would, however, caution those who are not railroad geeks to prepare for some long stretches of boredom--just as, I imagine, conductors on the railroad advised passengers to prepare for their own stretches of boredom on the great Western plains of the United States.