Rating: 3/5

Nectar in a Sieve, written by Kamala Markandaya, is a wonderful novel that lets the reader peek inside the heart of Indian culture. Markandaya, the author of A Handful of Rice and 
Some Inner Fury, is actually named Kamala Purnaiya Taylor; she was raised in Mysore, India but she later moved to Britain after India declared its independence. Nectar in a Sieve follows the life of an average lower-class Indian, looking at the effects of globalization and the conflict between traditional and rural India. The narrator is Rukmani, who is married to a tenant farmer named Nathan. Their family’s main goal for each day is to survive. The book has negative event followed by negative event into a catastrophic break down at the end. Markandaya simply takes the problems of India (drought, monsoon, loss of tradition) and applies them to her fictional characters. 
	The effect of globalization and modernization on the readers was very dramatic and interesting. It was also fascinating to see the extreme differences between life in the United States and life in India. Indians have many more problems to deal with than we do, including unpredictable monsoons and droughts, a large class of starving farmers when the weather is poor, and chaos in their cities. There is so much organization in American life that we get used to it, but India has very unorganized cities and villages, and it was very fascinating to read about. Also, the Indian views and culture was clearly seen through the events that the characters experienced and their thoughts and feelings, and it was wonderful to learn about it. 
	The novel was very extreme in some parts, and it was a pretty depressing read. When you think it couldn’t get any worse, another tragedy comes along. This is not necessarily a weakness, but it gets a little mundane after a while. Markandaya could have mixed in more positive events to have a larger contrast, and to prevent the reader from getting eventually numb to the pain the characters go through. Also, the book could drag at some parts of the story, and I lost interest in some parts. She could have shortened some of the excessive discussion of topics already covered. She had long descriptions that could have been more concise. 
	Overall, I consider Nectar in a Sieve to be a pretty good book. It was not one of my favorites, but I was interested through most of it. It was enjoyable to see the Indian culture through the eyes of one experiencing it herself. It is a wonderful novel for anyone who enjoys learning of elements of other cultures.