Rating: 4/5

I tend to steer clear of biographies; I find them dry and dull and usually not worth the effort it takes to read them. But after finishing The Sea Fairies, my curiosity about Baum himself was piqued. Like many children, I grew up with the Oz books - Baum's, with an occasional and far inferior attempt by Ruth Plumly Thompson. (Yes, children can tell the difference. It doesn't matter the age - you know when one book is better than another.)

In recent years, I've started to build, or rebuild collections based on which books I truly want to keep on my shelves - rather than the more pretentious "this makes me look intelligent or at least well-read" instincts that I think drive a fair amount of book owners. As I weed through my books, I find that I'm consistently drawn to certain categories, many of which have always appealed to me, since the age that I'd first learned to read on my own. Baum's Oz stories have always held a special place in my heart and my imagination, and I currently have an entire shelf dedicated to him.

Before I started to read some of the non-Oz Baum books I hadn't grown up with and have purchased in more recent years, I wanted to gather a bit more information about the man behind the curtain. Why did he focus so much on female-centered stories? Why were his descriptions so lavish - from room decorations to clothing to a bit of filmy lace on a girl's gown? What was Baum like, and why did he write these books that I've always loved so dearly?

Disappointingly, a lot of the answer boils down to: money.

But of course it's more complicated than that.

Rogers writes in a clear, approachable style; although she includes a fair amount of detail, including sales figures for Baum's various publications, the paragraphs always have a narrative flow that makes them much more than a stale recitation of facts. She does get a bit repetitive in places and loops back on herself, muddying the timeline by titling her chapters with date ranges but organizing them by theme. Baum might've been simultaneously writing books and working on theatre productions, but Rogers will focus on one, then the other, introducing some confusion by attempting to arrange his life in a more orderly fashion than he'd ever managed himself.

Rather than stating the bare-bones facts of Baum's life, from start to finish, Rogers inserts her own interpretations of his thinking, motivations, etc. That makes it a much more engaging read, but I didn't always agree with her - and it also makes me wonder what bits she was leaving out, or shrewdly representing in a way that fit her arguments. 

For example, Baum's sometimes blatant racism is buried in the footnotes at the very back of the book, which I carefully read through because I'm a completionist. It would be easy to miss these less favorable pieces of information about Baum's life and worldview. Some of the language Rogers uses is frankly a little suspect itself - such as praising Baum's portrayal of "noble savages" - and in the footnotes, she carefully explains away all his racism as merely a sign of the times. In one case, she says, Baum wrote a horrific editorial due to the reasonable fear for his life and safety on the frontier. Talking about wiping out another population of humans was, to Rogers, somehow defensible.

It's true that racism was (and often still is...) a daily fact of life for most white Westerners. It also appears to be true that Baum had some fairly progressive views about all people - regardless of gender, color, class, etc - being equal. That's something he wrote about in his idealized fantasy worlds, and I do agree with Rogers that the intentionally absurd hate between the blue &amp; pink countries in Sky Island makes that one of his best books. It's still worth noting and examining his less progressive views and bits of writing, to the same level that Rogers does with Baum's feminism.

Interestingly, his grandfather-in-law was an abolitionist - which you'd think would expand his worldview, but Rogers skips over that while writing her excuses for some of his less tolerant writing. 

Rogers is very heavy-handed in her insistence that Baum was, through-and-through, a feminist who fervently respected and fought for women's rights. This does appear to be true, both in his fictional depictions of women (well, girls mostly) and in the newspaper editorials that Rogers discusses in great detail in the early sections of this biography. Baum, whose mother-in-law was a prominent suffragette, argued passionately for women's right to vote, and believed that women should be free to do and be whatever they wished. He was absolutely devoted to his wife for their nearly 40 year marriage. He thoroughly respected her as a complete and independent person, rather than reducing her to his wife and the mother of his children. He also left most of the finances and practical decisions to her, since he was very, very bad at them. 

Baum was, according to Rogers and the collection of reminiscences she gathered here, a soft-hearted, impractical, highly imaginative dreamer who was always optimistic, friendly, and generous with others. I'm a little bit skeptical of this rosy portrayal, because literally no one is that perfect. It's also clear that Baum Did Not Get Along with his first Oz illustrator, W.W. Denslow. Rogers admits that he frequently criticized the work of his later assigned artist, John R. Neill, whom he never got to know on a personal level, and his exchanges with his publisher show that he had a thick streak of pride and self-importance. That doesn't make him a bad person by any means, but I think it does him a bit of a disservice to try to pretend he was superhumanly good.

The bits about Denslow were very interesting, and I'm glad Rogers went into this section in a bit more detail. As a kid, I'd always wondered why the art changed so dramatically after the first Oz book. I have a particular fondness for Denslow's original depictions of the characters, but in terms of personality, intricacy, and tasteful alignment with the narrative, I found Neill the superior artist. Baum didn't agree, and he repeatedly told his publishers that Neill's art didn't match the images he had in his head. 

Denslow stopped illustrating Baum's works because they had a major rift in their friendship, which destroyed their creative partnership. Denslow shared Baum's copyright on the first Oz book (Rogers didn't say what happened to his royalties when Baum went bankrupt and forfeited his), and he bitterly fought to be recognized as The Inventor of certain characters, because he illustrated them and therefore brought life to them.

Rogers sides with Baum on all counts. I'm inclined to believe Baum was the primary creative force behind this world, particularly since he wrote more than a dozen additional books in the series, with inventions that were more interesting and innovative than even the initial Scarecrow, Tinman, and Lion. But if Baum had such an immense breakup with a very dear friend, and struggled in later years to keep other business partnerships afloat, I doubt he was as Santa Claus-like as Rogers wants to make him appear.

In short, this is an entirely biased book. For a more even-handed depiction of Baum's life, I'd probably have to look elsewhere. But I might find a different rendition terribly boring.

Rogers is a capable writer, demonstrating many of the same qualities she praises Baum for: good sense, approachability, frankness, and a clear simplicity of language that keeps the pages turning at a reasonable pace. I did learn a considerable amount of new information. 

One of the biggest things I'd never known was that Baum wrote under numerous pen names. He made a few forays into adult fiction - Rogers doesn't seem to think these were of much note - but also had several long-running series that he churned out alongside his Oz books. One was a set of classic boys' adventure stories, filled with action and violence and significantly more racism than the books published under his own name. Another, Aunt Jane's Nieces, was a modern series about three girls, supposedly written by a woman. Rogers mentions in passing that Baum's publishers even set up a fake female author to do interviews - after reading Baum's books to be properly informed about their contents. 

I would've liked to read more anecdotes like those, but Rogers keeps turning back to Oz as Baum's most lasting achievement, and the one that interests her most. 

She does spend a fair amount of time going through Baum's other career attempts: running newspapers, futilely trying to find success in the theatre, starting up a failed movie production company, etc. Baum had a lot of ambitions, and he was optimistic about being a huge success in everything he tried. Unfortunately, nearly everything he truly wanted to do turned out to be a failure. From the moment he tried to become an actor as a young man - and fell for a scam that made his family lose a bunch of money - he was obsessed with the theatre, and kept trying to return to it throughout his life. The only successful production his name was ever tied to was the first run of The Wizard of Oz, which was changed so much from his vision that it was unrecognizable. (Much like the well-known movie, which Rogers states Baum probably would've liked. I disagree. He would've loved the success and the money, but the movie ruins the story just as much as the theatre production did...which he did complain about, bitterly, until it made him enough money that he had to publicly retract his words.)

It's honestly pretty depressing to read about a man who spent his life creating things he didn't love, because the things that he was passionate about never made him any money. Realistic. But sad. Like Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, he tried to end his Oz franchise numerous times, but he had to keep returning to it - writing final installments on his literal deathbed.

Rogers finds much to criticize in Baum's final Oz book, Glinda of Oz, which has always been my favorite. His last two Oz books, in my opinion, were the best. So that's another area where Rogers and I disagree.

The last few chapters of this book are mostly an immense amount of literary criticism - which made this less of a strict biography and something I honestly probably enjoyed more. Rogers goes into depth with all of the Oz books, and several of the other books that I have waiting on my shelf, so that makes me excited to try them for myself. I'm also relieved to see that The Sea Fairies didn't sell well and isn't highly regarded...that does match with my opinion of it, so it's not just that I was somehow missing its magic. 

Rogers answered one of my other questions, too: Baum knew a lot about frilly, fragile, expensive items. He spent time as a general store owner, specializing in fancy goods from overseas, and traveled for years as a fine china salesman. Using those experiences, he ran a fairly successful periodical instructing businesses in how to create attractive window displays. (Which he shut down once he was making enough money writing children's books.) Baum had a good eye for beautiful things and knew how to tastefully arrange them, so it's no wonder that he could describe them so well in his fictional works. 

I don't know if this would be The Definitive Baum Biography - Rogers cites so frequently from other works that I wonder how much entirely new material is covered here, and what she missed - but it's an enjoyable, well-written one that gave me a better window into the man who wrote some of my favorite books. I particularly liked the bits of background information surrounding each book, which makes me more excited to read some of his lesser-known works, like the ones about electricity and Santa Claus. 

It does sound like he had a pretty happy life, despite the numerous financial setbacks. He loved his family, had a lot of friends, and adored his wife, who was his partner in every way. I definitely shed a tear at the depiction of his deathbed. I suppose it's not too bad that he never made a go of it in the theatre...sometimes the dreams you set for yourself aren't the areas you're meant to pursue. And he did something else he wanted: he made children happy, and he left an impression that will last for generations.