Rating: 2/5

In this book, Volti offers an ambitiously-broad survey of many of the sociological issues related to technological advance. However, its breadth of scope requires significant tradeoffs in depth of analysis that make it often interesting to read, but seldom very informative.

On the positive side, readers not particularly familiar with the history of technological development will find within these pages a variety of anecdotes, most of which are quite fascinating (though admittedly, many of the author's examples have become tired cliches to those of us who have spent some time studying technology or history before reading this book). However, when it comes to discussions of the contemporary issues related to technological advances, there's really not a lot of substance here. The author raises a number of interesting issues, but covers them so briefly that the reader is left with a feeling that the author has asked all the same questions that have already occurred to anyone who has recently read a newspaper but not made any substantial attempt to answer them. While it's refreshing to read a work by a sociologist who (mostly) keeps his own political views to himself, I can't help but wish the author had covered fewer topics but in much greater depth, offering point-by-point analyses of multiple perspectives on the issues.

Beyond the depth of analysis, the book is a bit of a mixed bag when it comes to the quality of scholarship. While the author seems to have well researched most of the topics, I did occasionally find issues where the superficiality of the analysis could easily lead to erroneous conclusions. Several pages, for instance, are devoted to the much-debated association between violent media and aggressive behavior, but the author does not appropriately qualify the data he presents with the psychological background necessary to correctly interpret those results (in particular, the differences (both qualitative and quantitative) between aggressive behavior as measured in the laboratory and violent behavior as observed in the "real world"). Of course anyone expects to find some points of disagreement with any author, but when the brevity of analysis of such an issue could so easily result in an incorrect interpretation of the state of the research, it does raise the question of the accuracy of some of the author's other statements.

At the end of the day, if you're interested in a book that provides a brief overview of some of the questions people are thinking about with regard to the interactions between technology and social institutions, this book will serve your purposes, but if you're looking for an in-depth analysis of the issues, you would probably be better served by another title.