Rating: 5/5

The Taming of the Shrew is definitely not the late 16th century proto-feminist masterpiece you’ve been hankering for, but what it lacks in positive portrayals of the “fairer sex,” is overshadowed by the bounding leaps of comic gusto on display in every line of verse. Simply put, TTotS is a caustic farce of the war between the sexes (the “merry war” that, due to inbreeding and lack of imagination, would eventually devolve into the barely functioning aborted mutant that is the modern day RomCom) that revels in its own irreverence and indecency. A wealthy Neapolitan nobleman is cursed with a total babe of a daughter, Bianca, with the unfortunate caveat of an unruly, acerbic older daughter—the Shrew of the title, Kate. While he would love to just go ahead and toss Bianca to the suitors who sniff at her skirts like a pack of TexAveryesque wolves, there’s no way in hell he’s going to let her get married and end up stuck with the unmarriageable Kate for the rest of his life. Luckily, Petruchio, who is in town visiting one of his friends, Hortensio—a suitor of Bianca—has no problem at all with immediately marrying someone solely for money marrying Kate. And you’d better believe he’s going to break his wife of any bad attitude she thinks she’ll be having with him. What follows is a fast-paced comedy characterized by its charming cruelty and bawdy wit. Scholars agree that this is most likely Shakespeare’s second play to be written and performed, and already the Bard of Avon’s preternatural talents are on full display. Everything you love in a Elizabethan Comedy is here, folks: disguises, sarcastic servants, snarky banter, a play within a play, puns at a machine gun pace, dimwitted fools, malapropisms and, of course, convenient marriages. Go ahead and leave your contemporary conventions and social sensitivities (which are obviously essential and important, so don’t give me any shit, thanks) at the door, and settle-in for some old-fashioned, mean-spirited laughs. 

Misogyny doesn’t get any more fun than this! (Someone please quote me on this.)