Rating: 5/5

Len Deighton's Spy Line, fifth in the Bernard Samson series and second in the "Hook, Line, and Sinker" trilogy that follows the "Game, Set, and Match" trilogy, takes the world-weary ex-field agent from exile in his childhood city of Berlin through a classic Deightonesque landscape of secrets, double-dealing, and danger.

Prequel Spy Hook ended, after Bernard's ever-more intrusive snooping into what either was inexplicable embezzlement from the Department or perhaps was, um, a hidden slush fund for some very highly secret operation, with an attempt by an oddly out-of-place contingent of British MPs in the French Zone to arrest him...whereupon lifelong friend Werner Volkmann casually identifies himself as the wanted man, allowing Samson to escape.

Samson is, as a Berlin club-owner tells him, "the only man I know who both sides would be glad to get rid of": "If you were found dead tonight there'd be ten thousand suspects: KGB, CIA, and even your own people" (1991 Ballantine paperback, page 8). It's true. The experienced agent, son of intelligence officer Brian Samson, who was stationed in occupied Berlin after the war, has run many a daring caper himself from West Berlin into East Germany, and now he has provided further years of analysis and evaluation back at London Central. He is no beloved of the Communists...and after the defection of his wife Fiona to become a high-ranking Soviet KGB officer, he knows he could be eliminated, whether because of his value against them or simply because of wifely vengeance or whim. Yet from his own side, his dogged investigation into the mysteriously missing funds--an investigation that seems to point toward the traitorous Fiona and also his former boss, Bret Rensselaer, who previously was described as having died in a gunfight in Berlin but who in the previous book suddenly reappeared in the United States--brings a peculiar series of warnings-off of various levels of obliqueness. And in that prequel he indeed was getting a strange vibe from the boys from Langley, too...

So-- Why the attempted arrest of a man far more dogged and capable and loyal than many in the business? Why the inability--or is it unwillingness?--to track the fugitive down to his "squalid room" (page 13) in the city where "[his] people and the Americans still have military powers" and "can censor mail, tap phones, and jail anyone they want out of the way" (page 8)? What of the idea beginning to flicker in and out of his belief that maybe, just maybe, Fiona's appalling defection in fact might have been a play in a long game far subtler than he ever had imagined? And what of his girlfriend Gloria, at 22 only half his age, who loves him and his children dearly and yet who wants to go back to school and who also in this book's prequel had introduced him to an old friend of the family who had ended up trying to kill him?

A twisty, twisty place is the world of Cold War espionage, and, really, nearly any discussion of the many surprises of this novel I would love to discuss would be a plot-spoiler. Suffice it to say, then, that Deighton's Spy Line is, as we have come to expect of this series, a compelling 5-star read.