Rating: 5/5

EADIE'S FOLLOW-UP TO "EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT"

Betty Eadie wrote in the "Author's Note" to this 1996 book, "My near-death experience was just the beginning of my spiritual journey. I understood the importance of sharing my experience and the truths I learned, and I began by describing them in the book 'Embraced by the Light.' Since then, my journey has continued with moments of great joy and periods of great challenge. Along the way, my awakening to God has revealed many more remarkable truths, and has led me to people whose trials and triumphs are powerful reminders of why we are here. I have learned much from my journey, but more than anything else, I have seen the hand of God at work in all of our lives. It is in that spirit that I now share some of the journeys I've taken and the lessons I've learned in 'The Awakening Heart.'" (Pg. xiii)

She reveals, "I began attending two different church groups. In one church I found a spiritual expression of God's love and in the other, a knowledge of God's plan. Together, they began to fill a void in my life... I found a place for both faiths, balancing the two different belief systems in my heart. I knew from my experience that each church fulfills spiritual needs that perhaps others cannot fulfill... No one church can fulfill everybody's needs at every level; there is no 'perfect' religion for all of us... because we are at various levels of spirituality, any step closer to God is good, so we should never criticize any church or faith where people are seeking God." (Pg. 41)

Of the writing of her first book, she explains, "The book was literally given to me word for word... as I wrote, and the book was unveiled, we knew that the book was coming to me---was given to me---almost by divine revelation." (Pg. 94)

She concludes, "I was shown that we each have a purpose, and I have seen that many people try to find theirs. I do not know that we are all to know our purpose... I do not believe that it is important for us to know God's purpose for our lives. He knows, so we don't have to; we are only here to serve... By following our passion, we will tap into the energy God gives us to serve our purpose." (Pg. 223)

Eadie's first book is one of the most popular "first person" accounts of an NDE; and this book (as well as its sequel The Ripple Effect: Our Harvest) will be much appreciated by those who loved her first book.