Rating: 1/5

BLUUURRRRGGH is the one word I would choose to describe this book. I might have somewhat enjoyed it were it not for the narrator, who is the most obnoxious and pretentious person on the planet. He makes many references throughout the book to trimming his pencil moustache, which he is growing specifically for his trip, and to packing the bowl of his pipe. He is snide and condescending to nearly everyone he meets, he refers to comics as good only for children and illiterates, and uses really flimsy contextual excuses to brag to the reader about all the languages he speaks. ("I assured the man my Cantonese was far from perfect...") I got the feeling that most of his conversations with other train passengers he only entered in on specifically so he could write about them later. And on top of all this, I found the prose to be lackluster, written as though by someone who's read too much 18th century travel-writing and filled with weird flourishes and descriptions like "this lovely little mountain pass" and "this good Indian woman". And even more on top of all that, it somehow managed to take this amazing, exciting continent and make it boring. Even taking into account the fact that South America in the '70s is a much different place from South America now, this guy barely got off the train in all of two months. So the book reads like train, train, train, bitch, moan, I am just like Leopold Bloom, South America is so dirty and backwards, this fine Indian woman is a credit to her republic even if she is an illiterate, I couldn't figure out why they all picked me out for a Gringo, especially since my pencil moustache was coming along so splendidly. The only part it actually got interesting was when he meets the writer Borges in Buenos Aires, but aside from that, this was the most joyless, jaded book I've read in ages. When he finally gets to Patagonia he doesn't celebrate in any way other than expressing some mild relief that the trip is over and he now gets to leave, which was exactly how I felt about the book.