Rating: 3/5

It always came back to that. The curse of caring deeply for one woman and being passionately in love with another. 
The much-reviled book.
And even more reviled H!

This was a letdown actually. Angst-wise. Knowing all the crap going in, the book proved mild and meh. 
The H is ‘good’ and ‘honorable’, the h is ‘sweet’ and ‘compassionate’, and the dead ow ‘bright’ and ‘vivacious’. The author preferred taking the we-are-all-conflicted-yes-but-basically-nice-and-honorable-people line instead of any great angst or moving drama over the betrayal. 

*Spoilers inevitable*
Past- 
Because it was betrayal of the worst kind. 
Of all the cheating Hs, his sin seems worse. He says he loved the h all the time when it was the ow who really made him feel happy and comfortable. And he preferred and sought his co-lawyer’s company with whom he had a deep friendship and lawyerly ‘kinship’. As for his wife/h, he had a very patronizing attitude and he either wanted to chide her or bed her. If you love someone – truly – a third person cannot find space in your personal/private/romantic life and certainly you can’t have ‘strong feelings’ for them. How’s it even possible if all your emotions and feelings are tied to one person, that another can slip in. 
I think Johnny Depp’s quote is a good guide in such situations.&gt;&gt;
If you love two people at the same time, choose the second. Because if you really loved the first one, you wouldn't have fallen for the second. 
Elementary!

Present- 
Before they meet again, he’s shown as a grieving, lonely man as he misses his dead wife/ow. The h gets mentioned only in passing, as a pesky memory - like a particularly bothersome bunion that pinches now and then. 
He’d truly loved Elaine, was shattered when she died….
From that he goes to this within a day or two of meeting the h again.
” It’s a much more compelling and painful obsession than that. I’m in love with you.”
Okay, so he drops everything and comes running to her rescue but that doesn’t erase what he’s done in the past. The instant cuddly-fuzzy-fluffy between them was annoying and taking the easy way out.
When I wanted the h to rant and rave, she’d say something mildly offensive and then backtrack and apologise. She apologizes at least 20 times, I’d say. 

What lifts the story?
Though the h forgives him (easily), she couldn't trust him. 
She knew with the knowledge of hindsight that if she’d been older and less idealistic she would have fought to keep her marriage intact. But she hadn't... She hadn’t been willing to be second best with him five years ago, and she still wasn’t now. 
Now without this, the story would've been complete trash.
Triangles are difficult to resolve without completely accepting or belittling the third person. He hurt her grievously and he grovels, but as a reader, my feelings weren't completely assuaged. Because the grovel and chase should have happened years ago, if he truly loved her. Instead, he let the divorce go uncontested and married the ow asap. 

Imo he was just plain selfish and greedy, and 'loved'/wanted/needed both of them.
He was in 'lust' with the h and in 'law' with the ow. And 'really loved' neither! 
Maybe he should have asked himself how he would have behaved if the ow, his colleague had been a man. He would have got the answer to whether his feelings were plus and over respect and friendship or not!

I skimmed, read back and forth but still will give it an almost-3 because this is not an easily forgettable or run of the mill book. And the murder-courtroom drama is okay as well.