Rating: 4/5

There are spoilers ahead for Final Friends: The Party. After the party at the McCoys’ that ended in tragedy, Michael Olsen is determined to find Alice’s killer. The police have ruled the case a suicide, but he isn’t convinced. In the meantime, the students of Tabb High have their hands full preparing for the SATs and organizing the homecoming dance. Jessica Hart dreams of getting into Stanford and being crowned homecoming queen, but something terrible started on the night of Alice’s death, and it’s only just beginning. Trigger warnings: death, suicide, severe injury, paralysis, grief, mental illness, electric shock therapy, abusive relationships, abortion, fat-shaming, bullying, threats.

Did I mention that I love this series and therefore cannot be trusted to be objective about it? Much as I don’t buy nostalgia as a reason, since enjoying something in the past doesn’t necessarily affect my enjoyment of it in the present, I can admit it is a small part. These were some of the first characters I loved, some of the first times a writer shocked me with the twists and turns of a locked room murder mystery. I wish I could re-read it for the first time (an oxymoron, I realize) to see if it still surprises me, but as it is, I’m enjoying all the clues Pike is laying down when it seems like he’s not up to anything in particular, plot-wise. He actually gives us the answer in this book, but I suspect it’s only obvious in hindsight. I love being able to look back at clues I should have picked up on.

Much like The Party, so much of The Dance is spent on character development rather than any murdery/thrillery twists, and that’s part of what I like about this series. I’m much more character driven than plot driven, and Final Friends is all about the characters. Michael and Jessica have realized they’re in love with each other, but they both think the other is too good for them; it’s top-shelf mutual pining, and watching Sara and Russ fighting/flirting is one of the joys of this series. Poor Polly gets sidelined hard by every character, and I feel for her. She’s struggling with the deaths of nearly every member of her family, and watching her unravel on her own provides some of the most unsettling scenes in the book. Weird Clark is also back with a vengeance (more thoughts on him in the next book). There are yet more minor mysteries to solve along with discovering Alice’s murderer, plus the looming tragedy of the dance. Same person? Everyone is a suspect.

I review regularly at brightbeautifulthings.tumblr.com.