Rating: 4/5

I bought this book as a joke gift for the long-distance boyfriend I had in college when I found it in a library book sale for 25 cents. It ended up being the only book I had with me when I flew home next, so I started reading it and I didn't end up giving it to him like I intended (which is good, because that relationship took an eventual nose-dive, and I ended up liking the book). 

Actually, I ended up liking the book so much that I read it again a second time later on-- which is a compliment, because I almost never (if ever) read books more than once, unless for reference. And now that I'm actually married (not to the aforementioned long-distance boyfriend), it's probably time to break it out for a third time. 

Wheat outlines his understanding of a healthy, Christian (specifically Catholic) marriage. 

He addresses cheating/divorce from a Catholic perspective, which I never really understood as a Protestant. This is probably the part of the book I took the most away from. Wheat explains that we are supposed to honor our marriage, and part of that honor includes forgiving the other half when they fail to honor the marriage. As Christ forgave, we should forgive. Although I don't fully agree with him about never allowing a marriage to fail due to infidelity, it changed my perspective a bit. I was raised with a hell of a lot of "self-respect" and a "you cheat once, you're done" sort of mentality. Straight up, no-nonsense Justice. One and done. But we aren't called to demand justice for ourselves. Instead we vow the equivalent of "for better or for worse," and cheating falls into the "worse" category. Marriage should be bigger than one literal screw-up -- which doesn't take away the pain and hard-work that accompanies overcoming the screw-up. 

The part(s) where I differ are about the terms of terminating a marriage. Physical, sexual or emotional abuse (for either spouse or offspring) are not to be tolerated. For me, that includes cheating on me and then having sexual relations without telling me about your affair first. If you come clean before compromising my health, there is still something left to save in our marriage; but if you make me risk my health unknowingly because you're so lusty/cowardly that the sex can't wait until after the conversation (and an STD screen), that blatant disrespect for my physical well-being is intolerable. This book helped me define that important (but hopefully irrelevant) line between Christian marital love and self-respect, which before was more self-love and self-respect.

The other thing I took away was the idea of actively loving to receive love in return. There's a whole philosophical tail-chasing conversation about altruism that can play into this, but I'm going to steer away (this time!) and refocus on nagging. For me, sometimes actively loving is not complaining. I love to voice my distaste for things I find inconvenient... like the toilet paper roll not being replaced once it runs out. But do I love my husband's sanity more than my love to complain? Can I sacrifice my desire to lash out with seething words about empty toilet paper rolls, if it will make my husband's life more enjoyable? And chances are that him enjoying his life more will lead him to be more willing to weigh the benefits of not having to expend the energy of replacing the toilet paper roll with the benefits of making my life more enjoyable by replacing the toilet paper... and if I'm a more pleasant person, he'll be more apt to want to continue keeping me pleasant instead of assuming that it would just be another attempt to fill the angry gaping void that is my blackhole of complaints.