Rating: 1/5

This book gets worse the longer it goes on. 

Shannon flies to Alaska to meet up with her fiancé, Rick, only to find that he’s missing, and she ends up roping in a man named Cody to help her find him. On paper, this is fine—Shannon and Cody will spend time together, and there will be some nice angst as Shannon struggles with her growing feelings for Cody. 

Except, that’s really not what happens. Don’t get me wrong, Shannon does enlist Cody’s help, but searching for her fiancé in the Alaskan wilderness is an afterthought. More time is spent having Cody talk about how much bigger everything is in Alaska—honestly, the only thing stopping him from making a dick joke is the fact that this book was written in 1982. And on the subject of Cody, he’s kind of the worst? I mean, he’s nothing like Brock from “Heart of Stone”—and yes, that is the new standard for terrible love interests—but he knows that Shannon is engaged and is ACTIVELY SEARCHING FOR RICK and he’s all over her. Making comments about how much she doesn’t really love Rick, she loves him. Sir, you have known each other for three days, calm down. Then, when it’s confirmed that Rick’s plan has gone down, he’s pretty much like, “He’s totally dead, but I can ease your broken heart with my dick. (Which is huge because everything is bigger in Alaska.)” 

Everything is wrapped up in a neat bow because once Rick is found, some other woman who was also in the crash shows up and tells Shannon that *she’s* in love with Rick and that she’s going to fight for him. DOES NO ONE IN THIS BOOK HAVE ANY DECENCY?? I mean, it all works out fine because now Shannon can be with Cody, and Rick can be with this woman, and Shannon and Rick are both, “I still love and care about you, but only as a friend” so no one gets hurts BUT STILL. This Belinda/Rick romance comes out of left field and her whole attitude is so off putting. 

Also, Noah is annoying as hell. Like I get, you have to contain your randy son, but he was way too much. 

I like the cover art, though. A solid four stars for that. Wish there had been a better story to go along with it.