Rating: 5/5

Well when Laura goes to a yard sell with her friends she finds a hat called pig city. So then she wore everyday to school. Everyone got used to it. Then she and her friends want to start a club called pig city because of her hat. They made them give insurance that is embarrassing and if they tell anyone about pig city it will be shown to everyoneSo then a kid named Gabriel gave a note to her that said that he knew about pig city but it is only a little that he knows. So then A girl named Sheila a girl who sits in back of Gabriel changed the note And said " I know all about pig city. If you don't kiss me I will tell the whole school. You have very ugly hair." Then she was mad so she asked Gabriel if he can come to her house. He didn't go since he was grounded. Then next week on a Monday he went to her house. Laura showed him the note. Gabriel said that she was lying. Laura never told a lie but since Sheila changed the note that happened. So they began yelling at each other. Laura kicked Gabriel out of her house. So then Gabriel was still mad then he started a new club called monkey town.They started writing on the board like Laura did. She was angry. Then one day Laura goes to Gabriel's house to return his shirt then Laura and the members of pig city attack! They put mustard on him everywhere! So then he was angry and he got the treasures of pig city which is the insurance and showed it to everyone. That was his revenge! So none of the members of pig city talked to Laura. They were all mad at her. Then when Laura was at this brick wAll Sheila and a boy named Howard cut of her hair! She got a bump. So then she saw a paper that said PIGS ARE BALD. It was singed from Gabriel since Howard ask Gabriel for his autograph. Laura was mad! She thought it was Gabriel but it was Sheila. The next day Gabriel goes to Laura's house and gave her flowers. He told her the big truth. They were friends again. Also the members started hanging out with Laura again. This was the end