Rating: 4/5

Rushdie and West’s anthology seems still to be the go to one for modern Indian literature, and it is a rich work worth more than a casual browse. It’s arranged chronologically and provides a good overview of the post-independence Anglophone Indian tradition from Nehru’s ‘Tryst with Destiny’ or ‘Freedom at Midnight’ speech of 14-15 August 1947 through to an excerpt from Kiran Desai’s first novel, published here before the novel itself appeared in 1998. A casual reader of Indian literature, however the collocation is understood—and Rushdie and West understand it widely (according to Rushdie in the introduction V. S. Naipaul declined to be included)—will recognise familiar names: R. K. Narayan, Anita Desai, Rushdie himself, Rohinton Mistry, Amitav Ghosh, Vikram Seth, Arundhati Roy. 

But for me the value of the book came from filling in gaps and finding extraordinary work by writers whose names have fallen out of the book chats. Excerpts from G. V. Desani’s All About H. Hatterr and N. C. Chaudhuri’s Autobiography of an Unknown Indian alone are worth the price of admission. Nearly all readers will find amongst the thirty-four works gems not discovered before. 

Mirrorwork was controversial amongst Indian writers and intellectuals when it appeared, and Rushdie was spoiling for the fight:

‘[T]his large and various survey turns out to be making, fundamentally, just one—perhaps rather surprising—point’, he writes in the introduction, and, ‘This is it: 

‘the prose writing—both fiction and non-fiction—created in this period by Indian writers working in English is proving to be a stronger and more important body of work than most of what has been produced in the 16 “official languages” of India, the so-called “vernacular languages”, during the same time; and, indeed, this new, and still burgeoning, “Indo-Anglian” literature represents perhaps the most valuable contribution India has yet made to the world of books.’

The book includes only one work not originally written in English, a translation of S. H. Manto’s Urdu ‘Toba Tek Singh’.

This seems not to have bothered readers not South Asian, but it didn’t set well at home. Sunil Khilnani, for example, in review noted the ‘indignation and irritation’ with which the anthology was met in India, and added some of his own:

‘The provocation lies not in the individual pieces that have been gathered together as representative of Indian writing but rather in Rushdie’s introduction. This is without a doubt a heroically self-serving performance, which makes the anthology less a balance sheet of contemporary Indian writing and more a 50th birthday present bestowed by Rushdie upon himself, midnight’s perpetual child. Its implicit function, in the Rushdiean scheme of things, is to produce a pop “literary history” of “Indian writing” since 1947, which reveals that it was all leading up to the arrival on the scene of Rushdie himself. Rushdie uses his selections to arrange a preceding sequence of paternity as well as to show off what he now claims as his progeny.’

This is a fight best not joined by someone who reads only one of the languages of India, i.e., English, and me, but fortunately for a reader who would like an alternate and equally-substantial selection of modern Indian literature more inclusive of work translated from the ‘vernacular’ there is Amit Chaudhuri’s 
  Picador Book of Modern Indian Literature
, aka Vintage Book of Modern Indian Literature, which Chaudhuri insists in his introduction is ‘not a riposte to any other anthology’, but, well, it is.