Rating: 2/5

"The Comfort of Strangers" is the unfortunate combination of two of McEwan's worst books (which were published decades later, obviously): "Saturday" &amp; "On Chesil Beach." It has that PVoAA (Powerful Voice of Authentic Authority), or that I've-published-stuff-now-I-will-see-places-with-the-eyes-of-a-wealthy-man tone. Ya know, the rich who think they're above even common violence (made, obviously, more "horrific" by their occurrence to a man of abundant means, gag). It also has that cringe-worthy vanillaness, exemplified rather well in "On Chesil Beach." There are also two lovers in this one; &amp;, like on "Chesil Beach", you couldn't give a rat's ass about either one of 'em.

McEwan's description, impeccable obviously, quickly becomes a banal thing (and before you pooh-pooh it, think also that at a scant 127 pages, the dude shoulda, minimal, CAPTIVATED us). It's as if McEwan lost track of his plot (we get, we get it: the randomness of events that occur to the average [and I must emphasize AVERAGE] tourist, means basically a looser script, a venture toward a certain plotlessness...) and lashing out in strong but overdoingit strokes, his belting-out of description description DESCRIPTION establishes an ambiance that hinders the main characters themselves. Our dislike is a quick but lasting thing. (Like, imagine for a sec. that Virgil was a dullard in the "Inferno"-- Dante's enterprise would've collapsed! There are certain entities that take our hands to take us places, and I believe it is intolerable to make them dunces, dullards, or pure-Fillers.)

Like, who cares? shall be the overwhelming and haunted thought reoccuring in your brain throughout as you try to figure out why this book is anywhere near the Great Works at all. (Is it? It's on the 1001 list, so yes.) Overwhelming, I guess, in the sense that apathy is overwhelmingly sad, futile, and UN-ARTISTIC.

With "The Comfort of Strangers" we begin to form the ugly side of the poetics of this gifted British author. When his books are interested in things, the narrative becomes vile; when there is no interest for Emotion or Depths in said objects (hell, even the vase in "Atonement" is a murky symbol of past bourgeoisie lifestyles colliding/breaking with the harsh pullings of war... but it remains a murkyish symbol nonetheless) the quality of novel really does suffer.

"Comfort" is all about the brutal nature of strangeness-- yes, people: bad stuff happens. Even if you do have the privilege of traveling throughout European cities and dark avenues for an entire month... even then, bad stuff can happen to you.