Rating: 1/5

it always amused me how the female author writing plot about cheating. i always wondering, do these female author wrote the cheating based on what they see as what a guy's mind would work?and start having a delusional solution or reasons to kinda "justifying" the deed by always put the hard shoulder more towards the wife for making the husband can strayed away from her? or did they view it from woman's perspective? coz i always found that in this kind of novel, all these female author put more weight to the wife more than to the husband. as if the exact formula is : he did that becoz you do that to him. why? when in marriage, a vow that the both party took should be the ring that bind each party to not crossing their vow. when one party deliberately feeling the same compassion care for other woman bcoz of the problem w/his spouse before he even talk to her or find a solution to work on it, then this kind of husband was just a pussy-cheater-unresponsible man. and all his reason to justify his action or his so called "unwanted" strong feeling towards the OW bcoz he felt that his wife was too imature and not match his way of think, was just his way to tell you that he is a scumbag. 

the story was start w/sharon received a "Warning" note about fergus involvement w/his co worker, elaine. both work in the same law firm. both a lawyer. sharon then went to elaine house just like what the warning notes told her, that fergus was going to run away w/elaine and she should caught them in elaine house before they both run far away. she come to elaine house, waiting. then fergus's car was coming, and he come in to elaine's house. sharon then getting out of her car and spying them both through the house's big window-glass. there she saw her husband pulled elaine to his embraced, holding her and kissing her slowly, long and passionate. sharong then knock on the door and saw elaine's lips was swollen and her hair dishelved. she straight away asking her husbd that was he having an affair? he said no. he was just having a strong feeling and attraction to elaine. but he wasnt physichaly unfaithful. i guess kissing other girl wasnt on his list of being unfaithful. what amazed me, fergus then saying sorry that he and elaine wasnt discreet enough so people at their work can saw their attraction to each other, thus making a warning note to sharon. what an amazingly asshole, right? sorry honey, im not discreet enough. i cut his balls for that statement alone. he wasnt saying sorry about his feeling toward elaine. he even asking her wife to understand his feeling to elaine. is this some kind of a new joke or new defense tactic from the cheating husband? ASKING HIS WIFE TO UNDERSTAND HIS FEELING TO ELAINE! . sharon ask elaine does she love fergus? she said yes! and she let fergus known all along that she willing to be intimate, but she also knw that fergus wont divorced sharon. so she want to moving out of town. sharon ask if fergus love elaine? he said he has strong feeling toward elaine, but sharon was his wife. so.... she cut him and she asked for divorced. he agree to the divorced even though the author making him saying that he doesnt want a divorced. but he agree to it bcoz he felt guilty to hurt sharon. and what makes even doesnt make sense, for his shamelesly pussy act, he said he felt guilty to sharon, but then after he divirced her, he marry elaine!!! and been happy along the way until she died! what a dick! he doesnt even felt restraint or thinking about how sharon would feel about him mrried to elaine. by doing that, isnt everything that sharon accused to him was being right? i mean, sharon mad at him for his unfaithful, then he said he love sharon and doent want a divorced, but then he married elaine. someone need to blow this guy head. 
when he met sharon again, he told her that elaine wasnt exacty being accepted in their work, coz many speculate that his marriage to sharon was break bcoz of elaine as the home wrecker. he deliver this story with angry tone and angry face. doesnt he know that this was exactly what elaine does? even though sharon was the one that put an end to their marriage, but what triiger this action was his and elaine's done! for god effing sake!!! reading this novel was like reading an imbicile plot. each story/plot/reason was overlapped with another. 

I soo hate how the author of this book makes the husband like he doesnt have a choice and pushing the readers to understand about his "emotional cheating" - acompany with a few kisses along the way, but not sleeping, only cought up kissing his ow a very passionate intimate goodbye kiss-
i hate how the husband said he love his wife, but he also have strong feeling towards his co worker and saying he didnt want to divorced but doent even making a convincing gesture to his wife that he indeed even if he has strong feeling to elaine, at least he should've said he loves and need his wife more, and his feeling was just a mistake. but nope. even when he divorced sharon, he married elaine and trully happy and trully love elaine. they even bought a house to live in and not live in an apartment where i think it would suit their life style, coz the author making us the reader see that fergus feeling to elaine was a calm, mature and compatible in brain storming about their world together. that kind of relationship didnt struck me as a "family"-family. more like a modern relationship where things not really attach by deep emotion. but then they bought a new house-house as if fergus was really want to make a real family since the beginning w/elaine. elaine was painted as a career woman with nothing want to do w/having kid coz her carrer was crucial to her, but then at another side, she was happily planning how her kitchen should be remodelled. again, this doesnt struck me as a just simple a carrer woman. more like she was a full time happy wife w/a happy husband to make their happy family long lasting. which is pissing me off. coz this was the condition that both of them have when sharon was crumbling bcoz her husband BLUNTLY saying that HE LOVE SHARON, BUT HE LOVE ELAINE TOO. and he proudly put a different need between these 2 woman. HE NEED SHARON FOR SEX, and he need elaine becoz SHE COMPLETE HIM!!! apparantly, elaine win this! i mean, fergus also bang elaine right? so, elaine bcome his perfect company, and he also can bang her too. while w/sharon, he cant even stand their differences at all and all he got from being w.her was just a constant erection. 

this is a bad novel if you want to find a satisfying plot about second chances and cheating plot. it just a story a bout a man who doesnt want to work his problem w/his wife, coz he doesnt even trying and put the blame for her immature act, simply bcoz they have 10 years gap. he cant talk to her or be in the same page bcoz he likes sports, rock music, and doesnt understand his law firm problm. coz that's what a man of 30 needs from his 20 y.o wife. and when she confront him, he just dragged her to the nearest bed and hv sex w/her. this bcom one of his solely reason of why she doesnt compatible w/her, bcoz either they fight or have sex. while w/elaine, he can have it all.
pitty of why the author make elaine dead, although im cheering for her bursting aorta. hell yeah for being dead. but it also unsatisfying, bcoz fergus was back and chasing after sharon again and saying he still love her and never stop loving her even when he was married w/elaine, when elaine has been dead 2 years ago, he didnt go and find sharon. he came to her bcoz she had a murderer charged against her. and after 5 years total, 3 years of it being married to elaine, 2 years being grieving and missing elaine, he then come and met sharon to help her case. and out of nowhere, he say he is inlove and love her just 1 day after he met sharon again. what a dick head. IF elaine wasnt dead, right now fergus might still happily live w/elaine and never ever met sharon again, although the author making it that he always have sharon in the back of his mind. 

i just hate this sisy, cant make-up his mind - son of a bitch of a husband .