Rating: 3/5

I FINALLY got a version of the second book in this duology, and I was ecstatic after loving the first one so much. This one wasn't as enjoyable for me, but it was a solid read nonetheless, and one that I'd recommend.

Renault continues Theseus' story pretty much where she left off in the first book. That definitely contributed to evoking the same feeling of the first one for me, and I was hooked from the beginning. As the story progresses, however, more years pass in chunks, and all of a sudden Theseus is a middle-aged man and I start feeling rather distanced from him. I thought up until the point where he meets Hippolita the story flows rather well and is interesting, but after that I didn't care quite as much. Possibly also due to me listening to the audiobook more sparingly around then.
After having had glimpses from the narrator himself into Theseus' future in The King Must Die, the second half just didn't hold as much mystery to me.

Regarding the characters, though I thought they were quite interesting here as well, they weren't as many or as explored in-depth as the Bull Dancers, for example. I found myself missing them a lot!
In terms of writing an interweaving of myth in the retelling, I think Renault is so very skill. Her prose is just so beautiful and really makes me dream in Ancient Greek. I have found it a bit difficult to look past some of the mysoginy in this duology, though it suits the time and I have read that it was done quite intentionally and in an ironic sort of way. The context of falling matriarchies in favour of patriarchies definitely seems to suggest it, but the narration and writing is not very explicit of that intent. Some things seem to cast Theseus in far too favourable a light than would be given to a man in such a situation, but that's just how this duology goes.

Please don't let these comments deter you from picking this up. If you want a glowing review of Renault's retelling of Theseus' myth, you need look no further than my review of the first book, The King Must Die. But I did want to justify why my rating and enjoyment was lessened in this second book, and for that I have to focus a bit more on the negatives. If you want to skip the second book, as well, you totally can, it can very much be a standalone. But I would still suggest it as we are presented with such treasures as Hippolita, Hippolitus and Piritoos.

Also, as a side note, it was eerie listening to the part about the earthquake in Athens and soon after reading the news that in real life that happened on the same day. Eek.