Rating: 2/5

2.5 stars
I thought I was going to like this, the first in the Fall Revolution sequence, but it was only OK.
Future Britain is balkanized into kingdoms and multiple mini-states, which might be military surveillance, or libertarian, or fundamentalist.
Main characters: 
 -Jordan, teenage nonbeliever from a religious enclave; he wants out.
 -Moh, a security mercenary whose dad was a big Trotskyist organizer.
 -Janis, a young scientist doing sketchy memory research on mice. 
Their paths cross after Janis’ lab is broken into and she calls for special security, who turns out to be Moh; they run together to Norlonto, the best (free-est) enclave in Britain. Jordan makes some money in a clandestine software operation and uses it to escape from Beulah; he meets Janis and Moh in a bar in Norlonto and they team up. Meanwhile a nascent AI may have emerged and be on the loose, the company Janis works for is in trouble with the world tech police for the memory research, Moh gets in a feud with his ex-girlfriend’s political organization, and some mysterious labor troubles are causing political problems and rioting. 

I’ve liked many of Ken MacLeod’s later books, so why not this one? 
1) The narrative was hard to follow. The characters’ decisions and the events that happened did not seem threaded together in a manner I could understand; I kept paging back to reread things, figure out who some organization was, see if I had missed something. 
2) I didn’t really get how their society worked. Why didn’t most of these people just get jobs, or move somewhere else (to a better enclave like Norlonto) and work there, make some money, enjoy life? There was a lot of running around and political organizing and rebel forces for (it seemed) not much clear purpose. 
3) Many people’s motivations/behavior didn’t make sense for me. Janis must have spent years in school and applying for grants to become a research scientist, but in a matter of hours she left her whole life and career behind and joined Moh’s collective as a soldier/hanger-on. Moh got in trouble not only with his ex-girlfriend but also Carbon Life Alliance, because he let Catherine go without a ransom. But why wouldn’t the org be happy to save fifty thousand pounds, instead of posturing about the importance of “freeing a hostage” even though he let her go for free?

Some parts were interesting: Jordan’s religious-nut parents discovering his stash of secular books; the AI hiding itself in the gun; Donovan switching careers from software to “crank” publishing. But overall the story did not hang together for me. Maybe the rest of the Fall Revolution series makes things more clear.