Rating: 4/5

My youngest son has become an avid chess player of late, so while I have no interest in learning the game itself, I figured I might as well learn its history. History is precisely what sparked my son’s recent enthusiasm; his favorite magazine, the Jewish history magazine “Zman,” did an article on the Karpov-Kasparov match. Kasparov was Jewish, and his victory was considered a blow to the Soviet elite, an angle that the “Zman” article undoubtedly played up. But the only grandmaster I’d ever heard of was Bobby Fischer, and that led me to the movie “Pawn Sacrifice,” which depicts Fischer’s historic match against Boris Spassky, and to this book. So I’ll start my review with a brief summary of what I learned from “Pawn Sacrifice” because it really is basic background for understanding this book.

Bobby Fischer was a self-taught chess genius who won the national championship at the age of 14. The Soviet grandmasters were considered the best in the world, though, so that was where young Bobby set his sights. He played several matches with them, but realized they were cheating by deliberately throwing matches and thus manipulating rankings and scores. He dropped out of competitive chess in protest, but in 1972, he was urged to return. We were losing Vietnam, and because chess was held in such high esteem in the Soviet Union, an American victory would be a real humiliation. Nobody less than Henry Kissinger telephoned him to persuade him to compete.

Genius like Fischer’s comes at a cost. The movie portrays him as paranoid, but with the pressure of the American government on him, plus being around the secretive Soviets, and the mental stress of the game itself, it’s no wonder he broke down. But it’s hard to be entirely sympathetic toward him because he was also an arrogant jerk. Though he himself was Jewish, till the end of his life, he spouted the most atrocious anti-Semitic conspiracy theories you can think of. Boris Spassky, on the other hand, proved himself a class act by applauding Bobby Fischer when he realized he’d been beaten.

This book picks up where “Pawn Sacrifice” leaves off. Bobby Fischer’s victory triggered a chess craze in the States, and author Fred Waitzkin was swept right along with it. After discovering he could beat everyone in his school and neighborhood, he went to some chess clubs in the City, only discover that he wasn’t champion material. Fourteen years later, in 1984, he had become a journalist, gotten married, and had a son, who, at age six, showed such promise at chess, he was being called “the next Bobby Fischer.” That is how Fred Waitzkin became a “chess father.”

Most of the book is about the high-stress world of youth competitive chess and Fred’s guilt for putting his son through it. He made it look so bad, I was glad my son has started out too late to ever play competitively. But aside from the hours of training and tension-ridden tournaments, there were two other corners of the chess world he explored that were quite interesting. One was in the informal world of the parks. I never gave much thought to the chess players I’ve passed in parks, but it seems they’ve got their own little subculture going. The other part of the chess world the book explored was in the Soviet Union itself.

Because he was a journalist who knew something about chess, Fred was assigned to cover the Karpov-Kasparov match, which was about as big as the Fischer-Spassky match. The fall of the Soviet Empire was a few short years in the future, but Fred saw no signs of it. (Did anyone?) What he makes clear is how big a deal chess was in Soviet culture. A grandmaster was treated with as much celebrity as a star athlete in the States. It made me understand why Henry Kissinger considered Bobby Fischer’s game such a priority. It was like a small-scale space race. This section of the book also captured in detail the negative side of the Soviet Union, and it was everything we’ve ever heard about: anti-Semitism, the suppression of dissidents, the endemic corruption, and the constant surveillance. It was one of the best real time looks behind the Iron Curtain that I’ve ever read. It was easily my favorite part of the book.

If you’ve got a young chess player in your life, this book will serve as a warning about competitive chess. But it’s still an interesting look at the many aspects of chess culture, and the Soviet section is especially worthwhile. I’m impressed enough with Fred Waitzkin that I might read his other book, which is all about the Karpov-Kasparov match. But not right away. Like young Josh Waitzkin, I think I need to take a break from chess for a while.