Rating: 4/5

Personal copy, deaccessioned by the Youngstown Public Library in 1969. Bought around 1980. 

Julie lives on a farm with her father, Tom; her mother, Margaret was an artist who died some time ago. Julie is looking forward to going to a school dance, and is spending the weekend with her friend Anne so she can go shopping for a dress with Anne's mother. She has $15 to spend. While a childhood friend on whom she has a crush, Dick, talks to her, he doesn't pay her as much attention as she would like. After the dance, she and her father take care of a collie about to have pups, Scarlet. Scarlet belongs to Mr. Lonsdale, and is a champion show dog. After delivering four pups, Scarlet dies, and Lonsdale leaves the pups with Julie and her father, and they feed them with eyedroppers. Three survive. Julie, who likes to draw, does pictures of them and even ventures into the city with her portfolio to ask a friend's aunt who works at a publishing house to look at them. She is encouraging, as is Julie's art teacher, Miss Farrell. Julie has Miss Farrell to the house, and her teacher makes some suggestions on how to improve the living room. Julie throws herself into that project, painting the walls and helping her father open up the fire place. The other pups have been sold, but Julie's favorite, Sonny, remains with her for quite some time. Eventually, Mr. Lonsdale takes him to show, and invites Julie to a competition. Sonny isn't doing as well as hoped, and it turns out that he is missing Julie! When she handles him, he wins. There is some other drama at school, where Julie submits a winning poster for the school play and also is named the art director for the newspaper. At the end of the book, Julie is allowed to keep Sonny as long as she shows him sometimes for Mr. Lonsdale, her artwork is getting accolades, and Dick seems to be taking an interest in her. 

This holds up surprisingly well for having been written 80 years ago. Aside from some fashions and outdated thoughts (there is a character named Chunky, one named Tubby, and a girl named Sue whose entire personality revolves her dieting), Julie's desire to improve her home life, hang out with her dog, and get better at art wouldn't be out of place even today. Her father is gruff, but loves her, and Mr. Lonsdale is a reasonable man who even gives Julie a book and an armchair for helping with the dogs. 

One thing it's really hard to fully understand is how important dances and dating were to 14-16 year old girls at this period in history. There were not a lot of options other than marriage for many girls, so knowing how to keep house and getting dates were both super important. Sure, Julie might go to art college, but she'd need someone like Dick to "take care" of her. 

I enjoyed this look at the past, even though my copy of the book has seen some wear (it has a very worn replacement cover screen printed with the picture on the original dust jacket and spider web printed interior cover sheets) and smells rather musty.