Rating: 3/5

I think this was OK overall. I had read her book called “the man who loved children”, which I thought was a brilliant study of some of the relationships in a large family and you can clearly see that Christina stead has some brilliant insights to give into the relationships that take place. She really reminded me of the American writer Carver who is able to dissect and go into what at first seems like only innocuous detail to paint a picture so effortlessly rich that you feel as though you're not reading a book but studying a painting. Christina stead is able to do this but I found this book a little bit boring if I'm really honest. It's about a woman who gets married to a man and I have to admit that I skipped large parts of it but a lot of it was about communism and capitalism and the clash in those two mentalities which is shown I think in the relationship of the couple in the book. She's clearly a great writer but I found this book a little bit boring and like I said I had to skip large parts of it.

Here are some of the best bits anyway.

Judas Maccabeus and his six sons, it's the menorah, that's the meaning of the seven branched candle stick that Jews use.

Don't you think we to have a lot of that ubermensch psychology, we’re just Nazis dancing to Roosevelt music?

Are we any better than the Germans, coming here like a master race (into America), full of money, eating like swine, with schemes for their improvement which happen to suit ourselves?

She hit the table. Stephen it's all very well for you. Your learned. You went to Princeton. But I came from Arkansas. They don't ever teach anything in America. They're afraid you might question the eternal values like ice cream soda. The tripping over themselves racing further and further backwards into the Ice Age, determined that whatever happens to the world, the Chinese people the Kashmiri, the Kazakhstani shall know more than the average American.

You may take it that there never was and never will be another woman for me. Anyone who was known Emily as a husband has had everything a woman, any woman past or present can give. And suffered all that woman can make you suffer. You cannot be husband to Emily and think of another woman. There are no other woman, when she is there. Are there other winds about when a tornado is in progress? And afterwards when someone says, of a wild wind, “quite a breeze”?, you think what's ignorance of natural forces!

The ancient Britons were a stupid dumb primitive barbarous people. They didn't know how to cook or make clothes. They didn't know anything. They made woad, that's a blue mud they put that blue mud on themselves for clothes and to keep off the lice. They didn't know how to fight, they folded before everyone, the Romans the Saxons the Normans, they run away to the Hills and those who remained became slaves and serfs, they washed the togas and cleaned the sandals of the Romans. They were cowards.