Rating: 2/5

I loved the premise: a woman—loving wife, devoted mom to three mostly grown kids, and all-around "good girl"—simply walks away from her family and her life and starts anew elsewhere. I think there are probably many, many women living a similar family dynamic who might fantasize about this kind of do-over, even if they never actually walk out the door, or as Delia Grinstead does here, down the beach away from the annual family vacation.

But Tyler lost me. I can buy that Delia pulls off this great escape without much forethought (if she thought it through, she might never have even made such an attempt), but I wondered at her lack of introspection once she'd left her family. Most of the narrative is simply moving forward in her new life. She boards with a kooky real estate agent, quickly finds a job as a secretary with the lawyer in the small town she's chosen, very much like what she did for her doctor husband (and her doctor father before him) in the small town she came from. She makes a few friends, gets a cat, takes a different job, this time taking care of and living in with a widower and his son. 

It's all very tame. She goes from the domestic role she's known most of her life to another that is strangely similar. And I don't take issue with that. Sometimes (oftentimes?) that's what a do-over is: a chance to do the same thing but with a different outcome. I wasn't expecting Delia to hike the Appalachian Trail or become a barkeep in some redneck town. Just leaving is enough of an adventure. I just wanted to understand it more, understand how she came to walk away, especially from her children. There is something archetypal about the mother-child bond, and it's completely unexplored here.

But as the story continues, Delia seems happy, and you root for her. Which is why it's so deflating when she returns to her family. It's her daughter's wedding that calls her back, and it's disheartening to see her slip right back into that old skin. Her husband, as staid as ever, hasn't changed. Yet she stays. Just as her leaving went unexamined, so does her return. I loved the story, got carried along, for sure. But in the end I simply put the book down and sighed