Rating: 4/5

For a tale with such a gloomy and sinister background and such a cruel villain at its center, The Phantom of the Opera sure was humorous. How has Tim Burton not already adapted this into a classic gothic comedy film? (Please make him make it, I would watch it endlessly)...

  "He had a heart that could have held the entire empire of the world; and, in the end, he had to content himself with a cellar."

When a gala performance is held to celebrate the retirement of the two managers of the Paris Opera House, the young and talented Swedish soprano Christine Daaé fills in for Carlotta, a Spanish woman who has suddenly fallen ill. Her performance is an instant success. Backstage, Vicomte Raoul de Chagny visits Christine after the show. The two were childhood friends, and Raoul recalls his love for Christine.

A man is found hanged underneath the Opera building, the two new managers are spooked by letters with texts written in red ink, the little ballerinas are on edge because of creepy rumors, and the chandelier falls down as the Phantom lives on in the cellars beneath the premises. 

  "She's singing to-night to bring the chandelier down!"

That synopsis is just as dramatic as the book itself; I promise. Especially everything that the Ghost says about Christine is written in that classic I-would-die-for-you-in-a-heartbeat, everybody-hates-me-and-I-am-doomed-to-eternal-misery, you-are-the-most-divine-being-I-have-ever-laid-eyes-on way. Either you hate it, or you love it.

The beginning of this book had me hooked, the tension eased in the middle section, and then towards the end the storyline spiraled into a huge tornado of happenings. I loved how it becomes apparent that Erik's trapdoors are the only real power he has over 'real society' up there at ground level and imagining the secret passages and booby-trapped nooks of the Opera House.

  "They played at hearts as other children might play at ball; only, as it was really their two hearts that they flung to and fro, they had to be very, very handy to catch them, each time, without hurting them."

The Gothic elements were incredible too. Raoul's fever dream-like moment at the cemetery was... A moment.

Though I was not convinced by the Ghost's 'villain story' and motives (nobody can convince me that being an unloved social outcast would drive somebody to create a torture chamber, collect enough gunpowder to literally blow up an entire opera building, live in dark cellars for years, and stalk a young woman and scream at her until she loves them — Mary Shelley did the social outcast thing so much better) I found that the overall setting and tone of the book was enough to drive me to rate it four stars instead of three. It's enchanting, and you don't have to be a fan of the gothic to be able to appreciate it.

Some have compared Christine and the O.G.'s relationship to that of Catherine and Heathcliff, but I can't agree there. The level of toxicity corresponds, yes, but Christine and the Ghost had no mutual tension while Catherine and Heathcliff certainly did. Moreover, Christine is the most innocent being I've ever read about — we can't say the same for Catherine, to say the least.

  "If I am the phantom, it is because man's hatred has made me so. If I am to be saved it is because your love redeems me."

The Phantom of the Opera is, while flawed, an incredible story. Would 9/10 recommend!

---------------

Additional Notes:
- I now need to visit Palais Garnier. Apparently, that's where Leroux got his setting inspiration
- Forever screaming at that masked ball scene ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
- The musical adaptation is now on my to-watch list