Rating: 4/5

True Believer
Read from July 3 - July 4, 2022,
Precise Review: 4/5

“This is the way it has turned out…and I think I can live with the way life is.”

This might be a long rant, I’ll try not to make it that way but I need to get some things settled. 

Religion: I don’t know what version of Christianity was portrayed in that book but I don’t agree with it. One of the reviews I read mentioned a “cult” form of Christianity and I would sadly have to agree. These Christians were isolated from the world and believed that they were better than others. I don’t want to take a judgmental stance on this because I’ve been in the same rut as well. I was in this Christian bubble and I thought I did myself much good by not associating with the world. But how can I be the light if I won’t step out and shine? I also don't like what the church guy said about his belief in God. He said he “hoped” that God exists, and that is what they cling to. I used to feel like this too, but then I recognized that if I am only going to “hope” God exists and have no true confidence, what's the point of my belief anyway? If I use the question “if” to ask myself about God, then it makes it hard to actually have a place to stand firm on my faith and I question everything that’s happened since it is a coincidence. My last concern will be the topic of evolution. I’m not a master of this subject, so I won’t speak like one. But I don’t believe the entire subject of evolution should be marked off. To evolve is to change, adapt and grow. I don’t think as God’s creation we remain the same. Perhaps the actual idea of apes to humans may be false, but I don’t think everything else is. Science and the Bible can go together, they both point to God. 

Okay, this rant could have been more well-developed but it was immediate thoughts coming to my head. 

I liked this book! But, I did not really like the ending. I don’t like Jody–period. I think he could be a bit more straightforward with how LaVaughn feels and say if he’s interested or not. I like Patrick more, and I wanted Lavaughn to do the same as well. But the whole triangle seems complicated, I think there’s more to it than meets the eye. 

The romance the mom had with Lester? Whew, I’m glad that was called off. I liked LaVaughn’s mom even if she had her hard moments at times. 

This is the day after my reading of the book, and I’m losing my initial feelings so this is hard writing again. But, I enjoyed this book. I liked the way LaVaughn developed.

(I liked this reader review much better: Virginia Euwer Wolff's True Believer is a telling story about growing up in a tumultuous, uncertain world. Wolff's brilliance lies in her incredibly formated text, which looks like poetry but reads like stream-of-consciousness prose. The reader gets to follow LaVaughn through her mid-adolescent experience, reliving his or her own uncertain years and feeling every ounce of LaVaughn's growing pains as she struggles through faith, friendship, love, and dreams. In a low-income, low-education community, LaVaughn struggles against the odds that tell her she shouldn't finish school and certainly shouldn't go to college. With a supportive mother and fierce determination, she victoriously pushes through setbacks to see that nothing will stop her from achieving her goals--even herself.

As someone who tutors students who are either low-income, first-generation, or at risk for not graduating, I strongly connected with this story. I personally am a first-generation college student, and my parents were determined to put me in college. However, I did not have anywhere near the setbacks LaVaughn or my students deal with. The novel helped me to see the importance of encouragement and a strong support system, and I realized I get to be that for my students. LaVaughn needed her mother, grammar teacher, and guidance counselors to push her toward her goals. I have a chance to be that for someone else. This story has given me a purpose in each interaction I have with my tutees.

While God is mentioned all over this story, it is often in a negative context with Myrtle and Annie's "Jesus club". This club drives LaVaughn crazy and she cannot understand the god they serve; she wonders how he could hate people she loves and how she could trust someone who makes so many bad things happen. These are questions all humans must deal with. While Myrtle and Annie come to conclusions that make most Christians cringe, LaVaughn's process toward faith is gradual and ongoing even as the story ends. She encounters a pastor who seems to be more loving than the ones Myrtle and Annie spend time with, and he encourages LaVaughn to see God as loving and accepting. While this god is much easier to swallow than the cult Myrtle and Annie have joined, it is not quite true to the God of the Bible. While He is loving, accepting, and forgiving, there is still an element of personal responsibility for sin that must be emphasized. But LaVaughn's searching is a testament to God's truth and grace at work in her life. (She explained my rant the best.) 

Overall, I would highly recommend this book, both for students and educators. Students can easily sympathize with LaVaughn's struggles as they grow into the young men and women that they want to be. They can grow in their ability to process conflict or lifestyle choices by watching LaVaughn make mistakes or handle situations with maturity and grace but lots of humanness. Educators can remember the tumultuous and real emotions of adolescence that we often feel far removed from. It can bring sympathy and compassion on the part of the educator that helps he or she be more sensitive to the students' needs. It is well written, with good, teachable themes and experiences that are easy to relate to. Wolff has created a story that is both relevant and timeless in its portrayal of the pain of growing up.)"