Rating: 1/5

MONTGOMERY TURNS HER ATTENTION TO EXTRATERRESTIALS

Ruth Shick Montgomery (1912-2001) was a journalist and syndicated columnist in Washington, DC., who later became a psychic who wrote a number of metaphysical books (sometimes through ‘automatic writing’), and claimed that she could communicate with medium Arthur Ford after his death.

She wrote in the Foreword to this 1985 book, “This is a book about extraterrestrials: who they are, where they came from, how they arrive, and why they are here. Midway in this next-to-last decade before … the long predicted shift of the earth on its axis, extraterrestrial communication seems to be a worldwide phenomenon…. They are said to be here to help us earthlings, and in my opinion we need all the help we can get in our strife-ridden, polluted, self-centered society… The more enlightened ones among us, according to the Guides, have had numerous lives on other planets as well as earth… during the past year or so I have been swamped by letters and calls from men and women who sincerely believe that their ‘real home’ is in another planetary system.” (Pg. 1-2)

She explains, “I have become a firm believer in reincarnation, and in the concept that a high-minded soul who wishes to depart the physical plane, by entering as a Walk-in. Why should I then maintain a closed mind to the possibility that space friends from other planets and galaxies are visiting earth to help us solve our problems? Just because I personally have not encountered a UFO did not mean the reports of others whom I respected could not be as reliable as my own would have been.” (Pg. 8-9) Later, she adds, “I am merely a reporter of these alleged happenings, because I have yet to be honored by an unearthly visitation. But I can hope, can’t I?” (Pg. 21)

She comments about Thelma Terrell (‘Tuella’), “I was somewhat turned off by some of her messages that purport to come from Jesus, the Mother Mary and other saints, and the Guides responded: ‘She would be wise not to infuse so much Biblical religion into her messages, as the Ashtar Command is nondenominational and like all spacelings worships the one Creator of us all. She is not actually hearing from the ones you mention, but is feeling what they might have conveyed. We don’t like to see the issue unduly tied in with Biblical stories, for the worldwide appearance of space people is not solely limited to those spiritual beings who have trod the earth, but includes ones from other areas of space and other galaxies. But make no mistake about it. Tuella is a highly developed soul with an important mission for which she volunteered.’” (Pg. 44)

She says of William Goodlett, “I can only quote my Guides, who commented: ‘By willing themselves there, space beings do indeed project themselves to other planets, just as Goodlett did in his out-of-body experiences. While on those other planets he actually trod the soil, and was seen by and conversed with others, who being more advanced than earthlings, were not at all surprised at the presence of a stranger as cohabitor of their sphere. His experiences were true and real… and he has projected himself into other habitats and galaxies because of his previous high development and awareness of how to cope with other beings… these highly developed spacelings are able to create through the assembling of atoms and the thought process.” (Pg. 126)

She recounts, “I first learned of this group of Arcturians in the spring of 1984 when a man named John Andreadis wrote to me… ‘…the message in your books is identical to what I have realized through my studies of the Hindu cycles of creation. As we know, the ancient religion of India, the Sanatan Dharma, is an explanation of the eternal immutable laws of the universe, so as we understand these laws the message is always the same.’ To be perfectly candid, I had never heard of the Sanatan Dharma. All that I do is transmit the Guides’ messages to my readers, although I have long believed that any of us who are legitimately tapping into a fourth-dimensional source of enlightenment will receive essentially the same truths, since the fountainhead is universal wisdom.” (Pg. 129)

She recounts, “Well, I guess the Guides have finally talked me into it. I have been aware for many years, of course, that famed psychic Edgar Cayce also emphasized the importance of gems, and often prescribed certain ones for those for who he gave life readings. He too spoke of the breastplates of Moses and the high priests, and of the symbology and importance of the jewelry embedded there.” (Pg. 187)

In the last chapter, she wrote, “In the early spring of 1984, as I was preparing to leave on a radio-television tour for the paperback edition of ‘Threshold of Tomorrow,’ the publisher’s publicity department asked if the Guides would be willing to make a prediction about the outcome of the Democratic primaries… and they responded: ‘Hart will make a good showing but will not win the nomination. That will go to Mondale, and Reagan will defeat him, but will be unable to serve out his second term… They then told me what they claim will occur to place Bush in the highest office, and the appropriate timing, but I do not wish to disclose it here for obvious reasons. I also want to point out that the Guides are not always right in their political predictions. Their batting average is phenomenal… Nevertheless, I think the Guides goofed on that one, and hope that they’re wrong again about Ronald Reagan this time.” (Pg. 222-224)

She concludes, “I asked for any final comments about our friends from outer space, and they wrote: ‘They will continue to arrive in increasing numbers as Walk-ins, and will be of inestimable value in leading people to safe areas; also in preparing them for the hardship during and for a time after the shift…’ So welcome aboard, space friends! We’re happy to have you aboard!” (Pg. 224-225)

This book will interest fans of Ms. Montgomery’s other books.