Rating: 4/5

I haven’t read a Hornblower for a year or so now. About 10 years ago, I regularly devoured one every 6 months to make them stretch, but then as a fickle child, I searched out other books. I have always admired authors like CS Forester &amp; Arthur Ransome who managed to write their books out of sequence (Ransome also wrote the chapters out of sequence) but which a generation later, reading them in chronological order seems like the natural way to approach said series.

This book is a strange child however; written at a time when Forester was diagnosed with crippling arteriosclerosis that was believed to end his writing career, he would live for another 20 years and continue developing the Hornblower series. Therefore, it has a very definite feeling of finality about it. A number of threads affecting the regular characters are tied here, which means, the final published book (the next one) is going to be a rather strange one indeed with favourite characters missing.

Having said this, the plot is strong and centres around the last months of the Napoleonic Wars. I never knew a Bourbon king was crowned nor that Napoleon seized power again. I knew of the escape from Elba, but the time sequence was never firmly set in my head, nor its consequences, ie: reassumption of power. As per other books in the series, this one is made up of two episodes that flow one from the other. First is the audacious capture of Le Havre – it is the sort of daring do that peppers Hornblower’s career and then him as a fugitive during the brief Napoleon interlude.

What I love in these books are the characters. Our regulars are strong and identifiable, making the narrative hum along. What is always fun in the regular love interest and in this one we have two to keep us amused. As I pointed out above, ends are tied up very much as they were with the death of Maria a few novels back.

Did I enjoy reading this one? Oh, yes! And in many ways it feels very final; how he was able to complete another in the narrative and embark on a further incomplete manuscript shows the testament of a good writer who can capture his audience with his narrative, characterisation and language. I may read that final recognised one later this year.