Rating: 2/5

There might be spoilers. I can't be bothered to carefully disguise them, so caveat lector.

Prudence is a prude. Alright, so she's a Scottish governess and in charge of a little boy who's supposedly in danger from his guardian, and they're on the run, so it's pretty much sensible that she's a prude and doesn't trust the uber-sexy amnesiac guy who's washed up on the shore and attaches himself to her. But am I not supposed to like her and root for her? She has no qualities that make that happen, and while our hero falls in love with her, I fail to see why because other than some instinctive hormonal reaction to a kiss he pushes on her early on, she gives him no encouragement. 

So maybe he's just a rake and the straitlaced, prim miss is a challenge. Wait, haven't we seen this guy before, forcing a kiss on an unsuspecting, unwilling woman? Yup, we have, at least those of us who've read the entire series. Sexy amnesiac is Harry Acton as "Hal", the name he decides on, even though when searching through names starting with H both Henry and Harry come up, which struck me as weird for the amnesia trope -- their own name is usually something fictional amnesiacs recognize. Being Harry naturally he has no respect for boundaries. I didn't like him much in Virtue's Reward, where he might conceivably be a villain (which I never bought; I just didn't like his behaviour). Here he's clearly not meant to be the villain; in fact he's near-perfect, except for eagerly discomfiting Prudence. But that's supposedly romantic; something I with my modern sensibilities can't really appreciate, even though good girls are also supposedly to always say no even when they feel yes, which might seem to call for a little pushiness. It's just that it's such a proto-rapey trope; I prefer gentlemen not go there.

If only Prudence had some qualities I'd see as positive. If she were smart, for example. But she's not; she's way too conventional to be a functional protector of the little boy in danger; without Harry she would have gotten caught immediately by the sinister man with the eyepatch. She has no sense of humour, no witty internal commentary on her own folly; just dour judgment of her own attraction. Furthermore, when she gets a chance, she promptly betrays Harry. Yeah, it makes sense, but it doesn't endear her to me; I wanted her to be on his side.

The intrigue of the book is something completely different from what it seems to be at the start, which I would have enjoyed a great deal, if only there had been some hints all along, and I might have done some sleuthing. But there is nothing; we know as little as the main characters, and so I felt quite removed from the outcome and wasn't very interested in the tragic, convoluted back story and the true villain. No doubt actually living in danger would provide plenty of thrill, but just idly consuming it without any notion of where it might be going was just not very entertaining. It's 2 stars only because Ewing is much better than most at conveying a sense of time and place for the Regency, and that at least provided some immersion; it just wasn't particularly pleasant but simply reminded me of how horribly repressive life back then was, primarily for women, but it wasn't all that great for men either. This generally works against me enjoying Regencies were it not for witty banter and creative circumvention of roles and rules. Of which there was really none here.

One thing I did appreciate: Harry feels shame for something he experienced, and that's a real thing which is rarely given to a male character in a romance. But it also makes his rake-like behaviour even a little more disquieting -- he ought to know how it feels, and yet, no, he hasn't made that connection. Or maybe Ewing hasn't. Probably too much to ask for a genre romance.