Rating: 3/5

I've read all but one of Dick Francis books. Starting eons ago when I was but a mere kitten, and ending at some point in the 21st century after his wife's death when Francis son Felix started helping his papa write the books. At some point in time I became aware of Dick noting in some interview or another that his books had been co-written affairs - with his wife. And there is a definite difference between those books written prior to the wife's death, during Francis supposed solo writing career, then when Felix stepped in to help (I'm not actually sure if there actually was a middle part there, the solo part I mean). But all of that is beside the point - this is solidly within the time period when the book was a co-writing production utilizing both Dick and Dick's wife's, Mary, writing abilities ("I am Richard, Mary was Mary, and Dick Francis was the two of us together.")

Another little point to note before I move on to the book itself: At some point I noticed, after reading about 90% of the Francis work, that I'd rated all of the books a good solid 4.5 stars without any falling an inch below or above that line. Whereupon I realized I'd fallen into a trap that can open up - I expect a certain rating to appear on what I read, the book was solid enough, so I rated it that rating. After I realized that the ratings for the final 10% of the books rarely reached 4.5 star level. Which I mention because the first time I read this book I rated it 4.5 stars, but I've no clue if I really thought it deserved that rating.

Right, so.... Common theme here. Amateur detective type trying to live his life (here named Philip Nore), is uprooted from his comfortable enough rut to face several mysteries, and several beatings (both by horse and by thugs - Francis seemed to have loved to beat up his characters through both methods).

Here we find Philip Nore, at or slightly above the age of 30. Jockey, kinda of tall to be a jockey, but still, a jockey. He has drifted through life, letting whatever would happen - happen, without much fuss made by him. Driven into that type of personality because of his childhood - of which he had none (or at least not the norm - mother would drop him off with friends for 'a few days', that would last weeks, months, and sometimes years; and he didn't have much in the way of formal school training). He's had some wins on the horse, and some losses - some of these losses were 'forced' losses, but he doesn't really like doing that kind of thing (more bluntly: he's been forced, here or there, to throw races). That throwing races isn't really the main plotline here, though an important issue, just not the source of the mysteries.

Nore works lazily at unraveling two mysteries: 1) the grandmother he never met before wishes for him to hunt down the half-sister he never knew he had - he kind of boredly looks around but doesn't want to help the witch (the grandmother being the witch, not the half-sister); 2) a great, though not exactly much beloved, race photographer has died and left his 'reject' box behind to be inherited by Nore (Nore is/was friends with the man's son; while helping the son he came across said box and asked if he could take it with him - the box was filled with overexposed negatives, and the like - rejects). The second mystery involves examining these 'rejects' and 'fixing them'.

A third mystery develops relatively quickly. Nore likes solving puzzles, and doesn't really think the 'common mistakes' that are in the photographer's box of 'reminders' are anything special, certainly nothing a good photographer would keep as reminders. So he investigates the mistakes and finds that they are actually well concealed photographs and photographs of letters. Of a . . . dark nature. (ETA: Right, sorry, this above paragraph reads like it should be the second mystery, no? Second mystery involves figuring out how to 'fix' the 'ruined' negatives so that images/pictures/letters would appear. Third mystery involves . . . was George a blackmailer?)

Whereupon I note that the book description is rubbish. At least the one for this specific edition (if the others are different, I do not care enough to look). "Longtime jockey Philip Nore suspects that a racetrack photographer's fatal accident was really murder--". No he doesn't. Late in the book someone makes some comment about how George's (I think the photographer's name was George) accident might not have been an accident. Before that Nore suspected nothing about the accident being murder. Nothing. And after the comment he was more 'well . . . huh . . . possibly?' not 'OMG! YES MURDER!'. 

Right, so. Nore wanders around riding horses. Takes photos; examines a different photographer's photos; falls into a romance by sheer accident; falls into a possible new career similarly by accident; solves a couple of mysteries.

Of note: Now that I've read the book for a second time I'll note a few things: Rereading this book reminds me that Francis main character in his books tended to be kind of rather depressing types; the 'Dick Francis' team did write some interesting books, but not at a high level like I'd recalled. Oh, and, I'm not sure I noticed the oddly rather okay view of homosexual relationships that is on display in this book (I mean by everyone but for the grandmother). Two of the people who raised Philip is remembered quite fondly by Philip - they were a gay couple; and another gay couple turns up - they seem okay-ish people. Which is interesting when I hadn't recalled Francis including such characters in book and this one is from 1980. (Don't, by the way, go into this book to read happy gay couples because of the words I use above; neither couple is exactly happy - one read like those relationships I read in lesbian pulp from the 1950s/1960s (though here, this book, involving men); while the other relationship was much more 'happy' - but neither relationship was examined in any depth and none of the gay characters have significant roles in the book).

I got side-tracked.

Good enough book. Nothing near what I probably originally rated the book, 4.5, but good enough book. 

Rating: 3.5

July 1 2019