Rating: 5/5

MINDBLOWN! 

In the course of the last 9 months I've become very familiar with the concept of Synchronicity from my own experience. Slowly I began noticing it, then there was a phase when I thought it was all just a false impression, then it became too obvious to deny it and after the first quirky phases of acceptance I've made friends with it. Sure, each of those events could easily be attributed to chance or some psychological bias, but when the peculiarity and unlikeliness grows and the frequency often goes beyond reasonable count (sometimes even 3-4 per day), it is simply inexplicable in the more conventional materialistic causality terms. At one hand I am quite reluctant to speak about these experiences, mostly because of all the stigma it is associated with, but on the other hand I would just like to go on the highest roof and scream about every time it happened. 

In that regard I am very happy that Jung gave it a very loud and clear scientific voice that should silence down anyone still dwelling on the "Dawkins delusion". The book is far from being easy to read, some preexisting knowledge on brain anatomy, Jungian psyche concepts (unconsciousness, anima, animus, the Self, the Ego, etc...) and eastern philosophy (Tao and I Ching) would come handy. 

But the real beauty of this book is not only that it challenges the orthodox reductive way of thinking in Western science, but it also provides a very potent alternative in a form of a modernized Tao philosophy. The principle of causality and materialism by implications carries in the idea of linearity. But if one is willing to let go of that and embrace the idea of Tao, which posits that the whole is included into each part, and that each part carries the whole within it, much like a multi dimensional fractal, where not just properties of space and matter are distributed in such way, but also time itself (try to imagine a multi dimensional space-time-matter Mandelbrot set), then the Synchronicity phenomenon becomes much more trivial and actually inevitable. The reason we find these events "unthinkable" is hence not so much in the nature of the event itself, but in the nature of our concept of "thinkability". It is an epistemological problem. :)

That is my understanding, in a nutshell... There is much more to be found in the book, with many more details and even empirical data. Jung just can't disappoint a curious person.