Rating: 5/5

This is the thirteenth book in the Chronicles of Brother Cadfael, of the Benedictine Abbey of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in Shrewsbury, in the England of the twelfth century. Cadfael lived a full life before becoming a monk, having been to the Crusades; he has now been a monk for some nineteen years, and is sincere about his faith, his obligations to the Benedictines, and his maintenance of the monastery herb gardens. However, his intellect is always piqued by mysteries, especially concerning young people. These are fun little mystery novels. My first recorded reading of this book was in 2005, and the next in 2010.

The spring of 1142 came very late, but by June everything is now blooming. Judith Pearle is the sole mistress, operator, and owner of the Vertiers' clothier business; three years ago she was happily married and pregnant, but her husband died and she miscarried. At that time she gave the house in the Foregate she had lived in, half of her assets, to the Abbey; the only payment she asks for is that she be given a white rose from the bush in the garden each year on the Feast of the Translation of Saint Winifred; if this annual payment is not made, the property reverts back to her. She has thought at times of taking the veil, if only to stop all of the eligible bachelors in town from pressing her to remarry. At present the tenant of the house in the Foregate is Niall Bronzesmith; he is a widow, and his five year old daughter is living with his sister’s family three miles outside of town. As the story opens, the young monk Brother Eluric, who was given to the Abbey at the age of three, is the person tasked with delivering the white rose to Judith each year; but he asks to be relieved of this duty, as he is tormented with the thought of the woman. Abbot Radulfus gives the duty to Niall. A few days later, Brother Eluric is found dead at the rosebush, which has been hacked with an axe. The next day, Judith disappears, and Brother Cadfael and Sheriff Hugh Beranger believe that she has been abducted by someone wishing to force marriage upon her.

This was a dandy mystery, and full of red herrings; and I look forward to reading the next book in the series.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
2nd Recorded Reading: June 17, 2010

One would think that Abbot Radulfus of the Abbey would have long since confined Brother Cadfael to his herbarium to keep him out of trouble; or, more accurately, to keep dead bodies from multiplying with alarming frequency. One wonders if anyone has written a parody of Brother Cadfael, in which he is insane (craftily so) and is actually the murderer of all the dead bodies that pop up near the Abbey. Having said all that, this Fourteenth Chronicle is good, and liberally supplied with red herrings to confuse the unwary reader.

Spring is late to arrive in Shrewsbury in 1142; in fact, the spring thaw does not occur until the first of June. This is a good thing (not least that the crops can now be sown), because the Rose Rent is due to the widowed Judith Pearle on the day of the Translation of St. Winifred, June 22. When Judith was widowed, some four or five years ago, followed by the miscarriage of her only child, she gave her house in the Foregate (where she and her husband had lived) to the Abbey, with the only proviso being that she is to receive one white rose from the rosebush at the house on St. Winifred’s Day. She lives in Shrewsbury proper now, running her weaving business with the help of her cousin Miles Coliar and his mother (her aunt); Niall the bronzesmith lives in the property in the Foregate that was given to the Abbey; he is widowed, and his five year old daughter lives with his sister out in Pulley (some five miles distant).

A young monk, who has been resident in the Abbey since his early youth, has been the designated person to take the rose from the bush to the young Widow Pearle each year; but Brother Eluric asks that he be relieved from the duty this year, as he has fallen in love with the widow, and is tormented by his desire for her. He is relived of the duty; but soon afterward, he is found dead under the rose bush in question, with the rosebush hacked but not destroyed.

It is true that there are those who would like to marry the Widow Pearle, who is in her mid-twenties, most notably Vivian Hynde (whose father owns the largest flock of sheep in the Shire) and Godfrey Fuller, another local merchant in the town. The Abbey (and Brother Cadfael) must determine who killed their monk, and why, and what it has to do with the annual Rose Rent due to Judith Pearle.

I enjoyed reading this book; while I was fairly sure WhoDunIt by the middle of the book, the Red Herrings distracted me (as they are meant to do).
---------------------------------------------
1st Recorded Reading: February 11, 2005