Rating: 5/5

Second Rating: 5 / 5

I just love this book, in all the charm and loveliness that it contains! It's a series that I find myself coming back to time and time again, to experience Lily's adventures with Queen Dragon anew!

It's a humble start, true, but reading it this time around, I realized that there are quite a few adventurous elements to it, both in events that happen, as well as in character development for Lily and what she experiences. This time around, I look forward to going through the whole series, and going through all the dangers and perils alongside Lily and friends. Cheers!

Rating: 4.4 / 5

If I had to use one word to describe the Lily Quench series, I would say that it is charming. The setup of the plot is really quite interesting: an orphaned girl living under the oppression of fascism (a kid-friendly version of fascism though, like the Empire and First Order in the Star Wars franchise) is determined as being bound to slay dragons because she is descended from dragon slayers, but then instead befriends the first dragon she meets and embarks on a quest to free her kingdom from the fascist rule.

What makes the story interesting is the combination of all these different elements and individual plot aspects that would not ordinarily find themselves in the same universe--i.e. tanks and bazookas along with dragons and mystical oracles. It's just a really original combination of things that makes for an interesting world to explore, and, especially for kids, covers just about all the right areas of "awesome".

If there's the one thing I had to take off points for though, it's that the climax of this story is just a bit too rushed to really be well-developed. The story, characters, and world are all unique and some descriptions go more in-depth than others, but the climax feels as though there's just so much that the author wanted to get in there, but she was given a word count limit of sorts by publishers and just had to "get it over with" for the kids. I'm not sure if this is the reason, but it feels like it, as action after quick action just follows one after another, Bang, Bang, BANG, and there's not enough time left to linger on any of what's happening--and when you've got soldiers randomly firing bazookas, a wedding gone amiss, a coronation happening in the middle of everything, a revolt of factory workers, and all the while there's a dragon flying over everything, you're going to want more detail on where and how everything's happening, you know?

Apart from that though, I look fondly on this as the first Lily Quench book I read, my first intro into this spectacular world by Natalie Jane Prior. I loved it as a kid and I love it now.