Rating: 3/5

Mmmmm…..

Fathers and Children by Ivan Turgenev is a story I have mixed feelings about. 

Initially, I really enjoyed this, largely because of a young man, a nihilist, named Bazarov. He accompanied another young man, called Arkady, to the latter’s family home to meet his widower father, Nikolay, and his uncle Pavel. Immediately, there were some uncomfortable discussions to be had as the opinionated Bazarov proved to be a taciturn, contrary (and in my opinion, arrogant) character – who spent his time disagreeing with everything Nikolay and Pavel had to say. There was a particular animosity between Uncle Pavel and Bazarov. Personally, I thought Bazarov was a complete tosser, and I would’ve thrown him out of my home, no matter how much Arkady fawned all over him. Arkady idolised him.

Despite my fractious relationship with Bazarov, I found him interesting as a character and whenever he appeared in a scene I made a wee “whoop” noise of delight (nothing too creepy, mind you), as I knew drama would ensue. If you read this, keep an eye on the relationship between Bazarov and Pavel – it crumbles dramatically.

The young men also visited Bazarov’s family farm, I found this part of the story incredibly sad – the parents of Bazarov, were almost ‘cap in hand’ gratefully simpering, in appreciation for their son’s visit. Bazarov seemed to exploit this, and even worse, he became increasingly indifferent to their love.

There’s also a love story in this liquorice all sorts, chop suey type of tale. Romance erupts when the boys visit a local aristocratic family – admittedly, this was interesting, too. 

I think the theme in this story is the differences between the old and the young. Seems obvious, I know. However, I could write a few pages on the theme as I see it – and that’s the difference between nihilists and the rest of us. What an annoying bunch.

Admittedly, the literary messages here are probably way above my ability to identify, define, and analyse.

I found this interesting in parts, but it was also all over the shop (for me) and didn’t seem at all cohesive – a bit like this review!

Good enough to recommend (the story, not my review).

Just. 

3 stars

If you'd like to read a far more insightful review of this interesting book , check out this review by Yules https://www.goodreads.com/review/show....