Rating: 3/5

Must read again.
Beryl Bainbridge said (possibly tongue in cheek), that most people needed to read this book three times before they understood it. Well I read it once, too quickly probably, and definitely feel I didn't understand it. Unless, of course, that is the point (which would be why Bainbridge might have had her tongue in her cheek).
Calling the six parts (chapters) of the book "plates" might be a clue. At the time in which the novel (novella?) is set, photography was in its infancy, and what we call "photographs" were then called "plates". The "plates" in the book were narrated/written/made/photographed by three different narrators, a technique which is always confusing, as, particularly in a novel this short, the reader is continually working out who says what, the relationships get differing perspectives and we frequently have to re-appraise both plot and perspectives.
One aspect that is unmissable is the horror of war and the shallowness and hypocrisy of 19th Century British colonialism. Which sounds like two things, except that they are connected. Colonialism was only possible through either threatened or, in most cases, actual violence. The depiction of war here holds no bars - it is graphic, bloody and shown to be every bit as gory, mechanical and inhuman as the "First World War" that it preceded. Colonialism is shown up as the murderous ego-trip of the rich few at the tragic expense of the poor, oppressed many.
Another element that struck me as important was that of chance and destiny. "Perhaps chance and destiny are interdependent, in that the latter cannot be fulfilled without the casual intervention of the former. A craggy rock placed at a distance from water will never be worn smooth." We can't help who we meet or often what effect that meeting will have on the rest of our lives. Myrtle is in love with her "brother", has children by him. Yet his indifference to her turns her into a victim for the rest of her life. 
All the relationships in this puzzling book are unrequited, imbalanced and destined to cause suffering - both the ones between individuals (marriages), and the collective ones (when nations meet and one represses the other). A bleak view of things, though perhaps one that the author means more as a critique of closed, blinkered and repressive Victorian sexuality and openly racist political thinking than one that applies to all of life. In those days, all sex was dirty, and the world outside England was inferior and it was perfectly acceptable to exploit it for the benefit of few (and, straight-faced, call it and actually believe it to be "civilizing the world"). Both loving relationships between individual people and political balance between nations have seen changes (improvements?) since. I think.
But our view of these things is always obscured by the fact that values were entirely different. Like looking at old photographs of people you've never met, it's impossible to form a clear image (excuse the pun - though it was intentional) of events. Rather like writing: there are many layers of perception between reality and the representation of it. At best it is a dim image - "through a glass, darkly."
So perhaps the novella is deliberately obscure. I'm only guessing, though. Which is the main point of reading, I think. Guessing, I mean...