Rating: 4/5

Wherein the main characters engage in a spirited competition to see who can tell the most outrageous lies. Everybody wins! 

Sir Gareth Ludlow has decided he’ll never fall in love again (his fiancée died in an accident many years ago), so he decides to propose to Hester, an older lady (well, she’s 29) who he thinks is kind and will be grateful to get away from her unreasonably demanding family. Hester, though she is clearly in love with Gareth, doesn’t want to be his marriage of convenience, so she's determined to turn him down. 

Matters get even more complicated when, on the way to Hester’s home to propose, Gareth picks up Amanda, a willful, lovely 16 year old runaway. He doesn't feel like he can leave her on her own, especially since her plan is to work as a maid or some menial job until her grandfather comes around and agrees to let her marry the guy she wants. But Amanda won't tell Gareth her full name, assuming - rightly - that he just wants to haul her back to her home with her grandfather. So he's kind of stuck with her, being a principled guy, even though it looks REALLY bad, like she's his mistress, aka bit of muslin. To make matters worse, Amanda's personality reminds both Hester and Gareth of his dead fiancee. This cements Hester's decision to turn Gareth down, since she knows Gareth isn't really into her, and she believes that sooner or later he's likely to fall in love with Amanda or someone similar. But then Amanda runs away once again ...

Minus a star for two things: giving the main romance seriously short shrift, and a secondary romance that was rather distasteful, at least as seen through a more modern lens.Amanda's love interest is apparently the right man for her because he's the only one who can control her wilder behavior. He seriously lectures her and bosses her around ... for "her own good." And she's not even 17 yet (he's about 25).

But the adventures of Amanda and Gareth are too funny: she makes up the most wild fiction about herself, especially once she realized Gareth isn't going to let her take off on her own, and Gareth begins matching her lie for lie. And people believe them!Mrs Ninfield drew a long breath. 'Sir, are you her guardian, or are you not?' she demanded. 

'No,' he replied, his voice grave, but his eyes dancing. 'I am an abductor. I met her only yesterday, and that by chance, snatched her up in my curricle, and bore her off in spite of all her protests to a gloomy mansion in the heart of the country. I need scarcely tell you that she contrived to make her escape from the mansion while I slept. However, it takes a good deal to daunt a thorough-going villain, so you won't be surprised that here I am, having hunted her down remorselessly. I am now about to carry her off to my castle. This, by the way, is perched on a precipitous rock, and besides being in an uncomfortable state of neglect and decay, is inhabited only by ghosts and sinister retainers of mine. From this fortress, after undergoing a number of extremely alarming adventures, she will, I have little doubt, be rescued by a noble youth of handsome though poverty-stricken aspect. I expect he will kill me, after which it will be found that he is the wronged heir to a vast property - probably mine - and all will end happily.'The hilarious thing is that the first part - all the way up to the decayed castle - is pretty much true, but because the whole thing sounds so outrageous, his listeners don't believe Amanda when she claims he's abducted her (which he has, though only for her own good).

Good fun! Read it not for the romance but for the comic adventures.