Rating: 1/5

This year's inductee into the Diana Palmer Gloriously Bad Hall of Fame.

Fever gives us a wealthy ranch owner who hates all women except perhaps his sainted, dearly departed mom, and maybe his sister. Every other woman is a gold-digging, man-eating, waste of hair spray although he is not above taking them for his sexual pleasure for a while and then sending them unceremoniously on their way with a diamond bracelet instead of a diamond ring. Let's call him The Stud.

The heroine is an amalgam of Mary-Sue-Pollyanna-Rebecca-Of-Sunnybrook-Farm-Little-Orphan-Annie-Beth-March, but we'll just call her Tiny-Tim for short. 

Tiny Tim skips around the meadow examining grass seeds, creating stone-age utensils out of discarded antlers, and mending the many patches on her second hand jeans. Tiny Tim is a gorgeous, blonde, blue-eyed, virginal, pure, sweet, intelligent, non-mercenary, American girl who has lived an unconventional life following her anthropologist parents around the world before being sent on assignment to The Stud's property, a magical meadow where there is no time, only forever. She has no concept of time, money, or materialism, and no marital designs on anyone although she dreams of a Prince Charming who will sweep her off her feet.

The Stud decides that this infant has been planted on his property to lure him into a ball and chain. He will teach her a lesson, pretending to be a poor, downtrodden ranch hand and not the Big Cheese, and the laugh will be on her.

It works! Not only does the Stud have her eating from the palm of his hand, but he promptly deflowers her and then keeps her as his convenient side-piece in the remote cabin in the boondocks of his property where he can come satisfy himself whenever he wants and best of all, not having to give her anything and not seeing any dollar signs in the gleam of her doe eyes. Follow extremely over long, purpletastic sex scenes that were unintentionally hilarious. I believe the words "velvet fever" were used more than once.

Tiny Tim thinks she is in love. When she finally finds out that all summer, her ranch hand has been playing a big practical joke on her, she doesn't get angry, or even leaves. Her little Tiny Tim heart just shrivel up a little more. The Stud yells at her for putting on a wounded innocent act and tells her he has nothing to feel guilty about since he only took what she was offering. Tiny Tim looks at him with her big eyes and nods.

In the end, Tiny Tim leaves not because she hates the Stud for what he has done and how he continues to behave, but because she is not good enough for him, being so poor, and does not belong in the sophisticated, glitzy, glamorous world of Utah ranch life. 

The Stud begrudgingly stops her from leaving a few lines before the end of the book, not because she is smart, beautiful, compliant, eager, sweet, etc. It's because he has found a spectacular shirt of grey, blue, and green linen stitched by fey fingers and adorned by antler buttons that she sewed, cut out, polished and even ironed (with an antique flat iron no less!) by herself. THIS is the catalyst for him falling in love with her and deciding he will keep her at his ranch for many, many, more years of stone-age fashion designs. No doubt she will always keep him looking fly.

I had a good laugh, I'm not gonna lie, but it was overly long, with a lot of space-fillers and dizzying repetitions about the timelessness of the magical meadow, and the curtain of her soft, silver, flowery, blonde hair, that he was frankly so obsessed with that I thought he was going to scalp her and wear it under his cowboy hat himself.