Rating: 4/5

Reading a book can be fatal. Or in this case reading an unpublished manuscript. That is the premise of the 19th entry in the Nero Wolfe series. Three people have died violent deaths and it takes Wolfe to see the connection.

The story opens with a visit to Nero Wolfe's office by Inspector Cramer. The body of Leonard Dykes; a clerk with the law firm of Corrigan, Phelps, Kustin and Briggs; was pulled from the river. When the police searched Dykes apartment they found a list of names tucked in a book. The names are meaningless. They cannot locate anyone with those names. Cramer would like Wolfe's opinion. Does he have any ideas? After all Wolfe is a genius. All Wolfe can suggest is that they are aliases which is not something Cramer did not already know. Cramer stomps out in a huff and Wolfe returns to his 'London Times’ crossword puzzle. 

Almost six weeks pass when a man, John R. Wellman, makes an appointment with Wolfe. He wants to hire Wolfe to find the person who murdered is daughter, Joan. She was the victim of a hit and run and a good daughter. To prove it he shows Wolfe a letter Joan had written to her parents. Joan had worked for a publisher where she would read manuscripts that had been submitted. In her letter home she told her parents the story of a manuscript she had rejected. The author, Baird Archer, had called her and wanted to hire her to discuss his manuscript and how he could improve it. The day after their "date" she died. Wolfe noticed that Baird Archer was one of the names on Inspector Cramer's list of names found in Leonard Dykes apartment.

This sets things in motion. The hunt for Baird Archer and the manuscript is on. Archie, and the police, descend on the offices of Corrigan, Phelps, Kustin and Briggs. Archie invites the secretaries to the brownstone on West 35th Street and Wolfe goes to Rusterman's. Archie also goes searching for whoever typed the manuscript for Baird Archer. He finds her but unfortunately it was minutes after she was thrown from a window.

There is the usual battle of wits between Wolfe and a crafty and intelligent killer. But is he any match for Nero Wolfe ... and Archie and Saul Panzer? Of course not. Wolfe, who for a time seems stumped finally sits back and pushes his lips in and out and then asks Inspector Cramer to have all the suspects come to his office where he will identify who the murderer is. A great entry in the series and in this one Archie flies to Los Angeles. Apparently a 10 - 12 trip when this was first published in 1951!