Rating: 4/5

In this book Koestler assumes a high vantage point on the topic set by the book's title: To him the creation of a work of art and the creation of scientific insight and knowledge is driven by the same mechanisms. I always find writers who manage to combine the arts and the sciences into a larger unit more attractive than those who overstress the boundary, at least those who do so habitually (which is often the case with humanities scholars). Koestler elaborates: "The criteria of truth differ from criteria of beauty in that the former refer to cognitive, the latter to emotive processes, but neither of them are absolute."
Some of Koestler's observations may sound trifle in themselves, but the integrative power and the arguments he builds over this long-form essay are convincing in the end. And sometimes we need the obvious to be explicitly stated, because our human apparatus of perception makes us often enough overlook it, e.g. "If one goes on sowing cabbage seeds, one cannot expect them to grow into mimosas - but that hardly gives one a right to denounce belief in the existence of mimosas as a superstition; and if one puts a creature into a Skinner Box, it will behave as one expects a creature in a Skinner Box to behave- with certain quantitative variations which are gratifyingly measurable, but still refer to behaviour in a Skinner Box." The only bad taste that this book left in my mouth were the occasional psychoanalytical explanations of driving forces, which seem already a bit dated by today, though they were certainly taken for granted in the 1960s when Koestler wrote this book. Some other aspects of Koestler's book, on the other hand, seem to have become even more relevant and true now, as compared to when the book was first published: "Modern man lives isolated in his artificial environment, not because the artificial is evil as such, but because of his lack of comprehension of the forces which make it work - of the principles which relate his gadgets to the forces of nature, to the universal order. It is not central heating which makes his existence 'unnatural', but his refusal to take an interest in the principles behind it. By being entirely dependent on science, yet closing his mind to it, he leads the life of an urban barbarian." Our world today is so full with cultural pessimists who see every new development in technology as another grave-stone on the cemetary of humanity, and hardly any of these pessimists actually spends any effort in trying to understand what is going on. Again, that's plain old folk-lore (as my mother used to say: "The farmer doesn't eat what he doesn't know"), but we could thank Koestler for pointing it out in these strong words.

P.S.: I've written this review two days after Great Britain has decided to exit the Europe Union. Arthur Koestler, a born (Austro-)Hungarian who became British is a continental European flower that decorated the UK very well. Wish them luck that they'll remain attractive not only to the managers of hedge funds, but also to those proponents of the beauty and the mind.