Rating: 2/5

I had no idea what to expect from this book, it's description is just vague enough to leave you with very little to go on. Yes, there are psychic kids. Yes, the future lies in their hands... congrats, you've just described a sizable chunk of fantasy/sci-fi novels. 

You're thrown into the world with no knowledge of what's happening, just that the town we arrive in is very religiously strict, and if you're psychic you're basically evil incarnate and must perish. We follow a girl and her friend who surprise surprise are psychic, and a slightly older boy who is psychic too and acts like a Gary Stu for quite some time. Something I do admire about this book however, is its ability to pack in so much plot into such a small amount of pages. I'm used to reading bricks that do less in their entirety than this did in a chapter. 

Not to say it didn't have its moments as well, the first 40% or so drags like one of the donkeys they keep using. We learn in detail the layout of most houses and tools. Then it sprints as soon as the action begins. There are odd moments where the pace goes from sprint to crawl randomly, which makes me feel like I skipped a page -but didn't. Also, I never could understand why they needed to stay in the village as long as they did, and when they do get out, things are handed to them quite easily.

It was a good read, an interesting perspective. However, somebody needs to fire the editor for this book. Let me show you the shopping list of interesting typos... "no chance ot slip into the tunnel", "been thrown inth the street", and my personal favourite that comes at a high intensity moment "The man was gone in durnkenness". That last one, comes near the end of the book when I was flying through the words to see what would happen, and then wham... durkenness, I laughed, tension gone. Additionally, there was a lot of repetitive phrases and words, it was enough that I noticed it happening more often than not.

All in all, I'd truly rate it a 2.5.