Rating: 3/5

Obviously, the story here is familiar. This is not a re-imagining of Robin Hood, it's a simple re-telling, a collection of many of the original tales in a single place.

The first thing any reader will notice is the style. This book was written in the early 20th century, but it written in a deliberately archaic style, and it's difficult to read or get involved in.

The story starts when Robin is just a boy, well before his days as an outlaw. The opening chapters are structured very much like a modern novel. They establish the setting and the characters, and the characters and situation develop nicely as the conflicts are set up. These chapters really draw a reader in. After Robin believes his life is going well, he a seemingly unceasing series of difficulties, each worse than the last. Finally, he is forced to make the decision that outlaws him. Up to this point, this is a very modern story, despite the Ren Faire prose. It is character-driven, builds slowly, draws the reader in, and establishes some formidable conflicts.

After Robin becomes an outlaw, though, the novel degenerates immediately into a picaresque. It is little more than a series of loosely-related adventures with characters sketched in broad strokes and low stakes.

This book was written as an adventure story for boys. It never had high literary ambitions. So, the fact that it ends up as nothing but a collection of adventure stories can't really be held against it. But it had set me up to hope for much more.

Creswick is very faithful to the oldest of the Robin Hood source material, sometimes to a fault. It is refreshing to see Maid Marian as the swordfighting tomboy she was meant to be, instead of the helpless maiden she was transmuted into as the story was told in the 19th century. On the other hand, Sir Guy of Gisborne makes a very brief appearance and spends almost all of it dressed as a horse, for reasons that are not adequately explained. Both Marian and Guy are faithfully cast from the Child ballads, but the resulting impressions on the reader are very different.

The ending is a little wishy-washy. Creswick mixes a few of the traditional endings, instead of settling on one, and the results are mediocre.

Overall, for what this is, it's good. It wasn't intended to be great literature, or to renew the Robin Hood legend, and it, indeed, does neither.