Rating: 5/5

An amazing book about one- if not the most tragic battle in modern history. The battle of Verdun stands to this day as the longest battle ever fought with its ten months filled will atrocities and evil that even today are difficult to imagine. Alistair Horne writes that no matter how you count (sources vary), it is clear that more 700,000 lives were lost in this battle. And even if the battle had ended, it stayed imprinted in the minds of the French to such an extent that years later in Indo-China battle cries from Verdun were heard in the bunkers. In Algeria, "De Gaulle Ne Passera Pas" was the favourite slogan of the french nationalists in O.A.S. 

The strategy of Erich von Falkenhayn was to 'bleed the French army white' and in months the landscape of Verdun was transformed into ghastly fields where the shells had blast away every last bit of life, trees and forests were gone, horses and men lay dying in the mud. The conditions of the soldiers where horrible, many did not sleep for days and in the forts, water supply was cut off on many occasions. The wounded couldn't be tended to and often lay suffering in craters created by the shells, their comrades not able to leave the trenches to aid them. The use of phosgene gas, heavy shelling, mud, bad weather conditions and the inhuman conditions all contributed to the sheer terror of Verdun. 

"The Price of Glory" is an amazing insight into the battle of Verdun as well as into some of the key figures (French and German) on the Western front during the Great War. Alistair Horne shifts from the generals: Joffre, Falkenhayn, Pétain (who I'm eager to read more about) and so on- to the regular soldiers in the trenches, forts and on the front line and doesn't shy away from including snippets from first-hand sources. He goes into great detail and covers many aspects of the battle, as well as the aftermath and what impact Verdun had on the collective mind in both France and Germany. His writing is beautiful and even poetic at times (especially in the epilogue which includes some very beautiful and melancholic, nostalgia-invoking pages) and I would definitely recommend this book to anyone interested in the battle of Verdun. This is the second book in his trilogy and I will be reading the 2 others soon. Alistair Horne is a great historian and a great writer.