Rating: 4/5

The first book of Aristotle’s highly taxonomical Rhetoric opens with a parsing of dialectic and rhetoric. He sets up the latter as an art of persuasion related to but nevertheless distinguishable from the former. After exploring the usefulness of syllogisms and enthymemes for both arts, Aristotle sets out his three basic categories of rhetorical discourse: deliberative, judicial (or forensic), and epideictic. He spends the rest of the first book exploring topics (related to the Greek topos, for place) useful for finding and constructing arguments in each of the three categories. The second book is generally focused on pathos, ethos, and logos, with Aristotle cataloging the various ways rhetors can make use of emotion, character, and reason as means of persuasion. He works through emotions first, explaining how various emotions can be useful to rhetors as well as characterizing the states of minds of those feeling particular emotions. He then discusses ethos, exploring the character of various audiences (young versus old, for instance) and how a speaker might thus adapt a speech based on a particular audience’s character. Lastly, he delineates varieties of logical argument: examples, maxims, enthymemes, and topoi. The final book deals with lexis, somewhat synonymous with “style,” and taxis, which approximates “arrangement.” Aristotle thus considers how various stylistic strategies such as energeia (which George Kennedy translates as “bringing-before-the-eyes”) and metaphor can be used to enhance a discourse’s persuasiveness depending on its classification, then breaks down the parts of arguments: the prooemion, the narration, the proof, the interrogation of the opposition, and the epilogue.

Kennedy's edition also includes a translation of Gorgias' "Encomium of Helen." In this encomium, Gorgias sets out to “refute those who rebuke Helen … whose ill-omened name has become a memorial of disasters. I wish, by giving logic to language, to free the accused of blame and to show that her critics are lying and to demonstrate the truth and to put an end to ignorance” (2). After narrating Helen’s history and parentage, Gorgias argues that “either by fate’s will and gods’ wishes and necessity’s decrees she did what she did or by force reduced or by words seduced or by love induced” (6). He claims that Helen is blameless if fate or force were to blame, as “by nature the stronger force is not prevented by the weaker” and Helen, the “weaker” in this case, cannot be blamed for fate or force’s irresistibility. “But if speech (logos) persuaded her,” Gorgias argues, it is still not difficult to exonerate Helen. For speech, he claims, “is a powerful lord that with the smallest and most invisible body accomplishes most godlike works” (8). Because “it is easy neither to remember the past nor to consider the present nor to predict the future … on most subjects most people take opinion as counselor to the soul” (11). “What is there,” then, to prevent young Helen from being “carried off by speech just as if constrained by force? Her mind was swept away by persuasion” (12). Speech is as strong as necessity, and “[t]he power of speech has the same effect on the condition of the soul as the application of drugs to the state of bodies”: “some instill courage, some drug and bewitch the soul with a kind of evil persuasion” (14). After setting up love as a similarly irresistible force, Gorgias concludes, “By speech I have removed disgrace from a woman.... I wished to write a speech that would be Helen’s encomion and my own paignion”--an amusement or plaything (20).