Rating: 5/5

I spent the entirety of the reading of this book wondering who...or what...is Mr. Bird. Mr. Bird is the owner of the Boarding-House of the title, who greets us immediately on page one with this: "I am dying." He does not mean sometime down the road. No, Mr. Bird dies then and there, from the feet up he tells the nurse. 

But that is not quite the end of Mr. Bird, who leaves a will: two of the residents of the Boarding-House will inherit it (comically disparate enough to move the plot forward, entertainingly); the rest of the residents may be tenants for life, their exodus only voluntary.

When Mr. Bird had written his will and had read it over he became aware that he was laughing. He heard the sound for some time, a minute or a minute and a quarter, and then he recognized its source and wondered why he was laughing like that, such a quiet, slurping sound, like the lapping of water.

Interlude: Note the precision of the time of laughing just above: a minute or a minute and a quarter. Trevor does this - a specificity of time - all through the novel: one resident must face the officer of punctuality every morning entering his work; another character times barmen to the second after ordering drinks; Hell, one character is named Nurse Clock. No, I don't know what that all means. I add it here as a public service, hoping someone smarter than me (a large enough pool) can figure it out. End Interlude

Mr. Bird very carefully, very intentionally, selected the residents. Without itemizing here, let's just say they are all just a bit off. Individual peccadilloes aside, though, what links them is their solitary nature. Yet they are not solitary in the Boarding-House.

Mr. Bird continues to be a presence: in the execution of his will; in somewhat spectral appearances; in truly delightful quick biographies he penned of the residents; and in flashbacks, such as his greeting to new kitchen help, a woman who entered the Boarding-House in a rush to pee:

You must stay here, you will like it. In this old boarding-house no one had told the unvarnished truth for the last fifteen years.

One resident, confused, identifies Mr. Bird as "the founder of heaven and hell on earth." Another says that he is "a man of infinite, subtle cruelty." So if Mr. Bird is a god - you could see where I was going - he is not a benevolent one. "I built that I might destroy," he is alleged to have said. But he is not a terrible, frightful god, I don't think. It doesn't matter if I'm wrong, because I'm the reader; and I see Mr. Bird as a fractious god, a stinker, a god Gary Larsen might have drawn, back in the day:

----- ----- ----- -----

Postlude: I first found William Trevor's writings fourteen years ago and I've been reading him ever since but mostly his later works. Just because they've been more readily at hand. But I found this just recently in a used bookstore in Seattle, a mere twenty minute walk from my granddaughter. It was hiding darkly on a bottom shelf; indeed, it took two trips for me to see it. It was remaindered, a few nicks to the cover, but it has turned out to be everything I love about a book: it made me laugh; it made me think; it entertained the hell out of me; it has a rarity about it; it is brilliantly imagined; it made me hide for pockets of time; it lies in my hands like a gift from an old man who just died; it will edge itself out of the space I put it in on the shelf, or I will think so; it makes me think I could do something similar; it will linger, teaching me otherwise; and, serendipitously, I read it with a friend. End Postlude.