Rating: 5/5

This is an intriguing book and an argument worth reconsidering today. I wanted to read it after growing frustrated with what is becoming clearer and clearer to me: glaring gaps in my students' basic cultural literacy (I am not talking about knowing about Raymond Carver or atonal music or varieties of Korean fermented spirits--I’m referring to very basic stuff).

Hirsch's argument is essentially that education (in the mid-80s) was failing to cultivate literacy in students because it had mostly jettisoned, according to him, any emphasis on content and instead chose to focus on formal, content-free skills, a pedagogical philosophy Hirsch calls "educational formalism." Today, you can grasp that phenomenon when you hear educators in the humanities—history, literature, modern languages, etc.--say they are not teaching a specific content (e.g. Roman political history, the poetry of Lord Byron, Italian culture) but a skill, something referred to with the one-size-fits-all phrase "critical thinking."

For Hirsch, cultural literacy is not a skill, and emphatically so, but a baseline level of actual, useful common knowledge that constitutes a field of shared meaning required for effective communication, reading, and writing. He uses the term "schema" to refer to the illuminating network of information that works together to make a person literate--i.e., the pre-reading required to read, say, a literate article: e.g. an article in the Financial Times or The Economist, an op-ed piece by a statesman in The New York Times, a travelogue in National Geographic, etc.

The crux of his argument is that literacy is not only a skill but is built upon a foundation of knowledge. There are certain things people need to know in order to claim literacy. What is the significance of the year 1066? Who is Henry IV? What is the Protestant Reformation? Who is Abraham Lincoln? What was the Alamo? Who was Achilles? What is the significance of his heel? How is the Ark of the Covenant different from Noah's Ark? What happened at the Battle of Waterloo? Who is Faust? It goes on and on.

His point is that in order to pick up, read, and make sense of information-rich writing, you need a baseline of knowledge that is unconsciously contextualizing and framing your efforts at making meaning.

This might sound strange, but anyone who is currently teaching in higher education can agree that certain gaps in knowledge are becoming apparent, particularly in the Pandemic generation. For example, I wanted to test Hirsch's argument, to see where my knowledge and my students' (Freshmen/Sophomores in college) knowledge were at odds. What was I assuming they knew that, in fact, they did not know?

Here are some examples of the questions I asked them:

I asked, "What literary character comes to mind when I mention the Prince of Denmark?" None of them said Hamlet. I asked them where the Civil War ended--at what famous site? None of them could say Appomattox Court House, and one student said the Alamo. I asked them to name a novel by Charles Dickens other than A Christmas Carol. They couldn’t. I asked them to name a single Russian novelist. One student said Marx.

I teach at a liberal-arts school that understands itself as highly selective. I do believe Hirsch's points, which seemed like they were conservative back in the 80s, will return soon. We have a serious problem: we can no longer assume that there exists an intellectual commons, a zone of shared knowledge that we can presume our interlocutors know about.