Rating: 5/5

Amazing! I’m fact as I read this book I see the reality of war and peace compared to today. 

His attention to details and his own letters to and from other generals and people in power. Makes this reveal more about his character than all the press and the fake media as he might have called it today! 

It has not changed and yet it has changed since then in the way we have waged war and the decisions we have made in the name of ending war! 

The dynamics of truth vs lies in public opinion in the nation and in the global eye has changed the game entirely! 

I do remember learning that Sherman was a cruel man and allowed rapes and pillaging and burning of the South in the name of evil! Against the Confederate South, but in hindsight and reading this book it suddenly changed my mind about who was really at war, who was being far too compassionate and who was not telling the whole truth and nothing but the truth as well as the press on both sides making up lies in order to sizzle the newspaper and sell more gossip than real news. 

But also in hindsight the ‘myth of Gen Sherman’ was created by the press and in fact that came back to help the Union beat the South by harnessing the fear and the imagination the enemy had as they crumbled ! 

Sherman realized that he was going to save thousands of lives and millions of dollars in wasted economic disaster ! Only an experienced business and banker who survived San Francisco militias and the power of the press to create doubt and crush banks and with it the lives of people!

In the March to Savannah Georgia it might be the best strategy and game changer for any war or future war if only they pay attention to the way St Louis, Memphis and New Orleans was handled by military personnel getting mixed into long term economic management and legal issues with such people that were still considered enemies!

Nobody in their right mind would have been so much of a genius when Sherman made the harsh reality to make Atlanta an example! He did not burn it out of spite like the movies Gone with the Wind may have dramatically lied. It was but a portion and most of the business and railroads were destroyed by both the enemy and the Union so that no more war could be waged. The wind blew and cotton bales burning caused a city of Charleston to burn or was it Columbia? It was indeed the cities outside of Georgia that were the most afraid and yet by mistakes by the enemy not the union did they destroy such a city in fire. 
For what army and what soldiers would start putting out the fires? If they had wanted the city to burn?
This is what they have lied about and it is not written and yet it is written in the military documents from both sides.
They are more legal and binding than words and gossip on the street! If social media was around it would be the newspapers. 

And yet as Sherman marched and disappeared the myth became more in favor of the Union putting an end to the carnage! No more war of droves of men against men!
When there was no food to feed the people then the soldiers were fed and could March faster and not have to rely on the railroads or supply

In today’s ideals? What Russia bombs is in ignorance as they will suffer from the carnage they will suffer from destroying the food water and medicine and how will Russia supply its own people and the soldiers? 
Nothing but starvation and defeat will follow. 

For Putin is not Sherman . Putin like Stalin and like Hitler have propaganda machines to wage war but will fail even with the global economic sanctions and idiots who are in power . 

War is stopped when business comes to a grind.
For the world is nothing but a business!
And this book will explain how and why Gen Sherman from his early life to the end when he retired. The truth about how he realized the difference between the king of war and the business of war. 

His realization indeed changed history in war as well as the business of war.