Rating: 5/5

PREJUDICES - THIRD SERIES 

By H. L. MENCKEN

Published, October, 1922

I read this book about mid 1960s and was not that impressed with it. Oh, it made sense and was relevant but at 16 your mind is in other places. Now that I am more aged and my priority is not going out on Friday night, I can find new truths and insights. This book covered Mencken’s analysis of 5 random Americans and how the contributed to American literature and politics. One is Abraham Lincoln (the other 4 were Paul Elmer More, Madison Cawein, Frank Harris and 
Havelock Ellis) and Mencken admires him but also lays it on the line about Lincoln. Was he the savior of America during the Civil War? Mencken would say otherwise. 

Back in the first half of the 20th century, America became very pro-Confederate. So many of our military posts had (and still have) been named in honor of Confederate heroes (Fort AP Hill, Polk, and so many more). So many books and the Media showed the South in a positive light (Gone With The Wind, Gen R E Lee, and so many more). What was it that started America to promote the South in the first part of the 20th Century? Well one of many reasons can be traced to some of America’s greatest writers such as H. L. Mencken. In his book “Prejudices” he presents Lincoln’s Gettysburg address as a lie. He admired the Gettysburg Address as a great oratory but not as truth. 

“But let us not forget that it is oratory, not logic; beauty, not sense. Think of the argument in it! Put it into the cold words of everyday! The doctrine is simply this: that the Union soldiers who died at Gettysburg sacrificed their lives to the cause of self-determination — “that government of the people, by the people, for the people,” should not perish from the earth. It is difficult to imagine anything more untrue. The Union soldiers in that battle actually fought against self-determination; it was the Confederates who fought for the right of their people to govern themselves. What was the practical effect of the battle of Gettysburg? What else than the destruction of the old sovereignty of the States, i. e., of the people of the States? The Confederates went into battle an absolutely free people; they came out with their freedom subject to the supervision and vote of the rest of the country—and for nearly twenty years that vote was so effective that they enjoyed scarcely any freedom at all. Am I the first American to note the fundamental nonsensicality of the Gettysburg address? If so, I plead my aesthetic joy in it in amelioration of the sacrilege.”

Today, we are taught, just the opposite and if you believe H.L. Menchen’s logic you will find yourself facing the hostile politically correct prejudice of today’s media.