Rating: 3/5

I'm such a huge B5 fan, so of course I'm going to read all the canonical books, even if this one is only "half canon". I really enjoyed getting the backstory for a pivotal part of the tv series! 

Just before the events of Babylon 5, Anna Sheridan is invited to join an archeological expedition to deep space that will alter the course of history. As her husband, John, begins his command of the Earthforce battlecruiser, Agamemnon, she is whisked off to a planet known to humans as Alpha Omega 3, but to other more ancient races as the infamous Z'Ha'dum. Hoping to find an alien technology beyond her wildest dreams, she suddenly finds herself accompanied to the planet by none other than a member of Psi Corps and a mysterious man known only as Mr. Morden. Why are they here? And is the planet really as empty as it appears?

It was great to see the actual events of Anna Sheridan's doomed expedition play out in real time. It is so important to the Babylon 5 story as a whole. The Shadows are way more terrifying in written word than on-screen, mainly because you get to read how it feels to be around them in details that tv just can't show. I enjoyed getting Morden's backstory as well! It almost made me like him, and I'm not sure how I feel about that. Getting bits of Kosh, Delenn, and Sinclair was fun too. The plot with John is not considered canon by the writer of B5, which is kind of a shame because it is a pretty good plot, but it isn't as vital as the one with Anna.

The writing style leaves something to be desired. The author reuses a bunch of phrases, including "put a fist to her mouth" which makes no sense in context. I think she means "hand" instead of "fist". Otherwise the visual is very weird. I noticed the use of "lines in the dessert" instead of "lines in the desert", and that was a pretty funny mistake. I also think she overdid John's character and Sinclair's didn't sit right for some reason. 

Overall, it's definitely good for fans of B5, especially since it adds to the main plot. But it's not a standalone, and unless you've seen the show, I wouldn't recommend the book. It was definitely written with the understanding that the reader knows what's going on in this universe, so go watch the show first, then come read this one.