Rating: 5/5

Possibly the best Christmas book EVER. Not only the greatest story since the original (you know, the one in the New Testament), but combined with P.J. Lynch's magnificent illustrations, this book is a gift you can open year after year!

Reread 2012: I had a sudden revelation this morning as I finished this book. It's not just the greatest Christmas book ever, but I have realized that it is probably in my Top Ten of All Time. Such a beautiful work! If anything can be a favorite part, it's the Fezziwig Christmas party, and the description of the dancing.

Reread 2013: Had a revelation just anticipating reading this this year: This is one of my all-time favorite books. I could read this any time of year.

Reread 2014: So much love for this story. So much love.

Reread 2015: I always try to make it through without crying, especially when Tiny Tim dies, and then the ending, when he did NOT die, but I failed again. And then I realized: If I don't tear up at that, I'm probably dead or a sociopath. 

Reread 2016: Was able to hand off the book to my daughter to read the parts when Tiny Tim does/doesn't die. The benefit of having kids!

Reread 2017: Woohoo! Managed to make it through the ending without becoming an incoherent mess!

Reread 2018: Finished in the car on the way to the Hogle Zoo for Zoolights. Had to hand it behind me to my 10yo daughter to read the last page. Just the best book ever.

Reread 2019: Just so damn good.

Reread 2020: Clutches book to chest. Gazes mistily into the distance.

Reread 2021: Didn't finish until January, as we got a late start. Still glorious. This year I didn't even make it to Nephew Fred's house, and had to have my daughter take over!

Reread 2022: Made it through Nephew Fred's house, but had son take over for the scenes at the Cratchit's house in both the Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come and the Epilogue!

Reread 2023: Choked up several times over different things this year, also we all like to yell out Rizzo's lines from The Muppet Christmas Carol, when appropriate.

Reread 2024: Just the best.

Reread 2025: Had to hand the book off as soon as he got to Nephew Fred's house!