Rating: 5/5

Advise and Consent by Allen Drury was first published in 1959 and awarded a Pulitzer Prize for Fiction in 1960. It has been thought of as a landmark piece of political fiction, and I must say, I found myself riveted to this amazing book. So much so, that I am now going to read the sequel Preserve and Protect. After working as a reporter and columnist for papers in California and Washington, Allen Drury then joined The New York Times in 1954 as a reporter in the Washington bureau. He was only forty years old when the novel that he had been banging out in between deadlines when the book was published, going on to critical acclaim. Drury knew politicians well and he gave each of his protagonists rich, although complicated, emotional histories and ideals. But at it core, it is a sweeping tale of corruption and ambition as it cuts across Washington, D.C.

Allen Drury’s Senate is a passionate and full-throttle place with these mid-twentieth century senators displaying oratory skills and talents that one would think current legislators would pale in comparison. Add to this the excitement of the print reporters in the gallery all rushing to report their news-breaking stories. The author penetrated the world’s stormiest political background as we are in the smoke-filled committee room of the United States Senate,

   “. . . each is aware that the Senate is about to engage in one of the battles of a lifetime; and each is wondering what it will mean for him in terms of power, reputation, advantage, political fortune, national responsibility, and integrity of soul.”

“A universal guilt enshrouded the middle years of the twentieth century in America; and it attached to all who participated in those times.”

What is so magical and appealing about this book is that Allen Drury was taken with men whose political ambitions and convictions spring from other passions. The most colorful of these men was the senior senator from South Carolina in the era of Woodrow Wilson, Senator Seabright Cooley spending his long time in office lording over the Senate Appropriations Committee with a shepherding of political ideals and goals. And then there is Brigham Anderson, a young senator from Utah whose wartime affair in Honolulu leads to a suicide in his office just hours before a crucial vote in the Senate. But the hero of the book was my personal favorite was Senator Orin Knox from Illinois. This was a man that put it all on the line for his moral convictions, his career be damned. And there was the Majority Leader, Robert Munson who is pressured by the President to pressure Brigham Anderson. With all of these threads in the mix, it is a page-turner. As one who has always been a part of the political world as I engaged in debates with my father many years ago, this was a beautiful book.