Rating: 1/5

I thought I would love The Sight because it's about wolves but the author knows nothing about wolf behavior and it's annoying me. The things he makes mistakes on are basic behaviors; I feel he was lazy and didn't do his research. He could have found this stuff out in a matter of minutes. 
For example, all wolves participate in the rearing of the pups, the author has only the females taking care of the pups. Fact: when pups are born, all members of the pack (male and female) secrete prolactin, 'the nurturing hormone', resulting in all members assisting in the rearing the pups. This is integral to the bonding process that is the single most important aspect of the wolfpack.
The author has non-family members in the same pack. This is a rare occurance as packs are formed of blood-ties, family members, again, integral to the bonding process. On the rare occasion when a pack accepts an outsider, that wolf is given the lowly and undesirable positon of Omega. The author has an outsider as the Omega but he makes the mistake of having other members as outsiders and non family members. 
And the biggest faux paw (you get the pun?) is having a second breeding couple. Never would a couple usurp the Alpha male and female's right to be the sole procreators, for many reasons, the most important being it's not in the best interest of the pack, the pack could not sustain such a large number of pups with 2 breeding couples. A couple must leave and form it's own pack if it wants to breed. The author also makes the mistake of the timing of the births, the non-cooperation of the pack, these things just cannot be if a pack is to survive. 
Another mistake: an enemy pack walking mere feet away from our pack, and the rival pack doesn't smell them? It's all about the scent for wolves, they don't rely on sight. It's just so inaccurate that I won't bore you with the myriad mistakes I've found because we could be here a long time. 
When I read a book, even novels, I want the author to do his research. And Clement-Davies is seriously lacking in this area. It's too bad, because it might have been a better book.

Besides all the inaccuracies, it's just not that interesting. It could have been, with the legends the author added but he goes about it too slow. I'm halfway through and not much has happened with the legend since the initial hook. I don't rush to get back to it. I can't continue with this book at this point, maybe at another time. 

Some months later: I eventually went back and finished it and my rating stands for the same reasons as halfway through. The only reason I finished it is I believe I can't say I hated a book with finality until I've finished it. And I think it'll get better (which they never do, sigh). 
I can definitively say This Book Sucks from start to finish.