Rating: 4/5

Nicholas Meyer did it again. After the very good “Seven per cent solution”, Meyer gives us another worthy pastiche (I know, it was published almost 20 years ago, but this is a real findfor me). This time, it is Holmes who narrates a much curious case: that of the Phantom of the Opera.
How Holmes became involved on this is handled very ingeniously and the best part is that you do not need to read “Seven per cent solution” to catch up. After he is presumed dead, Holmes finds a job doing the second best thing he does: playing the violin -at the Garnier Opera, no less-. Everything runs smoothly until Irene Adler, “the woman” suddenly gets to replace an ailing diva. Being the smart woman she is, Irene spots Holmes right away. In a move that can be described more or less as blackmailing, the woman gets a reluctant Holmes to follow the Phantom’s track in order to protect Irene’s colleague and friend, Christine Daee.
I’m not much of a “Phantom of the Opera” buff though I’m familiar with the basic outline therefore I’m judging this book only as Holmes fan. As an opera conscious fan, I also have to note that Meyers is well informed and throws his opera references very cleverly (I only caught a small mistake).
It is remarkable how Meyers gets a veritable version of Holmes “voice”. We can suspend disbelief and take it as penned by ACD.
Yes, Holmes narration is problematic; it is not as interesting as Watson. It is not Meyer’s blunder; it is intentional and capital for the story because there is no way Watson could have witnessed these events and another narrator does not necessarily work (I am talking to you, Sam Siciliano). Holmes narration works because it is very much what we can expect from Holmes: cold, undetached and lacking the surprise factor(we already know the outcome anyway) his work produces in less brighter people –Watson and thus ourselves-.
Some reviewers have mentioned their disappointment on Holmes’s behavior. He seems erratic, less confident and at times, plainly foolish. But it does make complete sense. Whether you choose to follow the “Seven percent solution” trail of a recovering drug addicted or simply take Holmes’s word that he felt like he was “on vacation”, our detective is below his usual level. Then remember this is Holmes telling us the events; maybe an observer like Watson would think some actions are a clear product of his intelligence but not Holmes; he is way too critical of himself.
My only complain? I was dying to get more of the Holmes/Irene Adler thread! Meyers is subtle but very effective on his characterization of “the woman” and his influence on Holmes. Get to the final page and tell me if you wouldn’t like more Holmesiana from Meyers!