Rating: 5/5

This book is written from the perspective of a boy who runs away from harsh treatment in England to sail on the Endeavor with Captain Cook who is the first European to sail around, chart, and document the flora and fauna of Australia and some of the surrounding islands. The book is written in journal entry form which I find interesting because it is different than most other types of books I read or listen to. 

I listened to this book with my 15 year old son and 10 year old daughter. There are descriptions of abuse and violence as well as nudity and cannibalism, but there is nothing in the book that is over the top graphic or gratuitous though some scenes were stomach wrenching. These instances only described what happened in the native setting. It was very interesting to hear about the first contact between cultures and see how the native people lived before colonization. The book simply told the truth which often was not very pretty. For this reason, I would recommend the book for middle school students and up. 

I thoroughly enjoyed this listen. I borrowed it from the library but will likely purchase the book as well. I want to know more about the real life boy and the journey as well. Someone ought to write a novel unit with geography, botany, sailing, cultural, and navigation tie ins. The book also has some wonderful characterization though much of this is implied. I found that the style made me think a little harder about what was really going on. 

Imagine sailing across the globe in a small wooden crate (by today's standards), all men aboard with each other day in and out through all sorts of situations including daily depending on each other for their survival. It is an amazing thing they did, very courageous, a little crazy, and I admire them all, but I did not like them all because some of the sailors were not good people. 

The people of the Pacific were amazing as well for how they traveled the ocean in their canoes, but I am glad there are no more cannibals. Not all changes brought about by colonialism were bad. The book shows the good, the beautiful, the bad, and the ugly of all people here. It simply showed the truth. 

We have listened in about 15 minute to 1 hour intervals over the space of 2 weeks. I recommend doing this and interspersing the story with visuals about the land they travel to as well as maps. I believe most boredom with the book is due to lack of understanding of the sailing terms, geography, cultures, and places discussed. A little more education would help kids appreciate the immense accomplishments and courage of the Endeavor's crew. 

The book is filled with adventure but not really written as an adventure story like The Lord of the Rings or Huckleberry Finn. The book does not really have an overall plot like fantasy fiction or even a video game. The book is more important than fiction because it reminds us that the only way to experience real adventure is to actually go live it. Most of us will never get to experience such an expedition, but in their story we can find inspiration to help us as we face challenges and seek adventure in whatever direction our lives takes us.