Rating: 2/5

I found this fairly disappointing. I think I was expecting more of a general survey of the various witchcraft accusations and the attitudes towards witchcraft, but instead it was mostly "the phenomenon of witchcraft accusations through a feminist historical lens". The biggest problem with this, in my opinion, is that it seemed taken for granted that people would want to oppress women, and so the mechanisms by which witchcraft accusations (and particularly successful witchcraft accusations) tended to hit specific demographics harder seems to have been neglected.

One example of this is that Karlsen suggests that one way witchcraft accusations were used was to keep inherited wealth and wealth in general in the hands of men, but this seems at odds with human nature to me. Most people care whether they, their families and whatever tribal associations they have control the wealth (generally in that order). It is much more likely that distributing the control of wealth along sexist and racist lines is in fact a "plausibly deniable" cover for reappropriating wealth rather than a deeply-held justification. In this light (and particularly since being sexist was not frowned upon in the 17th century), it makes little sense that people would use witchcraft as a cover for sexist redistribution, since the sexist redistribution is itself a cover for something else. To me, the groups she identified as the biggest targets for witchcraft accusations - unmarried women, widows, older women and especially lower classes - seemed to be the ones least likely to be able to defend themselves because their position in society was already marginal.

To be charitable to Karlsen, this book seems more academic in nature than populist, which makes me think it's possible that the problems I've identified are not flaws in logic but elisions made to avoid repeating the things everyone in the field already knows. She certainly seems quite detailed and fairly balanced, and this book comes off much more as an exploration of the phenomenon than any sort of polemic about the patriarchy. Still, it did leave me feeling like the causes and consequences have not been adequately fleshed out.

2.5 of 5 stars