Rating: 4/5

I have the sixth edition.

This is a very satisfactory introductory textbook for first year undergraduates. Really, you cannot go wrong with this book. My complaints are few, and I will only go over the complaints, rather than the positives, because otherwise I will simply say this book is very good and its treatment of topics astute as an introductory text. There are some factual errors, unsubstantiated and generally dubious claims (that the authors were doubltessly aware of being dubious, I can only assume), and frown-inducing insinuations scattered throughout the text, but I think if I were to think poorly of every introductory textbook to do such things, I'd be left with no introductory textbooks. 

So, first. Chapter one does a less than satisfactory job of giving a well-principled motivation for the field, an overview of its scope and contents, its goals, and what might be considered its principle subfields. 

Second, the header layouts. This is but a typesetting nitpick, but the way the headers are printed really is not very intuitive; traditional numbered sections would have been much easier to navigate.

Third, definitions are often unclear and are difficult to find upon navigating the text. There is, indeed, a glossary at the back, however, I feel this is more cumbersome than simply arranging for the definitions in-text to be easier to find and refer to. As I am familiar with the terms I didn't find this very bothersome, but I think a beginning student would have less patience. 

Fourth, the rhetorical tone. This is but a matter of style, but I find the academic tone employed has a habit of making a reader loose track of where they are (for a fresh undergraduate, I fear it might scare them off!) - and the use of rhetorics does more to hamper the course of arguments than to make them explicit. 

So, while the book is indeed very good, it is not the most accessible to someone new to the field, I think. This is indeed a very big caveat for an introductory text, and were these issues to be rectified in a subsequent edition - which indeed would require some reasonable amount of rewriting, though I've surely seen bigger transformations between editions - I'd say it's the perfect introduction. (Well, I will concede I would have liked some deeper history of the field.)