Rating: 3/5

Being a woman in medieval times is no joke, but being a wife is a colossal task. The specific one we're introduced to here is quite a character though, and I was surprised reading about her!

The Wife of Bath is a poem taken from The Canterbury Tales and describes a worldly woman named Alison telling the tale of how she got married five times. In her story, she ponders the nature of marriage and explores autonomy and the relations between the sexes.

It's laying the foundation for what feminism would later build on. Or is it? It's crazy how contemporary this feels considering it's hundreds and hundreds of years old. It does entail rather binary ideas of what men and women are, but at the same time, it humorously uncovers how ridiculous the inequality between the genders is. Because everything is drenched in jokes, though, it's actually hard to make out what precisely Chaucer is making fun of. Alison is a strong-headed woman fully aware of her desires and priorities, yet the way she is presented makes me feel like Chaucer wasn't trying to introduce us to a character he himself thought of as particularly trailblazing. So I guess it's up to you to read this as either an early feminist text or a basic man making fun of the control issues of the opposite sex.

Even when trying to break the chains, she remains part of the system. What I found interesting from the perspective of a woman in the 21st century was how she's not actually able to free herself from societal boundaries. She's clearly trying to be in control of her life and doesn't think too highly of the men in her life, yet she is not fully able to be seen as an individual on her own: the title itself says as much. She's not Alison; she remains a wife named Alison. So whether this was meant to be satire or not, it shows us, even centuries later, how much we still need feminism.

In 2015 Penguin introduced the Little Black Classics series to celebrate Penguin's 80th birthday. Including little stories from "around the world and across many centuries" as the publisher describes, I have been intrigued to read those for a long time, before finally having started. I hope to sooner or later read and review all of them!