Rating: 5/5

Steaming to Bamboola is Christopher Buckley's first book, an entertaining account of his time spent as a Merchant Seaman. He shipped out in 1970 at the age of 18 as a deck boy aboard a Norwegian tramp steamer and ended up circling the globe. His pay was $20 a week and he has since remarked, "I've never since worked harder physically or felt richer." The book has been out of print for a while, but richly deserves to be brought back. If you can find it used and are a fan of Christopher Buckley and/or sailing travelogues, be sure to snap it up while you can.

In today's world of container shipping the days of the tramp steamer are all but gone, but they live on in this raucous account of life on the high seas. We meet rebellious deckhands, nosy room stewards, and an ornery bosun from Alabama who openly says he shot a man but did jail time for something else he refuses to reveal. There is the ex-submariner from Kentucky money who can quote Shakespeare, suspect cooks who routinely miss lifeboat drills because of bouts of the DTs, and a captain and chief engineer who have been sailing together for over a decade yet utterly despise each other. If you have ever spent time on a ship you have probably run into colorful characters like these. We endure horrible storms with them and even worse on-board entertainment. We head ashore with them in foreign ports of call, hang out with them in seedy seamen's clubs and barely roll back up the gangplank in time for the next leg of the trip bruised, battered, and barely conscious. Some may call these men misfits while ashore, but at sea they have no equal.

In one especially interesting part of the book we hear amazing stories from the past in Sailor's Snug Harbor, a home for retired mariners in Sea Level, North Carolina. Several residents of Snug Harbor have over 50 years of sea time. It is here that we encounter fascinating accounts of the man who was blown into the smokestack when his ship was torpedoed off the coast of South America in 1942, the story of the captain of the first ship sunk in WWII, and more.

At just over 200 pages, Steaming to Bamboola is a quick read with fun insight into the world of the Merchant Marine and the long gone tramp steamer. Christopher Buckley, son of William F. Buckley Jr., is a good writer and does a terrific job with this, his first book. If you have spent time on ships, are interested in life at sea, or are simply a travel junkie like me, definitely pick this one up if you can find it.

Special note: Steaming to Bamboola is a good companion volume to John McPhee's Looking For A Ship (1990), another enjoyable firsthand account of the life of merchant seamen on tramp steamers.