Rating: 5/5

The story of a marriage from its inception through to the premature death of the wife. It is no grand passion, no Romeo and Juliet but the quiet loving relationship between two people jaded by life who, by finding each other, experience more happiness than either feel deserving of.

Ruby has made poor choices in life. Brought up in a comfortable family with a servant and loving parents she throws it aside for the adventure the wild man, John, has to offer. Ruby quickly realises that the romance of the open road is for those who do not live an itinerant lifestyle. He is a seasonal worker and they move from shack to shack. Her pride will not allow her to go back home even when he proves to be abusive and unfaithful (she walks in on him with a teenage girl). 

Ruby is trapped until the day John dies from injuries he sustained in a bar brawl. The author does not dwell on the details, maybe to place us in the position of Ruby where she hears what has happened but has little more than a sketchy understanding of events or perhaps to intimate that there was more to it than being reported. In any case Ruby is relieved rather than grieving, much to the disapproval of her community, but still will not return home.

She meets Jack while taking a cigarette break from the maid’s job she has been forced to take. He is a bachelor twenty years her senior (she is still only in her early 20’s) and aesthetically nothing to write home about but they both sense in the other a need to be cared for and although one can’t call it a marriage of convenience there is something of the port in a storm to their union.
After their meeting the book tells the story of these two people who share a deep but quiet love. Together they weather personal tragedies and tragedies inflicted by others. It is a beautiful story of Jack and Ruby growing together, accepting each other in all their rawness and failings and how a simple, fulfilling life can bloom from unlikely beginnings told in uncompromising, unadorned prose.