Rating: 4/5

Confucius has a lot of wisdom. Anyone who is serious about living life well would do well to read the Analects.

Poignant Quotes:

If you try to guide the common people with coercive regulations and keep them in line with punishments, the common people will become evasive and will have no sense of shame. If, however, you guide them with Virtue, and keep them in line by means of ritual, the people will have a sense of shame and will rectify themselves.

Give your parents no cause for anxiety other than the possibility that they might fall ill.

Both keeping past teachings alive and understanding the present - someone able to do this is worthy of being a teacher.

If you learn without thinking about what you have learned, you will be lost. If you think without learning, however, you will fall into danger.

This is wisdom: to recognize what you know as what you know, and recognize what you do not know as what you do not know.

When you see someone who is worthy, concentrate upon becoming their equal; when you see someone who is unworthy, use this as an opportunity to look within yourself.

People in ancient times were not eager to speak, because they would be ashamed if their actions did not measure up to their words.

Zigong said, "What I do not wish others to do unto me, I also wish not to do unto others." The Master said, "Ah, Zigong! That is something quite beyond you."

When Zilu learned something, but had not yet been able to put it into practice, his only fear was that he would learn something new.

He was diligent and loved learning, and was not ashamed to ask advice from his inferiors. This is why he was accorded the title "Cultured."

I should just give up! I have yet to meet someone who is able to perceive his own faults and then take himself to task inwardly.

One who knows it is not equal to one who loves it, and one who loves it is not the equal of one who takes joy in it.

When walking with two other people, I will always find a teacher among them. I focus on those who are good and seek to emulate them, and focus on those who are bad in order to be reminded of what needs to be changed in myself.

The gentleman is self-possessed and relaxed, while the petty man is perpetually full of worry.

The Master was affable yet firm, awe-inspiring without being severe, simultaneously respectful and relaxed.

Learn as if you will never catch up, and as if you feared losing what you have already attained.

When a man is rebuked with exemplary words after having made a mistake, he cannot help but agree with them. However, what is important is that he change himself in order to accord with them. When a man is praised with words of respect, he cannot help but be pleased with them. However, what is important is that he actually live up to them.

Yan Hui is of no help to me - he is pleased with everything that I say.

The Master said, "The Good person is hesitant to speak. When being Good is so difficult, how can one not be hesitant to speak about it?"

The Master said, "The gentleman is free of anxiety and fear. If you look inside yourself and find no faults, what cause is there for anxiety or fear?"

A gentleman helps others to realize their good qualities, rather than their bad. A petty person does the opposite.

Imagine a person who can recite the several hundred odes by heart but, when delegated a governmental task, is unable to carry it out, or when sent abroad as an envoy, is unable to engage in repartee. No matter how many odes he might have memorized, what good are they to him?

Those who possess Virtue will inevitably have something to say, whereas those who have something to say do not necessarily possess Virtue. Those who are Good will necessarily display courage, but those who display courage are not necessarily Good.

Do not worry that you are not recognized by others; worry rather that you yourself lack ability.

Yuan Rang sat casually, with his legs sprawled out, waiting for Confucius. On seeing him, the Master remarked, "A young man devoid of humility and respect for his elders will grow into an adult who contributes nothing to his community. Growing older and older without the dignity to pass away, he becomes a burden on society." He then rapped him on the shin with his staff.

The gentleman does not promote someone solely based upon their words, nor does he dismiss words simply on account of the person who uttered them.

To make a mistake and yet to not change your ways - that is what is called truly making a mistake.

When attending a gentleman, there are three types of errors one may commit. To speak when it is not yet time to speak - this is called being rash. To not speak when it is time to speak - this is called being secretive. to speak without taking into account the countenance of one's lord - this is called being blind.

Learning broadly and firmly retaining what one has learned, being incisive in one's questioning and able to reflect upon what is near at hand - Goodness is to found in this.

Love God
Know God
Love others
Become like Christ - humbly observe others to emulate the holy and discard the unruly
Make Disciplemakers