Rating: 2/5

"All's Well That Ends Well" ... except for, umm, this play ... because it didn't end well at all but let's keep things in order and start at the beginning of this clusterfuck. Don't get too excited though, albeit the two star rating might seem low I still kind of appreciate this play and find it interesting. I am a huge fan of Willy's "problem plays" (aka the dark comedies aka all the plays in which he finally developed some interesting characters that are absolute shitheads and morally grey). The depth of the characters is great and I usually enjoy the morale dilemma that they find themselves in. 

All's Well That Ends Well has a very simple promise: the young girl Helena is in love with the Count of Roussillon, Bertram. When she learns that the King is sick, she decides to make a deal with him. If she manages to heal him, she'll get to chose one of the lords of his court for marriage. If she fails, she will be executed. (sounds fair ... kinda not, but whatever) Luckily (for her, not for us because all the things that suck in this play are because of that), she manages to heal the King and choses Bertram as her husband. This scene (which happens toward the end of Act II) is one of the most vicious and awkward scenes in all of Shakespeare's canon, since all the gentlemen of the court reject Helena and Bertram openly voices his dislike for her by asking the King if he has to be "brought down", only because she raised him (the King) up. 

That scene is so interesting on so many levels because it twists the power dynamic that is inherent to most Shakespeare plays (men in power, women submissive) ... whilst still not really twisting it. On the one hand, we see that Helena is in power (because the King granted her this position). However, when she proposes to Bertram she does so in the most submissive fashion ever. Like, for real, it's bizarre. Bertram quickly asserts his dominance by dismissing her. And you can't really be mad at him for it, since that whole deal between Helena and the King was made 100% without his knowledge and his consent. Forcing someone to marry somebody else is just not cool. But whilst Helena is willing to let it slide and accept Betram's decision, the King is absolutely not. He wants to assert his dominance because he feels like Bertram is disrespecting him by not following the rules he has established. So, all in all, it's just a clusterfuck of a power dynamic. 

So far, so good. I like the moral problem posed in the first two acts. I liked the witty dialogue and banter and was somewhat intrigued. From Act III onwards, this play completely lost me. Basically, Bertram decides to flee from France in order to avoid marrying Helena. He's quite the shithead about it for telling her that he would rather die than have her for a wife. The Countess (his mother) is horrified at his actions and chooses Helena's side (which I found surprising). And Helena decides to follow him to Italy. There she learns that Bertram has fallen in love with the young Diana and wants to woe her. What then ensues is just plain right disgusting, since the two women make a deal and decide to perform the bed trick on Bertram. Before Bertram left France, he told Helena that only if she will obtain his family ring and will be carrying his child, he will accept her as a wife. Helena decides that Diana should woe Bertram and demand the ring from him. She should then make out a date with him on which they would have sex. What then ensues is that Diana gives the ring to Helena, and Helena takes her place on the date, so that Bertram (unknowingly) sleeps with her as opposed to Diana. This is basically rape, since Bertram never consented to sleep with Helena and the women tricked him into thinking he slept with Diana. It's disgusting, and the point of the play where I lost respect for almost all of the characters. 

Helena then fakes her own death (what a mood), only to reveal herself at the right moment at the court of the King of France (because naturally Bertram came home once he found out his would-be wife was dead, lmao). Bertram then acts completely out of character by being impressed with Helena's actions and accepts to marry her since she fulfilled the two conditions he imposed on her earlier. It's so fucking ridiculous, and I don't get Shakespeare's narrative choice for the end at all. Why not have this play end without a marriage? He wasn't forced to write a comedy. I would've loved Diana to be a bit more opportunistic and fuck shit up by actually keeping the ring for herself or something like that. There was a lot of potential there. Bertram's conversion at the end is so sudden, it makes no sense at all. We don't need no happy ending, Willy. Get a grip.