Rating: 1/5

For those of you that would find this an engaging and useful book - all five of you...not all five of you on goodreads.com, but all five of you at least somewhat sentient beings within the english speaking world - I beseech you to leave a review that will entice me to read the second half of this book. I aquired this for a dollar or two at a library book discard sell and, a couple years later after reading reference after reference to William's (I think his last name is spelled "Whyte" yet, on this particular website, the box overlaps the name of the author and if you click above to look at it, it erases everything you've written - thus my lack of comment on The Historiography of Modern Architecture which was, no doubt, pithy and important but was eradicated by this stupid interface! Fool me once goodreads.com...) book about Organization Man I started reading this as it was on hand. So I got about half way through, I seem to recall, 500 pages of William expounding upon the legalese of how the few interested people circa 1967-ish might go about saving swaths of rural land in the state of Maryland from being subsumed by sprawl. Perhaps it was because of the author's reasoned, somewhat banal, actuarial-like approach to the issue combined with my assumption that 30-something years later - as I'm reading this - every piece of acreage he's talking about has probably been paved over 8 times, I found it depressing in so many ways. He delves into various tactics of land aquisition that has perhaps proved beneficial since. He mentions something called a "Fee-simple" strategy I seem to recall, and perhaps he invented this? And perhaps this has proven, subsequently, to be some major tool for aquiring land away from avaricious developers in such states as Vermont and Oregon? I dunno...I'm a redneck from Texas/Arkansas where everything is simple, yet doesn't ultimately work. And, as I said so many ages ago at the top line of this run-on paragraph, let me know why I need to find my copy, blow the sundry dust bunnies off of it, and read it to get something out of it. And don't tell me that it's more important than Organization Man. I did eventually read it and I'll soon comment on the frequent overuse of that one by people who obviously haven't read it!