Rating: 2/5

Allies of the Night is the eight book in the Cirque du Freak series. While Darren, Mr. Crepsley, and Harkat are still searching for the Lord of the Vampaneze, mysterious killings bring them back to Mr. Crepsley's home town. But something suspicious is going on. The only thing is, will our heroes figure it out before it's too late?

Plot

Let’s be real: the plot is being drawn out and spread too thin. The whole vampire/vampaneze war is interesting. So is the quest to find and kill the Lord of the Vampaneze. But a half-vampire in school? An entire book full of the protagonists searching for their enemies? These are things that are not interesting. This is the third book in a row that I’ve given two stars to. This is the same problem I had with The Chronicles of Vladimir Tod. The overall plot was interesting enough but it was spread out too much and became boring really quickly. Same thing’s happening in Allies of the Night. Same as with Hunters of the Dusk. It was mostly boring with a bit of action at the end. 

Writing

The writing has gotten boring because nothing is going on. It is good quality writing, I give Shan that much. Shan’s writing has always been good, except when there’s no action going on. For the life of him, the man cannot write mundane scenes very well. And this book was full of them, just like the last two. 

Characters

I’m starting to dislike Darren a little more. He’s around twenty-five but he’s still making bullheaded decisions. Yes, he’s matured as far as fighting goes, and how he views humanity, but he still makes these naïve choices that are not becoming of someone his actual age. 

I like Harkat Mulds a bit more. He’s not afraid to speak up against the questionable things Darren is planning on doing. The relatshionship between him and Darren could have been shown more, though. This book revolved a lot around Darren so I don’t really have an opinion on the other characters.

Things I Didn't Like

The whole school thing was pretty pointless in my opinion and I didn’t like it. I don’t really see a reason for it and it feels like a waste of a book. It was also an insanely easy predicament to get out of. Mr. Crepsley could have said that someone forged all that stuff, which they did. They could have moved out into the woods near the town or travelled to a close town altogether. The school plot is my main gripe.

Diversity

Debbie’s back! So that brings the female and racial diversity count back up to a total of one. Yipee. Downside, however, is that Debbie eventually just becomes the damsel in distress. Take that how you will. That’s about all as far as this section goes. 

Overall

This entire book was boring. I cannot put it more simply than that. Nothing really happened except at the end. You can’t have the action happen at the end while making the reader to struggle through three-fourths of the book and expect them to be happy about it. I know I wasn’t. I’ve already read this series once and there’s a reason I couldn’t remember what happened after The Vampire Prince. It’s because between that and The Lake of Souls was too boring to remember! I’ll trudge through the next few books, but if they continue this way then I definitely won’t be happy about it.

Here is a link to my notes.