Rating: 4/5

Originally published as Le Bataille, The Battle is a modern French author’s homage to the novel Balzac often declared that he wanted to write, but never got around to writing. The Battle is, perhaps, the ultimate military novel. I say that in spite of the fact that my bookshelf here on the site and my bookshelves at home are practically papered with military novels. I started with juveniles written during the Second World War (the Dave Dawson series), expanded to Napoleonic sail, discovering Hornblower, Bolitho, Ramage, Lewrie, and Aubrey before moving to Napoleonic infantry (Forrester’s Rifleman Dowd (sic) and Cornwell’s Sharpe) and Napoleonic cavalry with Mallinson’s (sic) extremely well-written novels that start at Waterloo and move forward. I have read Stendahl’s and Tolstoy’s epic novels of the Napoleonic Era and branched out slightly into Alexander Fullerton’s naval adventures in the First World War. I’ve read Cornwell’s adventures of a “Copperhead” during the U.S.’ War of Northern Aggression and savored James L. Nelson’s sailing novels of the American Revolution. But I have never, ever read a grittier, more realistic expression of the waste of warfare and the lack of glory than The Battle.

The Battle is grim, dark, and ruthless. Providing the account of more than 50,000 French soldiers slain in the Battle of Essling, the pages of this book underscore the horrors of amputation (a butcher’s bill piled even higher than the ones in the pages of the aforementioned sailing novels where amputation played a key role), the destructive egos of many within the French command without losing sight of the ethical swamps in the hearts of the enlisted men, the ruthless use of anything and everything as a weapon (at one point, a mill is tarred, set afire, and cast adrift to destroy a vital bridge), and the high cost of fouled logistics and delayed reinforcements. Such emphases were more vivid in this book than in any I’ve ever read before.

Perhaps, one reason for this gritty realism is that Rambaud made extensive use of contemporary sources, the memoirs penned by many of the participants themselves. One such anecdote, taken from Lucas-Dubreton’s Soldats de Napoleon, told of a standard-bearer for Napoleon’s Imperial Guard who was beheaded by a tight configuration of Austrian roundshot. The standard-bearer had hoarded gold coins throughout the campaign and hidden them inside the pole that held the flag. When he was killed, the gold coins showered everywhere, but the action was so intense that no one could stop to pick them up. Eventually, a wounded grenadier found himself behind the main lines and scooped up some of the coins. They were inscribed with “Unity, Indivisibility of the Republic” and, since Napoleon had now declared France to be an Empire, the coins had been declared worthless five months before. What irony! The treasure he carried to his death was worthless to those he left behind. 

As a novelist, Rambaud has one of the styles I dislike. To me, he jumps from character to character in such an epic style that he never quite gives me time to become emotionally involved with one character before jumping off to set the dramatic scene with another. This may be the result of an old man reading a novel written for the Internet generation, but I am a firm believer that we have to really care about the characters before we can be drawn into their feelings. Only with certain ill-fated characters does Rambaud accomplish this result. As a result, my feeling is that this novel which could have been my highest rated reading experience, drops a peg to reflect a better-than-average reading experience.