Rating: 5/5

“I didn’t say I liked it. I said it fascinated me. There is a great difference.” - Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray

Nabokov is brilliant because if you had to write a character, one of the least sympathetic characters would be a pedophile. However, this is exactly who our main character is. 

Lolita centers on Humbert Humbert, a man obsessed with a 12-year old girl. He unapologetically describes his obsession, how he willingly sacrifices his entire life for her. 

Lolita is fleeting. Humbert understands that the girl will age and outgrow his obsession. What is disturbing is that almost all romantic relationships follow a similar timeline. 

When we first fall in love, our brains are awash in high levels of dopamine, high levels of cortisol, and low levels of serotonin. Serotonin is associated with obsessive-compulsive behaviors. Have you ever tried not to think of someone but are drawn helplessly back? Thanks, Serotonin!

After one or two years, the cortisol and serotonin return to normal levels. Now, will your “love” really last, when you realize that the person sitting across from you actually has faults and imperfections?

On this reread of Lolita, I am now plagued by the question: Is Humbert telling the truth? Do I believe that the events unfolded as he described them? If the eyes are the window to the soul, why do we first meet Lolita with sunglasses on?

There is an interesting Yale lecture on Lolita found on YouTube. 

The lecturer asked, “Would you like to have dinner with Humbert Humbert (understanding that the entire audience is outside the age of a nymphet)?” 

How much do you believe Vladimir Nabokov personally is reflected in the novel?

Do you think Mr. Humbert is sorry for his obsession?

Does Mr. Humbert trivialize what he is doing in the novel?

Lolita is a retelling of sorts. At the beginning of the book, Humbert describes a relationship with Annabel Lee. This is actually a poem by Edgar Allan Poe. 

If you enjoyed Lolita, you may also want to check out My Dark Vanessa.

How much I spent:
Softcover text (Penguin Classics version) - $11.69 at Blackwell's
Audiobook – 1 Audible Credit (Audible Premium Plus Annual – 24 Credits Membership Plan $229.50 or roughly $9.56 per credit)

2025 Reading Schedule
Jan	A Town Like Alice
Feb	Birdsong
Mar	Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere
Apr	War and Peace
May	The Woman in White
Jun	Atonement
Jul	The Shadow of the Wind
Aug	Jude the Obscure
Sep	Ulysses
Oct	Vanity Fair
Nov	A Fine Balance
Dec	Germinal

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango