Describes the rocks you're looking at as you drive the roads of Northern California -- which in this case means San Francisco and north. Even if you're not too interested in geology and don't want to read the whole book in sequence, it's a nice companion as you drive to Tahoe or Pt Reyes. Really good sections on gold country: when you think about environmental problems today, don't forget that the 19th century had enough technology to fuck up an awful lot of shit with just coal, steam, and railroads. They actually managed to flood vast tracts of the Sacramento Valley with the detritus of gold mining!

The best part of the book though is at the very end, the discussions of Lassen Volcanic National Park and Lava Beds National Monument -- both of which are incredibly interesting geological stories that unfortunately are not strikingly picturesque. The simplest geological structures are usually the most scenic -- think Crater Lake or Mauna Kea -- but California geology in general and Lassen in particular are palimpsests which can only be read as historical sequences. I was blown away by the simple revelation that there is no single spot on any road where you can see all of Lassen! It's so true yet I had never realized it. I was also amused by this description of the 1915 lahar: 

"Several ranches were completely buried under deposits of mud, and littered with boulders weighing as much as 20 tons, all within a few minutes. The fact that some of the boulders were red hot lava added considerable interest to the occasion."

Ha! Scientist humor is the best :)

To get the most out of this book it's helpful to have a basic understanding of California geology: slip-strike faults, batholiths, and marginal trenches come up over and over for obvious reasons. The authors cover this ground, but very quickly -- I found John McPhee's _Assembling California_ and _Basin and Range_ very helpful for the bigger picture. Unfortunately the illustrations are crappy, so be sure to look at some decent color photos of the most common rocks -- sandstones and mudstones, serpentinite, basalt, granite, anthracite and dacite -- before heading out on your road trip.