Rating: 5/5

Irving Stone is a masterful writer and researcher. I can't imagine the amount of work he put into this book. I loved and devoured (almost) every word.

The book started slow... very slow. So slow I picked it up one month and put it down until the next month, and the next, and the next. It was my bedtime snooze fest. I didn't get caught up in it until about 200 pages in. By then I was invested in John and Abigail's story and was used to Stone's writing. 

I truly enjoyed reading every detail of the Revolution, John's days in the Continental Congress, their time in Paris and London (the parties!!), his Vice Presidency, their constant upkeep of their homes in Braintree, their family troubles, their love story.

It was surprising to me that they lived most of their lives in debt, with constant worry of how to keep up with the Joneses (or in this case, the international royalty). Another surprise was learning that even in the early days of the country, there were major disputes against the two parties, always wars and rumors of war, always little revolts, always trouble with waning patriotism. History truly is one eternal round.

_

"I must judge for myself; but how can I judge, how can any man judge, unless his mind has been opened and enlarged by reading?"

"One could possibly be master of one's fate in a quiet era, but perhaps an era only looks quiet in retrospect. Perhaps for the people who had to trudge their way painfully through it, it was filled with turmoil."

"But above all, except the wife and children, I want to see my books."

"My dear Miss Abigail, you are not only my wife but my mother-confessor. Your listening absolves me. I then sleep like a woolly white lamb. Did you know that absolution for your husband would be part of your job as a wife?"

"There's no role I enjoy more than being the omnipotent savant at my own dinner table."

"The two hired hands John had left behind were experienced workers but not inclined to crowd too much accomplishment into any one day's work."

"...may we learn by defeat the power of becoming invincible."

"These are times in which a genius would wish to live. It is not in the still calm of life, or the repose of a pacific station, that great characters are formed. The habits of a vigorous mind are formed in contending with difficulties. All history will convince you of this, and that wisdom and penetration are the fruit of experience, not the lessons of retirement and leisure. Great necessities call out great virtues." - Abigail to son Johnny

"That magnificent contingent of men with whom he had started a revolution, carrying it through to the creation of a wholly new and noble form of government, had been kissed by God. Otherwise, how could they have accomplished so much in the course of their own generation?"