Rating: 5/5

Personal Response: I really enjoyed reading this book. I was actually recommended to read this book by my brother two or three years ago, but I lost the book so I didn't get very far. I think one of the reasons I liked this book so much is because I can relate to it so well. my brother loves baseball so he would always beg me to play with him and we always had a great time and joked about making the majors as they do in the book.

Plot Summary: The plot of this book begins with a kid by the name of Seth talks about how is father is dead and tells how he died. After this Seth says he goes to a baseball park and sees a kid named Jimmy playing baseball with his dad. Seth thinks Jimmy's dad is hard on him but Jimmy thinks that his dad just wants to see him succeed. The kids play baseball and Jimmy teaches Seth more and more about baseball and gives him cards and posters etc. One day Jimmy invites Seth to go to his first ever MLB game and Seth likes it except Jimmy's dad gets drunk and scares Seth. Over the course of a year they go on playing ball until Jimmy tells Seth he has to move away with his mom because his parents got a divorce(Jimmy's dad had a drinking problem). Seth keeps on playing baseball on the Babe Ruth league and even plays Jimmy's team once. Then one day Seth's freshman year Jimmy is at his school. He moved back and joined the baseball team for the last half of the season. Then the next year as sophomores Jimmy makes the varsity team along with another sophomore named Todd while Seth gets stuck on JV. Jimmy and Todd have a great baseball season and even make the newspapers while Seth's team is lackluster and don't even finish with a winning record. Another year goes by and after all three of them practicing really hard they all make varsity. They all have a great year and only lose one game. They play the best team in the conference and win but that night Seth gets a call from a kid on the team and is told Jimmy was in a car accident. Jimmy dies and the team only has one game left. This game would decide if they make the state playoffs or not. They decide to play for Jimmy and win but end up losing in the first round of the playoffs.

Characterizations: 
Seth Barham: Starts out with him as an 8th grade boy who is average height and not skinny but not fat. He is shy at first but loosens up. Brown hair and is best Friends with Jimmy Winter. Father died when young.

Jimmy Winter: Also starts out as an eighth grader and is Blonde and usually seen wearing sports goggles and a New York Mets hat. Is built kinda of like Seth. Has a father but he is a drunk. Best Friends with Seth Barham.

Todd: We first meet Todd in his freshman year if high school and at first he is a kid who kinda thinks he's all that and should be treated better then everyone else. He doesn't try very hard during practice and is still the best hitter on the team. This all changes when Jimmy come back and tells at Todd from then on Todd tried during practice and treated people with respect.

Recommendations: I recommend this book to boys ages 12-18. I feel this is a suitable age limit for this book because it would be difficult to understand if your under than 12 and if your older then 18 you wouldn't be able to relate to it as much.