Rating: 4/5

(I have the Hayward edition copyrighted 1950 and printed 1967. My first reading date in here was 1969, which means I've had this book as part of my life for 54 years!)

Would I have gone back to a complete (re?)reading of this collection without Katherine Rundell's wonderfully enthusiastic "Super-Infinities"? Probably not. And I'm glad I did. Other than the quotable quotes, Donne hasn't really opened up for me before, and I went into the poems much further this time through. There are still many parts of many poems that are closed to me. That I haven't spent the time with, time to decipher the syntax of those sentences, or to look up the elevated diction of the early 17th century. 

The poems reflect Donne's journey, spiritual and sometimes physical, from lusty young man to the devout Dean of St. Paul's cathedral. And he thought deeply about everything all along the way. How many lines in here became titles for other writers? 10? 20? And this doesn't even include the Sermons! But what I was most taken by were the lines I didn't know or didn't remember. 

In this edition of Hayward's the editor has divided them into sections that only partially reflect the chronology of Donne's life. I admit that I was most dreading the section entitled "Verse Letters to Severall Personages," where I thought my eyes might just be moving over the pages but registering nothing. But that became the most interesting. I realized that some of the contemporary poems as letters that I had admired (Harrison's, Richard Hugo's, etc) were simply a variation on this practice. Here are some wonderful lines to a Mr. I.L., whom we don't know, apparently, but from the two "letters"/poems we know was a farmer far from London:

So may all the sheepe bring forth Twins; and so
 In chace and race my thy horse all out goe;
So may thy love and courage ne'r be cold;
 Thy Sonne ne'r Ward; Thy lov'd wife ne'r seem old;
But maist thou wish great things, and them attaine,
 As thou telst her, and none but her, my paine.