Rating: 5/5

I've started a project of reading books from the 1970s as my own personal coping mechanism for the current day, and it was pretty random that I stumbled upon this one, Elizabeth Alone, so quickly. I knew nothing about this novel or the author, William Trevor, but I liked the publication date of 1973, and I liked the title.

Yet the title doesn't really do this story justice, as it's not really about Elizabeth being alone, is it?

It is, instead, an ensemble cast of characters we are introduced to, almost immediately, a small group of women who have been admitted “to hospital” for various gynecological grievances, most of them resulting in hysterectomies. A modern woman might be miffed at some of the casual reasons some of these women are being cut open, but I was advised to get a hysterectomy as recently as last year, in response to my complaints of experiencing an incredibly long peri-menopause. I didn't need one, and I didn't choose to have one, but I have learned that knee-jerk solutions to gynecological issues weren't left behind in the 1970s.

When 41-year-old Elizabeth Aidallbery divorces her husband, she is advised that a hysterectomy will make her “feel better,” (you know. . . maybe she'll feel less hysterical). Elizabeth is not an advocate for her health, and she figures, “her womb, at forty-one, might well not be up to its purpose. . . its removal was probably neither here nor there.” Might as well get one as not.

“In hospital,” Elizabeth is placed in a ward with a woman named Lily Drucker, who has had 4 miscarriages and hasn't been able to bring a pregnancy to full-term, a 25-year-old woman named Sylvie Clapper, who has something that seems like endometriosis, and a woman named Miss Sampson whose reasons for having a hysterectomy are as vague as Elizabeth's.

And here's the true beauty of this book: as we come to know the backstories of these four women in the ward, we realize that they represent all types, for the most part. We come to know them as they are cut open, sewn back together, and struggle to swim through a sea of anesthesia to seek the shore again; they are all people, they are all of us. It is all here. 

In case you have the impression in this moment that this is a woman's story or a story about only women, let me clarify: men have roles here as significant as the women. If these women are the constant points on their hospital beds, the men orbit around them and are as equally fascinating.

This book grabbed me by the ear immediately and had my attention at a time when it is incredibly challenging for me to focus on much of anything. 

Every time I started reading, I fell through space and time to this little hospital ward in 1973, England, and it was the only place I wanted to be.

To me, William Trevor's writing, in this novel, is as good as Graham Greene's, Penelope Lively's, and John Williams's. Do you get it? Do you understand now how good this is?

I have a new favorite author. Rejoice, rejoice: life hands us gifts, when we least expect them!