Rating: 4/5

Picasso for me has always been a legendary artist whose work flew way over my head - though visually it managed to capture my attention. After reading this memoir from his long-time girlfriend/de facto wife I learned that his art was intended to be bold enough to get me to pay attention so that I would then stop and think. Much like the young child who stomps his feet for attention feeling any is better than none, Picasso wanted to cause a stir, make you uncomfortable and even disturbed by what you saw - in his art and apparently in his life as well. Once he had your attention, there was much to be learned - for better or worse.

Gilot tells what another review here on Goodreads so aptly described as a detached tale of her time with Picasso. She escapes a violent and controlled life with her father to an inspired and liberated world with Picasso, or so it seems. Picasso is far older than herself or even her father for that matter. There is a 40 year age difference. He speaks often of wanting to keep her all to himself, stashed away in secret. The romanticized sound of this to a young Gilot is truly foreshadowing of the demanding and selfish world that it is to live with Picasso.

Gilot was an artist before she met Picasso and that connection is what held them together for so long. Her memories here are told from a very old soul - a young woman who gave of herself to someone she admired and learned from. Someone who tormented her but also was a source of pleasure. In the end, she was just another in his pattern of discarded partners. I feel she believed she meant something special to him - just as all of those before her and after felt as well. He clearly tormented her emotions and was a force that impacted her life ever after. But I do applaud her ability to include so many touching tales amongst the ones that depict him as monstrous emotionally. She was not innocent in her role as the other woman. And so I left this book feeling neither sorry for or happy for her. It was told very matter of factly and allowed me to project my own experiences and emotions onto the moments she chose to share.

There is plenty of fascinating insight into Picasso as an artist, his creative process, the inspirations and techniques that he employed. I appreciated these bits as much as I did watching the sad but predictable train wreck of a love story gone awry. I can now revisit his art with a larger base to draw from and give it greater time and curiosity - not because he has placed a temper tantrum on a canvas in order to get me to look beneath the layers but because innovative expression deserves a second look.