Rating: 3/5

Tey's five Alan Grant novels (six if you count The Franchise Affair, in which he makes a brief appearance or two) are each quite different from the next. The Singing Sands, the last of them, is no exception. It gives the impression of having been stitched together using two quite different ideas Tey had for a novel: the one a comedy about the people of the Hebrides, the other a sort of John Buchanesque plot about the mystical lost city of Wabar, the Shangri-La of the Arabian desert. Holding all of this together is an account of Grant, given medical leave because suffering from nervous exhaustion through the stresses of work, going north to Scotland to spend some quiet time with his cousin Laura and her family, fishing and walking and generally getting over things. We must remember that the version of The Singing Sands we have is almost certainly not a final draft, it being a manuscript discovered among Tey's papers after her death. No doubt, had she lived, she'd have tidied everything up to render the published version a seamless whole.

When Grant's night train arrives at Scoone (sic; not Scone in Perthshire but an invented town in the Western Highlands), the sleeping-car attendant discovers that the young man in compartment B7 is dead. Grant leaves him to it -- he's a copper, but an off-duty copper -- and it's only later, when struggling through a Scottish hotel breakfast, that he discovers he's accidentally purloined the dead man's newspaper. Mysteriously, in an empty space in the paper appear a few penciled lines, an incomplete poem:

  The beasts that talk,
The streams that stand,
The stones that walk,
The singing sand,
. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .
That guard the way
To Paradise.

Those evocative lines help make this a cracker of a start to a detective novel. But there's a problem for the book as a whole: we never really discover why the dead man wrote the piece of verse -- we assume he was inspired by certain events that we do learn about, but there are no other signs of an urge to compose poetry -- and we most certainly don't discover what should be in those two blank lines. Moreover, when we later piece together the chronology of what happened to him, it's hard to know when he did the actual writing.

Leave that aside. Tey's evocation of the Highlands and its people is wonderful. This sense of delighted familiarity continues as Grant, his neurosis ebbing, becomes obsessed with the dead man and that fragment of verse. The obsession takes him to an island in the Hebrides reputed to have singing sands. While his detour there gives Tey the chance to tell a very amusing, near comedic tale, this section of the novel is completely redundant; those singing sands aren't in Scotland at all but, as Grant discovers upon his return to the mainland, in distant Arabia.

And it's with this discovery that the story properly restarts -- and a very fine story it becomes. I mentioned above the elements of Buchanesque adventure; Grant doesn't actually partake in that adventure himself, but the plot and its solution hinge upon it, and we do actually feel the same sense of awe that Buchan (and indeed Haggard) could conjure in their relevant tales.

Tey's prose is marvelous, a constant source of entertainment. (It does flag for a page or three late in the book, when Grant is making the acquaintance of Arabian explorer Heron Lloyd, but this may have been a stylistic experiment that, for me at least, didn't come off.) There are places in the novel, particularly in the first one-third or so, that had me giggling aloud. The solution to the mystery is all a bit hurried and perhaps a tad contrived (the murderer sends Grant a detailed confession, saving him perhaps fifty pages of further detective work), but that didn't bother me.

I first read The Singing Sands about 35 years ago, as far as I can reckon. (How long? Thirty-five yeeeeaaaarrrrs.) I was prompted to reread it by the Past Offences #1952 Book Signup, and am very grateful to that site for the prompt. The book offers a thoroughly enjoyable reading experience despite being a bit ramshackle as a mystery novel.

And now I must think to reread some of Tey's other novels. For that matter, I don't believe I ever did read A Shilling for Candles, so perhaps I'd better start there . . .