Rating: 5/5

Other formerly shocking novels of previous centuries have lost their power, batteries quite flat (Madame Bovary, Ulysses, Lady Chatterly’s Lover) – we love them still but we wince no more, we may be quite amused at the idea that this word or that idea was not allowed in polite society – we may, indeed, be vastly amused at the very idea of polite society because society is just not very polite at all these days. But uniquely, Lolita, this great and appalling novel, only gets more shocking and more dangerous as the years go by, as more and more paedophilia is uncovered every other day in the news, in nurseries, in hard drives, in the highest of churches, as the paranoia spreads. I found myself quite nervous about even being seen reading Lolita at work. And very glad the cover was an awful grey with a hideous attempt at a butterfly in the corner, and not the suggestive white-socks-and-short-school-skirt of some editions.
 
Lolita is the blackest of all comedies, the blackness of a deep mine of human corruption with all the canaries long dead in the poisonous atmosphere. It’s a comedy about depravity. You want to know what depravity is? These days, that’s a quaint word. Reminds me of that risible phrase of the censors “a tendency to deprave and corrupt”. Here is depravity :

This was an orphan. This was a lone child, an absolute waif, with whom a heavy limbed, foul-smelling adult had had strenuous intercourse three times that very morning. (p140)

When, during our longer stops, I would relax after a particularly violent morning in bed, and out of the goodness of my lulled heart allow her – indulgent Hum! – to visit the rose garden or the children’s library… (p160)

Thrusting my fatherly fingers deep into Lo’s hair from behind, and then gently clasping them around the nape of her neck, I would lead my reluctant pet to our small home for a quick connection before dinner. (p164)

… and her sobs in the night – every night, every night – the moment I feigned sleep. (p176)

Depraved is when you don’t wish to acknowledge the pain you’re doling out as you feast and guzzle, or, yes, you do acknowledge it, with a sad shrug, oh la, alas, it is sad but that is how it is, or perhaps it’s when these tears, this misery, makes your pleasure even more piquant and delectable. I think Humbert bounces gently between the three. Yes, poor little Lo. As he says himself:

I entered a plane of being where nothing mattered, save the infusion of joy brewed within my body. 

As you read Lolita the uncomfortable feeling steals over you that whilst VN had no direct knowledge of his grisly subject, nevertheless he’d thought about it a bit too much. In HH’s mind, and we are never out of it, we go fumbling, frolicking, frottaging and frothing in paroxysms of nympholepsy, we hang over his shoulder the whole time, we’re with him during every bated glimpse of little Lo’s long languid limbs, drooling, always drooling, and of course, we're with him from first spurt to last. VN didn’t have to write about a highly intelligent, highly cultured paedophile. That was his big fat choice. 

WHY PAEDOPHILIA?

I stumbled upon this quote from the wonderfully named Leland de la Durantaye in the Village Voice:

To search for the experiences leading to a work of art is as natural as not finding them.

I’m not altogether sure what VN was up to. Yes, Lolita is a case study, but VN hated Freud and psychoanalysis. Yes, it’s a criminal confession, but VN was a writer obsessed with self-reflecting introverted solipsistic linguistic game-playing, those are the novels he wrote, from Ada to Pnin to Pale Fire – parodies all, and he really wasn’t much interested in realism. If you were picking your team of realistic novelists, Vlad the Impaler wouldn’t even be a substitute. So it’s ironic that his one and only famous – I mean, really famous – novel is about a giant social problem which is always as fresh as today’s headlines, and never gets old, just like those nymphets.

LOVE IS THE SWEETEST THING

Perhaps Lolita is VN’s meditation on love. Because Humbert loves little Lo. He tells us so in such gorgeous sentences that you would have to have a heart of stone not to believe him. That must be it.

This nymphet thing, it’s an idea, an erotic ideal, not a person. VN’s Humbert is constantly in search of a human being who most closely embodies this ideal. He’s actually not interested in little girls at all, finds them unpleasant – except insofar at they personify the nymphet idea. At that point he turns into a sick junkie whose connection has just arrived. But the girl will only be desirable for two, maybe three years. As soon as the girl in question grows up &amp; passes into adolescence the poor paedophile turns away in disgust. And of course there can be very little connection between the two interested parties except on the level of carnality because one of the parties is a middle-aged male and the other is a 12 year old child. Humbert’s obsession condemns both of them to profound loneliness, as well as morbid co-dependency – he can’t allow either of them to have any normal friendships. This whole hideous situation is laid out for our bug-eyed perusal – the fulfillment which can only ever be coercive, the love which can only ever be rape, the relationship which can only ever be damaging. 

Humbert loves his little Lo. We know because he tells us so.

Don’t think I can go on. Heart, head – everything. Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, . Repeat till the page is full, printer. (p109)

And I looked and looked at her and knew as clearly as I know I am to die, that I loved her more than anything I had ever seen or imagined on earth, or hoped for anywhere else. (p277)

Even if those eyes of hers would fade to myopic fish, and her nipples swell and crack, and her lovely young velvety delta be tainted and torn – even then would I go mad with tenderness at the mere sight of your dear wan face, at the mere sound of your raccous young voice, my Lolita. (p278)

In 1963 Phil Spector put out a single by The Crystals written by Gerry Goffin and Carole King called “He Hit Me (And it Felt Like a Kiss)” – it took them a week or so to realize that their audience found the song repulsive and it was withdrawn. But that idea of what love is can be found in every other courtroom. I found her in bed with another man so naturally I shot her. I loved her so much but she told me she was leaving so of course I killed her. I couldn’t stand the thought of her leaving. She died because I loved her. I loved her to death. Day in, day out, this is the love in many men’s minds. This is the cold polar opposite of If You Love Somebody Set Them Free. That happy sentiment is thought to be Not Love At All by many people. Possession is nine tenths of the conjugal domain. HH owns Lolita, she can’t go anywhere. He glories in how much his she is. 

Oh Lolita, you are my girl, as Vee was Poe’s and Bea Dante’s, and what little girl would not like to whirl in a circular skirt and scanties?  (p107)

Maybe that nasty Nabokov is suggesting that the nature of love is that love does not care about the loved one, not really, it says it does, but when you look at the thing closely, it doesn’t. The weddings, the honeymoons, the diamonds, the sweet words, all of it, maybe that’s just for your benefit, all bribes. Could even Vlad be that cynical? Maybe.

HUMBERT HUMBERT WAS GAY

I think this theory is reductive, demeaning and wrong. But he was very camp.

THOUSANDS OF LOLITAS

Childhood for girls didn’t used to be as protected as it is now in the west, and it still isn’t, of course, for many girls in many countries in 2011. Humbert’s crimes against Lolita would not be seen as crimes at all in many places. There are plenty of tour guides who will assist you if you want to be Humbert for a week or two in Vietman or Cambodia. There’s thousands of Lolitas out there if that’s your cup of tea. In the West the Victorians invented childhood* and their earnest reformers tried and eventually succeeded in sweeping away the crowds of child prostitutes which thronged Hyde Park and the other thoroughfares of London as they did in the time of Samuel Johnson. Liberal Western culture has re-engineered the whole notion of childhood but it’s perpetually under attack

From the Lancashire telegraph

‘Don’t take away their childhood’ say East Lancashire mums
2:40pm Wednesday 22nd June 2011

PUSH up bras for nine-year-olds, ‘WAG’ slogan T-shirts for pre-schoolers and high heeled shoes for toddlers. These might sound like ludicrous concepts, but over the past year a string of high street retailers have been criticised for selling such items.

VERY ODD

Lolita is a strange book. After grinding away in the literary undergrowth for decades, catching butterflies and dodging Nazis, VN spent 5 years writing it and a couple more years finding a publisher, and then WHAM! Number one best-seller. Fame, notoriety, and heaps of crisp dollar notes came raining down. He quit his job and left America, lived a swish life in Switzerland. He was in his late 50s and he’s written a novel everyone wanted to read and – I am going to guess – few people actually finished. Lolita displaced Anatomy of a Murder as the No 1 bestseller, and was replaced in turn by Doctor Zhivago. Those first eager purchasers, they were looking for a shocking frolick, and they got a second James Joyce, brilliant, wild, too clever by half, terrifying, witty, revolting and, of course, ferociously cultivated. Was that what they wanted?

You read novels and you think well, this was good, but that plot there or this conclusion or that style could have been improved, you know, so, only 3.5 stars. But Lolita is a novel which writes its own rules, a mesmerising mashup of horror, beauty, wildness, syntactical dexterity and adventures in extreme obsession and extreme vocabulary, a novel that I am amazed exists at all. 

*http://engl212fc.wordpress.com/2010/1...