Rating: 5/5

THE ACCOUNT OF THE BETTY AND BARNEY HILL ABDUCTION INCIDENT

John Grant Fuller, Jr. (1913-1990) was an American author of several nonfiction books and newspaper articles, and well as a former columnist for the Saturday Review magazine. Although many of his books focus on UFOs or other ‘supernatural’ topics, he also wrote an important anti-nuclear power book, ‘We Almost Lost Detroit.’ 

The Introduction to this 1966 book by psychiatrist Benjamin Simon explains, “On December 14, 1963, Mr. Barney Hill presented himself at my office .. for a consultation… At the time I knew nothing of Mr. Hill’s problems, but when he introduced his wife… I wondered, fleetingly, if their interracial marriage might be involved in Mr. Hill’s disturbance.. [I] soon realized that both needed help… At the time there was no indication that either the interracial marriage or the UFO experience bore more than a tangential relationship to the central problems which Mr. and Mrs. Hill presented---crippling anxiety, manifested by … Mrs. Hill … in the form or repetitive nightmarish dreams… the UFO experience … presented for both Mr. and Mrs. Hill the focal point of the anxiety which had apparently impeded the psychiatric treatment Mr. Hill had been undergoing for some time… They were constantly haunted by a nagging anxiety centering around this period of several hours---a feeling that something had occurred, but what? A treatment program was outlined, and it was decided first to try to unlock … the amnesia, and that for this aspect of therapy, hypnosis would be used… I had no indication of the developing storm until the late summer of 1965 when I received a telephone call from a newspaper reporter who … [was] aware of the Hill story… and my part in it—including the use of hypnosis; he requested an interview with me---which I refused… during … 1965… [came] a series of articles in a Boston newspaper… written by the reporter to whom I had refused the interview… 

“Mr. John Fuller had been investigating UFO phenomena in the New Hampshire area and was working on a book … The Hills… asked me to make available to Mr. Fuller… the tape recordings of their treatment… The decision to release the recordings created a corollary problem for me… my participation could cause me to be identified with certain statements and conclusions by the reporter about the Hills’ experiences, with which I strongly disagree. The mystique of hypnosis and my position … seemed to give them the quality of an authenticity quite at variance with the facts… The charisma of hypnosis had tended to foster the belief that hypnosis is the magical and royal road to TRUTH… The truth is that [the patient] believes to be the truth, and this may or may not be consonant with the ultimate nonpersonal truth…” 

Fuller recounts that, during the fateful drive, the Hills pulled off to the side of the road. Betty said, “‘it’s still up there, and it’s still following us, and if anything it’s coming right toward us.’ … [Barney] was getting irritated … because she was refusing to accept a natural explanation. At one time … in 1957, Betty’s sister and family had described seeing clearly an unidentified flying object… Barney neither believed nor disbelieved… If anything, he was more skeptical of flying objects after hearing her story.” (Pg. 12-13)

He continues, “the huge object---as wide in diameter as the distance between three telephone poles along the road, Barney later described it---swung in a silent arc directly across the road, not more than a hundred feet from him. The double row of windows was now clear and obvious. Barney was fully gripped with fear now… he knew it was as big or bigger in diameter than the length of a jet airliner… Behind the clearly structured windows he could see the figures, at least half a dozen living beings…. They were, as a group, staring directly at him. He became vaguely aware that they were wearing uniforms… Betty, now nearly two hundred feet away, was screaming at him from the car, but barney has no recollection of hearing this… His memory at this point is blurred. For a reason he cannot explain, he was certain he was about to be captured… With all his energy … [he] ran screaming back… to Betty and the car… Barney was near hysteria. He jammed the car into first gear, spurted off down the road, shouting that he was sure they were going to be captured… Then suddenly a strange electronic-sounding beeping was heard… They each began to feel an odd tingling drowsiness come over them. From that moment, a sort of haze came over them.” (Pg. 15-17)

He goes on, “Some time later, how long they were not sure, the beeping sound repeated itself… They were still in the car---and the car was moving, with Barney at the wheel… Betty remembers faintly saying to her husband, ‘NOW do you believe in flying saucers?’ And he recalls answering: ‘Don’t be ridiculous. Of course not.’ But neither can remember much detail… until they had driven on to the new throughway… it was nearly full daylight when they reached home… the kitchen clock read shortly after five in the morning. ‘It looks,’ said Barney, ‘like we’ve arrived home a little later than expected.’” (Pg.17-18)

The next day, “Betty went to the phone and caller her sister… Betty recounted the story of the night before. [Her sister], who had no reservations about the possibility of a UFO sighting … grew very excited and confirmed Betty’s growing feeling that the car or their clothes might… have been exposed to radiation…” (Pg. 22-23) At Betty’s urging, they called the Air Force Base… she skipped the details of seeing the double row of windows… She did, however, report the fins apparently separating at the sides of the craft, with the two red lights on either side… Barney was extremely reluctant to come to the phone… he sheepishly avoided mentioning the figures he had clearly observed on the craft…” (Pg. 25-26)

During one of Barney’s hypnosis sessions, he told Dr. Simon that in 1957, “We talked about flying saucers… Betty said she believed in them… I didn’t believe in them… I listened---and I did not criticize… But I have not talked about flying saucers since 1957, when we were talking about Sputnik. And this was 1961.” (Pg. 84-85) Fuller comments, “All through the account under hypnosis, Barney had indicated his deep-set resistance to the idea of Unidentified Flying Objects. As Barney later said, the likelihood of the object being a product of wishful thinking on his part seemed very slim, indeed. His strong objections to the existence of the phenomenon were deeply set, although his ambivalence about the experience was puzzling.” (Pg. 107)

He acknowledges, “Both Betty and Barney maintained under the stiffest questioning that their memories for these experiences were immediately wiped out after they left the vehicle…until hypnosis restored them.” (Pg. 188)

He recounts, “The doctor now begins to test the extent of Betty’s influence over Barney… ‘BARNEY: She said that she had a dream and that she had been taken aboard a UFO. And that I was also in her dream and taken aboard. DOCTOR: How did she tell you this? BARNEY: Usually when someone was visiting. And I just told her it was a dream and nothing to be alarmed about… She would tell me that she had gone into the UFO and talked to people there on board. And she was told that she would forget. And she told these people in the UFO that she would not forget. And I told her they were only dreams and that I can’t believe that, whatever these things are. But she says no. That somehow she feels there is a connection between these dreams and what happened.” (Pg. 195)

He continues, “DOCTOR: Could she have planted all these thoughts about the UFO in your mind? You said that she wanted to hypnotize you. BARNEY: I know Betty did not hypnotize me. I wanted to think she had hypnotized me. I wanted to think that the object wasn’t there. And that’s why I said, ‘What are you doing, Betty? Trying to hypnotize me?’ And since I kept saying it was a plane, I wanted her to say, ‘Yes, it’s a plane.’ … But it kept following us and I did not like that.” (Pg. 205)

Later, “BARNEY: Could I after 1961 have dreamed of a UFO, and then under hypnosis my dream is coming out?... the only part of my dream that I had recently that made any sense was the structure and walking up to the object. It was just a distorted dream, but the physical structure of the craft itself fitted in with my conscious attitude of what a craft like this would look like. And, last night, I dreamed again of being on a UFO…” (Pg. 233)

Of Betty, “DOCTOR: When you had all these experiences with your dreams---why would you have dreamed all these things? The dreams were the same as the experiences that you felt you had. BETTY: I figured that in my dreams, I remembered what actually happened.” (Pg. 274-275)

This book will be “must reading” for anyone interested in this case, or other purported abductions. (Fuller is, it should be noted, a much more capable WRITER than many others writing on this topic.)