Rating: 5/5

Whew! Finally finished rereading all the Alistair MacLean books that I enjoyed so much as a teen, beginning with 1957's outstanding HMS Ulysses and running through 1968's Force 10 From Navarone, (after which it's pretty much universally acknowledged that the quality of his books took a pretty steep dive).

Guns of Navarone is consistently and deservedly listed among MacLean's top 3-4. And yes, it features some of the ultimately predictable plot twists he loved to sprinkle in his stories - "the good guy was really a bad guy pretending to be good, but then he really WAS a good guy!" - but remember, this was only his second book (the first being a straight-up combat story), and so was still pretty original for its time. 

Like a lot of older (and usually British) authors, I have to read with a dictionary - or at least Google - close at hand. In this case I had to turn for help on the following:

"Three days to go, engine u.s., and a first-class bloody mess..." -  took a LONG time to find an explanation here on a WWII-era list of naval abbreviations; "u.s." or "u/s" stood for "unserviceable."

"Now he squeezed the trigger four times, for he wanted to mak' siccar..." - early etymology of "massacre," perhaps? Nope; turns out it's an obscure Scottish term literally meaning "to make sure," relevant here as the character shooting was Scottish (like MacLean himself).

Along with Ulysses, Navarone was also one of MacLean's few books to have no female characters - generally a plus in his case as he was NOT a strong writer of female roles. That was changed (along with a lot of other things) in the film version, where the characters of Louki and Panayis were changed to Andrea's sister and a friend. (Also in the movie, the very American character of Dusty Miller was unfortunately played by the very British David Niven - never a good casting choice.)

There's still a lot of unread MacLean out there - including his last book of the 60's, Puppet on a Chain, which I may or may not have read before. But for now at least, I'll say farewell on a particularly high note.

INTERESTING OBSERVATION: I'd say the majority of "likes" or comments on my MacLean reviews come from GR friends in South or Southeast Asia, where apparently he remains better known and appreciated than he is here in the U.S. - so glad to see he is still getting the respect he deserves in SOME parts of the world!