Rating: 1/5

I don’t write reviews but if I can keep someone from reading this it’ll be worth it. 

This book is an insult to Sappho’s memory. Not only because it revolves around Sappho moping around for Alcaeus (and don’t get me wrong, that was also ridiculous) but mostly because it’s very poorly written. The writing is inexcusably bad. 

The ‘erotic’ scenes made me nauseous and the romance was dull, rushed, and boring. Sappho and Alcaeus have insta-love and there is no reason given for them to love each other. The central themes of Alcaeus’s poems/songs are his political beliefs, war, and drinking. Sappho’s main themes are love and women. What drives them together? Erica Jong doesn’t know and neither will you. But you’ll be forced to listen to her whine about missing him, even though he’s an unappealing asshole. 

Unless you understand the history of men undermining Sappho’s sexuality, you may not get why I’m so offended by the plot of this book. Jong has Sappho marry Cercylas of Andros despite the general consensus of modern scholars who acknowledge that the name was a pun meant to make fun of Sappho’s lesbianism (Cercylas is slang for male genitalia and Andros means man, ie Dick of Man Island). The existence of Phaon is laughable as it was only mentioned in dramaticized versions of Sappho’s life to consolidate her attraction to women with a fatal frenzied love for some man that drove her to suicide. Her relationship with Alcaeus was only rumored hundreds of years after her death because they lived in the same place at the same time. It seems Jong wanted to write a straight romance set in Ancient Greece, but couldn’t she have picked someone else if that’s what she wanted? Why bring Aesop into this? It’s so bizarre. 

Of Sappho’s surviving poetry, she only names women as lovers. It seems Jong didn’t read any Sappho. Where is Atthis, Gongyla, Anactoria, Abanthis, etc etc? She makes up an enslaved woman as Sappho’s brief romance and leaves it at that. Sappho writes extensively for her love for a woman named Atthis, who was her childhood friend and subject of many poems. She’s reduced to one of Sappho’s sexual exploits. Jong doesn’t care though. It must be sexier to replace Atthis with Alcaeus to her. 

I would forgive the creative freedoms she took if the writing or characterization was any good, but it’s not. The narrator, a middle-aged Sappho, never explains anything while skipping from topic to topic. The plot makes no sense. Jong must have looked up interesting places and things in Archaic Greece and just stitched them together with loose connectors. The plot makes no sense and does no hommage to Sappho’s poetry. Jong must have thought Ancient Egypt would be sexy so she needed that in her plot too. None of it makes sense. 

She also has Sappho put down other women in a very problematic way. Jong was a prominent second wave feminist in the 70s but seems to have not matured past putting down feminine women who like nice things. I’d like to show her several poems where Sappho talks about wanting certain fashionable clothes and fawns over well-dressed women. 

At least Jong did some research on Pittacus and the politics of Mytilene, not that it’s well-written or explained coherently. 

Don’t read this if you’re gay, smart, or both. It belongs in a supermarket with a shirtless man with glistening abs on the cover. Also, she calls female genitalia a “delta”, which I can’t read with a straight face.