Rating: 5/5

This book is LONG. Almost 800 pages of a man who history has mostly forgotten? But the writer makes it a mostly interesting 800 pages. 

Henry Clay was one of the most famous men in America the first half of the 19th century. He ran for President three times as the candidate for his party, and sought a nomination probably as many times. He rose to prominence as a young representative from Kentucky, quickly became House Speaker, and spent the better part of 40 years in and out of Congress, with a short term as Secretary of State and as a lawyer who argued numerous cases before the Supreme Court. He had 11 children, most of them who died young or tragically, and of the ones who lived to adulthood, were insane or drunk. He was a man of supreme ego, which was probably his undoing; while he was perhaps the greatest orator of his day, his cruelty in speech made it where political leaders learned to not trust him and Americans chose not to vote for him. 

Perhaps the most interesting part of this book was his relationship with Andrew Jackson. Jackson, a war hero from the War of 1812 and future President, was publicly mocked by Clay, and never forgot it. Jackson spent much of the rest of his life ensuring the Clay would never be president. Reading this in 2025, it was interesting to see parallels of the many of the current situations of tyranny and a president seeking to destroy public institutions in the name of 'the people'; this book shows Clay fighting (usually unsuccessfully) to stop Jackson from shutting the Bank of the United States and Jackson's attempt to ensure that the federal government and its workers submitted to the obedience of the president's will. In one of the famous speeches quoted in the book, Clay spoke against 'the abuses and corruptions of an adminstartion, under a chief magistrate who is endeavoring to concentrate in his own person the whole powers of government....Senators! Let us perform our duty in a manner worthy of our ancestors.' In this time of 'trouble and revolution', amid the 'general gloom and darkness' that now prevail, 'let us continue to present one unextinguished light, steadily burning, in the cause of the people, of the constitution, and of civil libery.' (p.459) Interesting to see how history repeats itself! 

One final thing...Henry Clay LOVED the ladies.