Rating: 4/5

Ben's Trumpet is a book that could be read to older elementary students as way to learn about a poor young boy that is growing up in the jazz age that is laughed at by other kids because he doesn't actually own a trumpet. Most days, Ben sits on the fire escape and listens to the music from the Zig Zag Jazz Club and joins in by playing his trumpet that he imagines to play. Ben especially looks up to the trumpeter in the Zig Zag Jazz Club. Ben loves to feel the rhythm of the music being played. Ben even plays for his mama, grandmother, baby brother, for his papa and papa's friends. One day while he is sitting on the stairway someone says, "I like your horn" which so happened to be the trumpeter from the Zig Zag Jazz Club! Ben was in awe. That was until the next day as Ben was playing his trumpet that some kids ask what he was doing and said "you have no trumpet" as they laughed at him. Ben felt upset until the trumpeter walks over to Ben and asked where his horn was. Ben replied with, "I don't have one". The trumpeter has Ben follow him back to the club where the trumpeter then allows him to play his trumpet. 

This book is a great way to let students know to never give up on their dreams. Ben dreamed about playing his little heart out with his trumpet that he imagined. Even though other students laughed at him for not actually having a trumpet Ben was able to have a mentor to look up to. This story is also a great book to use to teach about mentors and finding a mentor to look up to. The images presented in the book show great illustrations that portray what some families looked liked in this era. Although, a younger student might need a book with color which why I rated this book a 4 out of 5 stars. This book might be better for higher elementary students due to that fact. Furthermore, I would recommend a teacher to read this book at the beginning of the school year to get students thinking about someone they could look up to. An activity that could be used with this is a writing piece. A teacher could encourage his or her students to think about someone they look up to. The students could write about why they look up to that person and eventually the teacher or student could give that person the writing to show how much they look up to them. This book could also be used as a mirror for any students that might not have a lot of money but still have a passion for something that might be out of their reach at that point in time.