Rating: 4/5

A very solid book by an author I'm increasingly appreciating, this is a collection of five short pieces (of varying length) linked by the sparsest of interstitials presenting them as part of a history lesson being given to a child of the future. 

That sparseness is a feature of Russ' work, and it's something readers are likely to love or hate. Russ' writing is the very antithesis of the infodump: she has a tendency to simply drop the reader right in, engaging them with the thoughts and feelings of the characters and leaving them to figure out the background as they go. This is not to say that the settings are ever less than rich and original: there are enough ideas in each of the stories here to fuel many a longer work. But for Russ, those ideas are the backdrop, not the purpose. It takes a high degree of skill, and bravery, for a writer to adopt this approach, but bravery and skill are certainly two features of Russ' writing. And so, for that matter, is a willingness to treat the reader as an intelligent agent rather than a passive audience.

The stories have little enough of a common theme, other than being a general exploration of feminism, gender roles, and alternative sexuality (though the last is not present in every piece, nor am I convinced it's intended to be thematic even where it does appear). I've previously read the novella 'Souls', which kicks off the collection and is by far the longest piece, but it's no chore to read it again. The remarkable Abbess Radegunde strives to protect her people from a viking raid, leading to some unexpected discoveries. 'The Mystery of the Young Gentleman' plays with gender and sexuality with an SF twist. 'Bodies' is essentially an old SF trope, the travelogue of a contemporary character thrust into the future, but with a queer main cast. 'What Did You Do During the Revolution, Grandma?' is a parallel worlds story (I loved the underlying concept here) which again, features an element of gender-crossing but mostly seemed to me to be about modern beliefs about sexuality in the middle ages. And finally 'Everyday Depressions' is one of those stories about why we read: a series of letters in which an author outlines the plot of a potboiler Gothic romance, clearly intended as pure wish-fulfillment escapism (the twist being that the romance, of course, is between two women - allowing the writer to comment on sexual politics even in the midst of this escapism). 

Overall well worth checking out.