Rating: 3/5

A better title for this would have been "Who is the Psycho", because at one point it seemed everyone might be, including the H an h! I'm happy to say that I guessed who the real psycho was and talk about twisted, vindictive and demented, not to mention EVIL! There used to be an old perfume ad that said, "Between love and madness lies Obsession", and that was sure true here!

The is in the first person, so you only have the h's POV, and there are times when you wonder about her emotional state (though with everything she went through it's understandable) as she gets overwhelmed by her conflicting feelings for the H, one minute loving him, the next hating him, trusting him, then frightened of him. His enigmatic personality sure doesn't help, neither does his habit of not directly answering her questions as she tries to regain her memory and identity back. It doesn't help to hear about the person she supposedly was, wealthy, spoiled and selfish, with a tendency to drink too much and lead other men on. One of those men was the H's former friend, the OM in the story, who takes the White Knight role a bit too strongly.

Then there's the "OW", the H's cousin who is clearly not playing with a full deck and makes no effort to hide her hostility for the h and resentment that she returned.

There are quite a few flaws here. The h was badly beaten in a mugging, which caused her memory loss and required emergency surgery to fix her face, so she looks like Deborah yet doesn't look like her. At the time this book was written there were DNA tests (not to mention blood and fingerprint ones), yet no one does anything. If the H had doubts, he should have said so and not slept with her, because if she was someone else, she could have been married or had someone special in her life, and let's not forget family that might have been looking for her.

Also, once the truth come out, everything is wrapped up too quickly and it feels too rushed. The epilogue should have been part of the main story and gone into with more depth.

What the author does well is keep you in suspense as to who did what, as there are slashed paintings (the h was an artist), drugged drinks, brakes tampered with, clothes destroyed, and other things to make it clear someone is out to get the h, but who? The OM thinks it's the H, the H thinks it's his cousin, the cousin hints that it might be the H or maybe her, and the h doesn't know what to think! It keeps you turning pages, just trying to figure it all out.

I recommend it, despite its faults.