Rating: 2/5

From the back of the book:

Scandalous Attraction
Richard, Earl of Delafield, has returned home after a long absence to find the family estate transformed into the site for a gala reenactment of a Medieval tournament. To Richard's astonishment, his brother Percy expects him to play host. Worse yet, he must play his role with Percy's choice for Queen of Beauty, the lovely Damaris Grayson...to whom Richard is scandalously attracted.

Irresistible Love
Never suspecting it is not Damaris, but her sister, who has captured his brother's heart, Richard remains properly aloof - thus insulting the fair lady who otherwise finds him most attractive. Soon the sparks are flying, the mix-ups multiplying, and misplaced jealousies are feeding the flames of passion. And as tournament day approaches, there is the promise of a dangerous encounter with truth...and a surprising confrontation with true love.

Review:
If the previous Regency romance I reviewed was a bit on the boring side, this one was definitely on the opposite side of the spectrum, and not in a good way. Due to her father's stroke, 21-year old Damaris is managing the household and crops while her mother and younger sister spend money they don't have on fripperies. Their neighbor and childhood friend, Percy, is crazy about Medieval history and is putting together a medieval festival/tournament and, in the middle of this, his older brother, Richard, Earl of Delafield, arrives after many year away (his reasons for leaving involve a duel and a woman who, of course, comes back to create mischief).

What follows is the interaction between all these individuals and their relationships/romances. The main problem is that the entirety of the book is people choosing not to communicate, either by not listening or by not speaking. Of course this creates tons of manufactured misunderstandings and drama that could have been easily resolved. The vast majority of the characters come across as immature and it's just not my cup of tea. This is technically a clean book but there's a good amount of talk about urges and some inappropriate behavior for the Regency period.