Rating: 3/5

When We Were Orphans made me realize that one can be deceived not only by people but also by books! Honest to God I thought this book was about solving a mystery. The protagonist being a celebrated detective added more fuel to the deception. No wonder I was disoriented by the middle of it trying desperately to understand what the mystery is all about. Well I'm not saying there was no mystery element; of course there is a touch of that, but not the way I expected. So there, I was deceived by a book!

But after all it was Ishiguro. What did I expect, a normal detective story that unravels a mystery? I should have known better. So if anyone wants to read this book, you are warned. This is no detective fiction. 

Now that it is clear that this book is no detective fiction, I'll venture to say that it was more of a man's self realization, his coming to terms with life. Christopher Banks, a celebrated detective is haunted by the disappearance of his parents when he was a child. His sole purpose in life is centered on solving the puzzle of their mysterious disappearance and finding them. Although he doesn't realize, his entire young life was affected by his loss and his career were more or less decided upon so as to be able to locate his parents one day. However, his quest leads him to some shocking truths and devastating discoveries and he finally see to his utter dismay that people he naively trusted are not who they appear to be. His quest of finding the truth is the wake up call of his life as he finally understands that he had lived in a delusion.

The story is presented by the protagonist Christopher Banks himself in a series of memories as he revisit the events of his life. For most part of the story, it was not all clear whether he is telling absolutely the truth, especially when it comes to his feelings, his perceptions. From the beginning one can sense something amiss in him. He had faced the worst nightmare a child could face - losing his parents. And one can see he lives in denial, in delusion. It is no surprise that he should be an unreliable narrator. 

The beauty of Ishiguro’s books undoubtedly lies in his writing. The tenderness, the compassion with which he writes about these flawed and tortured characters always strikes a major chord in the reader's heart. Christopher Banks may be delusional, his narrative may be unreliable, but he certainly earns the readers unreserved sympathy. 

The story also touches on the Second Sino-Japanese War and his forthright account of brutality of the war is Ishiguro's contribution to the world to say no to war. 

However, there is still a puzzle that I have not deciphered. And that is the meaning and relevance of the title to the story. Earlier in my read I thought it is because the main protagonist and couple of other characters employed were orphans. But after the read was over, I'm not quite so sure. Although I cannot find a better interpretation, I'm convinced that there is some other meaning beyond my grasp. 

Overall, I enjoyed this read. And although the story was nothing, not even close to what I expected it to be, the actual story that was presented through a flawed character held my interest and kept me engaged.