Rating: 5/5

Two years from the life of Richard Henry Dana, Jr., did not go as anyone, including Dana himself, would have expected. For a young Boston gentleman of good family, a Harvard scholar, to sail “before the mast” as a common sailor on a merchant ship would have seemed unthinkable: it simply wasn’t done! But a persistent eye ailment that interfered with Dana’s studies got him thinking that a physically demanding regimen of out-of-doors hard work might restore his health; and Dana’s decision to go to sea ultimately resulted in the writing of a book that is at once an American literary classic and one of the greatest sea stories ever told.

Two Years Before the Mast (1840), Dana’s recounting of his 1834-36 sea voyage – around Cape Horn to the coast of California, and back again – achieved great popularity from the time of its initial publication, for a number of reasons. For one, sea stories were at the peak of their popularity at this point in American literary history. As ships ventured further and further into what had been unknown territory, they caught the imagination of an adventure-minded public who wondered what marvel might come next, the same way many people of today enjoy seeing movies about the future possibilities of space travel. Dana’s book therefore came into the world at the right time to find a receptive audience.

Another reason for the popularity of Two Years Before the Mast has to do with Dana’s chronicling of life in 1830’s California. Once Dana had inured himself to the rigors of a sailor’s life, and had endured the hazardous passage around Cape Horn, he found himself in California at a time when California was going through a period of profound change. 

It had been Spanish for centuries, the province of los Californios, the old Castilian aristocracy; but Mexico had gained her independence from Spain in 1821, and therefore Dana and his shipmates were living and traveling in Mexican-ruled California as they loaded aboard their ship the hides that were the reason for their ship’s voyage to the west coast of North America. 

Moreover, there were hints of further changes in the air, as growing numbers of Anglo-Americans were settling in California, converting to Catholicism (as required by Mexican law), and thriving in their new country. In 1840, when Dana published his book, much of American society was seized with the idea of Manifest Destiny – the belief that it was the “manifest” (or self-evidently obvious) destiny of the United States of America to be a transcontinental nation, stretching from the Atlantic to the Pacific. That belief, in practice, meant all or part of California switching over -- one way or another -- from Mexican to U.S. sovereignty.

No one could have known in 1840 that California would declare herself an independent republic in 1846; or that gold would be discovered in California in 1849; or that California would join the Union as the 31st state in 1850. But the possibilities of California were very much on Americans’ minds in 1840 – something that further contributed to the popularity of Dana’s Two Years Before the Mast.

But many books are popular in their own era, only to lose that popularity with the passage of time; and Two Years Before the Mast endures in our time because it is a great story that is very skillfully told. Dana captures well the dangers of life at sea, as when in Chapter VI he describes the death of George Ballmer, a young English sailor who fell into the sea and was lost. Comparably moving is the passage in Chapter XV in which Dana describes with indignation the flogging of two members of the ship’s crew: “A man – a human being, made in God’s likeness – fastened up and flogged like a beast!” (p. 153). Dana’s vivid descriptions made the American public aware of the suffering of common sailors, and Dana spent much of his later legal career advocating on behalf of those who sailed before the mast.

The book is also noteworthy for its descriptions of life in the Mexican province of Alta California. Dana’s ship stopped for ox-hides at San Diego, San Pedro (now the port of Los Angeles), Santa Barbara, Monterey, and San Francisco, and it is interesting to hear Dana’s impressions of each community. Santa Barbara “is certainly finely situated, with a bay in front, and an amphitheatre of hills behind” (p. 101). Monterey “is decidedly the pleasantest and most civilized-looking place in California” (p. 129). By contrast, according to Dana, San Diego “is not more than half as large as Monterey, or Santa Barbara, and has little or no business” (p. 171). True from 1834 to 1836, perhaps; but today, the S.D. Chamber of Commerce might beg to differ.

His impressions of the Mexican people of California, unfortunately, seem shaped by cultural bias: “The Californians are an idle, thriftless people, and can make nothing for themselves” (p. 125). Regrettable words – and sadly, not the last time a New Englander has had something bad to say about Californians. Just see what happens in any bar in Boston when the Red Sox have just dropped both ends of a doubleheader to the Angels or the A’s. 

This Penguin Books edition of Two Years Before the Mast includes “Twenty-Four Years After,” the appendix in which Dana, for later editions of his book, describes returning to California in 1859 – by which time the Golden State, nine years after her accession to the Union, was a thriving center of Yankee enterprise and American commerce. Thomas Philbrick of the University of Pittsburgh provides a helpful introduction and thorough notes. Dana’s original glossary of nautical terms is here as well – something that can be most helpful, given the specialized nature of nautical terminology. It may help to have a schematic of a brig of Dana’s time before you as you read. But however you read Two Years Before the Mast, read it. Whether you live in California (where Dana is honored through memorial plaques, schools and streets that bear his name, and even a statue at Dana Point in Orange County) or elsewhere, read it. It is truly a milestone in American literature.