Rating: 4/5

I have to preface this review with an important admission, which is that my background in popular science literature has definitely not prepared me to fully comprehend, let alone criticize, the finer scientific arguments presented here. There are whole sections of this book that are inaccessible to me due to esoteric vocabulary alone. Margulis and Sagan appear to have written an intelligent book that is supported with a fair swath of responsible research, but I'm far from able to detect the points where their reasoning fails to cash out or their evidence is unsuitable, if in fact any such infractions exist. That said, I enjoyed the book very much. It was definitely a departure from the basics of evolutionary theory as I have come to know them, but I didn't run into too many red flags that made me think Margulis and Sagan were arguing anything that should be relegated to crackpot territory. And while they are certainly arguing against a certain mainstream view (referred to as "neodarwinism"), they also didn't seem to be rejecting any essential, nonnegotiable evolutionary concepts. 

The idea of acquiring genomes as the primary impetus for biogenesis is entirely new to me, and I find the whole suggestion fascinating. While I did sometimes got lost in the more technical bits, Margulis and Sagan did a good job of making their general points accessible. Apparently 20th century science didn't take into account the crucial role that bacteria play when it comes to influencing Earth's ecosystems and generating new species, so the authors are trying to make up for what they see as a major deficit in evolutionary thinking. Their holistic approach generally resonates with me, as I enjoy thinkers who try to draw connections between different systems of thought and academic disciplines. The problem with this method, however, is that it's easy to create patterns where none exist, and sometimes there are few people with the requisite expertise to properly analyze and reject any missteps, if they exist. So I read this book with a kind of cautious enthusiasm, with an emphasis on enthusiasm. Many of the ideas that are championed in this text, such as the Gaia hypothesis, are worthy of consideration even if they prove resistant to traditional empirical scrutiny, at least in my view. So I tried to me open-minded here, but not so open-minded that my brain would fall out.

My favorite part was the suggestion that life's purpose is to build complex systems designed to thwart the second law of thermodynamics with ever-increasing efficiency, which is actually a view I've ascribed to since I wrote a paper about entropy in high school. It is really nice to see that notion fleshed out and legitimized by members of the scientific community. Viewing myself and my greater biological community as unified through a defiant resolve to persist and propagate despite the fact that individual energy systems invariably degrade into inert states is both empowering and spiritually gratifying for me. 

Even though I liked the book overall, there were a handful of questions that I didn't feel were addressed properly by the end. The authors provided lots of examples of how small creatures can acquire the genomes of other organisms to precipitate speciation, but I was surprised that they failed to offer examples of how this happens (or might have happened) with larger mammals, such as humans (the one exception is that they refer to the cow's rumen a couple times, but never in much detail). I was left wondering how, for example, symbiogenesis could have produced humans from apes, or dogs from wolves. Even if they were purely speculative, I would have appreciated some suggestions about how genomes are or have been acquired by organisms that play a larger role in my life. I don't think this necessarily discredits the authors or this book, but it's certainly something I'd bring up if I had the chance to sit down and chat with Margulis and Sagan. 

Another issue is that I remain unconvinced that terms like "cooperation" and "competition" aren't useful when talking about evolution, even if we accept the basic principles of genome acquisition. The authors repeatedly mention that such terms don't really apply to their particular interpretation of evolution, but I just don't think their arguments really support that claim. In fact, Margulis and Sagan describe symbiotic relationships as often resulting from physical conflicts between organisms that, over time, learn to work together instead of trying to kill one another, thereby acquiring one another's genomes and sometimes giving birth to a new species. It seems to me that the concepts of cooperation and competition are very useful in describing this development. It's just that we need to realize that such terms are fluid––organisms that once competed can become co-operants, and vice versa. I think Margulis and Sagan really just want to revise how we think about these words, not do away with them altogether. Indeed, I find it laughable to think we'd ever have a theory of evolution in which cooperation and competition weren't incorporated, at least at some basic level. 

Despite my few complaints, which I'm not even sure make any sense given that I'm not a scientist, this book provided the kind of shift in perspective that proves more and more rare as I continue the process of self-education. I found myself realizing that I think humans are, if only in a metaphorical if not a literal sense, being "acquired" by nascent technological entities and other super-organisms, such as nation-states and corporations. Just as larger beings can encapsulate microbes and adapt them to serve specialized functions, thereby prioritizing the needs of the whole over and above the needs/desires of the individual microbes themselves, I believe super-organisms are currently enacting the same process with populations of individual humans. Maybe this has always been true in some sense, but I feel that the process is accelerating at an unprecedented rate due to the increasing power of technology and the far-reaching consequences of globalization. It would be arrogant to suggest that I know where it's ultimately all headed, but I find it harder and harder to envision a future in which the concerns of individual humans beings are of much importance. And while that thought scares me quite a bit, I'm not convinced that such a world would be evil or bereft of significance and value. Maybe that's just how life develops, whether we like it or not.