Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars, rounded down. A reread after some years of this classic mid-twentieth century historical romance. Like many others, I started reading Heyer as an uncritical teen, and I'm sure I would have read this one at least a couple of times. Now as an adult, and coming back to the book after some years, I didn't really enjoy it as much as I probably did then. 

The writing is still, and always, wonderful. Heyer can draw a character so swiftly and cleverly. Even the most minor characters are quickly described in vivid word pictures that allow you to see just the kind of person they are. 

The plot in this one is kind of fun. The title describes it well. As the story proceeds over several months, the characters' lives become more and more entangled, and it's not till the very last chapters that it's all sorted out for (nearly) everyone's HEA. Ivo and Serena who were engaged years ago, but broke it off after a terrible argument. The newly widowed Fanny, Serena's stepmother, who happens to be younger than her stepdaughter, and the very nice beta, ex-army Hector. The innocent and naive Emily and the common-sense Ned Goring. And the young and foolish Gerard. The lives and romances of all of these characters become entwined, and it takes the whole book to disentangle it all satisfactorily. 

As usual, the secondary characters are lively and add lots of interest to the story. The standouts are Emily's mother the grasping and manipulative Lady Laleham, and her splendidly vulgar (and very rich) mother, Mrs Floore, of whom Lady Laleham is ashamed (yet so happy to take her money).

So all looks good for a very enjoyable read. But there were two key things that held me back from rounding up to 4 stars. One: as with a number of Heyer's HRs, there is very little overt romance between the MCs, Ivo and Serena, until the very last section, when the book finishes with a couple of excellent and lively scenes, and the two muddled lovers finally get back together. But after all of the modern HRs I read, I'm now used to and looking for much more romance threaded throughout the book. In this case it's just not there. The reader has to infer, on very scant evidence, that Ivo and Serena are still in love, even after all these years. I just wanted more romance, and earlier on than the last chapter! 

And two: I didn't particularly like Serena, the FMC. She's not a very sympathetic character. She has her good qualities, for sure, but she can also be quite bossy and b*tchy. And she has a shocking temper. Sometimes she completely overreacts to a situation, and can be quite mean to others. Even though she is always sorry afterwards, I just don't like that character type as an MC in my escapist romance reading. Ivo too could be very harsh to others. I didn't like that he became engaged to Emily. She was an innocent pawn, and his treatment of her was unfair and cruel at times. Ivo was also quite cruel and unsympathetic to his ward, Gerard. 

So as it turns out, this is not my favourite Heyer read. It's tightly plotted, cleverly written, and there are some funny lines and moments. But Serena was too hard to like. Perhaps if there had been more romance, it might have softened her in my eyes a bit. But there wasn't.