Rating: 3/5

For revealing all the tactics auction houses like Sotheby's uses to ensnare bidders, it gets 5 stars. For telling the factual story of the birth and rise of this world-famous auction house it gets 4 stars. But for engaging me it gets 3 stars and hence my rating. I confess that my husband and I are amongst Sotheby's 'customers' but we have worked hard not to be amongst their suckers. This isn't easy as they truly have mastered an entire cookbook of ways to get your paddle (or phone bid) into the air. Lacey reveals auction houses' practises that entice the innocents in -- low estimates, glamorous provenances, chandelier bids (The "ancient tradition of the saleroom for an auctioneer to take imaginary bids 'off the chandelier' until the prearranged reserve price on any item has been reached" p. 69), which means if there is only one bidder in the room ... the bidding has led him to the level of the reserve even if its true value would have been substantially lower. Author Lacey has also pegged many of the reasons auction houses succeed: the need to fill those new empty mansions acquired by the nouveau riche, the thrill of the acquisition, the idea of buying into glamour by connection (for those bidders of celebrity sellers). But as Lacey also warns, "People should be buying to own. If they are buying to resell, then they should be dealers--and they should take the advice of dealers" (p. 312). 

This is a book easily skimmed and would serve as a good primer for newcomers at auctions. But if you're looking for the stories of the people behind the house, the book is already 23 years old in 2021 (published in 1998) so most of the personalities are long retired. There are some surprises, however, and for me it was learning that the Duke of Windsor wrote a book on clothes detailing many of his and his father's wardrobe pieces with charming stories of when, where, why and how the various articles should be worn. It was amusing and revealing and I had hoped for more such intimacies. In short, it was a good 'escape from Covid' read unlike what I usually read.