Rating: 1/5

This was by far the STRANGEST, CRUDEST, most DISGUSTING book I've ever encountered. And I don't mean in the get your heart pounding, good kinda titillating way. 

I don't know if I should be shocked or relieved that it was first released in 1978, cuz 

What the hell were they smoking back then? Not only is NONE of this consistent with historically accurate behavior of 1776, I don't see how this could even be considered as having been "tweaked" for entertainment purposes cuz... 

Let me just give some examples as to what I'm talking about. 

  
    Gideon started for the door, muttering angrily, "Uncle Malcolm is going to hear about this." But Roxanne's anxious voice called him back. "No, Gideon, let it be. I acted like a damned hussy and I deserved what I got."
  

This was said after our heroine, Roxanne, pulled her night gown down (that was previously described as being completely see-through— so she’s traipsing around her uncle and cousin in a sheer nightgown in 1776 with NOTHING underneath it), exposing her breast in front of both the Hero and her teenage, MALE cousin, then preceded to fondle herself. To which the Hero quickly smacked her across the face and told her to cover herself up. 

So...just for a little context, Malcom is Gideon's and Roxanne's oldest uncle at around 60 years old. After both his parents died in a carriage accident when he was a small boy, Gideon went to live with his Uncle Malcom in Kentucky. Malcom, originally from London, England, had decided to move to Kentucky from Boston when his wife and son died due to illness many years ago. Roxanne had recently been sent to stay with her family there because of a typhus outbreak in her hometown of Boston. So we have the Uncle, the niece, and the nephew... 

  
    "She knew that Ruth was Uncle Malcolm's woman had been for many years. He had bought her from a brutal stepfather when she was but fourteen years old. He built her a small cabin a few miles from his own and settled her in. Over the years, he had visited her regularly, instructing her in how best to please a man in bed."
"...After so long a time, it was evident that the teacher was still very adept. For although Ruth was still a young woman, she had never turned to a younger man. Of course, there is Gideon, Roxanne thought. I don't suppose he counts, though."
"...It was Malcolm himself who first took her cousin to see Ruth. Gideon had told Roxanne all about it one day."
  

Took Gideon to see her when he was THIRTEEN YEARS OLD.

For SEX lessons!!! With the uncle’s “woman”! 

  
    "Ruth, the lad's been playin' with himself! Take him to bed and show him ..."

..."Did you go just the one time?" He had grinned widely and shook his head. "Hell no. I've been goin' regular ever since." "Does Uncle Malcolm know?"
  

To which Gideon responds, "Sure," and says that they even go together most of the time.....

  
    His hand had gone immediately inside Ruth's blouse, and Roxanne could see the kneading of his fingers through the material. She looked away in embarrassment as Ruth laughed and slapped at his hand. "Shame on you, Malcolm. In front of Roxy."
"...Then, before her popeyed stare, Malcolm had carried Ruth to the bed and was pushing her skirt up around her waist. My God, Roxanne thought, hurrying to sit down with her back to them, he's going to make love to her right under my nose. Amid the noise of the thumping and bumping on the bed, she blushed furiously and would have left the cabin it if wasn't so cold outside."
  

So, yeah, it’s completely normal that the uncle would be 100% ok with getting down and dirty right there in front of his 18-year old “innocent” niece. 

Even all this ick fest aside, the writing was terrible and the characters weren't even likeable. At the beginning of the story when the Hero comes upon the the attempted rape of the heroine and claims that she's his wife, he and her both are subsequently faced with having sex in front of this group of Native Americans in order for them to buy this lie that they’re in fact married. It really didn’t take too much convincing (if any at all) for this supposedly frightened, virginal, properly raised, heroine to let him strip her clothes off. 🤷‍♀️ Then when the hero is trying to prep mentally for having gentle sex with the virgin heroine, the author makes a big deal of the fact that, 

  
    "For the first time in his life he did not want to hurt a woman."
  

Like,

I think we're really meant to swoon at this "heartfelt" sentiment. 

The heroine is annoying and always trying to get at the Hero. Why?

But she's dedicated to the attitude and is convinced she wants to marry a man that's been courting her, while simultaneously meeting up to have sex with a 15 year old Native American girl. 

  
    "Honey, I don't know if I'm talkin' out of turn, but I think there's something you ought to know. There's a young Indian girl that goes up to Seth's place about every day. I see her cross the river, and Seth always meets her."
  

But it's not like the Hero is any better. He leaves the heroine, after she makes it clear that she doesn't want anything to do with him, and is taken captive by another Native American tribe where he meets the chief's youngest daughter.

  
    "Little Doe will keep you warm." Caleb smiled now. She had continued to do so ever since.
"...He felt a stirring in his loins. Little Doe was delightful in bed. He had experienced his second virgin, and in the long cold nights he had coached her carefully in the ways that he enjoyed."
  

So at this point,

and disgusted! And want nothing else to do with this train wreck of a book that I don't see how any sane person could ever actually enjoy reading. Needless to say, I do NOT recommend because it's straight bullshit.