Rating: 4/5

Four animals are the main characters in this book, a superb, adventurous, amusing entertainment from 1908. Ratty the friendly river rat and loves his stream , Badger, sour, not a fan of others keeps in the woods, Mole uncomfortable, shy, lives in a hole, and Toad , rich, incorrigible, very fun- loving though a bit unhinged, with the biggest, best house in the neighborhood . These four, close friends...sometimes...they can and will annoy each but never be disunited for long. Toad the fearless, the life of the party however not always at an appropriate situation, easily bored spends like a drunken, mad sailor which he often resembles. Believes he is smarter than in reality, to be blunt just another frog. Buying boats, floating up and down the the river not good, or a very skilled oarsman , clumsy, needs help from his friends frequently, a boy in a mature body . Poor Ratty his rescues begin to grow tiresome and now dear old Toad buys a pricey motor car, the silly better word, nincompoop will soon at this high rate lose all his late, lamented father's money. Police chase the Toad for quite numerous indiscretions, washerwoman her horse stolen, joyriding in other chaps automobiles, driving like a maniac . Nevertheless he is not a bad amphibian and hiding with the rather tired friends in their hollows, can be pleasant next to the harsh alternate...gloomy jail no joy, the grub bad and in such sparse amounts too . The writer Mr. Kenneth Grahame was a very important banker one of three running the Bank of England, youngest ever then, who wrote this for his 4 year old sick boy not a professional however. Reads the tale to the nearly blind child, him undoubtedly too young then to comprehend until later in his sad , short life. Mr. Grahame childhood's sweet memories of living with a kind uncle by the calm upper Thames River, so pleasant an escape from the pain of parents no longer around. Siblings scattered to other relatives. The beautiful flowing, though muddy brown waters, white clouds turning dark, fishes jumping in the air, splashing down, swimming beneath, birds flying about, happily chirping on trees, lizards walking funny side- to- side movements. Oh if the talented author had only written more, glorious things would the world have gained...
just a couple of other short stories published. His personality comes through a lover of country life, a man withdrew from society with wife and child. This still will be a substantial monument to him.