Rating: 5/5

The Meaning of Consuelo by Judith Ortiz Cofer is both a stunning tribute to the island of Puerto Rico (and something of an indictment of U.S. development and its negative impact on the island’s culture and natural splendor) and a deeply affecting story of one family’s heartbreaking misfortune (the mental instability suffered by the family’s beautiful younger daughter, Mili). The story is told by Mili’s older sister, Consuelo, who is charged with keeping an eye on her sibling from the time they are toddlers. Against the subtle backdrop of Mili’s mounting mental illness, Consuelo tries to forge her own identity within her fractured family and the confines of the larger Puerto Rican culture of the 1950’s. She does this while trying to make sense of her budding womanhood, her puzzlement over Maria Sereno (the cross-dressing neighborhood outcast), and her attachment to her gay cousin, Patricio (who is something of a pariah in his own family).

This is a deeply moving story about the suffering of women and the fragile bonds that hold families together. It is so authentically rendered you will feel as though you are in the kitchen with three generations of  Puertorriqueñas, drinking  café con leche served through a stained cloth colander as they share their collective bewilderment over the tragedia befalling their otherwise upstanding, middle-class family. I reeled from the pain experienced by the Signe family. They tried so hard to keep it together and hold on to their façade of being gente decente—decent people, trying to avert a scandal surrounding Mili’s mental illness. As for Consuelo, I loved how she handled herself after losing her virginity to Wilhelm (her European classmate who spurned her practically the moment he wordlessly stuffed his penis back into his pants). That experience taught Consuelo a hard life lesson that is particularly prevalent in Latin cultures: The same sexual act renders the male participant at once victorious and victimized (and thus deserving of pardon), while causing his female accomplice to be shunned and solely condemned. Girls—and boys—everywhere could take a lesson from Consuelo’s silent outrage and unflappable personal pride, even in this era and setting. That girl didn’t just get mad, she got even like a lady—brilliantly, and without uttering a word. 

The gut-wrenching ending was harsh, and I didn’t see it coming. But with her unhappy ending, Ortiz underscores the tough choices young adults must sometimes make: You can either drown with the sinking ship out of loyalty to your family, or run away and save yourself.  

At 185 pages, The Meaning of Consuelo is supposed to be young-adult fiction, but it boasts a strength of character you often don’t find in adult offerings. Its combination of exquisite prose and keen human insight makes this otherwise fast and easy read a cultural emblem and literary treasure. 

I will not soon forget The Meaning of Consuelo. Most books written for a mass audience suffer from a notable lack of depth and emotion. However well-crafted and entertaining they may be, they leave you hungry once you’ve finished, because all they offer is a sort of literary pabulum—a blandness akin to airline fare. But every now and again, along comes a hidden gem like The Meaning of Consuelo—poignant, quirky, heartfelt, and utterly unselfconscious—just like its protagonist. I would love to see more “Consuelos” topping the bestseller lists, but authors like Ortiz write from the heart, rather than pander to the masses.