Rating: 4/5

”It isn’t up to me to recognize the demons of this world. That is not a human task. God will tell me. All I have to do is listen.”

Villain retellings are nothing new in literature. I think that we as readers (and writers as authors) find something almost morbidly fascinating in humanizing someone that has been considered evil or misunderstood for so long. 
  ”I am polluted. I am wicked.”
Villains are often more popular than the heroes. There’s something so enticing about both their actions presently and the wonder that comes along with it: How did they become evil? What forces drove them madness, rage, and despair? From Marissa Meyer’s Heartless to Gregory Maguire’s Wicked, authors have taken normally evil and frightening characters and added a touch of humanity to them. They weren’t always bad; oftentimes, they were good. But something happened that affected them so deeply and scarred them so horribly that they turned into the monsters we hear about at bedtime, with the lights turned off and the covers over our head.

But I think that no matter how many villain reimaginings I can read, nothing will ever top the genius that is Donna Jo Napoli.

Her fairy-tale retellings are some of the best out there. Younger generations probably haven’t heard of her much because her books are older in age (and probably aren’t considered ‘hip’ or ‘cool’), but they’re glorious works. She manages to dig deep within the original, one-dimension fairy tale characters and flesh them out into fully realized beings. The fact that she’s able to do this with both her protagonists and antagonists is nothing short of a literary wonder. And The Magic Circle is no exception.

We all know the story of Hansel and Gretel. Two children get lost in the woods and find a house made of candy. It belongs to an evil witch who wants to fatten the children up so she can bake them into pies. But they outsmart her and end up pushing her in the oven instead. But who is the evil witch, anyways? What made her build a house of candy in the woods? And why did she want to eat them? Who was she?

In this version of the Brother’s Grimm tale, she is simply known as the Ugly One. A midwife living in medieval Germany with her daughter, she is known for her hunchbacked posture and ability to deliver healthy babies even in the most dire of circumstances. Longing to give her daughter more than she has to offer, she makes a bargain with the devil; she’ll call up his demons from within the Magic Circle in exchange for their help. But when she breaks the devil’s bargain, there’s hell to pay. Off to the woods she goes, forever banished from her village. She makes a house out of candy to keep the demons away. It’s a hard and lonely life… until two children become lost in the woods.

Retellings of any tale are some of the hardest things to write. Stories are hard to write themselves, but taking a potentially beloved piece of literature and rewriting it for a new audience? That’s hard to do. It’s a fine balance of keeping enough of the original to make it true, but giving it a new twist to make it more relevant and exciting. And Donna Jo Napoli gets it just right. Her retellings are the perfect mix of old and new, tying up the loose ends seamlessly and intertwining her own story with that of the original so that it makes perfect sense.

Shedding tears for a witch I have only ever come to know as evil is probably a hard thing to fathom. But goddamnit Napoli did such a brilliant and fantastic job with the Evil Witch. The Ugly One truly is a creature to be pitied. Shunned almost all her life and reviled in her later years, all she wants is to be accepted, to be loved, and to be wanted by someone -- her daughter, her neighbors, and even the lost little children who happen upon her house. And her realization that nothing and no one will ever love her is something so heartbreaking to read about.
  ”’You thought they loved you, didn’t you? Imagine that, human children loving a witch. You pathetic piece of boar dripping! You thought love could save you. Watch. Watch it all crumble away! No one will ever ever love you again.”
The demons in her head from her transgression are constantly whispering in her ears, tempting her with doing maniacal acts of their own bidding. And yet she refuses. Underneath all the Brothers Grimm descriptions of a mad, evil witch is a tormented, sorry soul who is fighting a losing battle with the devil.
  ”’Eat them,’ scream the voices in my head. ‘Eat them, eat them, eat them.’”
If you haven’t gotten the hint, you should check Donna Jo Napoli’s works out. They’ll make you see fairy tale characters in a whole new light, and maybe (just maybe), make you feel pity for the characters you have been taught to revile. Because after all, there are two sides to every story.

P.S.: If you’re just getting on the Napoli train, my two favorites of hers are Zel (a retelling of Rapunzel told from the POVs of the Prince, Zel, and her mother), and Beast (a retelling of Beauty and the Beast set in 18th century Persia from the Beast’s POV). They’re brilliant!