Rating: 5/5

This is a fascinating view of an eccentric man who lives on the Carribean Island of Providencia. Oscar is (was, his name was or is Oscar Bryan) one of those people who are both deeply interesting and passionate and also can be irritating. Wilson, a sociologist, visited the Island and encountered Oscar. Oscar oscillates between being a genius and a troubled man. It is questionable that he is 'mad'. He is different and while he was real be could have been from a novel say by John Fowles of 'The Magus', but he is not harmful. He is a mix of intrusive, elusive and insightful. He is not insane. He is curious and quite different from most of us. When someone dies, a Catholic, the priest who arrives speaks in Spanish which most of the Islanders only partly understand. He fluffs it. Oscar takes over and gives a brilliant oration then contradicts himself. In that moment he is inspired, passionate and compassionate and then suddenly loses hold of that state. 
 I see some have dismissed this book. They haven't, it seems to me, read it properly, or they have rejected it after a short read. I say this as for me this is a deeply insightful book into human life and the problems of the individual and their rights versus that of the group. I am surprised by the negative reviews, as I have read almost nothing as amazing as this account. 
 Yes, it is a little disturbing. Oscar lies under peoples' houses--listening to what they say. He knows and doesn't know 'everything'. He is the Island's shaman-idiot-genius but he reveals to Wilson some deep sadnesses that arise from distressing experiences as a man, husband and a father that he has suffered. He has loved, and in some ways lost and this has led to the complex psychologcial 'trick' he plays on himself and others. Perhaps also he has lost some trust. We never really understand Oscar, but who can understand anyone, even themselves? 
 So like a work of literature this can be seen as a work of philosophy, sociology and anthropology; as well as a look somewhat into the troubled but very unique heart and life of Oscar.
 Here is part of the blurb on my older version (Vintage, 1975):

 Oscar Bryan calls himself a "man of the eighth variety, a man of keen insight and wide vision." His compatriots on the tiny Caribbean island of Providencia call him mad. He is a tramp, thief, eavesdropper, informer. Yet he is also a vital element in [the] island society.....British anthropologist Peter J. Wilson uses an extensive series of taped interviews with Oscar to study the relationship between the individual and his society, and the ways in which the "mad" reflect the values around them. 

 Also: "Oscar.....provides a glimpse of a bizarre, colorful society and an even stranger, charming character born of it. .... gives another way of understanding what we call insanity."
 (Human Behavior)

 Oscar has actually suffered some tragedy in his life, related to his marriage and his children, and this torments him. He is far from mad. When he raves it is sometimes like a strange and beautiful poem. This is a rare book and it is amazing to read.