Rating: 4/5

I think that with this book I finished reading about the Glass family, and I’m not going to lie, that knowledge makes me want to go outside, lay on the ground, and wait for the earth to take me.

Or at the very least reread Franny and Zooey, and then reread Nine Stories, and then reread this, in an unending loop until eventually I get sick of them and then can go on with my life unemotionally.

(I don’t think I could ever get sick of them but it’s an optimistic thought.)

I would have loved these stories of this family no matter what, I think - I mean, it’s hardly a unique trait to be an English major with a fondness for Franny and Zooey - it’s referenced in Caroline Kepnes’ You, for god’s sake - maybe I’ll just make this entire review a series of clauses bracketed by dashes until everyone unfollows me - but I was extra destined to love them, because I read them alongside one of my favorite people. I will always have affection for this family and these stories and Salinger, and more so because of the wonderful memories I have of reading them, and the time in my life when I was doing so.

AND THAT MAKES IT EXTRA SAD THAT NOW I’M DONE.

My heart actually hurts.

I love this family so much, and I love their stories, and these two additions are equally as lovely.

The first story, Raise High the Roof Beam, Carpenters, is a top to bottom delight. (Also, in the interest of full discretion: until I actually opened this book I did not realize that the title was two separate story titles. I have no excuse for this, considering Franny and Zooey is the exact same thing, but here we are.)

Seymour: An Introduction, counterintuitively, for me started out tiresome and got less and less so. Really in the end I caught myself thinking “oh, to be such a wonderful person that a story like this is written about you,” and the fact that Seymour is fictional seemed nearly beside the point.

The Glass family is very real to me.

Bottom line: What I wouldn’t give to go back to reading Franny and Zooey for the first time.

-------------

there's not enough Salinger in the WORLD, honey!

review to come / between 4 and 4.5 stars

-------------

i'm sad and i'm going to read Salinger until i feel better