Rating: 4/5

“Connie walked dimly on. From the old wood came an ancient melancholy, somehow soothing to her, better than the harsh insentience of the outer world. She liked the inwardness of the remnant of forest, the unspeaking reticence of the old trees. They seemed a very power of silence, and yet a vital presence. They, too, were waiting: obstinately, stoically waiting, and giving off a potency of silence. Perhaps they were only waiting for the end; to be cut down, cleared away, the end of the forest, for them the end of all things. But perhaps their strong and aristocratic silence, the silence of strong trees, meant something else…As she came out of the wood on the north side, the keeper’s cottage, a rather dark, brown stone cottage, with gables and a handsome chimney, looked uninhabited, it was so silent and alone. But a thread of smoke rose from the chimney, and the little railed-in garden in the front of the house was dug and kept very tidy. The door was shut…Now she was here she felt a little shy of the [keeper], with his curious far-seeing eyes…”
-	D. H. Lawrence, Lady Chatterley’s Lover 

The difficulty in discussing D. H. Lawrence’s Lady Chatterley’s Lover is that it has long since ceased being a mere book. Originally banned as obscene in the United Kingdom and the United States – among other countries – it represents a watershed moment in the movement towards free speech and anticensorship. Today, you are just as likely to read this in law school as in an English literature class. 

We take for granted the idea that governments should not tell us what to think, write, and read, but when Lady Chatterley’s Lover was first published privately in 1929, such was not the case. Outlawed by legislators, tarred by moralists and scolds, demand for Lawrence’s final novel paradoxically grew in tandem with the efforts to suppress it. 

This demand eventually led to a legal fight. In 1960, in the famed case of R v. Penguin Books, Ltd., a jury in the United Kingdom determined that Lady Chatterley’s Lover was not obscene. Around the same time, a United States District court found that its publication was protected by the First Amendment. These decisions, along with others, are now recognized as a turning point in the liberalization of speech, a journey that has led us – for better or worse – to the untamed frontiers of the internet. 

In short, Lady Chatterley’s Lover has more baggage than a 19th century tycoon traveling around the world. The challenge, in finally reading it, is to judge it based solely on its merits, rather than its larger impact. 

Ultimately, I found that to be impossible. 

I liked Lady Chatterley’s Lover fine enough. More than that, I respected it, and appreciated it, because Lawrence’s willingness to say the unsayable pushed back against the then-acceptable notion of closeminded bureaucrats and prudish lawmakers determining the legitimacy of art. Nevertheless, since its legacy is so well known, I’ll try to stick to the substance of Lady Chatterley’s Lover, not its historical echoes. 

*** 

Once you’ve peeled back the layers, the most surprising thing about Lady Chatterley’s Lover is how basic it is at the storytelling level. Lawrence’s tale relies on archetypes, tropes, and cliches, combining the standard love-triangle with a class-transcending romance, all set against the background of fading British aristocrats bemoaning an industrializing world. 

The main character is Constance (Connie) Reid, the titular Lady Chatterley, who finds herself in a constricted, near loveless marriage to the immensely rich Sir Clifford. During the First World War, Sir Clifford received a paralyzing injury below the waist. Unlike in Hemingway’s The Sun Also Rises, Lawrence is not coy about the consequences. Specifically, Clifford is impotent, and compensates by retreating into a life of the mind, inviting an endless procession of artists and intellectuals to his estate at Wragby. 

Connie quickly grows tired of the tedious, pedantic discussions that arise from these meetings – a feeling I shared, as this starts slow – and seeks solace in long walks in the nearby forest. It is in this Edenic parcel that she meets Oliver Mellors, the gamekeeper. Mellors is a pointed example of the hypocrisies of the British class system. Born to a low station, he lifted himself through his military service in India, but finds that however much he climbs, high society will never accept him. Cynically understanding this, Mellors throughout the novel switches between a near-incomprehensible vernacular – which is extremely frustrating to read – and proper English. 

Within no time, Connie and Mellors are trysting like rabbits. They are also – or so Lawrence wants us to believe – falling madly in love with each other. Whether or not you believe in the fundamentals of their connection (I certainly did not), they certainly achieve a special union through their lovemaking. 

And that’s really why we’re here, isn’t it? 

For the sex? 

*** 

Obviously, sex is a basic biological function, necessary for the continuation of a species. For humans, though, it is so much more. It is a powerful motivating force, and a key facet of identity. It can be a consuming compulsion. Channeled healthily, sex can be profoundly meaningful; channeled wrong, and it can lead to dark places. Sex makes people do unwise things without hesitation. It can lead a person to disrupt the status quo, to destroy everything they have, to lie, and to betray. 

Unsurprisingly, sex figures largely in fiction – and not simply in romances and erotica – because so much can hinge on this single act. 

But even if sex belongs in a mainstream novel, it does not necessarily follow that you want to read about the mechanics of the deed. Dramatic imperatives can still be achieved with the bedroom door closed.

With that said, a warning: if you prefer novelistic carnal knowledge to be transmitted by implication, Lady Chatterley’s Lover is not for you. In this book, Lawrence flings the bedroom door wide open, and just sort of stands there, unmoving, and unblinking. 

*** 

Lawrence’s sex scenes have often been described as “graphic for their time.” 

I disagree. 

They’re explicit by any measure, including the modern day. To be sure, some of their impact is diluted by unintentionally hilarious euphemisms, including references to the “mound of Venus,” “crises,” and “loins.” But they are also exhaustively recounted, closely observed, and quite numerous. There is a stretch in the middle where it’s just one bedroom session after another, with Mellors exhibiting the refractory abilities of a twenty-year old. There is also a lot of language, with enough f-bombs and c-words to make you wonder if you’ve stumbled onto an episode of Game of Thrones. 

*** 

Accepting that Lady Chatterley’s Lover is softcore uplifted by the trappings of themes, sense of place, and high-level sentence structure, the success or failure of the work as a whole depends on the success or failure of the sex scenes. 

In my mind, sex scenes serve three big purposes: (1) to propel the plot; (2) to reveal character; and (3) to stimulate, arouse, or otherwise elicit a response. 

The “worst” sex scenes do only the third thing, substituting shock and gratuity for substance. Good scenes usually manage some combination of two out of three. 

Sex is best used in a novel when all three elements are joined. 

That’s what happens here.

First, Lawrence’s sex scenes not only propel the plot, they are the plot. Without them, there is no conflict. They are used to set up the drama, to move things forward, and to drive the narrative to its – pun intended, sorry – climax. 

Second, Lawrence uses his breathless descriptions of consensual adult activity to excavate Connie’s being, unearth her motivations, and vividly reveal the arc of her maturation.

Finally, the sex scenes are evocative. Despite the dated language, a misunderstanding of “the bowels” as a source of desire, the regrettable overuse of the word “phallus,” and a certain repetitiveness, they are expressing a lot. 

*** 

All of this is to say that Lady Chatterley’s Lover lives up to its reputation in realms both highbrow and low. Unlike, say, Tropic of Cancer, which I found to be emptily provocative, Lawrence uses his R-and-X-rated materials for entirely sincere and legitimate purposes. It is for this very reason, after all, that Lady Chatterley’s Lover became such an effective ram to batter down the imposing walls that had bounded and constrained artistic expression for hundreds of years. It is why it will always have a place in the history of both literature and the law.