Rating: 4/5

I feel that I need to take a deep breath before entering John Banville's world. I know that I will get gorgeous writing, a succession of impressions and intimations - but also (usually) a deeply unpleasant protagonist. I also know that I will have to manage my expectations about linear plot (I have a theory that those of us who fell in love with books as children never wholly let go of the desire to encounter a rollickin' good yarn) and that I will have to be prepared to be left with ambiguity and vagueness at the book's close.

I can't say that this book has caused me to revise that opinion. I knew it was part of the Freddie Montgomery trilogy so I had no trouble divining from the protagonist's opaque ramblings that, despite his new name of "Mr. Morrow", he was, indeed, Freddie Montgomery, released from prison after his theft and manslaughter charge, but again up to no good. Essentially the book is a long memory, of Montgomery/Morrow recounting how he got drawn into a shady art deal. The mysterious Morden asks him to put his expertise and genuine passion for 17th Flemish art to use to evaluate and authenticate a set of paintings, apparently inherited from an eccentric 19th century collector. Montgomery/Morrow thus visits the abandoned house where the paintings are stored, not just to feast his eyes on the paintings, but also, and increasingly, to tryst with a beautiful woman who seems loosely connected to Morden. Their erotic games become increasingly disturbing, but Montgomery/Morden is totally in thrall to her, even as he becomes vaguely aware that the police is keeping an eye on him, and that another underworld character, "Da" keeps popping up in his life in the most disquieting ways. To round out this collection of disturbing characters, there is also the sudden reappearance in his life of his Aunt Corky, now slowly dying in a retirement home but still capable of the occasional confabulation. 

It's all very indirect, and much of the book consists of Montgomery/Morrow bemoaning the loss of his lover and describing himself as a purely passive bystander, or plaything of fate, a puppet in the hands of more devious characters like Morden, Da or even the police. He seems to have lived this episode in his life in a sort of fog, just like most of the story takes place in a hazy, drizzly Irish autumn. I have a hard time with these characters who seem to have no agency in their own life - but as always, the beautiful writing saves the book for me.