Rating: 5/5

‘All I knew were the suburbs of fear ... and now here I am, in the big city.’ 

Welcome to the Alan Moore revolution, the almost unknown artist who is about to start a British remapping of the American comic book landscape, similar in a way to the effect the Beatles had on the pop scene( Moore, who is incidentally also a musician, is closer in spirit to David Bowie and Led Zeppelin). Before Watchmen or V for Vendetta, it all starts with this series about a superhero from a backwoods Louisiana swamp, a minor horror property in the DC catalogue.
Alan Moore was invited to take over the character after very low sales figures and given free rein by a forward looking editor. With support from young and daring artists like Stephen Bisette, John Totleben, Rick Veitch or Alfredo Alcala, Moore redefines not only the genre, but the whole way we approach the medium: it’s time for the comics to grow up and to address adult issues in a mature and original manner. It’s time to earn some respect as graphic-novels and not as facile entertainment for children.
Incidentally, this is also the first major series to ditch the restrictive and outdated censorship from the Comic Book Authority.

My review covers only the Alan Moore period, issues 20 to 65, collected in 6 hardcover albums, about 1200 pages. Knowledge of what went on before is helpful, but not necessary to follow the events in this story arc. Knowledge of the larger history of the DC Universe, Golden Age, Silver Age and Modern is also useful. Since I am in general staying away from the two giants (Marvel and DC), I did have some problems with some of the guest characters featured here. This is where the introductions to each of the six albums proved useful, providing the necessary background information.
The artwork also took some time to get used to and was a bit uneven if I’m totally honest. Still, even when it is a bit rushed or taken over by guest artists, it remains a strong support for Moore’s scripts and, when it hits the right spots, it gets mind-blowingly awesome. I’ve tried to save a few of my favorite panels and posters for this review, but there are whole issues that made me go Wow!
Before I try to sketch a road map for the Alan Moore run on Swamp Thing, I will say that he is the main attraction for picking up the Saga: for his original ideas, for his breaking the barriers for both the horror genre and for the comic book format, for his poetic style, for his engagement with environmental and social issues, for his knowledge and respect of comic book history and characters, for his support of artists against the corporate control of creativity.

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

First album starts with a bloody sweep clean of the slate for what went on in the first 19 issues of Swamp Thing v2. The monster from the swamp is killed by mercenaries hired by Sunderland Corporation. His remains are taken to a secret laboratory ( The Anatomy Lesson ) where they are studied by a man named Jason Woodrue, who will soon be revealed as another of the DC superheroes: The Floronic Man.
Meanwhile, most of the Swamp Thing’s friends and allies are hunted down and eliminated or forced into hiding.
The first major change introduced by Moore in this first cycle is to move away from the standard origin story of most superheroes. The original Swamp Thing, Alec Holland, was a scientist who was burned to death in a bomb explosion. He was reanimated in the waters of the swamp by the super powerful chemicals he was researching.
Moore gives his monster an identity crisis, resolved by the revelation that he is not a man with superpowers, but a vegetable that has absorbed the memory and the personality of Alec Holland. The Swamp Thing was never human. He is an avatar, a champion of the Green – the super-conscience of our planet’s biomass.

This first album has two main story arcs: The Floronic Man gets his own connection to the Green and goes on a rampage against humanity, as retribution for the way humans are destroying the planet. Swamp Thing must sever his connection to the Green before Woodrue saturates the air with oxygen and burns everything down

 “You have waged bitter and undeclared war upon the green, gutting the rain forests, mile after mile, day after day, but know this: the war has come home! It is man's turn to embrace the scythe.” 

The second cycle is pure horror and follows Abigail Cable, who will become the main love interest in the series for the Swamp Thing, as she starts working with autistic children in a local institution while the place is attacked by a couple of visitors from Hell, the Monkey King/ Kamara and the rhyming devil Etrigan.

The second album is where the series really took off for me. It starts with a private ghost story, one in which the Swamp Thing must bury the last remains of his humanity ( The Burial ). The episode also recaps for us the origin story of the Alec Holland character.
The Arcane Cycle follow Abby Cable as she is tormented by her former husband Matthew, now possessed by the spirit of a previous nemesis for Swamp Thing: Anton Arcane.
In the second part of the cycle, the Swamp Thing must descend into Hell in search of the soul of Abby – a riff on both Dante’s Inferno and the Orpheus/ Eurydice myth. In Hell, Swamp Thing is helped by several forgotten DC heroes from the past.
There is a single issue here that is a homage to a children’s series that I loved for its word games and for its science-fiction plot:  Pog 
There is also what is probably the most beautiful and romantic issue in the whole run, a welcome respite from the relentless horrible things that happen to Abby and the Swamp Thing :  Rite of Spring 

The third album introduces the concept of multiple incarnations for the Swamp Thing through the Ages and two characters that will be major players in Neil Gaiman’s Sandman Universe – Cain and Abel as keepers of stories and dreams in  Abandoned Houses 
Moore decides to take the series in a new direction that he calls  American Gothic  . Under instruction from a new character that will later earn his own long-running series and film franchise (John Constantine), the Swamp Thing starts to travel across America, Easy-Rider style, as a witness to an impending Apocalypse.
The American Gothic Cycle is linked in the DC Universe to a major event known as the Crisis of Infinite Earths. In short, a secret cabal of shamans and sorcerers in Patagonia is harvesting psychic energies from terrified humans in order to summon an Abomination that will bring down Heaven. Constantine is trying to prevent the summoning and wants Swamp Thing by his side in the quest. The cycle will spill over into the fourth album.

 “Maybe the world has run out of room for monsters... or maybe... they're just getting harder to recognize.” 

Among the horrors witnesses by Swamp Thing are a toxic-waste hobo who destroys his home and his vegetal body ( The Nukeface Papers), underwater vampires, a female werewolf, zombies, a haunted house, gun violence, racism, slavery, zombies ( Strange Fruit ) and others.

The fourth album closes the American Gothic cycle and ends with the most ambitious and spectacular universal battle between Good and Evil. There is a single issue here ( Windfall ) that also explores the fight between good and evil in individual consciences, triggered by a bite from the fruiting body of Swamp Thing, a sort of aromatic sweet potato with psychedelic/schizoid effects (LSD?). Moore returns the whole superhero concept back to individual choice and responsibility.
Another favorite issues for the whole run is found in  The Parliament of Trees  where Swamp Thing visits the hidden sanctuary of past champions of the Green deep in the Brazilian tropical forest.

Album #5 is moving the action to Gotham City, a chance to visit Arkham Asylum and meet with Batman and other DC regulars. While Swamp Thing was battling for the future of the whole Universe, bigots and morons in Louisiana accuse Abby Cable of perversion with monsters. Sent to trial, Abby jumps bail and ends up in Gotham City, where she is immediately arrested again. Swamp Thing gives in to anger and unleashes his new found powers on the metropolis, transforming the asphalt jungle into a real, green and vibrant tropical forest. Without spoiling the actual events, the highlight of the album for me is  The Garden of Earthly Delights  - Alan Moore at his anarchist best.

A single issue here ( The Flowers of Romance ) brings back a couple of support characters from issue #20 for an exploration of domestic abuse and psychological torment of a woman by her trusted partner.
The album ends on another high note that marks the transition of the series from strict horror content to science-fiction in an issue painted entirely in shades of blue:  My Blue Heaven 

Album #6 offers us several incarnations of the Swamp Thing as a space vagabond, an exile who seeks for a way to return to earth and to Abby in the weirdest places.
Alan Moore run is brought to a close with both skill ( Loose Ends (reprise)  ) and emotion  The Return of the Good Gumbo  . The whole idea of superheroes as savers of humanity is challenged.

Saga of the Swamp Thing, under Alan Moore’s guidance, was a wild ride, an incredible journey and a thought provoking study of existential threats to both individual sanity and planetary survival. Whatever reservations I usually have about superhero comics or series running into hundreds of issues were swept aside by the sheer energy and invention of the creative team working on the albums. All the accolades and the prizes won by them are well earned.