Rating: 3/5

A mental breakdown is a gradual process; it is something that happens slowly over a substantial period of time. With this play it was like a smack in the mouth; it came suddenly and without any form of real warning. And I find that a little odd. 

Sure, something can trigger us off though we don’t necessarily go from perfectly calm and collective to meltdown mode in an instant. Blanche is clearly delusional. She has convinced herself of a life that doesn’t really exist. This is her body armour, a shell she uses to protect herself from what is actually happening in her life. She pretends to be a member of a higher class in which her life is perfectly fine, but it’s not really. 

 Nobody else is aware of this. Her persona convinces most and keeps the rest away. In this she’s not remotely insane or unhinged; she’s just damaged and on her guard. Life has got her down. So at the end of the play, when she supposedly gets raped, she loses it.

The sexual chemistry was there from the very first scene in which she met Stanley. She was drawn to his animalism and domineering masculinity; she clearly desired him even if she would never directly admit it to herself or others. So when he eventually makes a move on her, she doesn’t put up any convincing resistance; she lets it happen: she almost wants it to happen. And I find it difficult to conclude that it is rape. It happens off stage and we only know of the aftermath. The crime is implied, though it isn’t directly explicit. 

  “We've had this date with each other from the beginning.”

I may be arguing against the tide, though if you consider the history of Blanche the rape can be fairly doubted. She has a way of weeding her way out of situations. She’s escaped her first marriage because her husband killed himself. This, again, seems doubtful. Blanche relays her tale, but from her side of things (the only one that is available.) Apparently, her husband killed himself off the basis of one conversation which confronted his homosexuality. This doesn’t seem real. She walked in on him having sex with another man. Nothing happens. Time goes by. She brings the subject up later on, and then BAMM! he kills himself. I find the whole situation doubtful. We only have Blanche’s take on things, and I do think it’s far from the truth. I think the rape can be seen as her escape route out of another situation. I think she lets it happen just so she can have an exit point.

Indeed, the perfectly poised and delusional Blanche couldn’t simply walk out of the door; she couldn’t simply accept that her sister doesn’t like her and that she’s a complete manipulator of people and their emotions. No. That’s not Blanche. She has to go out with a bang, so to speak. I think the whole insanity thing was an act or to the point that she has deluded herself into thinking that it’s real. I am, again, arguing against the tide. I can’t find any sources that agree with me. But, I am almost convinced of it. I just can’t accept that she could have been driven to complete madness just like that. Not that I’m undermining the terribleness of rape, but in this situation I don’t think it’s a valid trigger to insanity. 

It’s an interesting play, and it made me think, though I’m not certain that the ending everybody thinks happened did happen.