Rating: 3/5

This was one of the best of the first dozen Saddle Club books, despite a couple of continuity errors (Barq changes from a chestnut to a bay, for example, and Lisa is suddenly taking piano lessons again.) This is one of the most horse-centric of the early Saddle Club books. It's told from Lisa and Carole's point of views. Stevie remains a mystery here.

This is a really bad book to start the series with. This book assumes that you have read most, if not all, of the previous 10 books. It makes references to most of the previous books. 

For the most part, the horse information given here is sound (pun intended), but there is one glaring error right at the book's beginning. Carole is worried about the rumblings in Barq's belly, thinking he may be starting to colic. It's when a horse's belly goes completely silent is the sign of colic. It's normal for horses to have quite a symphony of digestive noises.

Pine Hollow gets its own Pony Club chapter. Whip dee dee. Although the kids in the book love it, I was pretty mystified. I never joined Pony Club, partly because of the expense, but mostly because it was deadly dull if you did not have your own equine. In those glorious years when I had riding lessons, I eavesdropped on a couple of classes at the stable where I rode. You just stood around and got a lecture. 

There are two main things that happen here that are significant to the series:

1) Veronica gets her Arabian mare Garnet.
2) Lisa is offered a chance to get a horse called Pretty Boy, but has to turn him down.

A good book series has a clearly defined baddie. It makes for good storytelling. Veronica is that baddie. She's become the same bitch she was in book one -- only she has become a better rider. She's a good villan, and clearly shows what not to do with horses.

Another Goodreads reviewer wonders where the adults are in this series. In the real world, the adults maybe would be more front and center. I'm going to stress maybe, because in my own life, adults have been the problem more times than they've been the solution. And this is a kid's series. Kids like to read about KIDS solving the problems. Heck, I was in my 20s when I read my first Saddle Club book, and I wanted to see the girls figure things out for themselves.

I don't know if Bonnie Bryant wrote this one. She gives "special thanks" to Margaret Smith. In other book series, the person getting special thanks is usually a ghostwriter.

I've noticed that in later editions of this book, covers show Carole as white or with some Latino features. In the first book, she is clearly described as African American. Come to think of it, I don't think she's described at all, except for having dark hair, in the last nine books.