Rating: 4/5

I bought this before a flight to Hawaii to add some colour to the different places I'd be visiting. I found it really interesting that Big Island was only identified throughout as Hawaii and that it was the source of a lot of the myths, although I'd guess Kamehama the Great coming from there and the importance of geneology and family history. 

This emphasis really reminded me of the Norse Sagas rather than myths and legends, generally where the Gods appear it's almost as if they are powerful Aliʻi (chiefs) rather than something adjoin to the Greeks. 

It's interesting the links between Christian stories, genesis and noah make an appearance with a hawaiian flavour. Probably brought by the first travellers to the island. And the story of Hina captures some similarities to the Illiad which raises some questions as the author was writing for an international audience whether he is emphasising the similarities to Western tradition.

Some stories fizzle out a little, the fated long iron knife, Kings ransom, worth an island, just disappeared from history. And a few others had abrupt ends. Some parts "he sailed to the land where the sea meets the sky" or "shields were unknown, Warriors would pluck spears from the sky of deflect then with a flourish" which sounds great but the book doesn't spend a lot of time on these ideas. 

Pele, the volcano Godess is the most prevalent Godess, with her caprices and furious anger. The primary characters section at the beginning of each Legend is essential for keeping track of all the characters (one legend has a dozen Ka*** characters).

There's an interesting bit that the early hawaians would create gods by carving them out of stone and hope they would bring them victory / bountiful harvest and should the new god not perform they'd smash it to pieces. This puts a different spin on Captain Cook who visited the islands a few times and accepted the benefits of being worshipped without realising his responsibilities.

There is a story at the end as the Hawaians threw off their own religion which had Tabus against women eating the same food as men, sacrifice of prisoners of war, low social mobility and other religious burdens. Whilst this made the job of the Christian missionaries much easier when they landed a few months later ita interesting to see a whole religious institution and the underlying unified faith be overthrown without many outside influences. 

A great read for anyone who's interested in legend/ mythology.