Rating: 3/5

I have a confession: I was a Great Gatsby hater.
My bad, that was me amongst the crowd rolling my eyes, calling it overrated. Saying there are better novels. Annoyed amidst all the movies and merch and endless stream of biographies and other media around the author and Zelda. To be fair, it is a book that exists almost more as easily identifiable marketing in the modern day than anything else and has its own fan culture around it, which made it something easy to scoff at when you are young and desperate to distinguish yourself as “well read” or at least more esoteric in your tastes. Which is rather embarrassing, I know, but hey, there were a lot of us and it was fun to join the crowd ready to find any flaw in Fitzgerald’s work and dismiss it wholesale. 

Then there was the realization that such behavior is precisely what society does to Gatsby in the novel. Enjoying the revelry of parties and frivolity, but quick to point a finger at him for bootlegging—*gasp* not a criminal who provides the illegal booze I have no qualms over drinking myself—shady companions, attempted homewrecking, or even the quickness of judgment to murder. Perhaps when we judge Gatsby, or a work like Gatsby, our judgements say more about ourselves than our targets of criticism. Is Gatsby a good person? Maybe, maybe not. But are any characters blameless? Certainly not. It is precisely through these cracks in the characters and the busted seams of their moral integrity that the real poignancy of the novel flows from. When the novel was selected as our community Big Read for this autumn I was admittedly a bit disappointed at first. Fitzgerald, however, wrote that ‘reserving judgements is a matter of infinite hope,’ and while I cannot truly claim in my heart of hearts that I was desiring to cultivate hope, I at least returned to the novel I’d already read twice in high school and university classrooms with an aim for a fresh attitude reserving judgment. Besides, ‘life starts all over again when it gets crisp in the fall,’ so why not start my life with Gatsby anew in the autumn season?

 Forgive me, readers, but I have seen Gatsby in a new light. 

Let’s not get too excited here. I still don’t find it to be a favorite work because maybe Fitzgerald was onto something when he wrote that ‘no amount of fire or freshness can challenge what a man will store up in his ghostly heart,’ but it is a work I will now appreciate nonetheless. I might even applaud it if nobody is looking. First and foremost, the narrative framing is a masterful play of perceptions as Nick’s view of Gatsby—manipulating us into his circle and then reeling away in frustration—keeps him at a precision of proximity from the reader to cast him as a mythic figure just like Daisy’s simple dock light takes on airs of an ‘enchanted object’ at a certain distance. Furthermore, Fitzgerald crafts some of the most pitch perfect sentences in his pages. The way the line ‘so we drove on toward death through the cooling twilight’ sends you spiraling along with them or how we can feel the impulsivity of Gatsby’s parties pulsating where ‘in his blue gardens men and girls came and went like moths among the whisperings and the champagne and the stars.’ It is with good reason the following quote is so recognized in the Western Canon of literature and even a curmudgeon like myself can’t help but feel his prose pluck at my heartstrings:
‘Tomorrow we will run faster, stretch out our arms farther. . . And then one fine morning— 
So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past.’
It is an impetuous pursuit we can all likely recognize in the anxious regions of our own hearts. The Great Gatsby is a novel running headlong into desire and dreams that are ultimately dashed upon the shores of a reality ruled by class and the social maneuvers of self-preservation, and who amongst us cannot relate? How often do we yearn for something just beyond our reach, how often do our wildest dreams get barred by the gates of entrenched society? In this, can we see Gatsby as an empathetic figure with his enduring hope and unquenchable drive? Nick certainly does, at least early on:
‘If personality is an unbroken series of successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he were related to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten thousand miles away…it was an extraordinary gift of hope, a romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and which it is not likely I shall ever find again.’
Nick is initially so infatuated with Gatsby’s vision that he finds Gatsby’s unseemly sides to be ‘no matter.’ The question is, do we the readers find Gatsby noble in his pursuit to ‘recover some idea of himself,’ or do we see him adrift on a fool's errand to ‘repeat the past’? Ask yourself. Now let’s consider it together.

In Gatsby we are forced to confront the fall of a person we may have liked, a person with qualities that made us want to be better ourselves, a person with a smile that ‘assured you that it had precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped to convey,’ a person who’s life story was one that engendered hope a person can rise out of the social boxes they were born into. A person who, at a glance, is the epitome of the American Dream and all the opportunities it promises. We watch this hopeful arc come crashing down into a cacophony of scandal, something society sweeps under the rug to whisper and snicker about, something we gleefully fuel the destruction of in order to dance upon the wreckage and think ourselves above it all as long as we feel it trampled underfoot. Which, to be fair, isn’t unlike how it felt to roll my eyes at the book. 

In all of this we must ask ourselves: is Gatsby intended to be liked or condemned? When the heart is weighed and measured do we find the flaws tip the scale and, if so, is it from our perspective beyond the ruin of his life that makes us judge him in this way? Do his redeeming qualities and striving for his dreams endear him to us or, better yet, would we find his flaws charming had his goal succeeded towards “happily ever after?” Or, perhaps, is the question itself besides the point as we are all flawed and the ricochetting of individual lives, aspirations and dreams deferred in all their foibles and foolery are altogether meaningful enough without the need of moral judgment as a compass across the narrative. It’s so easy to cast a villain in a story as a method of clear dichotomy, but perhaps we have no need for a nearly defined antagonist when we are all ourselves both heroes and villains of our personal narratives in our own right. Often we find the greatest enemy is the self and look for external narratives to defer our acceptance of complicity. 

Let us turn our attention not to the narrative framing of The Great Gatsby, Which really lends magic to our journey through fascination and subsequent disillusionment. The disillusionment with Gatsby parallels the cast of characters' personal disillusionments with themselves, each other, or even the American dream itself once it's found out to be more myth than obtainable mission, impossible to pry away from the obdurate clutches of the Old Money men. Nick, in his free agent attachment to both Old and New monkey, makes for an ideal narrator for this tale. Nick assures us he is a quiet, open-minded observer and one must wonder if Nick sees the eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg as a twin to himself. The infamous sign with its watchful eyes overlooking the Valley of Ashes are often debated as a symbol for god, capitalism, the moral and spiritual decay of society, a warning of judgment, or, simply—like most symbols—a vessel into which characters pour their own meaning in ways that reveal more about them and their anxieties than anything else. In a similar regard we find Nick’s narration of Gatsby’s story to be as much about assessing himself as it is a chronicle for of how his affection and disdain for Gatsby wax and wane.

‘All plots tend to move deathward,’ observes Don DeLillo in his National Book Award winning novel White Noise, and Nick’s narration of Gatsby—reflected upon in hindsight almost as a mockery of Gatsby’s own attempt to revive his past—affixes its aim towards the dramatic sequence of deaths near the novels end. How tragically fitting it is that a tale nudging a theme of the American dream would equate the life of a dream with mortal death. In a discussion on Fitzgerald’s revision process across multiple drafts of The Great Gatsby found in the essay The Craft of Revision: The Great Gatsby, critic Kenneth E. Eble shows how an early draft found Nick saying he could read Gatsby like a character where he was ‘reading the climaxes of all the stories only in a magazine’

Eble discusses Fitzgerald’s desire to cast Gatsby as a mythic figure—though expressed in a letter to a friend’s criticism of his draft that this ‘vagueness I can repair by making more pointed’ in order to find a better balance of Gatsby as flawed reality and a larger-than-life figure—and we see how Nick’s narration manipulates our distance to him to this effect. The closer to Gatsby we get, the more his flaws appear in stark contrast and the more ill-advised his dreams may seem. his pursuits seem to us. We see a similar effect in the green light at the end of Daisy and Tom’s dock. It is an ‘enchanted’ beacon of a dream when kept at a distance but the symbol collapses into mundanity up close when it reverts back to being a simple lightbulb. But in this we also get a read on Fitzgerald’s intentions to portray Gatsby not by his trail through life but the culmination of his climactic moments.

Such is the dilemma of attaining our desires. Like a dog chasing a car, to catch our dreams is to cease the hopeful pursuit and assess our goal without the rosey lens of yearning and finally ask ourselves if such a pursuit was worthwhile or what to do with ourselves without that drive. Is the journey greater than the destination? And if all plots move deathward and the novel thematically addresses a disillusionment with the American Dream, what can we expect to find at the end of the rainbow? We feel this trepidation in the lead-up to Gatsby’s kiss with Daisy:
‘He knew that when he kissed this girl and forever wed his unutterable visions to her perishable breath, his mind would never romp again like the mind of God…Then he kissed kissed her. At his lips’ touch she blossomed for him like a flower and the incarnation was complete.’
Recalling Myrtle’s reminder that ‘you can’t live forever,’ all parties, loves, and life must come to an end and in sealing his lips to Daisy’s, Gatsby has signed the death certificate of his dreams. In her essary Disembodied Voices and Narrating Bodies in The Great Gatsby, professor Barbara Hochman addressss how ‘once Daisy is present, able to ‘put her arm through his,” ‘the colossal significance of [the green light has]...vanished forever’
The end is near…mortality has set in.’ ‘The incantation was complete,’ and thus the green light is returned to a lightbulb, Daisy is returned from a romanticized symbol of the past to heroically rescue from the imprisonment of a brute to the reality of an unhappily married wife of a despicable man, the veil of enchantment has crumpled and the magic has been snuffed out
‘Possibly it had occurred to him that the colossal significance of that light had now vanished forever. Compared to the great distance that had separated him from Daisy it had seemed very near to her, almost touching her. It had seemed as close as a star to the moon. Now it was again a green light on a dock. His count of enchanted objects had diminished by one.’
Yet, compelled by the inevitability of disaster afoot, the reader swaps out the narratorial drive of Gatsby’s pursuit for our own urge to see through the oncoming destruction. Like an inevitable trainwreck ensuing, we can’t tear our eyes from the page with Nick acting as our own eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg into this valley of soon-to-be ashes of the American Dream. 

With our focus on the ambitions of Gatsby, we can’t forget the ancillary cast. First there is, of course, Daisy and the easy interpretations of her reality being incongruous with Gatsby’s dreams. She is caught between her husband Tom and lover Gatsby and, as literary scholar Judith Fetterley lays out in her essay On the Politics of Literature , such a grappling for romantic control of a woman is indicative to the gendered undercurrent of American literature of the time in its own assessment of the American Dream. Daisy is ultimately symbolic of this dream and we have Tom as a symbol of Old Money and Gatsby as the flamboyant symbol of New Money—a class distinction symbolized in the geographical divide of West and East Egg—essentially quarreling for control over culture. As Fetterley writes:
‘[T]he background for the experience of disillusionment and betrayal revealed in the novel is the discovery of America, and Daisy's failure of Gatsby is symbolic of the failure of America to live up to the expectations in the imagination of the men who “discovered" it. America is female; to be American is male.’
Gatsby and his pink suit are an affront to the “traditional”
values Tom represents (his views on race can lead one to assume a present day Tom would be reposting bad-faith “white replacement theory” hot takes on his social media) and the fight for Daisy can be seen as a stand in for social scuffling. It opens opportunity for Fitzgerald’s scathing criticism of the old guard that refuses to relinquish cultural control to the idealism of the youths and Daisy and Tom washing their hands of responsibility like a jazz era Pontious Pilate reveals the true targets of condemnation in the text.
‘They were careless people, Tom and Daisy — they smashed up things and creatures and then retreated back into their money or their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that kept them together, and let other people clean up the mess they had made.’
Those seeking similar literary investigations into criticisms against the carefree, responsibility avoidant nature of a ruling class whose wealth makes them feel they can adopt the heartless nature of Greek Gods to which the common citizen is a mere plaything or pawn would do well to read Françoise Sagan’s Bonjour Tristesse which I personally feel addresses this topic more effectively. But we also have to consider Nick, our “open-minded” observer who is also not without blame. By nature of his banking career, Nick watches the struggles between new and old America, simply chronicling it while reaping the financial rewards from the faulty systems of society they constructed. If Nick feels judged by the eyes of the billboard doctor for his complicity, if can be enlarged to include his financial maneuvering of society toward profetizarían that is revealed to be dividing the nation and oppressing the working class, like George Wilson’s who’s life and wife are jusy amusements to rich men like Tom. The shots he fires the silence the story feel less villainous when viewed as a punching up at the heartlessness of the domineering classes.

Once again we must consider that this isn’t a novel in which Gatsby being either a villain or a hero isn’t the question, but one in which we must confront our own flawed humanity and nature of our pursuits set against a backdrop of class, culture and inevitable outside judgement and ask ourselves what our own judgements say about us. I’ll (begrudgingly) admit this is a literary investigation I can respect and admire. I’m not too proud to say I was wrong to scoff, and one should remember the crowd of yay-sayers for Gatsby are just as numerous as my former naysayer peers. Sigourney Weaver adopted her first name as an allusion to the book for instance and each year some young, eager minds will be enchanted by the novel and find a joy in literature. That is a hope I can subscribe to, and while I still won’t rank The Great Gatsby high amongst my treasures novels, I highly appreciate the wealth of literary value to be found in the work and have enjoyed studying it and grappling with its themes. Is Gatsby a good person becomes an avenue to wonder, like Nick, am I even a good person and our our fast rebukes of Gatsby a projection against our own flawed nature. Do we love to watch a hero fall for the fall or the feeling of superiority, of watching another life brought to ruin to consider our own stable, superior, and safe? Love it or hate it (and either and totally understandable) The Great Gatsby is an enduring classic and I can finally admit that I not only understand why but can cheer it on as a worthwhile investigation into American culture. Read it if you have not, give it another chance if you have, and find a new spark in Fitzgerald’s treasured work.

3.5/5

‘[A]s I sat there brooding on the old, unknown world, I thought of Gatsby’s wonder when he first picked out the green light at the end of Daisy’s dock. He had come a long way to this blue lawn, and his dream must have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it. He did not know that it was already behind him, somewhere back in that vast obscurity beyond the city, where the dark fields of the republic rolled on under the night.’