Rating: 5/5

"To sing?" he demanded, his voice shrill with incredulous scorn. "You'd stop saving lives--souls!--to sit in a bar and sing? Oh, but you only did it while you needed the money, isn't that right? And now that you can fiddle for it, everybody else can... can be gutted and skinned, and it won't disturb your self-satisfaction even as much as a wrinkle in your precious costume would, huh? It must be nice to be the only person worthy of your concern."

Rivas was a redeemer: someone who was hired to find girls kidnapped by a religious cult and bring them back. But those days are in the rearview; now he earns his dime playing music at the local bar. 31, perpetually drunk, and a bit of sourpuss to boot. He's not interested in getting back into redeeming. But every man has a price, and in Rivas's case, the victim is a girl he loved long ago.

Dinner at Deviant's Palace is in dire need of rediscovery. While easily shelved as dystopian, it feels much more like a fantasy with some light steampunk undertones. (If you're as allergic to steampunk as I am, that may sound like a bad thing, but here it works really well--feels organic to the world.)

While at its core, it's a simple save-the-princess story, but the world Tim Powers crafts--and the society that inhabits it--is awesome. For much of the book Powers is able to convey an ongoing dread thanks to his primary antagonist (the Jaybirds, a hypnotic religion no one can stop, and its leader, Jaybush) and Rivas himself (a former hot shot redeemer who now feels all too fallible). I don't know that Rivas starts off likable, per se, but he's an engaging presence. And then he becomes likable.

Mix all of that with some really snappy prose. It's funny, while also shining light on human nature in a way that's really appealing. Consider:

I like the way, thought Rivas in almost honest puzzlement as he settled his knife back in its sleeve sheath and walked on, that every person in the world thinks his or her friendship is worth something.

or,

"You... damned... idiot."
"Aw, Jesus, brother, all I--"
"Shut up! Say Jaybush if you want to swear!"

or,

"You need me more than I need you, Rivas. I can--"
"Then you don't need me at all."

I think perhaps Dinner at Deviant's Palace befell the curse of having been released in the wrong decade. Dress it up in a modern cover (and maybe give it a title that doesn't scream Silence of the Lambs ripoff) and it might just start catching some eyes. Because, boy howdy, it deserves more eyes.