Rating: 4/5

Goodness, what a gorgeous book! 1977 DAW paperback printing with cover and inset art by Don Maitz. #226 in the DAW pantheon, just in case you are a collector…...okay, okay…..I know, I have a bad tendency to get caught up in the aesthetics. I make no apologies for my love of obscure pulp paperbacks…….

What we have here is a book called “Drinking Sapphire Wine,” by Tanith Lee, and it is the second volume in the Four-BEE duology, preceded by “Don’t Bite the Sun.” I suppose that each book could be read as a stand alone, although to be honest I really don’t believe that “Drinking Sapphire Wine” will make much sense if you haven’t read the first installment. Lee did the great bulk of her world building in “Don’t Bite the Sun” and someone trying to tackle this as a singular work will be a little bit lost. The Four-BEE books were supposed to be a trilogy, but Lee decided to finish the story in two installments. It’s a shame, because I could easily have followed these characters for at least one more outing. If you are interested in seeing what I had to say about “Don’t Bite the Sun,” you can read my review of that book here:

https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9...

A short summary of where we are at in the story is necessary here. It’s been a few years since the events recorded in “Don’t Bite…..” Our unnamed narrator from the first book has taken on a male body and persona for a time and has been trying to integrate him/herself back into Jang society. S/he has also been spending time at the Historical Archives, reading up on customs from the times before the great domed cities. Discovering the fine art of duelling, S/he decides to accept a challenge from another Jang male. As it turns out, though, the act of a conscious taking of another life is still considered one of the taboo crimes in Four-BEE, and our protagonist is put on a trial of sorts and forced to choose between Personality Dissolution (PD) or exile outside of the dome, away from society. The narrator chooses exile, and switches back to a female body before S/he is placed outside the comfortable confines of Four-Bee.

Outside the dome, she (hereafter referred to as female, since she can never change her sex again) tries to settle into a life of lonely seclusion. She is familiar with the desert however, as a result of her archaeological adventures from the first book. She soon encounters the fauna of the desert in the form of a cute, furry critter she nicknames “Grey-Eyes” because it has, well, grey eyes. There is a broadly comic section where the Grey-Eyes infiltrates the sandship that our narrator lives in and gets into the food processor, causing it to malfunction in spectacular fashion. This malfunction causes a significant section of the nearby desert to get watered, an event that would only be normal during the infrequent rains that come through once or twice a year. The subsequent growth of the desert flora reminds her of her ecstasy at seeing the growth the first time on the expedition, and she cooks up a plan to have Four-BEE send her a water mixer so that she can continue to water the desert. 

She soon settles into a daily routine of watering her desert oasis and communing with the reborn land around her. She is even visited by a member of the Four-BEE media, who wants to make a motion picture record of her exploits in an attempt to discredit her among the denizens of the huge glass city. But then her isolation is shattered as others begin to arrive from Four-BEE in open rebellion against the ruling Committee, the quasi-robot overlords of the great domed cities. 

No spoilers from here on out. Suffice it to say that our narrator acquires allies and hidden enemies in ever-greater quantities and the story comes to a head as you just know that the Q-R Committee can’t abide by a societal disruption of epic proportions……

The Four-BEE duology is ultimately successful because Tanith Lee keeps her focus steadfastly on the big ideas of human nature. Her idyllic society is put out of balance by the singular human quest that transcends time and technology…..who are we? What is our purpose here? Are we merely slaves to the System, acting in accordance with prescribed norms, or do we really have free will? Surely these are questions of value, even in a society like Four-BEE, where death has been conquered and absolute freedom to do just about anything is the norm. 

And by way of explanation from earlier in the review….it is the INTENT of terminal harm that gets our narrator exiled from Four-BEE, not the act itself. The loser of the duel was brought back from his/her life-spark in the Limbo Tubs as usual, so no real death occurs. The big shock to the system was in the mere pantomiming of harmful action. Her media coverage has backfired on the Committee and provided for a platform of unrest among the citizenry at large, especially the younger, adolescent Jang class. This indicates that the society at large is stagnant and perhaps even a bit sick. How can creativity and individualism survive in a nanny state where there is no want or need and crime and vice don’t exist? Can the spark of human existence thrive in such a society, even when the society seems benign and comforting on the surface? Tanith Lee knows the answers to these questions, and she plays out her narrative in fine and entertaining fashion throughout. 

“Drinking Sapphire Wine” exhibits a bit of a more standard and linear writing style than you will find in “Don’t Bite……” The spirit of the story is fully intact, but there is less shimmering and shiny clutter to be found here. I’m certain that this is a result of the main plot action shifting from the domed cityscape to the sparse and sandy desert region of the planet. There is still no resolution as to whether or not this is a future Earth or a completely alien environment, though the clues definitely point more towards this being a future Earth where humanity has evolved in conjunction with technology in the wake of some cruel environmental disaster. But it is also obvious that the desert terrain of the planet is healing itself, and could be livable again given the kind of care that our narrator and her cohorts are willing to confer. If I were to employ the metaphors and similes of my review for “Don’t Bite…..” I would have to say that this book is way less glam rock and way more one of those acoustic “unplugged” albums that were so popular back in the day. The essence of the story is intact, but it’s less noisy and not covered in glitter and sequins.

Mass media is more often than not anchored to the time that it was created. A book will often tell you more about the time that it was written than it does about any supposed future. As such, one could easily dismiss these novels as relics of the hippie past, one where The Merry Pranksters stayed on the commune and grew closer to the land while they expanded their minds, but that would be shortchanging the bigger ideas that Lee brings to the table. That said, there IS a sort of sweet, hippified vibe to the proceedings, not surprising given that these novels were a product of the post Aquarian Age ethos that was still floating around in the air in the mid 1970s. 

The Four-BEE duology is a futuristic bildungsroman for the science-fiction aficionado. The world building is exquisite, the characters are compelling, and the language that Lee uses shimmers and shammies with what can only be termed as passion. I highly recommend that you seek out these two somewhat obscure entries in the Tanith Lee canon. You will be pleasantly surprised by what you find.