Rating: 3/5

__________________________  
Snape looked at me thoughtfully. “How old are you?” he asked. 
“Thirteen.” 
“You’re smart for your age. If you go on as smart as this, maybe you won’t reach fourteen.” 

My name is Diamond, Nick Diamond. No, it ain’t. My name is Nick Simple. I’m 13, I live with my 21-year-old brother, and I help him out in his detective agency. “Tim Diamond” is the name my brother decided to use for business reasons. He figures using the name Diamond will make us sound like tough old-time noir detectives. He wants to be like Sam Spade—a guy whose last name appears to be something you can find in a deck of poker cards. Herbert, that is my bro’s real name, is an experienced copper. He had 2 weeks on the force before the police department decided it was time for him to retire. Herb realized that this law-enforcement experience qualified him to be a PI, an honest-to-goodness private detective, a real dick.

I am the brains of the outfit. I have to be. Otherwise, we wouldn’t eat. Herbert couldn’t solve a murder mystery if he witnessed it, made a video of it, and had the murderer immediately come up and give him her business card and a bloody kiss on the kisser. OK, he did solve our first case. A woman hired us to find her missing Siamese cat, and he found the cat—by running over it with his car. 
 
 

As this story begins, there is a knock on our office door. Herbert and I expected it to be a beautiful blonde with silky gams and a dress snugger than a python’s embrace of a howler monkey, because that is who usually knocks on a detective’s office doors in old movies. You know the type, a woman that gives you a “smile you can feel in your hip pocket.” Or, since I’m 13, a chick with a shape you wouldn’t mind studying in Geometry class. 

But instead, it’s a dwarf—though his name isn’t Friendly or Happy. He hands us a package, gives us $500 to keep it safe for a week, and promises to pay us another $500 when he retrieves it. The package turns out to be an actual box of Maltesers Malted Milk Balls. In the U.S. today, a small box of Malted Milk Balls only costs about half the amount he was paying us to safeguard his, so I was suspicious. Turns out that my suspicions were justified. Suddenly, a lot of people—very bad people—want the dwarf’s box of delicious candy treats. 
 
 

I am the narrator of The Falcon’s Maltesers. [That title sounds oddly familiar for some reason. I don’t know why.] The arch villain who is after the Maltesers is called The Fat Man. He has been on a diet though, so he is now The Thin Man—which, come to think of it, is the title of a Dashiell Hammett novel. Oh, I see it now. Just a coincidence though. It is a coincidence like when Herbert and I snuck into the nightclub called Casablanca—just like that 1940s movie with Humphrey Bogart--and I meet a frail called Lauren Baccardi. Come to think of it, Bogart was also in a movie with The Fat Man called the Maltese Fal… never mind, never mind . . .

🌟🌟🌟 Stars.  Yes, this is a witty spoof of classic noir stories, and it may even be a YA novel––with all the dead people, it is hard to tell. I smiled a lot though. Will the author be able to sustain the grins in the next entries in series? That’s the mystery.