Rating: 5/5

The wisdom of uncertainty.
He states this novel's definition to Kundera during its work, opening this monument of 20th-century literature. Man has only one life, and the weight of his choices is matched only by the lightness of his existence. It is impossible to rewind his life and know what would have been the course of his story if he had taken other paths. To endure this impasse and not whip up eternal regrets, we might as well accept life as it comes.
The story is well known, but you might as well ramble on it because it is beautiful. Tomas is a brilliant surgeon who lived in Prague in 1968. He is more interested in his feminine conquests than in political agitation. He marries Teresa, a tormented young woman who is jealous and drunk with political and loving ideals. Stifled, Tomas multiplies his infidelities, particularly with his friend Sabina, an individualist photographer who loves freedom.
During the Prague Spring, Tomas and Teresa flee to Switzerland, but the young woman cannot bring herself to live far from home and returns alone. Tomas must then choose between a light Helvetian life where he can blossom in his profession and quench his thirst for love or join Teresa, lose his job, and expose himself to communist repression. He returns to Prague and becomes a tile washer, and the couple goes to live in the countryside with their dog, Karenina.
Like all romantic palaces, access to this book is impressive. The title alone requires taking Paracetamol. I put the skates to glide on this waxed prose with felted steps. In the first sentence, Nietzsche quotes. You have to hang on to ODP. I sometimes had to reread specific paragraphs because it was awkward to wink between two sentences. He must say that a philosophical commentary follows each character's decision. Remember never to invite Milan Kundera to a dinner party. Suddenly, getting attached to the story is difficult because the digressions leave the reader spectator. I understood the author was not trying to grab my attention and attend a lecture. It took me a long time (I'm only a man) to know that this step back intends to reflect on life's unique meaning. I am glad I waited until maturity to engage in this reading. Greener, gravity would have gotten the better of my lightness.
So it's not just a beautiful love story amid Russian tanks. Nor is it the novel of an intellectual exiled against the communist regime and its mythologies. His characters are as many victims of the story as their personal choices. Instead, I believe it is a meditation on individual freedom and the opposing forces that shake our lives.
Each reader of this novel remembers this literary journey. The end of the Karenina dog's life is imminent. Thomas and Teresa's attachment to this beast testifies to more humanity than all the states of mind that tormented their romantic passion.