Rating: 4/5

The book Once Upon A Thief is a fiction written by Kay Hooper, the New York Times Bestselling Author of Whisper of Evil. Max Bannister is made to risk his family’s treasures, which had taken his family a long time to acquire, to use as bait in order to catch a master criminal, and in order to protect the family fortune, he must put his trust on his world-class security expert half brother, Wolfe Nickerson and exhibit director, Morgan West without them knowing about what the Interpol has planned. As the story progresses, it mainly focuses on the different events between Morgan West and Quinn, Interpol’s most wanted thief, but was more on Wolfe Nickerson and Storm Tremaine. 

After Morgan and Quinn’s unexpected meeting that one night Quinn robbed the Mysteries Past exhibit, Morgan, weirdly, would always know about Quinn’s whereabouts or if he’s nearby, so when her gut was telling her that something bad might’ve happened to the most wanted thief, she decided to follow her instincts and look for him and was led into an old building where Quinn was held captive by the same thieves who also robbed the exhibit where they first met. Morgan and Quinn eventually got out alive since the men only left him locked him up in one of the rooms.

Storm Tremaine was hired as the Mysteries Past exhibit’s new computer technician after their security was breached, her and Wolfe had gotten close throughout the book and started dating. Later on Wolfe had found out about Storm’s secret, her working for the Interpol to help catch the most wanted thief and felt betrayed by her, but they soon made up. 

After reading the description of the book, I was ready for all the mystery and suspense, but instead I was given romance, so I was only a little disappointed about that since it focused more on the development of the romantic relationship between the characters, but I think the slow build up bond between Storm and Wolfe made up for it (even though that was not what I came for) so it was fine because of how entertaining their banters were every time they see each other, so it did not disappoint me as much. And I have to say, the ending really made me curious about what will happen in the next book since this one ended in a cliffhanger. Plus, I wanted to see more of Quinn and Morgan since I have a strong feeling the second book would be about them this time after reading the ending, and because I feel like they did not make a lot of appearance in the book especially since I needed an explanation because I was confused as to how Morgan can sense when Quinn is nearby or how she can just find where Quinn is just by following her senses and also about Quinn telling Morgan that he can make himself not be found by her if he chooses to, plus the description of some scenes like this made it seem like there was something supernatural going on, same thing with Storm’s cat and Wolfe, about how he keeps saying that he feels like Storm and her cat the same person, but I feel like I am the only one who thinks that way, and so I guess that was part of the mystery of the characters.

Overall I think it was a good book and after writing this review, I think I have come to the conclusion that it was a good mix of mystery and romance. And I will recommend this book to the people who are looking for a good mix of both especially romance because I think that part of the book was written well with a mix of mystery on the side.