Rating: 5/5

Bearstone is an awesome adventure novel, about a young, troubled Ute indian named Cloyd Atcitty, and how he was sent away to work on a farm with an old man named Walter Landis. they spend the summer together, and have some ups and downs, but overall they get along. the story takes many unexpected turns, like Cloyd cutting down all the peach trees, but in the end they all turn out posative, because walter takes that opertunity to reopen a gold mine on his property. this book definately deserves 5 stars, the ending is so beautiful. Even durring the bad parts of the story the author still finds ways to keep you entrested, like when the bear dies, he added how cloyd was tracking the outfitter hunting the bear, and how he tried his best to spook the bear so it would run away. after everything that happened in this book, I could not stop reading, it was so good.
 Out of everything in this book, my favorite quote is when cloyd is visiting walter in the hospital, and offers for walter to keep his bearstone, "Waltersaw into Cloyds dark eyes and felt the conviction of a man, not a boy". This quote was at such perfect timing in the book, and Cloyd deffinately deserved that, after everything that he did for walter. the two of them have deffinately had a lot of ups, and downs, but at the end they really pull together, and strengthen their relationship, and walter builds a lot of trust in cloyd. this quote really shows how much their friendship grew from the beginning of the book to the end.
I think their are many possible themes in this story, but I think the main theme is forgiveness. in the begenning of the story Cloydis just a troubbled kid who ruined walters peach tree, and the fence that he built, but after all of that walter finds a good outcome and the two of them go up to the hard rock gold mine. also cloyd saves walters life in the mine, andoffers to take care of him on the farm, instead of moving him into a home. throught the story both characters forgive eachother for things they have done, and they end the story with a really strong friendship.