Rating: 5/5

This book possesses a terrible timelessness. Though written a few years after World War II to examine the factors that led people to embrace fascism and communism, it still rings true for our times, clearly explaining the reasons why so many people have embraced anger, intolerance, and a foolish wish to return to a past that never was. People need to read Eric Hoffer now more than ever.

Those who see themselves as stuck in a life with no prospects, losers at the game of economic and social success, want to know what happened and who is going to do something about it. They are uninterested in explanations of global macroeconomic forces and long term dislocations caused by skill imbalances. They want someone to blame, someone, that is, other than themselves.

In this short book Hoffer dissects their anger and fear, their willingness to surrender themselves to leaders who will do their thinking for them, their susceptibility to even the crudest of propaganda, and their need to find an enemy to blame and to strike out against. None of this needs to have any basis in rational thought, because if they were capable of rationally analyzing their situation they would not have jumped on this bandwagon to begin with.

How do we deal with this? We would like to think that education would do it, or economic recovery, or even religion, but all of those were available previously and did not stop the slide into irrationality. As Mark Twain said, “You can’t reason someone out of something that they weren’t reasoned into in the first place.”

I suppose all we can do is recognize the problems when they occur, and work diligently to oppose the forces of ignorance, intolerance, and violence. We have no choice. If we can’t stand up against them, we will lose our freedom, our security, and our rights. By the time the good and decent German citizens in the 1930s realized what was going on, it was too late for them. Let’s hope it's not too late for us.

This is a book that each of us needs to strongly recommend to our friends. It explains the present as well as the past. Let’s hope it is not also a roadmap to our future.