Rating: 5/5

The author Rick Sandford was a gay porn actor in the late 1970s and early 80s under the name "Ben Barker." In these films, he looked like a boyish Michael J. Fox and managed to project an innocent quality, no matter what hardcore acts he was performing. This knowledge is helpful in understanding the later Rick Sandford, now forty and working as a TV and movies extra, in this autobiographical novel.

Rick lives across the street from a yeshiva or religious school for Chassidic Jews, ranging in age from pre-pubescence into their twenties. Rick finds that he is fascinated by the students, and as his character develops, reads their holy books in English, as well as apes their dress, which includes wearing a yarmulke or scull cap, and tzitzis, a knotted accoutrement worn under the shirt in which each knot represents one of the 613 laws of Moses. Throughout the book, there is an evolving mystery as to why Rick should want to emulate these religious boys, particularly since Rick himself is a gay atheist. He befriends a number of them and is candid regarding his own lack of a belief system and his homosexuality. Phallic worship is about the only religion Rick personally subscribes to.

Some of the older boys, many of them virgins, hate Rick, fear him, and are cruel toward him, sensing that he's mocking them or is just crazy. Others, particularly the younger boys, are open enough to like and befriend him and respond well to Rick's own openness and honesty. But as Rick continues to rub many the wrong way by wearing the religious garb, the animosity against him builds until an explosive act soon involves the police. It is only then that Rick comes to understand, as revealed in the 25th chapter, his own motivation for dressing like people who fascinate him as much as their religious beliefs repel him.

Rick Sandford died of an AIDS-related illness five years before this book was published, and in his passing, the literary world lost someone very special with a unique view, in this instance, of two opposing worlds briefly eclipsing one another.