Rating: 3/5

Just When You Think You're Out, They Pull You Back In
Review of the Penguin Modern Classics paperback edition (September, 2021) of the original Jonathan Cape hardcover (1974)

But war's a game, which, were their subjects wise, Kings would not play at. - William Cowper (1731-1800) (Epigram used for Spy Story)
Author Len Deighton considers this the second of four 'Patrick Armstrong' novels, preceded by An Expensive Place to Die (orig. 1967) and followed by Yesterday's Spy (orig. 1975) and Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Spy (orig. 1976).

Many would like to think of 'Patrick Armstrong' as being a later version of Deighton's spy 'Harry Palmer' from an earlier book quartet (1962-1966). That is probably especially due to 'Palmer' being embodied by popular actor Michael Caine in the film pentalogy (1965-1996, 3 of them 1965-67 based on Deighton's books, 2 later ones 1995-96 based on original screenplays). Deighton has explicitly denied that association however. The 8 books are still often grouped together due to the spy being unnamed except for his alias, and for his being associated with the fictional security organization WOOC(P) (similarly unnamed) and its spy chief Dawlish. To increase the blurring of the lines, both Dawlish and Harry Palmer's Soviet nemesis Colonel Stok both appear in Spy Story.

Spy Story is somewhat of a tentative return after Deighton having taken a few year's hiatus from the genre to write a comic thriller (Only When I Larf) and war thriller (Bomber) in the interim. 'Patrick Armstrong' is only indirectly involved with spying as he now works in a war gaming centre, but where the job does still require him to go on submarine missions to gather data on Soviet naval movements. Much of the plot of the novel is involved in describing the gaming at the centre, where a new brash American, ex-Marine Col. Schlegel has assumed command, to the irritation of Armstrong's co-worker Ferdy Foxwell. 

The espionage aspect becomes more explicit when Armstrong discovers that there is a cabal planning a Soviet Admiral's defection with a possible substitution into Armstrong's own previous life due to his physical resemblance with the Russian. Soviet agents under Colonel Stok also barge into his life. He finds out that his own previous apartment has been co-opted for the defection plan and the faction succeeds in semi-kidnapping him until he manages to escape. Eventually Schlegel and Dawlish appear to direct the final steps of the plot which was an apparent misdirection to scuttle German re-unification talks. Much of this is not clear until explained in the final chapter, so the reader is confused throughout. I LOL'd with one reviewer who wrote that they were still confused even after reading the plot summary on Wikipedia (spoilers obviously if you click through).

Primarily I missed the banter of the more cynical and sardonic 'Harry Palmer' character with his chief Dawlish from the earlier books. 'Patrick Armstrong' is not as entertaining.

Cover image from the original 1974 Jonathan Cape hardcover edition. Image sourced from Wikipedia.

Spy Story is the 6th of my re-reads of the early Len Deightons (I first read almost all of them in the 60's/70's/80's) after having learned of the Penguin Modern Classics republication of all of his novels which were published during 2021 as outlined in an online article Why Len Deighton's spy stories are set to thrill a new generation (Guardian/Observer May 2, 2021).

Trivia and Link
Spy Story was adapted as the film of the same name directed by Lindsay Shonteff in 1976. A trailer can be viewed on YouTube here.