Rating: 3/5

Genre: Fiction/Serial Killing/Love

After spending three years in the Juvenile correction facility for the murder of his mother and stepfather, Eric Poole is finally released. He moves in with his aunt for awhile until the press calm down and find something else to report on in the newspapers. One particular day he looks outside the house to find a blonde girl in the branches of the willow tree in the front yard. He eventually remembers he met her several years ago by the train tracks. He met her just after he had murdered one of three other girls her killed, all of them with beautiful black hair and tan skin. Eric was a serial killer and used his charm to lure beautiful girls to do what he wanted and then killed them to enjoy a moment of "tenderness" with their dead bodies. The girl, Lori, hides in Eric's car when he finally leaves his aunt's house and travels in search of a dark haired fellow inmate from the prison named "the Senorita." Eric spends time with her, buying her presents and food until he realizes she knows that he killed the girl the day by the train tracks. He tries to kill her in her sleep but she wakes up when the pillow to smother her is still in the air. Eric then knows he cannot kill her. Eric meets the Senorita at a carnival and it turns out to be a trap set by the police to catch him in the act of killing again. Lori discovers the trap and warns him before he does anything. The two then continue travelling and spending time together as Lori experiences the tenderness she has never felt from anyone. While out canoeing, Lori falls in the lake and drowns despite Eric's attempts to save her. He is charged with murder for her death and locked in prison, even though the Leutenient in charge of Eric's case knows that he probably didn't murder her because she was not his type. He is kept in prison anyways.

This book was astonishing for it's originality. Although the subject matter is disturbing and depressing, at the same time, it is eye opening to see into the mind of a killer and try to comprehend the emotions they feel when killing. I would be careful in deciding who I recommend this book to but it is definitely worth reading for it's pure originality and uniqueness.