Rating: 4/5

This was sexy old school bodice ripper with a heroine that can give Scarlet O' Hara a run for her money and a H who is a billion times hotter than Rhett Butler. I loved Jason ! He was the poor half Cajun boy who grew to become a respected and wealthy officer in the Union army. Desiree was the girl he used to fantasize about from the first time he was a puberty ridden adolescent and he saw her racing along on her horse, with her lush raven colored locks blowing in the wind. This novel hit all the right buttons in my old fashioned romantic soul. 

Jason was the ideal H, with his sexy green eyes and his magnificent body. He really loved the spoilt and whiny Desiree. She did irritate me quite a bit until the ravages and poverty of the Civil War forced her to become a more mature and less selfish young lady. But at the beginning she is a beautiful, vain, spoilt and superficial Louisiana southern belle with a "Mammy" that adores her. That part was very stereotypical. She had met Jason only once before when she was a little girl and he was an adolescent Cajun boy living in the bayou adjacent to her father's plantation. Even then she had been intrigued by the handsome young lad with the mesmerizing green eyes.

They meet years later when her life is in ruins and Jason is a spy for the Union army. Circumstances conspire to force them together and their sex scenes are superb and sizzling hot ! Jason was so masterful as a lover, in true bodice ripper fashion. Jason still had his crush on her and soon it grows into love. I found it a bit one sided at first because Jason loved her long before she grew to love him. They are separated for a while because of Jason's job in the army and Desiree's big mouth gets her in trouble with General Butler's soldiers because she breaks the infamous law vis a vis southern women being rude to Union soldiers. She is almost arrested and almost forced into a sexual relationship with a lecherous union soldier who is Jason's superior in the army but the gallant Jason arrives in time to save his beloved.

The story is filled with lots of ups and downs, as befitting a civil war historical romance and Desiree's dead fiance even returns alive and tries to make trouble but the MC's are married by this time. Jason is badly wounded in the war and the doctors had wanted to amputate his leg but Desiree's black "Mammy" uses her knowledge of herbal medicine to help nurse him back to health. It is then that Desiree truly realizes how much she loves him. Desiree also has an unfortunate miscarriage and there's a bit of tension between the MC's because Jason thinks his love is unrequited and the southern belle isn't exactly forthcoming with protestations of verbal love. Their sex life continues to be hot though and the epilogue is beautiful. We are told that both Jason and Desiree live to a grand old age and have beautiful kids and grandchildren too. I loved it !