Rating: 4/5

Rating this 4 stars as per relative to this being a children's book.

I reread this as an adult because, A. I'm researching my own filles-du-roi heritage, and B. I remember liking it as a young girl. It WAS great on so many levels. While the writing is hugely simplistic, as per required by a 13-year old girls diary, Trottier was really able to hit home some of the emotional aspects. I felt actual pain as Helene had to say goodbye to France, to her childhood home, the lambs that she won't see grow to be sheep, the frogs in the wood. It isn't enough to say Helene migrated from France to Canada, but that she left a home where she, her father and sister roamed the grounds and knew intimately. Where she would never see the walls of her bedroom again. This loss was conveyed extremely well.

I was also surprised to tear up upon Catherine's death, and Helene's mourning of her family. You really felt her grief, and dark awareness that she was the last one left. The author did a commendable job of maintaining Catherine's memory for the rest of the book, which felt very realistic.

Plenty of research went into New France and ships and the voyage, and it was great to see it so tangibly portrayed. There aren't enough books describing Canada during early settlement, and reading this I realize how often I forget what a strange, alien environment these people found themselves in. Trottier is one of the leading writers of the early Canadian (colonist) frontier, along with another book of hers. I appreciated every detail in this.

I also appreciated the subtle humour dispersed throughout the book. The cuteness of the cat, Minette. Helene's own wit. Monsieur Deschamps gross but comical advances. 

The big reasons I didn't like it was the same reasons I took issue with it when I was 12. Tante Barbe was too convenient a figure. And frankly if I were Helene I'd take up Cousin Pierre's offer. And then there's The ick factor. I kept looking at the diary entry dates hoping another few years would pass, but nope, it was all between ages 13-14. I totally get that many girls married at that age, but it didn't make Monsieur Aubry, age 30, a commendable romantic figure. Like another reviewer said, if she was a handful of years older, I could get behind this. But she was a child, and it might be a weird message sent to young readers about normalizing developing attractions to much older men.