Rating: 5/5

I have no idea whether Stefan Zweig is better known now than when this edition was first published back in 1981. In the 1920’s and 30’s he was a big name, but post-war his works seemed to fall into abeyance. This, to me, seems unwarranted, as although in some ways his characters are largely very much of the Victorian school (rich, powerful, first class travel, cigars and drinks in the study etc) his works concern themselves with the timeless themes of love and loss, all showing great psychological insight and written in a concise style which is a pleasure to read. Zweig described these tales as “concentrated full size novels” a term similar to that used by his friend Arthur Schnitzler, who described some of his short stories as “little novels”. Schnitzler, who trained as a psychologist, has a more ‘clinical’ feel to his tales, Zweig’s are by contrast full to overflowing with humanity. Even if you feel that the characters are of a time and place, the meat of the tale still applies. They are all wonderful.

In ‘The Royal Game’ a chess Grandmaster plays against an unknown of extra-ordinary talent. This person learnt about chess without ever playing a physical opponent and the tale is about what it takes to keep one from going insane and the price that is paid for doing so. Obsession (of a negative nature) is the theme of ‘Letter From An Unknown Woman’ in which the authoress tells of her love (and interactions with) the recipient. ‘Amok’ is narrated aboard a ship carrying a doctor who is determined that his (failed) ‘duty’ to his patient shall be somehow mitigated, a theme similar to ‘Fear’ in which a woman who has also failed in her ‘duty’ to her husband is reaping the whirlwind as a result. The titular tale is in some ways a ‘coming of age novella’ in which a youth discovers he wields a power over his mother and her potential lover. What ‘the burning secret’ is, is obvious to the reader but the beauty of the tale is in that knowing, for Zweig uses the child as a means to explore the conflicting emotions (and how they play out) of the adolescent mind.

Each story is about sixty pages long, but the prose is so clean and refined that it both feels a lot shorter to read and the tales provide far richer fare than the page count might suggest. The Penguin edition also has an excellent introduction by John Fowles which gives an outline of Zweig's life and suggests reasons why his star might have waned. Whilst I believe his reasons are valid, I would like to add another; that many readers, especially English reading ones, by which I really mean UK, tend not to read much literature in translation; perhaps because there is already ‘so much’ written in English. Surely after forty years this has changed somewhat- the net allows us to buy books from anywhere we wish. Zweig, like de Maupassant, Flaubert, Dostoevsky, Kafka and Schulz should be on everybody's reading list.

NOTE: Pushkin Press appear to have reprinted all the stories in this volume but looking at their website it appears 'The Royal Game’ is called ‘Chess’ is NOT in the 'Collected Stories'; most confusing...