Rating: 1/5

I read this in serialized form (as published over 3 parts in the December 1971 through February 1972 issues of Analog). It may differ from the final complete publication (and definitely different from the 1981 version expanded as King David's Spaceship).

A Spaceship for the King is the first novel published in Pournelle's larger "CoDominium" universe, which covers well over a thousand years' worth of future history. This one begins on the planet Prince Samual's World though most of the action is on Makassar. It is a strange novel. It's set after a collapse and thousand year Dark Age and the new Empire is rediscovering and reincorporating all of Earth's old colonies. Prince Samual's World is one of those, but King David's secret police chief realizes that their world is considered too primitive to avoid being made a slave planet (no spaceship!) so the anxiety is all about trying to get the plans for a spaceship which they discover might be on another, even more primitive with a leftover Imperial Library. The first third of this book is simply about discovering this, while the final two-thirds are about traveling to Makassar, sailing a ship, and fighting a few battles against the local barbarians, and the serialized novel ends just after they get access to the Library. In addition to the question of whether or not PSW will be able to build a spaceship in the first place, there are several other dropped subplots (Colonel MacKinnie sure seems to maybe like Mary Graham despite being incredibly chauvinistic towards her, but this story includes no resolution that he's wrong for being a jerk).

It's just very disappointing, and while reviews of the expanded edition (King David's Spaceship) seem to indicate that my plot points are resolved, it doesn't seem very satisfactory, so I'm left with the realization that all this was was a "competent man uses superior tactics and technology knowledge to fight primitives" which is something I've read many times over with David Weber and David Drake and S.M. Stirling, ha.