Rating: 5/5

One can only presume Henri Charriere (Papillon, or simply Papi to inmates) was a cat in a previous life, and was still blessed with nine lives in this, believe me he needed all of them. Nine death-defying escapes from the brutal penal settlements of French Guiana in eleven years, pushing his stubborn body to the brink each time, wow!, now that's quite something, how it was even possible for a man of flesh and bone not to die a hundred deaths whilst also going round the bend is beyond me. He would not accept a life's incarceration for a crime he didn't commit, no way, after being wrongly convicted of murder in Paris 1931, and sent to the infamously named Devils Island. The man who had a beautiful butterfly tattoo on his chest, against all odds beat a system dreaded from the days of Napoleon who used its harsh and near inhospitable conditions to punish renegades and political prisoners. Well, this prisoner was simply having none of it!

This was a big book in length, and it felt like it to, through a ravaging chain of events Papillon reads both as an adventure story of high thrills and tension and a savage graphic account of the misery and inhumanity of the French penal system. Right from the start there is no settling in period, and you’re left in no doubt as to how hard you needed to be to survive. Charriere grabs you by the scruff of the neck and drags you all the way on this incredible journey, leaving you just as exhausted as he. The emotions are explicit, the story is resolute and pumped full of testosterone, and the lessons from his life are succinct. He made his first break from the prison of Saint Laurent within the first forty-two days of his term navigating the heat, humidity and shark infested waters of the Caribbean Sea. Showing exemplary courage and will power he reached as far as Colombia using a rickety and an old crumbling wooden boat only to be captured and returned back to the French, this totally pissed them off. Angered and embarrassed French officials shipped him to the devil’s islands without delay. The failure only made him more resilient; he simply refused to accept his fate, eventually ending up in Venezuela, doing a little jail time, before, with the sun on his back he's a free man.

The book also explores the humane relations Papillon shared with his cell mates, and you feel for a lot of them to, he was heavy handed with the sods but easy to make friends with. He learned to live with the rogues, the dreaded convicts who hacked at moment’s provocation but he never abandoned the meek and the suffering, whilst also getting along with guards and wardens. Most were never repulsed by his intense obsession to break out, believing his innocence and respecting his dream to live as a free man. It was this trust that enlivened his spirits and increased his strength to keep his sanity in the lowest ebbs of confinement, which generally were truly awful.

On finishing Papillon I put the book down feeling that, out there in the big wide world, anything is possible. This is a testament to the human spirit on a grandeur level, an adrenaline soaked, hard as nails unshakable will to live. As for his writing, he took to it like anything else, without ever imagining that he could fail, putting pen to paper, 5,000 words a day, and if events from 30 years before ended up feeling a little fictionalised, he still managed to get Papillon across to the reader in the most believable way. An experience never to be forgotten. 5/5