Rating: 4/5

No one likes Alan Turner. He's a spycatcher with the British foreign office, and if he's talking to you, your career is probably over. With gleeful ferocity, he tramples across uncrossable boundaries of diplomacy, decency and class.

The year is 1968. The West is mired in the Cold War, the British have lost their empire, young people are rioting all over the globe, the Vietnam War is in full swing, and in Germany, a mysterious and charismatic leader is rising swiftly to power. 

Sensitive international negotiations are scheduled for the near future. Suddenly, a low-level diplomat disappears from the British Embassy in Bonn, along with a highly confidential personalities file. Find the file, Turner is told, but for God’s sake, don't let the Germans know.

Turner is no Smiley. He’s cynical, sharp-tongued, dirty-minded, happy to make enemies, and worst of all, from the wrong social class. He begins his hunt by assuming that the disappeared diplomat, Leo Harting, is spying for the Soviet Union. By the novel’s end, he is trying to save his life. 

The book begins by taking us through the different departments, levels and personalities of the Embassy, a world with which Le Carre is obviously familiar. He has an other-worldly gift with dialogue; when the cheery young Cockney from the code room speaks, you can almost hear his accent. The same can be said for the Ambassador from the fancy old family, the career diplomat, the German journalist and the Polish immigrant. 

Layered, rich with detail, it does take some time getting started. But once I realized where the story was going, and what Harting has been searching for, I couldn’t put it down. The culminating scene, a massive political rally where we finally hear the mysterious Karfeld speak, is a masterpiece. As a private army fans through the crowd, beating up anyone who might disagree, the future tyrant plays to our worst qualities as human beings, calling upon the starstruck masses to embrace their resentments, their vindictiveness, their jealousies, and their unreasoning fears of the Evil Other. An uncannily fitting book to read on 9/11.