Rating: 4/5

‘Voyage of the Space Beagle’ by A. E. van Vogt was eye-opening for me! The science fiction novel is actually four linked stories in the manner pursued by the newer Star Trek series - the having of one major story or a character’s dilemma carried in the background from episode to episode until a Big Finish episode, while each of the episodes individually had a new story in the foreground. The four stories originally were published separately in popular science fiction magazines. The Space Beagle is an intergalactic space ship traveling through space: “Its five-year mission: to explore strange new worlds; to seek out new life and new civilizations; to boldly go where no man has gone before!” Does this sound familiar? 

Three of these stories were written in 1939, the fourth being written in 1943. 

But there’s more!

In one story, there is a space creature which is almost invincible. It lays eggs inside of living people. The egg, upon hatching inside a person, eats it way out.

One of the crewman, thirty-one-year-old Elliott Grosvenor (our apparently selfless hero), practices a holistic self-education system called Nexialism, “… integration of many sciences…”. It’s about learning a little about a lot of stuff, not specializing in any single field of science. Nexialists specialize in training the mind’s mental approaches to acquiring knowledge and information, so that a practitioner is able to be more of a polymath than an expert in one thing. Practitioners also learn emotional self-control. Their Big Picture mental process puts facts before emotions even as the practitioner takes care to examine the emotions of everyone around them, taking the feelings of individuals psychologically into account as a factor in conclusions. The purpose is to arrive at logical conclusions which are the best option for survival of the many, even at the expense of the one.

Sound familiar?

Of course, almost every department head, military leader and technician boss on the ship thinks Grosvenor is too stupid to live. Only their subordinates and junior scientists bother to answer his questions - IF their bosses haven’t ordered them not to talk to him. Which some of them have done so.

The ship’s crew are divided into two groups of men with authority: scientists and military types, with the military men believing the scientists are fools, and the scientists thinking the non-scientists incapable of logic or having intelligence. Since the stories were written in 1939 and 1943, there are no women aboard.

Such a happy ship! Clearly they will pull all together in facing several strange monsters who attack them before they understand the nature of what is attacking them or why.

No, not. Sigh. 

Gentler readers, this is a novel which is the source of many ideas which were extrapolated by science fiction writers later in the twentieth century! There are a lot of science and sociology discussions between the various scientists that reminded me of the discussions that happen on the Star Trek shows, especially the newer ones, as the specialists try to understand the nature of the monsters and how to defend the ship against them.

I have to admit I enjoyed the book the most in identifying what plot points have been rebooted and make-overed by our current crop of science fiction writers.

Some quotes from the novel are eerily appropriate in the interrogation of recent witnesses who were summoned by U.S. Congress extreme right-wing Republicans to a hearing before a House subcommittee. The witnesses/scientists were insulted, threatened and verbally intimidated in Congressional hearings by House Representatives who are followers of Donald Trump’s manner of controlling everyone around him.

From the book:

””I notice,” said Grosvenor, “you didn’t say anything about his qualifications for the job.””

“”It’s not a vital position, generally speaking. He can get advice from experts on anything he wants to know.”” McCann pursed his lips. ““It’s hard to put Kent’s appeal into words, but I think that scientists are constantly on the defensive about their alleged unfeeling intellectualism. So they like to have someone fronting for them who is emotional but whose scientific qualifications cannot be questioned.””

Grosvenor shook his head. ““I disagree with you about the director’s job not being vital. It all depends on the individual as to how he exercises the very considerable authority involved.””

McCann studied him shrewdly. He said finally, ““Strictly logical men like you have always had a hard time understanding the mass appeal of the Kents. They haven’t much chance against his type, politically.””

Grosvenor smiled grimly. “”It’s not their devotion to the scientific method that defeats the technologists. It’s their integrity. The average trained man often understand the tactics that are used against him better than the person who uses them, but he cannot bring himself to retaliate in kind without feeling tarnished.””

The Republicans are definitely using the approach the character Kent uses to acquire power over the other men traveling in the Space Beagle. Truth be damned, even if one’s lies or one’s egotistical need to be in charge kills more people.

The crazy nonsensical attack approach using exaggerations, misdirections, false narratives, the not-relevant sideways issues and lies:

https://youtu.be/vIwFeG1TAxY?si=AL2m5...

https://youtu.be/hk6y19AbLNE?si=GJ62C...

https://youtu.be/vCq6haTQZtg?si=9ZWjb...

https://youtu.be/2GgpKRoRYGE?si=XxMNv...

https://youtu.be/zWwuOZ18ABA?si=H5KCq...

https://youtu.be/u2CVFS6MT1E?si=v3lNu...

The more fact-based, but still obviously hostile, not accepting anything you say, spinning the truth to suit the beliefs of the ignorant, approach:

https://youtu.be/b7Q28CcUEzw?si=duK_c...

https://youtu.be/hahOJNKFLRI?si=ZMT7R...

https://youtu.be/HxOhlnje_GA?si=i5af1...

https://youtu.be/RARlZ3eIKCM?si=ywUEb...

https://youtu.be/K-O-QtDEwyU?si=_r8IL...

In the hearing, various Republicans accuse Dr. Fauci and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) of being responsible for bringing the virus Covid-19 to America. In tones of severe disapproval, the Republicans express amazement that this rumored creation of Covid-19 for the NIH and Dr. Fauci was paid for by American taxpayer money. The Republicans give no reason WHY the NIH or Dr. Fauci would want the American people specifically to die from Covid. Republicans are convinced the proof of their suspicions have been deleted from computers. The absence of proof is the proof. They also quote from published articles stating suspicions and opinions of individual medical professionals who are known to be on the fringes of real science supporting their accusations.

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) gave a small amount of money, $120,000, to the Wuhan lnstitute of Virology, which has an annual billion-dollar budget of operating funds. NIH did NOT instruct the Chinese scientists to create Covid-19 with the money from the NIH. It was for another study, for which there is ample proof. Plus, there is no way $120,000 would begin to cover the cost of development of a virus like Covid-19. There is absolutely NO proof at all that the NIH or Dr. Fauci personally required the Chinese to develop the Covid-19 virus for the purpose of distributing the virus throughout America to kill American citizens. 

Every country in the world had people dying from Covid, including Chinese people. I find it difficult to believe the Chinese government had a design of genocide to kill off all of Humanity, including their own people. Since Covid-19 was deadly mostly to the elderly and the sick and the immune-compromised, I think this is a very strange designer virus for genocide, created apparently by the Chinese on behalf of Dr. Fauci’s and the NIH’s plot to kill everyone in the world. It clearly isn’t very efficient at killing everyone, unless you are sick, immune-compromised or old, which, hello, is not EvErYOnE, is it? 

Making children wear masks is not a type of torture. Making adults wear masks is not type of torture. Wearing a mask does not hurt at all. Many Republicans in the hearing equate it with being an evil torture terrible to endure. I have worn a variety of masks. None of them hurt me. I have friends, relatives and neighbors who wore masks. None of them expressed any pain from doing do.

Beating up a kid hurts a kid. Burning a kid with fire hurts a kid. Breaking a kid’s bones hurts a kid. Spanking a kid hurts a kid. Physically assaulting a kid hurts a kid. Falling down hurts a kid. These are facts. A kid wearing a mask does not hurt a kid’s face, or his body for the matter. Lots of kids wore masks during the pandemic without any pain. Some experienced annoyance, though.

Wearing a mask does not hurt. Since it doesn’t hurt, it can’t be defined as a torture. Full stop. This is a fact. 

Statistically, children are more resistant to Covid, but they can carry the virus home to their parents and grandparents who do not have the resistance that children have. Many children were discovered to carry the virus if they were exposed but they were asymptomatic. However, when adult teachers, parents, grandparents, fellow adult passengers on trains/planes/cars/buses are exposed to Covid-19 consisting of virus particles being breathed out by asymptomatic and not-sick-at-all kids, the adults around them can get very sick. Teachers were very afraid of catching Covid-19 from the kids, not vice versa. Not that any of the Republicans mentioned this FACT. Many teachers refused to come to work because they were afraid of catching Covid-19 from their kids. Fact. This is why kids were required to wear masks. It wasn’t the kid who needed protecting from Covid, generally. Also, sidebar, many kids are immune-compromised because of health issues. They COULD get sick and die from Covid-19. Also, a mask was intended not only to protect the wearer from the virus which might be being passed around in the room by another person, but they were worn to protect others from a person who had the virus and was wearing a mask because they were breathing it out of their mouth.

They also went after Dr. Fauci for recommending people get vaccinated. Most private corporations and state institutions gave people the choice to get the vaccination or not. If they didn’t get it, they were told to stay home. Many of the unvaccinated lost their jobs because they weren’t permitted to go to their place of work to do their jobs unvaccinated. If they had got vaccinated, they would have kept their jobs. The corporations and institutions, and especially the government which would and did foot most of the bills from taxpayer money to care for sick people, did not want the other employees to get sick with Covid, mild as it was if one was vaccinated. Or worse, while vaccinated employees might be asymptomatic because they were vaccinated, they could still pass on the virus carried into the room by the unvaccinated to elderly or immune-compromised family members or friends or neighbors at home who could not get the vaccination safely due to poor health or youth. From what I heard from non-vaxxers and the House Republicans, they did not think passing on the virus to their fellow employees, family members and friends and children, and possibly killing them, was as important as what they felt was their own right to not get vaccinated. They want to choose to not get vaccinated even if it meant killing other people who could not get vaccinated because of their health or for whom the vaccine did not work well. Somehow, non-vaxxers can’t hear themselves, I guess, because what they are actually saying is “I will kill you if your genetics has made you susceptible to the virus, and your immune-compromised children, your elderly parents and grandparents, by giving you the virus to make you sick and then pass on, because I don’t want to get vaccinated. Or wear a painless mask that doesn’t hurt but it annoys me.” 

The Republicans pointed out vaccination didn’t work for everyone. In their spinning of the science, that made the recommendation of getting vaccinated or getting fired if one doesn’t get vaccinated an evil demand without merit. Many of them would not allow Dr. Fauci to point out the obvious reasons why the vaccine didn’t work for everyone, interrupting his explanations. A few questioners finally allowed him to talk and explain. The main reason is the Covid virus mutates. A Covid vaccine works very well on one variety of Covid. But soon there is another variety of Covid circulating and the vaccine being used doesn’t work on it. So another vaccine has to be created to deal with the new type of Covid virus. Simple, yes? Dr. Fauci pointed out the measles virus does not mutate, so the vaccine one gets for the measles lasts for decades. This is not true with Covid-19 vaccines because the Covid virus in the wild mutates all of the time.

The Republicans didn’t want him to really respond, though, and shouted him down with insults and misdirection. 

Another reason the vaccine does not work was the vaccine designed for a specific type of Covid stops working in time, its protective effect of stimulating the body’s immune system working less and less. The science answer to that is booster shots. 

I mean, it is what it is. Perhaps in the future the scientists will develop a vaccine which works for decades against all the different mutations of Covid-19, but that day is not here. But, as far as the Republicans are concerned, these unavoidable problems with vaccinating people against Covid with the current manufacturing processes and science discoveries about the virus are a conspiracy against the American people. 

Again, can these Republicans hear themselves? They are angry that people are being saved by getting vaccinated? The vaccinated are not killing the immune-compromised and the elderly and others who have weakened immune systems, by passing on the virus to them because they got vaccinated?

Well, the character Kent reminded me a lot of these House Republicans. Grosvener reminded me of poor Dr. Fauci.

If those Youtube videos on that wild so-called hearing to discover facts that was performed by House Republicans doesn’t blow your mind, here is what was recommended by a different United States Congress, along with many other countries around the world faced with a pandemic exactly similar to the one caused by Covid:

”Responses
Public health management

Coromandel Hospital Board (New Zealand) advice to influenza sufferers (1918)

In September 1918, the Red Cross recommended two-layer gauze masks to halt the spread of "plague".

1918 Chicago newspaper headlines reflect mitigation strategies such as increased ventilation, arrests for not wearing face masks, sequenced inoculations, limitations on crowd size, selective closing of businesses, curfews, and lockdowns. After October's strict containment measures showed some success, Armistice Day celebrations in November and relaxed attitudes by Thanksgiving caused a resurgence.

While systems for alerting public health authorities of infectious spread did exist in 1918, they did not generally include influenza, leading to a delayed response. Nevertheless, actions were taken. Maritime quarantines were declared on islands such as Iceland, Australia, and American Samoa, saving many lives. Social distancing measures were introduced, for example closing schools, theatres, and places of worship, limiting public transportation, and banning mass gatherings. Wearing face masks became common in some places, such as Japan, though there were debates over their efficacy.[228] There was also some resistance to their use, as exemplified by the Anti-Mask League of San Francisco. Vaccines were also developed, but as these were based on bacteria and not the actual virus, they could only help with secondary infections. The actual enforcement of various restrictions varied. To a large extent, the New York City health commissioner ordered businesses to open and close on staggered shifts to avoid overcrowding on the subways.”

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanish...