This collects two of the editor’s favorite short stories from each year of the 1980s, from 1980 through 1989. It starts with Peter Taylor’s “The Old Forest”, one of the two highlights of the collection. You can pretty much tell what the story’s about from the first paragraph. The rest is extrapolation in the best sense.

	I was already formally engaged, as we used to say, to the girl I was going to marry. But still I sometimes went out on the town with girls of a different sort. And during the very week before the date set for the wedding, in December, I was in an automobile accident at a time when one of those girls was with me. It was a calamitous thing to have happen—not the accident itself, which caused no serious injury to anyone, but the accident plus the presence of that girl.

The other highlight is Charles Baxter’s “Gryphon”, which tells the tale of a young boy, fourth grade, confronted by an adult in authority whose refusal to accept reality becomes progressively more epic as the story progresses. The delusions she presents are pleasing ones, and he has an excuse to believe them: all he must do is acquiesce to authority. But not everyone finds the delusions as pleasing as he does, so he must fight to protect the delusions he has accepted from authority.

The 1980s also saw the publication of Tim O’Brien’s “The Things They Carried”, one of the two selections from 1987, and several other very good stories. The eighties also saw the onset of AIDS, and one of the strangest stories is Susan Sontag’s weirdly circumspect “The Way We Live Now”, which involves naming neither the patient nor the disease while clearly describing both through a sort of rambling repetition of other characters’ descriptions.

	At first he was just losing weight, he felt only a little ill, Max said to Ellen, and he didn’t call for an appointment with his doctor, according to Greg, because he was managing to keep on working at more or less the same rhythm, but he did stop smoking, Tanya pointed out, which suggests he was frightened, but also that he wanted, even more than he knew, to be healthy, or healthier, or maybe just to gain back a few pounds, said Orson, for he told her, Tanya went on, that he expected to be climbing the walls (isn’t that what people say?) and found, to his surprise, that he didn’t miss cigarettes at all and reveled in the sensation of his lungs’ being ache-free for the first time in year.

The paragraph then continues on for the rest of the first half page and all the way down the second.

Another of the better stories is Ursula K. LeGuin’s semi-science fictional, in the sense of being an alternate history, “Sur: A Summary Report of the Yelcho Expedition to the Antarctic, 1909-10”, in which a group of women make a non-research trip to the Antarctic, just for the experience of being there over the summer of 1909-10. Other than being an alternate history (or, perhaps, a secret history, as it doesn’t contradict known facts) and being somewhat gauzily fairy-tale-ish, there’s nothing of fantasy or science fiction in it.

In another quaint relic of the past, of the approximately (I’m going by name, which of course can be misleading) twelve men and eight women in the book, five of the men and none of the women have their birth year given in the introduction to the story. I suspect part of the reason was a fascination with their age; the average birth year of those whose year was considered newsworthy was 1921; the earliest two were born in 1910 (Paul Bowles and Wright Morris). But fascination with age couldn’t have been the entire point, because the youngest, Raymond Carver, born 1938, would have been only 44 in 1982 when his “Cathedral” appeared.