Rating: 4/5

Lev Raphael published his Nick Hoffman mysteries back in the 1990s, and has recently reintroduced them as e-books. These books do something that is hugely important to me: they offer murder mysteries with interesting characters and superior writing, and feature a longtime gay couple as the centerpiece of the stories. There are other couples and other relationships swirling about in the atmosphere around Nick and Stephan, but these two men are at the core of the story. 

“The Edith Wharton Murders” is the second of eight Nick Hoffman books, and takes place in the fictionalized Michigan university town where Nick is a writing professor and Stephan is the writer in residence. There are sly little joking references to Miss Marple and Jessica Fletcher in the story, but there is also a strong overlay of the English writer David Lodge, whose best known novels revolve around the internecine politics of university life in the UK. 

Surely there is a conscious reflection of Raphael’s own life in academe here, but his portrayal of the absurdity and tragic pettiness of the world of Edith Wharton scholars (an author whose work I personally love, to a point) is delicious. As Nick desperately tries to control the Wharton conference he has been forced to organize, and as he continues to manage the hurt he feels from Stephan’s emotional betrayal in the previous (first) book, we feel alternating waves of sympathy, disbelief and comic giddiness as the entire procedure begins to spin off its axis. 

And, as I said, at the hub of this swirl of personalities and college life, are these two men, in their mid-thirties, settled, happy in their life together in spite of the inevitable pain and hurt that longtime relationships often embrace. There is no overt sex in this book, and there doesn’t need to be. There is nothing in this book to make the straight world queasy-except, of course, the sharp focus on the gay men themselves. This intense visibility, Nick and Stephan’s motivating force at the core of this novel, is probably enough to ensure that a large part of the mystery-reading audience won’t touch it. For all the advances in politics in the world – right up to universal recognition of same-gender marriage this year – our visibility still makes the other 95% squirm. 

So, for all their charm and their readability, Lev Raphael’s Nick Hoffman books are important to me for this reason. How lucky I am that they’re so good.