Rating: 3/5

I first heard of Tim Powers as being one of the Laser book authors (#28. The Skies Discrowned by Timothy Powers, 1976, ISBN 0-373-72028-9 and #47. Epitaph in Rust by Timothy Powers, 1976, ISBN 0-373-72047-5). It was then I discovered that he was a colleague of Philip K.Dick. This sparked interest. I then heard a recent interview on the CBC radio with Tim Powers and found him to be an intelligent and engaging personality. "Dinner at Deviant's Place" is the first and only Powers novel I've read so far. I did not expect the style to be similar to PKD's and for the most part it was not. In this novel, however, the post-apocalyptic California setting was similar to PKD's non-genre novels and there were bits of true weirdness and elements such as these vampiresque bloodsucking creatures called hemogoblins.

However, this novel was hit and miss for me. The overall story is just fine: Gregorio Rivas a musician (song writer and decent pelican player) who had retired from his service of rescuing disciples of a religious cult known as the Jaybirds led by madman Messiah Norton Jaybush (a very Californian idea - as SNL's Drunk Uncle would say in his glass of rye: - "scientologist!") in order to rescue an acquaintance - no, this was actually potential girlfriend of thirteen years before, for a price one could not refuse by her wealthy and powerful father...

There are many cool bits and others that were dull and some that made little sense. The treatment of alcohol use, for instance, was utterly bizarre. Not only are fifth of bourbon considered currency, it seems that a stiff drink, of anything at all - beer, tequila... is the cure for every ill including (I think) brainwashing and mental illness. Not since the television show Bewitched (a perhaps the recent Mad Men series) have I seen alcohol treated this way in fiction.

Overall, I enjoyed the book and will read more from Tim Powers, though I suspect that this novel is not indicative of his usual or more recent work.