Rating: 5/5

Harnessing the Power of Storytelling to Remember the Holocaust

Often, when Jewish writers and thinkers speak of the Holocaust, the question of “Where is God” comes up. Herself a Holocaust survivor, Yaffa Eliach, interviewed others who lived through this terrible period. Many found the Holy revealed in the ordinary, in the unholiest of places. The theme throughout this diverse collection of stories of the Holocaust is faith. Another great Jewish thinker, the late Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, spoke of the extraordinary faith of Jews in the worst of times, when hope seemed all but lost. Furthermore, Eliach set to give these people a voice, so they may tell their stories for future generations. The best people to tell their history are those who themselves experienced it, and to recount their past in their own way, on their own terms. 
Dr. Eliach quotes another Holocaust survivor, the late Rabbi of Bluzhov, who told his congregants, “There are events of such overbearing magnitude, that one ought not remember them all the time, but one must not forget them either. Such an event is the Holocaust.” The Hasidim have been telling stories that embody a combination of wit, humor, and miracle since the days of the founder of the movement, the great Baal Shem Tov, along with such writers as the Rabbi Nachman of Bratslav, Franz Kafka, I.L. Peretz, and S.Y. Agnon. And this practice continued through the Holocaust. This talent is evident in the interviews that make up the stories of this book.

The stories are divided among several themes.

Ancestors and Faith. For some imprisoned Jews, when the future seemed so uncertain, the memories of departed loved ones shared space with their grace. "I was holding on to my ancestral merit. I was holding onto the coattails of my father, and my grandfather, and my great-great grandfather of blessed memory," said the Rebbe Spira. "Tel me, my friend, how did you reach the other side of the pit?" The great Rebbe appears in several stories of this section. He was present even at the first Chanukkah and the Seder night at Bergen-Belsen, where those present had yet to escape the darnkess of the Narrow Place. Rabbi Israel Abraham Koczicki's mother was present in spirit at Belzec. And at Bronia, "God is everywhere... but..." Yet, in a Lithuanian shtetl, "The Messiah is already here," even if He could not be seen.

Friendship. These could occur in the most unlikely places at the least likely time. In my personal favorite, "The Mosaic Artist's Apprentice," the friend who saved thirteen-year-old Jacob's life was none other than.... And who was that little girl Esterke?

The Spirit Alone. Some are "slain with the sword"; others, "slain with hunger." In such dark places, even "Satan's altar," "even the transgressors in Israel are as full of good deeds as a pomegranate is filled with seeds."

The Gates of Freedom. In this section and throughout this anthology, Jewish tradition is ever present. It and faith keep alive that even these places where "God does not live here anymore," in the end, there comes redemption, when it was possible to rejoin the human race.

Where was God? It may have seemed to be nowhere; yet, He was everywhere.