Rating: 3/5

Wow, what a book. What an amazing author - to have thought in this way in 1879!
This is a very interesting read - to see how the author thought in such a time, which would have been controversial indeed. 
A brief summary of the plot ***SPOILERS AHEAD *** - it starts off as a grand adventure with Hugh Keith setting off for the usual grand tour, but changes his plans when he finds out about relatives who ventured to the Central Americas and were never heard from again. He eventually finds these people are still alive and have prospered, but have many 'strange' customs from having been separated from the old society for over 100 years. The custom he finds strangest of all is 'Handfasting' - a practice of marrying your partner for 1 year before deciding if you will stay with them for the rest of your life. At the end of the year you either walk away from your partner or commit. Hugh falls in love with a local woman called Lilliard Abercrombie and finds her unable to read, but a very gifted storyteller and fast learner. They decide to leave the colony together and face many challenges because Lilliard refuses to marry until a year is up. Needless to say western society is not very accepting of these views.
I have left many details out, like what they do with any children born when hand fasted, but hopefully you get the idea.
This is not the most gripping of authors, as most of the novel is about stating what is wrong with society and a recommended solution - as you can imagine there are many holes in this theory, but at least the author was trying to come up with an answer to the problem of marrying people who hardly know each other and spending the rest of their lives in misery.
A thought provoking book, like a French meal - can be very simple but those few herbs that set the meal onto a different level make it seem so much more.
I was thinking about this book long after I finished reading it.
I would recommend this book for anyone who is after some mental stimulation and wondering if religion was not involved how people would have developed.