Rating: 4/5

This read wasn't at all what I expected, however, for the main part it is very interesting and informative, although it highlights the disparaging attitudes of the English, poor treatment, mocking and making fun of South Sea Islander’s lack of inhibition, cultural beliefs and their natural way of life. For in fact the English with their constrained lives, class distinctions*, snobbery, unclean cities and rivers one would think that coming upon the beauty of Tahiti or Hawaii jealousy would more likely ensue. 

Many years ago I was introduced to a descendant of Fletcher Christian, who had the last name as Christian and who recounted some of the family history, born on Norfolk Island. As the years proceeded after the death of Fletcher Christian and his fellow mutineers the remaining settlers of Pitcairn Island on 8 June 1856 arrived on Norfolk Island. Bounty Day is a re-enactment of the landing at Kingston Pier. Pitcairn Island became uninhabitable and too far away from civilisation.

Captain Bligh served under Captain Cook as Master of the Resolution on Cook's third voyage who was a skilled navigator and he deeply respected Cook, later adopting many of his leadership techniques. It's hard not to be affected by the numerous movies made regarding the Mutiny on the Bounty to not be persuaded that Bligh was nothing but a tyrant and a bully. However the read does point out that the punishment of flogging in particular was pretty much par for course on any ship of the time as well foul language from those higher up on the chain of command.

There always seemed to be the problem of poorly built ships, ones that started to leak after just leaving England. They were not especially built ships for such voyages that occurred during this time for the purposes of exploring the Pacific Ocean, a vast body of water with all the elements coming from South America, El Niño and La Niña, events that significantly affect global weather, as well as the extreme changes of weather at the equator of either the wet or dry seasons and cyclones. With limited navigational tools, leaky ships and many dysfunctional seamen as well having to replenish food and water stocks it would take a strong leader to contain the crew even with the assistance of Petty Officers and Warrant Officers. Statistics reveal that over 50% of the crew were ordinary “seamen”, using the term loosely…., as some would be runaways from the law, petty thieves and completely illiterate. On Pitcairn Island only one person could read and write, the boy Jack Adams, Bligh's clerk, had taught him to read and write.

As was alluded to by a commentator towards the end of the read “that Fletcher Christian and George Young had influence over the Bounty because they were ‘genteely connected’*. Money or birth was the mark of a ‘gentlemen’, Bligh had neither and, for whatever reason, had not acquired the language of the ‘as if’ gentility of a professional officer”.