Rating: 3/5

This book reads very much like a first novel and one that would appeal to teens with lots of melodrama, dashing heroes, swordfights and a beautiful heroine. There are many spots were the writing doesn't flow very well and the characters are all pretty much cardboard. There's noble Jack, wicked Tracy, spoiled and selfish Lavinia, intelligent and kind Diana, etc. These character archetypes would be developed into flesh and blood people in later novels but in this first work, Miss Heyer had not yet developed her ability to create real people the reader can care about. My favorite characters are Sir and Lady Miles. They're the most well-drawn characters in the novel and seem like people I would actually like to know. The plot is a bit ridiculous and unbelievable and a bit complicated. There are many characters to keep track of and I had to keep turning the page back to find out who was speaking or what was happening. There's lots of sweeping melodrama and adventure but not much romance. We're told that Jack and Diana fall in love but the actual falling in love is glossed over, perhaps because Miss Heyer had not yet been in love or perhaps because she was writing for her kid brother. The historical details are incredibly impressive and fans of historic costuming will die at the descriptions of powder, patch, hoops, wigs and other styles of the mid-18th century. I would recommend this book to those who love an old-fashioned high drama adventure story or to those fans of Miss Heyer who wish to see how her style evolved. It's not a bad effort for a seventeen year old's first novel.

reread October 2020 3.25 stars
I enjoyed this book much more the second time around. The writing is very sophisticated for a 19-year-old first-time published author. The story, however, is right out of a teenager's romantic imagination. The story is slow to start but then we finally meet Jack and I got caught up in his adventures. I still wish the falling in love had been a bit more developed. It's pretty silly as is. The story slows down again and then picks up in the last few chapters. I stayed up late to see how it all turned out. There's an epilogue, thank goodness, that provides the final happy ending. 

The story is pretty dated. It works for the time period except for the attempt at period language: an' for and, "forsooth", "tar an' 'ounds", that got on my nerves. I strongly object to the villain, Tracy "Devil" Bellmanoir, the Duke of Andover. He is dastardly and gets away with despicable behavior! I don't believe it was acceptable to rape innocent young ladies even in the Georgian period. It sounds like the other maidens he ruined may have been of a lower social class, which was acceptable, but it's hard to tell. He dashes off to France for a time and then comes back as if nothing had happened. You would think he would have a hoard of angry fathers out for his blood. Of course this being a romantic comedy, all turns out well for Diana because Jack arrives in the nick of time.  

Jack is a lovable rogue but an idiot. Richard is a whiny, weak idiot and his wife Lavinia needs to be put back in the nursery and told NO often and loudly. She's a spoiled brat. I can't stand her. Her brothers are terrible people too. All of them are out to ruin her Richard. As with my first reading, the only characters I really liked were Miles and Molly! The O'Haras are a charming, loving couple and really good friends to Jack. Honorable mention goes to Diana's aunt who loves her niece and is sensible enough to recognize when her niece isn't happy. Miss Beauleigh doesn't push Diana. Diana's instincts are excellent but I stopped liking her once she turned weepy and silly. I felt terrified with her and anxious for her during the thrilling conclusion and wanted her to get her happy ever after but I wouldn't want to be friends with her.

Read this if you like swashbuckling Georgian romances. If you like Ross and Francis Poldark but not all the drama, you might enjoy this one too.