Rating: 5/5

A "GUIDE" TO THE "ROMAN CATHOLIC VIEWPOINT"
 
Fr. Richard Chilson of the Paulist Fathers is in residence at St. Lawrence Catholic Church in Minnesota, and was formerly director of the catechumenate program at Holy Spirit parish in Berkeley. He has written other books such as 'Full Christianity,' 'An Introduction to the Faith of Catholics,' 'The Hour Is Now: Praying with the Gospel of John,' 'Meditation,' etc,

He says about this 1987 book, "Christianity is a religion which proclaims the good news of Jesus Christ. It encompasses a multitude of communities called churches in various shades of agreement concerning details. However the common foundation is Jesus---his life and teachings, his death and resurrection. Among these churches, one claims an authoritative position centering upon the bishop of Rome... This guide introduces the Roman Catholic expression of Christianity. Although much is held in common, in the few places (often crucial) where various churches disagree, this guide presents the Roman Catholic viewpoint." (Pg. 3)

He suggests, "The resurrection narratives should not be taken literally. They point toward this great truth. Since resurrection surpasses our understanding, the stories too cannot fully articulate the event. Thus sometimes Jesus seems to have a physical body... In others he appears incorporeal... these narratives share a similar structure. They begin with the disciples' confusion, despair, and sorrow... The messianic prophecies did not speak of betrayal and death. Then in the midst of their despair breaks the resurrection.... and the appearances of Jesus himself. Jesus has triumphed over death... The resurrection narrative shapes all Christian experience." (Pg. 190-191)

He states, "Modern science relies upon the theory of evolution to understand the present proliferation of creatures on earth. This theory is not intrinsically in conflict with Catholic teaching on creation. Evolution explains how species have arisen during the course of the earth's history. The Christian doctrine of creation assert that whatever is owes its existence to God. It does not attempt to explain how the various beings have come to birth. Teilhard de Chardin's evolutionary vision of creation has inspired ... both Catholicism and Protestantism." (Pg. 220-221) Later, he adds, "Although silenced by the Church and unable to have his work published and debated while he was alive, Teilhard's books, issued after his death, have inspired not only theologians and Christians but many unwilling to accept the narrow confines of twentieth century materialism." (Pg. 404)

He argues, "Jesus' use of the imagery of hell and damnation does not describe a particular place but emphasizes the urgency of his message and the seriousness of our decisions for or against the kingdom. Jesus views life as a crisis demanding decision. We can refuse God and thus risk damnation... the Church does not teach that hell is a place, but only a possible state of being. However the Church does teach of Satan and of demonic powers. There is evil which is not solely dependent upon human beings... But these forces do not have any true power... the victory over evil has already been won in the cross of Christ." (Pg. 254)

He adds, "A theological opinion held by some states that the unbaptized free from mortal sin go to a state of limbo. Such an opinion was never defined by the Church. And the Second Vatican Council's insistence upon the universality of grace from the very beginning of each person's insistence makes the idea of limbo less and less tenable today. All infants in danger of death should be baptized. But this is not so much to save them from limbo as to join them to Jesus' death and resurrection and bring them into membership in Christ's Church." (Pg. 255)

He points out, "The American bishops acknowledged some principles of dissent in their letter of response to Humanae Vitae (which dealt with birth control). They proposed three conditions for justifying public dissent from non-infallible teaching... There is divergence within the Church upon a number of issues. While authorities may be unhappy with dissent, until now a workable means of dealing with and resolving it has not been found. Vatican II spoke of and initiated dialogue within the Church. Today the dialogue continues." (Pg. 362)

This well-written and open, "progressive" approach to Catholic doctrine will appeal to non-conservatives and non-traditionalists