Rating: 5/5

This survey was written after rereading all of Lawton’s novels. My rereading did not follow either the order in which the books were written or the chronological order of the story itself. I will try to complete this survey from two points of view: i)imagining that I read this book immediately after the first three novels (which, in fact, I read a long time ago), and ii) remaining aware of the series as a whole, including later books that I have read several times.

After reading The White Death, one could easily assume it marked the end of the story, a conclusion to a trilogy, especially given Troy’s retirement. Nevertheless, there was still the possibility of continuation, which fortunately came to pass, largely thanks to the introduction of Joe Holderness in later installments.

At the time, when reading this book for the first time, I was somewhat surprised to see the author return to a timeline preceding the first book, as it had not occurred to me that Lawton might “go back and fill in the gaps,” an idea reportedly suggested to him by a close friend.

In fact, Lawton’s novels are particularly rich in their interconnections, with storylines frequently linking back to earlier events, sometimes explored in greater depth in later books. Indeed, some of the events in this novel are briefly referenced in the earlier three books, even though those stories take place later in the series’ timeline.
Also, certain events from the past appear here in a form that is later revisited and developed in the author's subsequent works. Admittedly, I am viewing this through the lens of hindsight, having already read several of the author's other books. In particular, I am thinking of Second Violin, where some of these elements seem to reappear in a more fully realized way.

The story takes place primarily in London in 1941, at a time when the United States had not yet entered the war. One of the recurring themes is the contrast between American intelligence amateurs and British intelligence professionalism. This is established almost immediately in a scene that is both amusing and characteristic of Lawton's writing style. A British intelligence officer surprises an American counterpart by revealing knowledge of a supposedly secret message received by the American services. When the American asks how the British obtained the information, the response is priceless: the British explain that although they possess the American codes, they intercepted the message from the German intelligence services, which had already broken the American codes.

The main plot unfolds in London during the spring of 1941. It begins when a German agent who had been spying for the Americans defects to Britain, bringing with him valuable intelligence (something that we only learn later that it was about Operation Barbarossa). From that point on, much of the story revolves around the American intelligence officer's, Cal Cormack, efforts to track him down and being aware that the spy is being follwoed by german assassins (disguised as refugees). The search for the German spy serves as an effective vehicle for illustrating many aspects of life in England in 1941. The relationship between Cal Cormack and Walter Stilton, the police officer initially assigned to assist him, highlights several contrasts: the perspective of an American outsider versus that of a British insider, as well as the difference between the straightforward world of police work and the far more elusive realm of intelligence and espionage. Their conversations are among the most entertaining parts of the novel. Cal frequently struggles to understand Walter's remarks, creating both humorous exchanges and a vivid portrayal of the cultural gap between Americans and Britons. Through these interactions, the novel also conveys the resentment felt by some Britons toward the United States for remaining outside the war. Cal's dinners with the Stilton family further illustrate the attitudes, concerns, and everyday experiences of ordinary British citizens during this difficult period.

Troy also makes an appearance early in the story, initially as a secondary character, which is somewhat unusual given his role in the previous installments of the series. Even in this limited capacity, however, he demonstrates the investigative skills and intuition that would later define him. Following Walter's death, Troy gradually assumes a more central role in the narrative and becomes instrumental in uncovering the identity of Walter's killer. His involvement is largely motivated by what could be described as a love triangle. Cormack is having an affair with Kitty Stilton, Walter's eldest daughter, who was previously involved in a romantic relationship with Troy, a relationship that will be explored in greater detail in a book written later. Walter's death places Cormack in a precarious position, making him the prime suspect in the murder investigation. Troy initially helps to clear Cormack's name, and his continued involvement in the case is later prompted by Kitty's request.

A good example of the unexpected and masterfully executed twists that John Lawton frequently incorporates into his novels is a meeting in the London Underground between Cal and another character, whose identity will not be revealed here in order to avoid spoilers. During this encounter, it becomes clear that certain events described earlier in the story were not quite what they appeared to be. The scene forces both Cal and the reader to reassess previous assumptions, demonstrating Lawton's skill at misleading the audience while remaining entirely fair in his plotting.

In the final section of the novel, the nature of what the German spy was attempting to deliver is finally revealed: information concerning Operation Barbarossa. This development reinforces the novel’s recurring “looking-glass” perspective on espionage, in which British and American intelligence services are shown to be reluctant to alert Stalin, despite the fact that he was in reality warned twice but refused to believe the intelligence.

One of the story’s central themes is, in fact, an attempt to provide a fictional explanation for one of these warning efforts, something the author himself acknowledges in the postscript. Within the narrative, this role is attributed to Alex Troy, who is revealed to be still alive. He makes his first appearance in the series through a highly cryptic message, presented in the form of an editorial published in a journal, adding another layer of ambiguity to the unfolding events.

To conclude observe that reading a novel whose events precede those of three other books you have already read might seem somewhat disappointing. After all, you already know where many of the characters and storylines are heading. That was certainly my impression when I first picked up this book.

However, Lawton succeeds in turning what could have been a weakness into one of the novel's strengths. He crafts an engaging plot populated by compelling new characters while also revisiting familiar ones at an earlier stage in their lives. At the same time, he skillfully weaves in important historical themes, including everyday life in wartime London and, perhaps most significantly, the intelligence warnings sent to Stalin concerning the impending launch of Operation Barbarossa.