Rating: 3/5

AUDIOBOOK! This is early Plantagenet history as from your gossip and rumor loving old uncle - so not all of it is true and is written as almost historical fiction. (We have the weather, what they ate and wore, exactly what they said.) However, totally worth listening to if only because the narrator, David Case, sounds like a pompous, disdainful, white guy; which absolutely fits Costain's condescending style. Some problems with the chatty style is that a fair number of inaccuracies are mentioned, as is always the case with gossip, and also new information has come to light since this was written in 1950 or so. But a brisk, often funny overview of Henry I - death of King John. [There are no footnotes, nor cited works.]

Some fun examples of the writing (Just a sample! The text is hilarious!) : 
"Matilda brought back three things from Germany: the richly jeweled crown she had worn, the sword of Tristan, and the most imperious temper that ever plunged a nation into conflict."
"The mind functioning in this mass of fatty degeneration was keen, nonetheless..." 
"Poor, feeble Louis; always at the beginning of something and never at the conclusion of it!"
"Phillip was concentrating his forces for a drive on Normandy up the Seine, the path his father had followed so often and so badly."

I have to say the last few paragraphs were offensive in the championing of brutal outcome the Norman Conquest as a necessary evil. According to Costain the Saxons had "certain racial weaknesses which would have held them back" and "They were a gross people, dull, sensual, inclined to a degree of drunkenness" and "London would never have become the great city" without the help of the (extremely brutal) Normans. This is UTTER NONSENSE and any research into the vibrant Saxon kingdom shows any idea that the Normans were intellectually superior to the Saxons to be false. 

That said: this was quite the romp once you know what you are getting into. I listened to the audiobook and Case is perfect for the part (!!) but it can also be found at https://openlibrary.org/