Rating: 5/5

This book is a 5 for any military historian. I suspect the massive amount of detail about particular units and people would be too much for the average reader. For them I'd say this book is a 3 or 4. A couple of notes before reviewing the book.

First, the author, Bernard Fall, had a unique ability to write a captivating book. He did a fantastic job of weaving small bits of personal information seamlessly into his larger narrative of events. His description of Genevieve de Garland's honorary induction into the Foreign Legion is a good example. It reminds me of Cornelius Ryan's ability to make the history come alive. 
 
A second note to people not familiar with it: French units are properly identified by their abbreviations, BUT for English speakers this sometimes looks backwards. For example, the 4th Colonial Artillery Regiment is 4 RAC and the 1st Foreign Legion Parachute Battalion (1er Bataillon Etranger de Parachutistes) is 1 BEP. Appendix E fortunately spells most of these out. I would recommend reading all the appendices first just to get familiar with terms and the number of units involved.
 
This book is a VERY detailed description of the Battle of Dien Bien Phu, the events that led up to it, and the planning and reasons behind the actions that were taken. Just in case you happen to live under a rock, the French lost. 

The ramifications of this battle for France and the United States are discussed very clearly and objectively in my opinion. The planning is gone over, and the failure to anticipate what could go wrong becomes evident early on. The decision to attempt to engage the Viet-Minh in a set piece battle that would result in their defeat is examined thoroughly. Fall said it best with "Henceforth, the planning of the battle of Dien Bien Phu took on the preordained air of a Greek tragedy."
 
Once the battle is joined in earnest, Fall did an excellent job of describing the individual unit actions in detail. He broke down almost every day of the siege and how the day’s events affected the status of the battle. Ultimately, the book is really about the people involved, the people on the ground there and what they faced. A good example of how Fall brought in fascinating bits and pieces of minute facts to make a compelling story is the counter attack to take back hill E1: Early on 11 April, when French and German Foreign Legionnaire paratroopers started their counter attack up hill E1, they began singing paratrooper songs before being swallowed up in the battle. The last two companies thrown in were from the 5th Vietnamese paratroops. They had no unit songs which could be shouted to give oneself encouragement but as Fall writes, "As the Vietnamese paratroopers in turn emerged on the fire-beaten saddle between the hills there suddenly arose, for the first and last time in the Indochina war, the Marseillaise. It was sung the way it was written to be sung in the days of the French Revolution, as a battle hymn of the French Republic. It was sung that night on the blood stained slopes of Hill Elaine 1 by Vietnamese fighting other Vietnamese in the last battle France fought as an Asian power."
 
Fall also did a good job of bringing to the reader's attention how this battle affects things that are happening "now" in 1966, which is when the book was written. He mentioned how the Viet Cong learned lessons, but the Americans did not. Twelve years later, for instance, the VC made sure to have deep bunkers. So the lessons of Dien Bien Phu were remembered by at least one side. The description of Lyndon B. Johnson's caution about getting involved in Vietnam makes one wish that the Johnson of 1954 was still around in 1964.
 
The author gave all the political and historical details that happened, but at the same time he was never far from the soldier on the ground, presumably because he spent so much time in the 1950s and 60s out in the field with the French, Cambodian colonial troops, Foreign Legionaries, South Vietnamese, and American soldiers/marines. That gives this book a certain "feel" that resonates; it "clicks". I didn't feel like I was reading someone whose observations were made from a distance, but more like they were coming from someone who was there. It's fair to say I'm not sure how much of that is due to shared experience, or because I agree with most of his observations of the political and military leadership. At any rate, I highly recommend this book to anyone who wants to know about this important piece of history.