Rating: 3/5

Two shorter novels in one! I haven't many of Frederik Pohl's stories, which is sort of a feat in itself given that he wrote sf for over seventy-five years. "The Tunnel Under the World" and the first part of the serial "Gladiator-at-Law" (written in collaboration with C. M. Kornbluth) were quite good, and interesting explorations of certain satirical themes. Pohl is definitely one of those "classic" sf authors with a strong prognostication sense: he may not get the details of the future correct, but he seems surprisingly prescient about the tone of the future.

Witness The Age of the Pussyfoot. Originally published in serial form in 1966, Pohl cleverly extrapolates shiny-and-new elements of that era (organ transplants, time-sharing computers, and almost certainly the new wave of teenage counter-culture) into elements of the future. So in the year 2527 everyone has portable computing devices that read messages, conduct monetary transactions, relay knowledge from a vast central repository, and dispense a variety of customized pharmaceuticals. Other than the drugs on demand, that's amazingly close to smartphone tech; only the "joymakers" of the story are cylindrical thingies and not glass-and-aluminum screens.

The story itself is about a guy who gets cryonically preserved in the Sixties and wakes up in the future. (Cryonics, incidentally, is still in the "maybe" column.) It's pretty transparently an odyssey through Pohl's world, as our protagonist stubbornly refuses to accept the new reality and generally goes around yelling "what's the big idea!" (sort of like L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt's "Compleat Enchanter" but less annoying) and getting in trouble just because he keeps refusing to hear his messages. Also there are space aliens, which seemed like a needless addition, or else a shoehorned villain. Overall I'd give it ★★★ or ★★★½, worth reading for the interesting future-world-building, but weak in the story department.

Second is Drunkard's Walk, originally published as a serial in 1960. This is a vintage mid-century sf story: overcrowded future world, conspiracies, psi phenomena. In fact the actual story (once it kicks into high gear) is pure Alex-Jones-level craziness. The writing is a bit uneven up until then; the story has early moments of absurdity that made me think "satire," until it dove straight into a conspiracy-thriller and lost all (intentional) silliness. And while the civilization of 2196 still uses magnetic tapes and CRT televisions, lectures at the University are video-recorded and televised―not a whole-cloth prediction, as this was already done sporadically as far backs as the Thirties, but still interesting speculation in light of educational programming on YouTube, which is closer to the graphics-heavy style that Pohl describes. Overall I'd give this a ★★½, solid, but not exceptional among the mass of Sixties sf serials.

OVERALL: ★★★. Pohl is one of the sf grandmasters for good reason, and it's worth reading at least some of his work. I'd suggest Age of the Pussyfoot for the worldbuilding.