Norton skipped from one genre to another. This is another of the backwaters of history: Egypt occupied by the Hyksos, and most of the Egyptians withdrawn to Upper Egypt (which, confusingly, is in the 
South--always had trouble with that'n).

If I'd read the blurbs before I read the book, I would have put it down unread. Norton's tendency to glorify warfare has always been one of the things that alienated me most. But there're a lot of things that make the book worth reading: the discussion of Egyptian/Nubian relations, the descriptions of classical Egyptian society, the fact that, despite the hero's isolated state, women really do play a significant part in the story...

There's a tendency to treat Ancient Egypt as if it were an androcratic state, in which the women are off somewhere in sealed courtyard/prisons, playing no part in the action. This runs counter to simple facts like that 'pharaoh' comes from words meaning 'house of rule', that women played a big part not only in court life but in temple life, and that one of the main reasons pharaohs married their sisters was that his child does not inherit--his sister's child does. Facts like that are at least recognized in this book, and others by Norton, and supply a useful corrective to the unwomaned landscapes of too many other novels about ancient Egypt.

This book begins with a genocidal attack on a Kush village in Nubia. The survivors of the murderous attack are (literally) invisible: they're hiding so they won't be killed. This dismissive attitude toward the Kush is never revised, even though the heroes have to depend on a Kush slave later to help some of them escape from a chancy scouting ploy. The Hyksos also are rarely treated as humans. There's no talk between them and the Egyptians at Thebes, and no consideration that if the Hyksos are having trouble with their Asiatic provinces (as is said), they may be amenable to negotiation. The Minoans, though always offstage, are repeatedly referred to as 'warriors', and there's an implication of a stratified society. This is inconsistent with archaeological evidence, which reveals the contemporary Minoans to have been peaceful and egalitarian, enriching themselves and others through an extensive trade network. Norton's prejudices in favor of warfare, slavery, and military serfdom (not even helotism) strongly influence her telling of a story of which even she has to admit little was known. On the other hand, she tends to prefer guerilla warfare to the asembly-line type the Hyksos practice, and her presentations of how awful warfare truly is are fairly realistic: but only to the point of how it affects soldiers: no mention whatever is made of the affect it has on the countryside, and little of its effects on citizens, who are mostly invisible, as well. It's as if the wars were against stuffed dolls: articulated stuffed dolls, that fight back, to be sure: but not real people, with breath and bowels and nervous systems--and farms, and houses, and....