Rating: 5/5

Espionage and social arrangements.

This is the fourth book in the Foundation series and my third read of the series and I just got to say that I’m eating this series up. It is sooo good and unique. Yes it still suffers from sexism and patriarchy like the prior books. Looking past the flaws, I think this is probably my favorite science fiction series I’ve ever read.

MAJOR SPOILERS:

This fourth book is after the ordeal with the Mule and the First Foundation believing they have finally vanquished the Second Foundation in the prior book. This book is about the linchpin character Trevize who believes the Second Foundation is still in operation because the Seldon Plan is running a bit too smoothly and reeks of orchestration. And then we have a second POV by Gendibal who is actually from the cabal of the Second Foundation and he claims the Seldon Plan is working too smoothly when they look at the Prime Radiant which must be evidence that there is another agent at work, pulling the strings. So you have these two parallel stories going on with amazing espionage and subterfuge and very cool deductions happening between the characters. One of the main elements in this book is the power struggle and politicking between the established physical government representative of the First Foundation and the shadow government which is the Second Foundation. It’s all really compelling to read.

And then on top of that you have the search for Gaia which as we come to find out is a world of in which all organism live in mental harmony which was created by the “Eternals” who are robots from thousands of years ago who apparently followed the First Law of Robotics so much that they created an entire dimension where humans are the only intelligent life form in order to protect them forever. So you have that little plot point going on which is worked really deftly into the story and everything interests the character Trevize. Trevize has some sort of unspoken and special ability to have a mind unaltered from mentalic influence. Gaia has selected him to make a decision for humanity: how should civilization proceed? He has three options: 1. Go with the autocratic and military rule of the First Foundation in order to establish a second galactic empire 2. Go with the shadow government that will be led by the Second Foundation or 3. Go with Gaia who will spread their consciousness throughout the galaxy to integrate all together in harmony. Basically the three options are fascism, technocracy or communism. Trevize goes with the third option, not because he believes it is the best, but it will take thousands of years to accomplish thus buying time for further options. 

I’m amazed that Asimov took his story here. His willingness to abandon the Seldon Plan and explore these concepts and the politics involved is truly something special. I think Asmiov had a really great mind to work these concepts into his science fiction.

At any rate. I LOVE this series and loved this book.