Rating: 4/5

I rated this book 4 stars.

The book "Multiple Choice," is about a fourteen year old girl named Monica who obsesses about anything and everything 98.782 percent of the time. She is extremely intelligent and can complete word puzzles in very little time, by taking phrases and unscrambling them into different phrases. In the beginning of the book, Monica takes us through her everyday life, and exactly how MUCH she obsesses. She has a brother and a sister, and while assisting her mother for their birthday shopping, they pick out bean bags. Monica is convinced that they are not equal in weight, and so she starts scooping out the insides and ends up making an enormous mess. This is just one daily example of her obsessing. 
In the middle of the book, Monica creates a game with her scrabble tiles called "Multiple Choice," that includes 4 choices. A is something she would ordinarily do, B is something really dumb, C is mean, and D is charitable. Her first choice, she picked B, which was wear her pajamas to school. The teachers were astonished at how perfect, clean-cut Monica would ever wear pajamas to school. She eventually got invited to a party, and picked B again, which was mention cookie dough in 5 conversations. She used Multiple Choice to pick many choices in her life, and made it more exciting and unpredictable, until one choice went way too far.Towards the end of the book, Monica picks C, write something mean about Lynn at school. The number one rule of Multiple Choice is that you can not go back on your choice. She had gone too far, and had to do it. Once Lynn saw what she had wrote, she gave Monica the cold shoulder and became best friends with Monica's worst enemy. Monica enters a craft fair and makes over 15 barb wire trees. Most that saw them really enjoyed it. Monica stopped obsessing as much, but still remained the same. 

Main Characters:
Monica- obsessive, serious, and careful
Lynn- Monica's best friend, outgoing, creative, carefree
Tish- Monica's sister, loving, loves soccer, competitive, good at spelling
Micheal-Monica's brother, sweet, soccer, fun
Monica's Mom- busy, nice, understanding, unfrequently dismissive 
Monica's Dad- calm, really cool, easy going, easy to talk to 

The dynamic character in this book is Monica, because she changes and shifts the most.She loosens up at the end of the book, and becomes a bit more daring. 

The theme of this book is to care about other people's feelings and also to live life fully, and not to be so tied up to being perfect.

I rated this book 4 stars because it was very interesting and enjoyable, but didn't have that spark or writing style that made me say, "Wow, I'm going to rate this 5 stars!"Nevertheless, it was a good book and I don't regret reading it. 

My personal reactions with this book somewhat tie into me wanting to be perfect, but relating to the new, free Monica more than the old, tied up and planned Monica. Most of the time I am fun and carefree, but once in a while I feel as if (for some odd reason) that I need to do everything perfect, whether its missing my spot be 2 inches (pitching), missing one question on a quiz, or getting the right amount of information for a report. In that reason of being a trained perfectionist, I can relate to the book immensely. 

I would recommend this book to the age group of 12-15 year old girls. It contains some cuss words, but doesn't have any sexual content, and doesn't drop the F-Bomb once. This book isn't recommended towards boys, because it wouldn't keep their attention for the first few chapters, and isn't written for them. They wouldn't understand the hardship of the friendship problems like all girls go through, and they may not have the same feelings about perfectionism, or may not relate to how she is feeling. (Monica expresses her feelings very strongly in this book, and the boys may be like 'she needs to suck it up,')