Rating: 5/5

The Virgin in the Ice is #6 in The Chronicles of Brother Cadfael, a set of 20 medieval murder mysteries by Ellis Peters. This is one of the best of the series I have read so far, and the medieval mystery is complex and the plot is sound. Set in 12th century Wales, the story revolves around a Welsh Benedictine monk whose past as a warrior sets him apart from his cloistered community. He lives at the Abbey Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, in Shrewsbury, Western England. 

 "It was early in November of 1139 that the tide of civil war, lately so sluggish and inactive, rose suddenly to sweep over the city of Worcester . . . "
 
 There is enough realism in the story and attention to broad historical detail that there is some violence and implied sex; however, there is no foul language or gruesome imagery. This disparity between the realism of the historical period of the late Crusades and the subtlety in which the author relates the tale is smoothly done and the reader will not feel they are being treated as a child, but as an adult who is given just enough details to add some darkness and some spirituality in the setting of the monastery. 

The narration drifts into a dreamy poeticism at unexpected places. "The dry, fine snow turned the night into a white, whirling mist, shrouding outlines, burying paths, blown into smooth, breaking waves only to be lifted and hurled again into new shapes."

The Christian reader will find many places in the text to contemplate and to find Christian wisdom, practices related to a monastery or simply religious piety. My Kindle copy is heavily annotated and highlighted. "It was all too easy to turn honest anxiety over someone loved into an exaltation of a man's own part and duty as protector a manner of usurpation of the station of God. To accuse oneself of falling short of infallibility is to arrogate to oneself the godhead thus implied."

Caedfel instructs:"You must not take to yourself more than your due. What you yourself did, that you may rue, and confess, and do penance for, to your soul's content, but you may not lift another man's sin from his shoulders, or usurp God's right to be the only judge." No scripture is quoted directly, but the morality of the New Testament is in abundance, greatly softening the atmosphere of suspense and fearsome adventure where lives are often at stake.

Ellis Peters is sophisticated and highly educated, a linguist and an English scholar, and her knowledge is revealed in her handling of the medieval plot and the customs and practices of a Benedictine monastery. Her novels have won numerous awards and accolades. 

Brother Cadfael is the archetype of the wise elder. “Never go looking for disaster,” said Cadfael cheerfully. “Expect the best, and walk so discreetly as to invite it, and then leave all to God.” 

I enthusiastically recommend this book and the entire series for light reading with a medieval atmosphere of simply religious piety.