Rating: 3/5

The 39th Nero Wolfe installment features three novellas where a blunt instrument is involved in a murder.

  Kill Now - Pay Later:

Peter Vassos had been coming to Wolfe's brownstone on West 35th Street around Noon on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday to shine Wolfe and Archie Goodwin's shoes after he had finished his rounds at a nearby office building. When the story opens he has shown up an hour early. One of his customers at the nearby office building had left his tenth floor office by the window and would not need his shoes shined. He hints to Wolfe that he may have seen someone. He didn't stick around and chose to come to shine Wolfe's shoes instead. The autopsy determines the victim had been hit over the had before going out the window. The police believe Pete may know something. When he turns up dead they decide he killed the office manager and then committed suicide. Pete's daughter hires Wolfe to exonerate her father and find the real killer. This story is dated. Bootblacks? It was a fun little story. Not great. Archie is Wolfe's leg man and visits the office building to check it out as well as the co-workers. In the end everyone is invited to Wolfe's office where he exposes who the murderer is.

  Murder Is Corny:

Everyone who is familiar with Nero Wolfe knows he is very particular about the food he eats. In this story we learn that between July and October he had 16 ears of corn delivered to his brownstone on West 35th Street from an upstate farm. The corn had to fresh. Picked no more than 3 hours before delivery. When the story opens Inspector Cramer brings the box of corn personally. It seems the body of Kenneth Faber, who had been delivering the corn for the past five weeks, was found by the loading dock in the alley behind Rusterman’s restaurant. Cramer was not being helpful. It seems the farmer had a daughter who told the police she had an appointment to meet Archie in the alley about the same time that Faber was killed. Archie is a suspect and in danger of being arrested. If Archie is arrested it would be an inconvenience to Wolfe to have to get by without his assistance. He winds up taking a case without a client to bill.

  Blood Will Tell:

Most of the mail received at the brownstone on West 35th Street is for Nero Wolfe. Sometimes Archie receives something. In this story he receives an envelope containing a tie and a note. The tie has a brownish stain. Blood? The note is brief and only says "Keep thus until you hear from me. — JNV". The return address is from James Neville Vance. No sooner does he receive the tie and note when he gets a phone call telling him to forget it and burn it. His curiosity aroused he decides to take a walk to Vance's building. Vance owns the building but rents out part of it as apartments. While Archie is there a policeman comes to do a welfare check on one of the other residents. In the apartment they find the body of Mrs. Martin Kirk. Archie decides he'd better leave. Of course the police suspect the estranged husband who hires Wolfe to find the real killer. 

None of these were particularly great stories. They were entertaining especially if you are a Nero Wolfe fan. This book was published in 1964 and is late in Rex Stout's career when he was about 78.