Rating: 3/5

It is said that in order to become a man, one must put away childish things. If that were true, then the characters in Jonathan Lethem’s Men and Cartoons elucidate the onerous labour of self-realization that belies the deceptive ease implied in setting aside what is childish. Whether it is a childhood compulsion to dress up as a comic book character, an inability to move past a once close companion outgrowing a friendship, or more nebulously, an adolescent fantasy of the possibility of romance with a stranger, each story reveals how an incomplete graduation from childhood constrains one from knowing oneself and, as a consequence, other people.

Take, for instance, one of the stand-out stories in the collection: ‘The Vision’. In it, the narrator recounts attending a dinner party hosted by someone he had known in childhood to have habitually affected the appearance and mannerisms of a Marvel comic hero, The Vision. Misrecognition dominates the evening; the narrator wrongly assumes “a grown-up encounter, involving wine and sophisticated talk” but instead gets caught up in a secret identity game of Mafia where he is unable to adequately represent his identity as a villager and carelessly places his trust with one of the ‘mafia’. Lethem’s measured prose steadily guides the narrative to its anti-climax. The revelation the narrator anticipates does not result in a dramatic effect or epiphany. Instead, the reader is left to wonder which character has failed to shed childhood’s costume.

Unfortunately, not all of the stories collected in this book measure up to ‘The Vision’’s precision and poignant bathos. ‘Access Fantasy’ reads as a bloated allegory of a then nascent influencer economy that doesn’t quite find a target and ‘The National Anthem’ is a meandering epistle that would have challenged the attention span and interest of its addressee, let alone a reader expecting short stories.

Men and Cartoons is as uneven as the medium in its title. At its best, it reveals the ways childhood haunts the rest of our lives and how nuance and subtlety shade any bold, hard-edged action or character regardless of how straightforward they might seem. Where it stumbles is in indulging in baser pleasures while at the same time repudiating them.