Rating: 5/5

“By the pricking of my thumbs, 
Something wicked this way comes.”

Shakespeare’s shortest tragedy is also one of his most powerful. Macbeth’s lust for power is compulsory, when confronted with the witches’ prophesy he is drawn into the tragedy as if he were a runaway train on tracks. He must fulfill his ambition.

“To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time;
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death.”

Macbeth is a tragic hero but, like Richard III, is also villain, and like Milton, Shakespeare immerses his audience in a character study of dark shadows. By casting the lot and allowing his tragedy to live out to its necessarily bloody conclusion, Shakespeare was drawing on primal heartstrings that people of his time, and people for all time, can relate. At the black heart of this play is a fear of death, and yet a perverse and paradoxical fascination with it as well.

“Stars, hide your fires; Let not light see my black and deep desires.”

Though written and produced in the late 1500s and early 1600s (originally) the subject involves witchcraft and sorcery and harkens to a pagan past, not too long lost on the folks sitting at the Globe. No doubt ancient family legends and folk tales still resounded in dank cellars and back rooms, and the imagery and symbolism Shakespeare used to such potent effect served as a chilling contrast with the Christian spectators. The inchoate curse of guilt for naked ambition is a theme readily apparent.

“Out, out, brief candle! Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage and is heard no more. It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.”

Lady Macbeth is one of the great female characters in literature. Her role as a temptress and wily beneficiary of the ruthless plan, and her eventual abysmal fall is one that resounds with readers and audiences to this day.

“Things without all remedy should be without regard: what's done is done.”