Rating: 5/5

An exceptional personal account of a scientist in his pursuit of better treatment options for cancer. This book is a biography of sorts, a narrative on how science truly works, and a commentary on science culture. While the science is dated, the process that Dr. Rosenberg went through is illustrative of how science works in the real world. He is honest throughout the book and keeps the pace moving. You sense an urgency is his quest. He recounts many of the great moments, but does not shy away from the failures. A wonderful book to read for anyone interested in science and cancer.

The book is broken into five parts. The first part sets up the major question that drives Dr. Rosenberg, whether the body's immune system can recognize and fight cancer. He details much of his educational and professional training here and the reader becomes acquainted with his passion for finding a better way to treat cancer. The second part details his early days at NIH in the late 1970s and early 1980s as he formulated hypotheses that would guide his research using interleukin-2 (IL-2). The third part details many of the clinical trials that he initially started with IL-2 and the challenges they faced and things they learned. The fourth part of the book explains the progress that was made with his therapies resulting in many successes for patients, some having their cancers disappear completely. The fifth part details his beginning effort into gene therapy for cancer, especially the politics of it all in getting approval from different regulatory committees. 

The book is personal in that you come to know Dr. Rosenberg and his patients very well. He expressed his anxiety over his patients and frustrations when they did not respond. You sense the hunger and passion in him to get immunotherapy to work. He shares his personal feelings about how science should operate in a more open way. This book was written during the early years of biotechnology and he already sees the benefits and challenges they bring to the scientific realm.