Rating: 5/5

I have a rough top 10 all time favourite books in my head. While I don’t think have really slipped under that, I do have quite a few ties over the years. Ever since I first read Conor’s Way it’s had a spot on that list, if not in the top 5. The book started haunting me to read it again a few weeks ago and when a book starts doing that I’ve no choice but to give in. I was rather surprised to see it’s been almost five years since I read it. I finished it last night and knew that it still is that high. This was, is and always will be a 5+ book for me. It’s not an easy read but it’s it’s so worth it in its richness. It’s currently on KU so anyone who is even the slightest bit curious needs to read it. It will break your heart and then heal it.

*/*/*/*/*/*/*/*/

While I’ve read this book a number of times and recommend it every chance I get, it seems I haven’t posted a review on GoodReads, something I must remedy immediately. 
Giving a very short one, I love everything about this book and is one of the first books I looked for when I switched from print books to ebooks.

While I got it for a Very Good Price back in the day, at $5 it’s still a very good deal.
Connor Branigan is probably one of the most tortured hero’s I’ve ever read. It hurts reading everything he has been through in his relatively young life. Of course that makes his HEA even sweeter when he finally gets it. But until then? Wow does he suffer. He grew up in Ireland, the poor tenants of a very nasty English Lord. He and his family were thrown off their land and that was only the beginning. His family starved to death during the Potato Famine.

He later joins the early version of the IRA in retaliation against the English. He was captured and unspeakably tortured into giving up his comrades. Despite holding out against the most horrific treatment imaginable, he finally gives in, only to be told by the sadistic torturer that another member had already given the information, his friends all killed and his torture was not even necessary.. 

He immigrates to America and things aren’t much better. There is a hatred in the country for all Irish immigrants and he’s finally reduced to trying to make a living as a prizefighter. But when he disobeys orders to ‘throw’ a fight, he’s beaten and then ends up under the roof of Olivia Maitland and her adopted daughters. The book takes place sometime after the civil way and Olivia is struggling. She is being hounded to sell her farm by a former rejected overseer. So when she notices a badly beaten man on her way home, she thinks maybe God is answering her prayers and once she helps him heal, he will help her with chores around her farm leading up to the harvest of her peach crop. But once he regains conscious, it turns out he’s her worst nightmare. He swears, he drinks, he smokes and he’s a bitter and resentful man.

But she slowly gets to know the man underneath his mask of hostility and she begins to fall in love. Connor has never known real kindness in his life and he is befuddled by it and resists falling in love with Oliva and her daughters with all of his might. But that proves impossible so he finally embraces his new role and as he does, he lets go of his self-loathing and finally reaches out for happiness.

This book is such a great example of the romance genre and why I love it so much. It’s beautifully written and we weep and celebrate with Connor and Olivia. They are both such lonely people yet so deserving of being loved. As I said, I’ve read this numerous times over the years, first in print and then on my ereader and every single time I do, I fall in love with it all over again. This book is easily in my top ten of every romance book I’ve read and if you haven’t read it yourself, you simply must give it a read.