Rating: 3/5

Goethe was very proud of this novel. He thought it was very complex "and it needs reading three times". I only read it once and I don't feel the urge of reading it again, at least, for the time being.

ELECTIVE AFFINITIES (first published in 1809) is a novel about marriage, however, it tackles the subject from an unexpected angle because it explores if marriage vows really should be indissoluble. 

Eduard and Charlotte are a middle-aged couple who live in their large estate in the country. The two have loved each other from a young age, but they only married recently, after the deaths of their respective spouses. They live in seclusion, enjoying their calm and peaceful lives as they seek to make up for the years they spent apart. One day, however, a letter from an old friend brings a change to this perfect life.

Eduard and Charlotte’s delightful life is upset when two guests, Ottilie and the Captain, undertake extended stays at their estate. Unexpectedly, the reader discovers that chemistry-of all subjects!- is introduced to analyze "philosophically" what starts to transpire in this genteel estate.

Goethe suggests that these characters have “natures which, when they meet, quickly lay hold on and mutually affect one another”. As forbidden passions heat the atmosphere, the four companions calmly debate whether human relationships result from some predetermined sequence of events (like in chemistry), or because affinities can be “elective”: in other words, “one relationship was preferred to another and chosen instead of it”. All these lengthy discussions are so pompous and ridiculously civilized. 

In order to avoid spoilers I will spare you further details. I feel quite uncomfortable writing in this way about a novel written by Goethe but I have to admit I thoroughly disliked the characters. They were cardboard creatures, not believable, well developed characters. Their dialogues are so artificial, so overblown, so utterly boring. And then, Goethe gives us the tragic, unbelievably inflated, dramatic finale. The ending is the perfect example of German Romanticism, an aesthetic I've never been fond of. I probably missed this novel's finer points but I don't see myself reading it three times to discover its concealed secrets.