Rating: 3/5

Another example of "picking up a book because the cover was interesting and the synopsis was compelling" while I was browsing at the bookstore. Even when I was reading the synopsis, I was a bit suspicious, seeing that this was going to be another "rape and revenge" themed fantasy book. Sure: the book was written in 1989, but nowadays the trope is wearing thin, especially as a primary motivator in a female-led fantasy book. But seeing that I'm a writer myself, I think it's fair to see how people approach the topic - especially from a female writer's perspective - and in the case of "Strands of Starlight", I wasn't *entirely* disappointed. 

The main character, a young woman named Miriam, had already suffered a great deal at the hands of the Inquisition, having been accused of being a witch for her "cursed" ability of being able to heal people from the brink of death. From the literary standpoint, a girl being able to heal others is already tipping on the cliche side. On the other hand - the narrative side of things - Miriam's experience as a healer is quite brutal: she's tortured extensively by the Church, and I don't recall that she can heal her own wounds... Speaking of the Church, you'll sense that the author has some anti-religious leanings (or at least, she's opposed to dogmatic organized religions), because of the Church's hatred of a person who can heal any wound is quite ridiculous, even in that Dark Age medieval way of thinking. Maybe it was a driving point of the author to show how absurd this way of thinking was, which ultimately put millions of people - most of which happened to be women who were unfortunate enough to be older women who worked with medicine - to death. I would think that a government would like to utilize people with that ability so their army or royal line could never be challenged. 

Anyway, so one of two things I appreciate from the novel was that - going back to what I alluded in the first paragraph - the author did do something different with Miriam's sexual assault. It's a big turning point in her life, as it would be with a lot of survivors, but the rape itself is never described. A big criticism of rape tropes used in creative works is how so many authors detail such acts in titillating near-consensual ways that's very off-putting if not downright insulting, with the usual rebuttal being "but it's realism." You can make such a heinous act impactful without presenting it as some sort of sick striptease, and I think the author carries that well. We know that Miriam's assault was savage by the fact that her physical recovery was arduous, and her emotional recovery exceeds the end of the book, since it's her personal driving point to even becoming a non-human, an elf, so that she can seek revenge.

That leads into the second point about this book that I appreciate: the elves, or rather, the application of elves rather than the elves themselves. "Strands of Starlight" is a historical fantasy, taking place in 12th century France. The elven narrative is very Tolkienian, which, sadly, is another trope that is wearing a bit thin nowadays (e.g. perfect elves whose age is coming to end in the shadow of humankind), but I suppose it works for this story. In fact, the author takes A LOT of artistic licence, since this place is basically "Europe in Name Only." Rarely are any real cities or provinces brought up to solidify the fact that the story takes place in this world. So maybe I just invalidated my entire point. XD

I guess one thing about the elves that I thought interesting is their ability of prescience (elves can foresee many futures) which can bring upon the discussion of free will, fatalism, and causality while reading this book, but for some reason it didn't. Characters discussed those themes in passing, but it never clung to me (and believe me: I think about free will and fate A LOT). I guess that brings to mind a pitfall for the book: it has potential, but I think it falls short in some areas. Maybe if the story was more grounded in our world or if the author just took the time to establish her own world, it would have worked out more, but I was never quite able to feel the magnitude of the Inquisition and the plight of the people, elves and human alike, as a whole. I was never really able to imagine beyond the locations that we are placed in or the scope of the elven race (the elves are so flat that I forgot that there were two other elf characters in the story beyond the two main elven characters, Varden and Terrill, and for a greater portion of the book, I couldn't really distinguish them).

In conclusion, this book wasn't bad, but it wasn't great: there was potential, but it was missed. This book is okay as a stand alone installment, but I'm not sure how the rest of the series fairs or if it even rectifies what I think are missed opportunities in this book, as I heard that the successors of "Strands of Starlight" fall much shorter. Maybe if I chance upon the sequel in another used bookstores, all give that one a chance as well...