Rating: 5/5

This is an important book and to read and understand why the Justice System has always been historically biased towards People of Color. The late Judge Wright gives a brutally honest opinion based on his personal experiences and observations as a NY Supreme Court Justice. Judge Wright has stated that most Judges are White Men from Upper and Middle Class backgrounds, Conservative, aloof with no understanding of Racism, American History, and other cultures especially of African Americans and Latinos that isn't stereotypical. 

Judge Wright also called out Fellow Judges for allowing this behavior to continue and explains why he was labelled a troublemaker by his peers, demonized by The Press, and NYPD which had earned him the nickname "Turn em loose Bruce" for being openly vocal about Institutionalized Racism and the reason he didn't go further up in his career as Judge. Wright also explained the real need for reform and not what is spoken of by people like Kim Kardashian West who mention it for publicity and not willing to do the work. 

I had the privilege of meeting Judge Wright 29 years ago when he visited my High School to speak to my classmates and I about the Justice System as he had mentioned in his book. Judge Wright was a friend of my High School Teacher who was also a Lawyer. This book was written 42 years ago long before the existence of Social Media and still relevant today. Judge Wright also called out the term "Reserve Racism" as an excuse to not address Racism in America that has become used on a daily basis in the media and anything positive dealing with African American Culture is negatively looked upon case in point, a conversation he had with a fellow Judge about the 1977 mini series Roots based on the book by Alex Haley. 

As you read this book, you will get the hard truth and no "Mickey Mouse Work" as told to me by my High School Teacher when receiving my homework assignment. . Do yourself a favor and get this book for yourself and others.