Rating: 4/5

“It is disastrous to permit the vagaries of the heart to infect the mind.”

The League of Frightened Men, which is the second Nero Wolfe novel and arose my interest with its obvious titular nod towards the second Sherlock Holmes short story, is full of aphorisms I can easily subscribe to. And as fun things should go first, let’s have some more of these right now:

”To assert dignity is to lose it.”

“Of course I am rude to you, and on such occasions I always regret that I do not know the art of being rude elegantly.”

“It’s a temptation to cling to competence when we find it.”

“[I]t occurs to me that no publication either before or since the invention of printing, no theological treatise and no political or scientific creed, has ever been as narrowly dogmatic and offensively arbitrary in its prejudices as a railway timetable.”

“God made you and me, in certain respects, quite unequal, and it would be futile to try any interference with His arrangements.”

And, best of all,

”But as Nero Wolfe says, a nurse that pushes the perambulator in the park without putting the baby in it has missed the point.”

Nevertheless, for all his witticisms and nonchalance, Wolfe is not becoming any more likeable to me than he was in the first book, and this is because of his imperturbable mercenary spirit, which rises to new hights, or depths, at the end of the novel but is obvious all through. Nevertheless, the book is a fun read, not only because of Wolfe and Archie but also because of its intriguing plot: Years ago, after a college hazing incident had gone terribly wrong and left Paul Chapin an invalid, the youngsters responsible for this accident tried to make atonement to Chapin in many ways but now several deaths have occurred among the members of this self-stylized League of Atonement, and the survivors got anonymous messages claiming that these men were murdered and more murders are to follow. Of course, they put it down to Chapin, who, although keeping smug, denies having anything to do with it, and it is for Nero Wolfe to bring some light into the matter.

In his second Nero Wolfe adventure, Rex Stout has managed a better pace, avoiding the slackening tempo at the end and giving Wolfe, in Chapin, an opponent whose wit is equal to the occasion. Archie still behaves like a clumsy clot and gets himself, at least once, into quite an awkward situation, and like in the first case, his narrow mind is set upon pinning the crime on a man who is characterized by otherness – this time being disabled.

Those two are not half as likeable as Holmes and Watson but still they keep me intrigued.