Rating: 5/5

Title: Why the Sun and the Moon Live in the Sky

Author: Elphinstone Dayrell

Illustrator: Blair Lent

Genre: Non-European Folktale

Theme: Generosity

Opening Line/sentence: “Many years ago, the sun and water were great friends, and they both lived on the earth together, the sun very often used to visit the water, but the water never returned the visits”.

Brief Book Summary: The sun and water are friends, but sun is upset because water never visits. So the sun asks why, and water says its because anywhere water goes it takes up the whole place, and the sun does not have enough room. So the sun builds a very large house to accommodate water. When water arrives, it begins to fill up the house, forcing the sun, and his wife, the moon to sit on the roof of the house. Water asks if it can continue to come in, and they continue to say yes, until they are forced to go into the sky.

Professional Recommendation/Review #1:
Kirkus
https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-re...
This Nigerian folk tale posits a previous sharing of earth by sun, moon and water until water visits the house of the sun. Water has warned the sun that his retinue is too large but the sun argues otherwise; sun and moon grow increasingly uncomfortable as water fills the house until they are forced out on the roof, eventually into their permanent places in the sky. As told to Mr. Dayrell by the Efik-Ibibio peoples, it's a difficult concept to picture, a problem the artist handles by depicting African tribesmen appropriately and skillfully dressed as sun, waning-faced moon and water. Mr. Lent's precise contours contain the abstraction by suggesting a dramatic reenactment, admirably represent generalized African motifs. An original approach to a traditional belief, and seeing may be believing.

Professional Recommendation/Review #2:
Publisher’s Weekly
Striking primitive illustrations aid in the retelling of this African folktale about the consequences of an overwhelming visit from Water and his people. 
https://www.publishersweekly.com/978-...

Response to Two Professional Reviews:
I agree that the usage of the unique tribesmen to depict the sun, moon, and water was a good touch to articulate imagery that can be difficult to depict. It created a fun story to read.

Evaluation of Literacy Elements: African folktales can be difficult because they can take elemental objects and personify them. This resulted in illustrations that were largely sparse outside of the detailed depictions of the components mentioned in the story. This allows the focus to be maintained on the dynamics between the elements.

Consideration of Instructional Application:
This Nigerian folktales could be a useful tool to deviate from a euro-centric approach to early childhood literature, in favor of more multicultural texts. I could also do a unit on personification, using this texts depictions of the sun, moon, and earth as examples.