Rating: 5/5

"It isn’t where you’re born in this world, it’s what you do."

If you’ve read my reviews of both Ross Poldark and Demelza, then you might be thinking here we go again… Candi’s set to get all fangirlish on us! Yep, you’re probably right! Jeremy Poldark is the third in this splendid series and just as riveting as the first two. In this one, the futures of some of my beloved characters are threatened, and I was worried indeed. Ross is faced with a dilemma and his thought process in determining the right path is fraught with tension. His emotions are complex, and he can’t seem to evade the shadow that hovers over him. A more pessimistic side of this strong-willed man appears to get the best of him. He reflects "there are no permanent things, only fleeting moments of warmth and companionship, precious stationary seconds in a flicker of troubled days."

Demelza is resilient, yet harbors some of her own doubts about herself. Nevertheless, she once more fights for those she loves with all she has. I love watching her in action. She is not a ‘manipulator’ in the ugly sense of the word, but somehow she still manages to hold the reins in some sticky situations! "It was one of the few comforting factors in Demelza’s excursions into society, this faculty she had of pleasing men. She did not see it yet as power, only as a buttress to faltering courage." She never schemes to her own advantage, but uses whatever gifts she has to work towards the benefit and happiness of others. If you don’t already know this woman, you are missing out on one of the finest characters. She ranks right up there with my favorite literary figures of all time. 

Aside from the leading man and lady, we also see more of Dr. Dwight Enys, who is quickly becoming another favorite. He is truly concerned for the welfare of the people for whom he provides medical service, mostly miners’ families and other impoverished folk. He does not look down his nose at those less fortunate than himself, unlike the other pompous physician in town. We are introduced to Caroline Penvenen and her little canine companion – I can sense she will be a delightful addition to the series as well. She inserted a brand of subtle humor into the storyline that I for one rather eagerly gobbled down. "I stay with my uncle, Mr. Ray Penvenen, whom you may know. I have no parents and he reluctantly takes the responsibility of an orphan niece, as monks take a hair shirt. So at times I remove the penance by removing myself; and others wear the shirt for him." I look forward to seeing more of her sharp wit in future installments. And, naturally, George Warleggan and his schemes are once more not to be ignored. He continues to insert himself into every situation, using his power to attempt to turn the tables against Ross and in his own favor. He’s the bad guy you love to hate!

Once again, I can’t emphasize more that if you really love engaging historical fiction with memorable and well-drawn characters, you need to give this series a try. You will celebrate the victories and bewail the misfortunes. You might even become a fangirl (or fanboy) yourself! I can’t wait to read book 4, which is on my reading plan for this month. I feel a sense of doom going into the next, but I pray all will be well for my cherished friends! A genuine 5 star book.

"As always fog made the land secretive and strange; it was not the familiar friendly countryside they knew and owned; it reverted to an earlier and less personal allegiance."