Rating: 4/5

Never Say Die, Watson!

In 1901 Arthur Conan Doyle heard about the legend of a ghostly hound haunting the marshes of Dartmoor, and he was so fascinated by this tale that he decided to turn it into a story about an old family curse. Originally, there was no talk of Sherlock Holmes in this context at first, but since it occurred to the writer that he would need the character of a detective in his tale to have the family mystery unravelled, Doyle made up his mind to reactivate Sherlock Holmes, a conclusion in which the prospect of increasing his royalty from the Strand Magazine might have had some little momentum. However, as readers knew – to their chagrin – Holmes had met the Grim Reaper in his final struggle with Professor Moriarty, and therefore Doyle set the story told in The Hound of the Baskervilles before the fatal duel between the master detective and the master scoundrel. 

Some time later, though, Doyle gave in to further public demand for new Sherlock Holmes adventures, although before killing off his popular creation in the Reichenbach Falls he was sure that unless he killed Holmes, Holmes would sooner or later kill him. This time, however, it seemed impossible to have all the new cases take place before 1891, and so Doyle did something that is very familiar to watchers of modern soap operas: He undid the death of a character by retrospectively rewriting part of the story. As can be expected of Doyle, he was a little bit more imaginative than simply to claim that Watson had just dreamed Holmes’s death – a solution that would have laid itself open to troubling psychoanalytical interpretations, by the way –; instead, in the first story, The Empty House, we learn what really happened on that fateful day in Switzerland, and also why Holmes had chosen to pass for dead from 1891-94. Giving a credible account of how Holmes could have made his escape from the annoying scrape into which he was put by Moriarty, Doyle had to cheat a little bit by retrospectively altering decisive details given in Watson’s original account of the demise of Sherlock Holmes. All the same, he does it in a way that rather wrests an indulgent smile from his readers than make them bristle, for example here:

”’I stood up and examined the rocky wall behind me. In your picturesque account of the matter, which I read with great interest some months later, you assert that the wall was sheer. That was not literally true. A few small footholds presented themselves, and there was some indication of a ledge. […]’”

Probably, Watson, who might have used his years with Sherlock Holmes to hone his powers of observation, also overlooked the canopied moving stairs that lead from the ledge directly to a smokers’ lounge from which the detective was able to follow the aftermath of the Reichenbach Fall events? Be that as it may, Holmes and Watson are once again reunited and, since Watson’s wife Mary has deplorably died, or conveniently been abducted by aliens, or simply vanished into thin air – our narrator hardly thinks it worthwhile to let us in on that secret –, the two men take up lodgings once again at 221b Baker Street and embark on a series of adventures the first one of which is laying Moriarty’s right hand, Colonel Sebastian Moran, by the heels.

”’[…] We will see if my three years of absence have entirely taken away my power to surprise you.’”

Thus Holmes to Watson in the course of their emotion-laden first encounter after such a long spell of time, and yes! most of the new cases collected in The Return of Sherlock Holmes are highly entertaining and may well surprise the first-time reader, and it is from this collection, as well as from its two predecessors, that most film adaptations draw their material. There are some sparkling highlights among them, such as The Adventure of the Solitary Cyclist or The Adventure of the Priory School, which are well-known to any one even slightly familiar with Sherlock Holmes. At times, however, Doyle also practises the art of recycling his old tricks as when, in The Adventure of the Norwood Builder, Holmes uses a controlled fire to solve his case, and what is good enough to baffle an extraordinary woman like Irene Adler will most certainly do its service to bring down a lesser criminal. The only thing that I found strange about this adventure is how the police could take charred rabbit bones for the remains of a human body – but if I remember correctly, Lestrade was on the case, and so again, it makes perfect sense. In one instance, namely The Adventure of the Six Napoleons, the parallel to an older case is so obvious – you surely remember the Christmas geese, don’t you? – that one may begin to fear that Doyle’s inventiveness was beginning to slacken, but these doubts are soon dispelled.

All in all, there are some very effective murder mysteries in this collection, my favourite being The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez, where Holmes gets a wonderful opportunity to show his skills of observation, deduction and, above all, setting traps. Other stories, like the one about Holmes’s encounter with the ruthless blackmailer Charles Augustus Milverton, an evil Mr. Pickwick, on the whole put our sleuth into the role of an observer. This story is remarkable nevertheless because it gives us a glimpse on the darker side of Sherlock Holmes – when, seeing the affair as ”a sporting duel between this fellow Milverton and [himself]”, he ruthlessly engages himself to Milverton’s maid in order to win her confidence and gain access into her master’s well-guarded house. Watson utters his qualms about Holmes’s procedure but is rebuffed in this way:

”’You can’t help it, my dear Watson. You must play your cards as best you can when such a stake is on the table. […]’”

Surely, such a degree of callous indifference to the feelings of a housemaid displays an unsettling streak of misogyny in Holmes’s character that should incur more censure from Watson. As usual, we also get a lot of hints at cases that didn’t find their way into Watson’s published collection but nevertheless have such an appetizing ring of mystery and oddness about them that we ardently wish someone would spread them before the public eye:

”In this memorable year ‘95, a curious and incongruous succession of cases had engaged his attention, ranging from his famous investigation of the sudden death of Cardinal Tosca — an inquiry which was carried out by him at the express desire of His Holiness the Pope — down to his arrest of Wilson, the notorious canary-trainer, which removed a plague-spot from the East End of London.”

Just imagine what kind of man Wilson, the notorious canary-trainer, might have been, and what the canaries could have been trained at – theft, burglary, impersonation of bigger birds like Christmas geese? Interestingly, Doyle seems to have thought that The Return of Sherlock Holmes should have been his very last foray into the exciting professional life of Sherlock Holmes, because at the beginning of the last story, The Adventure of the Second Stain, Watson tells us that Holmes has by now retired from his work and become a beekeeper on the Sussex Downs and that at his express wish, Watson is to abstain from publishing further cases from his career. Still, we need not despair because, as history would show, Holmes had not done with Doyle yet.