Rating: 4/5

Overall I found this to be one of BN's better reads. The reveal of their true feelings is too close to the last page as per usual in a BN romance, but the crazy ambling road they took to get there was fun.
A wee bit of upstairs/downstairs going on.

Rose is a lonely girl of 28 who works as a clerk in the medical clinic where Radolf (the Dutch doctor, of course) works. She's worked there for 3 years and is (of course) a wallflower. But Radolf's mother shows up one day and talks Radolf into talking Rose into being his grandmother's companion in her final days.
I really don't think Radolf thought anything about Rose until then and it was still a very slow opening of his eyes over the course of the book, to his true feelings for Rose. Even Rose doesn't start thinking of him that way till about half way.
"How puzzling it was that she could love him so wholeheartedly and find him such a tiresome man."

He does indirectly cause Rose to be fired, so she ends up working for his Godmother as a maid. The story was kinda full of coincidences like that, but I didn't mind. Rose ends up serving him dinner and stuff while his godmother tries to match him up with a god awful niece and another daughter of a family friend or something. Both were horrid people and I never felt worried. He wasn't trying to make her jealous, but it did kinda suck, because by then Rose had come to realize she had feelings for him, but was sure that he disliked her. I mean there could have been no doubt over that, what with the way he would talk down to her in a disgruntled way.
But really he was uncomfortable around her because he was starting to fall for her. They never say his age but talk about him like he's older and given up on marriage and love. He's pretty set in his ways and not about to take kindly to having to change them.
All of this of course, I read between the lines.

Another plus, is Rose's pampered cat, Charles.

Even though the ILY's don't come till the end, I found them more romantic than the usual BN endings. 

Rose herself seems like the usual doormat at the start, but has a fair bit of gumption around Radolf and speaks plainly to him, which I don't think he is used to.

Overall, a sweet read that I will probably revisit!

Safety is good. Radolf dates occasionally when his relatives force him to. Rose doesn't date when she's living in London, but she had more of a social life when she had lived at home. She had been kicked out of her home after her father died, by her asshole step-mother.