Rating: 4/5

This commenced as a two star and holding. I found complexity in introductions and early character development. The author chose a large assortment of writing tools to use and he didn’t refuse many. He used vernacular extensively and dropped either foreign names, artists, phrases or sayings that all added up, by the conclusion, to a rewarding whole.

Talking of the end, as much I criticized the cornucopia and totality of data, I admit now that the conclusion would have been less rewarding and enjoyable for me without it.

For readers not used to John Layton, don’t ‘persevere’; instead, let yourself go with his flow and trust that this is one very talented writer who knows exactly where he is taking us. Layton is meticulous. One of the protagonists if not two reflect that same attention to the details of observation, deducing, testing and proving before concluding their tiles in the story. That is why the conclusion always seems ready to reach out and snag- but it remains just around another corner of observation, plus providing a dash of curiosity for measure!

It was an enjoyable book reading, excellent plot; however, for me most rewarding, was the amazing research and detail relative to life during the bombing of the UK, (BTW, when and where I was born, delivered by my dad in a bomb sheltered room.)

Now, I have a greater understanding of not only what my parents were living thru and coping with, but also Layton provided us details of such items as ration books by interlacing them thru the lens of the Proletariat versus the Plutocrat; and oh, how well he did that near the middle of the novel. The class struggle or entitlement of UK citizens are served up in a. On conventional manner where it is the effect rather than the cause which gets the emphasis. We get an exceptional literary treat in both his ‘Class’ comparatives, and also his description of immigrants, refugees and even the world of the spy versus that of the Scotland Yard and then juxtaposed with a USA Forces Officer. ‘Nuff said, I want no spoilers in here. Read the novel for enjoyment and you will be satisfied and satiated.