Rating: 5/5

Wow, this book is amazing. It’s almost like you, yourself, are being brainwashed in a real life “Red Chinese Prison.” That’s what really did happen to married couple Allyn and Adele Rickett, two Philadelphia academics, studying in China in the early fifties. 

Allyn was asked to provide brief reports to the state department, an activity he should probably have thought twice about. These reports must also have seemed relatively innocuous, both because he didn’t have all that much to report, and the information was collected fairly informally. He never saw himself as a spy. The new Chinese government saw things differently, however, and both husband and wife were ultimately arrested and imprisoned as foreign agents. 
 
Both describe initial fears that they would be tortured or otherwise mistreated, but in fact, nothing of the sort occurred. The prisons of Communist China in the 50s were on a rehabilitative mission to mold their prisoners into model comrades. They accomplished this by housing prisoners in groups, with one group member in charge of leading what were basically re-education sessions featuring the infamous “self criticism.” 

Each prisoner was encouraged – but never forced – to admit his or her fault and plan for a brighter future in accordance with Communist principles. Basically each person repeated something along the lines of, “I did something wrong and I’m going to be better – and I’m also going to give doctrinaire ideology a starring role in both my consciousness and vernacular...” As simplistic as this method may seem, it worked. Allyn and Adele described repeating the desired formulations just to repeat them at first, but slowly, many if not most prisoners truly took on the attitudes they had initially only parroted. 

By the time the Ricketts were released four years later, their mindset was such that they shocked and scandalized the American press with their fervent declarations that China had been quite right to imprison them, thank you very much! The effect wore off after a while, and the couple was able to write their book about the experience from a place of greater detachment. They remained grateful to have been ultimately treated well in prison materially speaking, and their book is an incredible artifact about post-revolutionary China that is simultaneously terrifying and inspiring, a little like revolutions themselves.