Rating: 5/5

When I was growing up, The Paper Bag Princess was one of my go to books. I'm not kidding, I knew that story inside out and could recite it without the book. As I got older, I lost that ability to recite this book without hesitation, but the memories are still there. This book holds a special place in my heart! Robert Munsch is a genius!

So, as the story suggests there is a Princess. Her name is Elizabeth! She is beautiful, lives in a big fancy castle, is engaged to Ronald, and has everything her heart could desire. And then a dragon comes along and ruins everything (like most girl's everyday life - obviously). Prince Ronald has been carried away and all of her belongings are gone! So, like most girls these days, she put on her best paper bag and went off to save the Prince! And how will she battle this wretched dragon? With her smarts!

This story gave me Shrek vibes before I even watched Shrek. It's not your average fairy tale and it's quite amusing! Elizabeth is a sassy yet relatable girl with some interesting (yet amusing) problems. I love that the Princess is the hero (and this is 40 years old, so Princesses weren't always kicking butt and taking names like they do today) and that she's wicked smart. I also love that in the end she stands up for herself and doesn't do what's expected of her. This book definitely added in to my spunky behaviour as an adult. 

The art work doesn't connect with me as much as it did when I was a kid. Of course, my style and preferences has changed but I still think the pictures work with the story. As always, the cover is what really stuck with me. 

I did like the forewards in this book - Chelsea Clinton and Francesca Segal share some sweet stories that I connect with. This book is a special part of childhood history for many people, so it was nice to see it wasn't just me who was obsessed with this book!

Overall, this is still one of my must read books. I'm glad this book is still circulating around and I hope many more girls pick up this butt kicking book and share it with the world!

Five out of five stars. I'd give it more if possible!

Thank you to NetGalley and Annick Press Ltd. for letting me travel back to my youth with this arc review. Seriously, I can hear my reading buddies chanting "Hey Dragon, Hey Dragon."