Rating: 5/5

Source: Self-purchase.
Rating: 5 stars for excellent.
Summary:
In the first book in this series, The Light and the Glory, the emphasis is on the founding of America through to the Revolutionary War.
In From Sea to Shining Sea, the emphasis is on 1787-1837, those fifty years after the nation was established.
Examples of topics:

the War of 1812, 
westward expansion, 
a nation divided over slavery, 
the Great Awakening movement, 
denomination and religious movements, 
circuit riders, 
the Alamo. 

My Thoughts:
I have loved both books in the God's Plan for America series. The third book in this series, Sounding Forth the Trumpet, I do not have but definitely want to read.
I feel the books in this series are exceptional tools for a home library or home schooling.

One of the best parts of the book is on the topic of slavery in America. Peter Marshall and David Manuel are transparent in their descriptions of slavery: the West Coast of Africa, slavery in America, the profitable industry of slavery, the division and conflict created because of slavery, an overseer's role on the Plantation, a day in the life of a slave on a Plantation, the break down and destruction of slave families, the Missouri debates, the auction block, and the justification given for owning slaves. I admired the author team for the careful and honest history lesson. 
Every delegate to the Constitutional Convention in 1787 acknowledged the evil of slavery. But not all were prepared to agree with those who demanded that it be abolished forthwith. The antislavery voices had a strong case: what could be crueler than to tear men and women from their ancestral homes and families, transport them under hideous, murderous conditions halfway around the world, there to break their wills and force them to do another man's bidding, for no recompense? This, in the world's newest republic, which prided itself on being a model of freedom. Page 28. 
Most Southern slave owners failed to see this hypocrisy. They regarded their slaves as they did their livestock-as property they had paid good money for and that represented a sizable investment. Page 29. 
A second part of the book I enjoyed reading is on westward expansion. The author team divided the westward expansion into four divisions.
Act 1-The Lewis and Clark expedition.
Act 2-The Mountain men and fur trade.
Act 3-Wagon trains.
Act 4-The removal of red men/Native Americans.

I'm planning to read more about mountain men and Native American history soon.