Rating: 4/5

I have always had a soft spot in my heart for Prince Arthur and Princess Eleanor Plantagenet and I looked forward to reading this novel that gave at least Eleanor more of a life than she was granted in the real world. I appreciated that love story but the real power in this novel is the story of the perfect storm that gave the world the Magna Carta. I love a good history novel that causes me to increase my understanding of powerful moments such as this one. The idea that England needed to suffer the hands of a monster like Jack Lack (King John) in order to bring things to the point when a charter would be drafted and signed that would rock and then change the world gives one much to ponder. And then the fact that a man like Stephen Langton was on the earth at the same time in order to balance things out really fascinates me. I took longer than expected to finish this one because of the pondering required.

The quotes I want to quickly access:

"It is possible that he (Pope Innocent III) did not take sufficient carrot assess in his mind what Langton was saying or, at any rate, to follow his reasoning through. Had he done so, he might have had a prophetic vision of what would come from this inspired type of leadership. He might have caught a fleeting vision of a broad green field on a bright summer day, where armed men bestrode their chargers and a pavilion stood in the midst of them and a king sat in futile efforts to avert the storm he had sown. Innocent III was too deeply committed to the elevation of the temporal power of the Church to feel too much concern for the needs of the common man. And so, years later, when Langton had achieved the first step in what he preached, they would cease to see eye to eye and the balance of their lives would be lived out in constant friction and suspicion."

"Not being blessed with prophetic vision, none of the three men in the ill-lighted room could know that Tostig's celerity had done much more than save the life of the Archbishop of Canterbury. If it had been allowed them to see ahead and know the shape of things to be, it would have been clear that the whole world had benefited. Had Stephen Langton died, there would have been no historic document signed on a meadow beside the Thames in a matter of a few turbulent years. Perhaps mankind would have waited a long time for the impetus to personal freedom which began with the Great Charter. A century certainly, two centuries, three perhaps. It would have come about in due course without a doubt, for the tyranny of absolute rule could not have been endured forever. Sooner or later the will to be free would have broken the bonds."

"She is like Boadicea, standing so bravely and proudly in her war chariot before charging the ranks of Suetonius," he said to himself. (Describing Princess Eleanor Plantagenet)

"It may be remarked in passing that much history has been made by individuals who did nothing seemingly but stand in anterooms."