Rating: 4/5

For reasons I will never understand Lucky Jim is considered to be a great novel, a funny novel and an academic novel. I am not qualified to question greatness, but on the other two counts Lucky Jim is a lot less than all that. Its use of the university campus is as a back drop and while it has some sharp barbs at the expense of life as a university instructor, they are generic and by now somewhat shop worn. The same jokes can and have been made about everything from Stalinist Russia to the Office. Usually done better. 

This edition of Small World is not the one I have in front of me. This re-read is from the Warnre Books edition. The Penguin Books (June 1, 1995) edition was the one I first read. Not only did David Lodge’s Campus Trilogy alert me to this fine author, but it taught me to look for the distinctive covers that Penguin books had at that time. In 1995 most people went to book stores and you shopped shelves with the spine of the book as your only clue about at what you were looking. 

Small World picks up a few years after the events of Changing Places. In that book, Professor of English, Philip Swallow. It trade out from the relatively insular life as a college professor in a mid-sized second rank English University, to the full on American West Coast , California experience of the Swinging Sixties campus life. In book two, Small World he has signed on to an entirely new aspect of life as a university scholar. He has joined the ranks of the traveling scholar. His date book is not about when to be in which classroom or even when he is to meet with the next promising graduate student. He is a research professor, living out his life one conference and one paper at a time. Success in this life is measured by who gives the key note address and who can hang what prestigious award on the university version of a wampum belt, his personal curriculum vitae. 

It is said that on campus differences are fought viciously because the stakes are so small. Lodge proves that the viciousness is not limited to on campus. Place academics from many campuses in a bottle er, sorry the conference circuit and all kinds of academic jealousies are fought in all kinds of oh so civilized ways. The conference circuit is nearly continuous. It takes the professors, and aspiring PhD.s into all time zones. Time zones, not places because the in the flow of countries the actual locations are at once dizzying and geographically immaterial. All conference centers are alike and the larger world outside of the small world of presenting papers is of no matter. 

Through the dozens of characters, Lodge maintains a steady pace of satire, jabs and polite put downs. All of them work because all of it is insider commentary on this aspect of academic life. Classically: Funny because it is true.