Rating: 2/5

The book is a series of essays by writers who are critical of Freud. In addition to his introductory essay, the book’s editor, Frederick Crews, wrote introductions to each of the essays. The book’s subtitle, “Doubters Confront a Legend,” is an understatement. These are not doubters at all. They are critics of the severest sort of Freud’s psychoanalytic legacy. Their focus is especially on Freud’s penchant to reduce all therapeutic intervention to sexual dynamics (Oedepus complex, etc.), to claim success when there was none at all (and frequently, with great harm was on his patients), and to manufacture his reputation as a great scientist of the mind. 

As Crews writes, “Freud was unable to document a single unambiguously efficacious treatment. Not only did the master psychologist not cure his most famous clients, he seems to have been only fleetingly interested in doing so. His goal was rather to reach intellectual closure by proving to the patient - and, later, to his admirers and detractors - the correctness of his etiological reconstructions.” Freud’s admirers, then and subsequent to his death, were cult-like in their devotion to Freud and aggressive in his defense. So too were their many devotee clients whose worldview, Crews writes, had been “revolutionized,” to the point of “passionate certitude” about deciphering the phenomenon of repression in others, especially “in those who remain stymied by unconscious resistance to psychoanalysis itself.”

I wonder if this book might not be seriously unbalanced. All of what these critics put forward rings a bell - stuff that a non-initiated observer may have wondered about and particularly regarding the reduction of every ailment to some sort of sexual issue. Remove that reductionist element, though, and the issues these critics cover - repression, dream interpretation, Freudian slips, catharsis, free association, the role of the unconscious and the Id - are vital phenomena when it comes to therapy: They are clues as to what might be going on at a non-conscious level. More broadly, this book of critical essays says nothing about Freud’s attempt to anchor mental phenomena in a Darwinian (biological) and Schopenhauerian (philosophically) framework, and to then apply these to the broader themes such as seen in Civilization and its Discontents and in his New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis.

https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Regarding those fans of Freud who do not tolerate criticism of him, and who say that such criticism is due to one’s own repression, the tables might be turned just as well on them: Why the true believer, fanatic stuff? What’s going on with them?