Rating: 4/5

The discovery of insulin by michael bliss: 4.5 ⭐️

“The death rate among those trying to write about the discovery of insulin sometimes seems higher than it is among diabetics” (15) oof

First, a special thanks to my university professor! He mentioned this book in our metabolism class and was kind enough to lend it to me. The book was a signed copy, gifted to him by the author, cause he had helped in editing the manuscript😍 How amazing is that!

This non-fiction book covers the discovery of insulin and the many controversies, deaths, and dramas that followed. The four creators (Banting, Best, Macleod, and Collip) were tied in a battle for proper credit on their work. It seems like a lot of it was initiated by Dr. Banting and while it was immature (and paranoid at times) of him I feel like the author was also too harsh. “Shark joins war on diabetes” (186) literally shows how intense it was for everyone to have the credit for beating diabetes, a disease (previous to insulin) that did great damage to patients and often caused a painful and quick death. While it doesn’t make it right, Banting was experiencing the immense stress of academia and research for the first time. I love the research process, it’s fun and challenging. But there is a constant fights for who did it first, who gets ownership (or becomes first author). Not to mention the drawer of null results, which are seen as “useless”. There is a constant need to discover something/publish something, a process that is incredibly rigorous and difficult.

I was surprised to learn about how immense Dr. Collip’s contribution was! I previously had no idea, text books often don’t delve into the purification process of insulin and how important it was in minimizing any toxic side effects. Sweet that McLeod’s replacement as professor of physiology at UofT ended up being Best! Super impressed by him and Collip. I’m not surprised that this competition caused a rift between Macleod and Banting, but I’m surprised that Banting and Collip got along at the end after all their fights. Ps, the author said that Dr. Best was the most handsome, so I would like to disagree and say it was Dr. Collip 😂
 
“Their struggle for credit was fired by each man’s desire to have his place in history, to have the only kind of immortality open to us. But perhaps the group at Toronto misjudged both their situation and posterity’s viewpoint. They did not realize that those who understood the history would eventually come to honour them all. Above all, we would honour their achievements”(248)