Rating: 4/5

So, I said to a friend the other day: "Watch out, I'm reading Mailer again...that guy is funny, insightful, AND inappropriate; it's a shame he is dead." Truly, that is how I feel. I know lots of people see him as just a good old fashioned prick, but I think there is more here. His writing is pompous and homophobic and certainly ridiculously sexual; but I just don't see it is a promoting the white man as better than anyone else. Instead, it's kind of like Louis CK's joke about how he will hands down admit that he has it easier than anyone else because he is a white man and he recognizes that isn't fair, but he is not willing to be re-born as a black woman to make it right. On one hand, the women are all sex objects, but on the other the men are extremely whipped and willing to do almost anything for her favor. Mailer certainly recognizes and explores the male/female power dynamic.

That said, this was not as good as Harlot's Ghost. It was good, but it felt more like a farce than anything. Mailer calls it both a comedy and a tragedy (in his pre-epilogue epitaph) and others have called it a mock noir, but I really found it to be farcical. It is (at times) laugh out loud funny and makes me want to go buy a blonde decapitated head (from a Halloween store, not for real) and carry it around in a plastic bag in tribute. Really, who can conceive of this stuff?

The plot is ridiculous and contrived and full of convenience (which I typically hate). EXCEPT that Mailer does this meta-author thing whereby his characters acknowledge the convenience and spew reasons for it based on spiritualism. With a straight face, Mailer presents the only male/tatooing/drugged out medium (Harpo) that I have ever encountered. I mean really, how can we accuse him of misogyny when he is willing to make a this guy a medium?

Of course, some of my love might be caused by Mailer's great focus on addiction (interestingly enough, this wanes in the second half of the novel; again, with the meta-comments Madden is focused on his addiction while he is drinking and lonely but once the shit hits the fan, he can no longer afford to wax romantic on his shortcomings). My favorite few quotes: "Over and over again I gave them up, a hundred times over the years, but always I went back. For in my dreams, sooner or later, I struck a match, brought flame to the tip, then took in all my hunger for existence with the first puff. I felt impaled on desire itself--those fiends trapped in my chest and screaming for one drag. Change the given." coupled with "No more might remain than the addiction itself, but addiction is still a signature on the bottom of your psyche."

And (as I mentioned in the comments on someone else's review) he provides not one, but two, complete descriptions of the cunt (one is a quote from Updike). I rather think Caitlin Moran (good feminist that she is) would approve.

It's just good. He is insightful, and funny, and (most entertainingly) inappropriate. Read it.