Rating: 4/5

Mara Valentine is a parents’ dream child. She’s smart, she’s involved, she’s not experimenting with drugs or her sexuality, and she’s Yale-bound. Her parents have another child who is much older then Mara and whose personality is a lot different. She’s the one who is always experimenting and finding herself and chasing after bums. She has a daughter, too, Vivienne (or V), who is a year younger than Mara. When Mara’s sister moves to South America to follow her latest dream and bum, V comes to live with Mara and her grandparents. The first thing she does is make out with Mara’s ex-boyfriend, which does not set the stage for any closeness between the two girls. Mara becomes a refugee from her own house in her efforts to avoid V, and V seems set on being a juvenile delinquent. They don’t seem to have anything in common at all – except family. But things change for both of them. Mara becomes a lot less stuffy when she falls in love for real, and V becomes a lot more responsible when she has some stability in her life and the time to explore some of her own passions. 

A good, funny, light read. I am not going to remember this one forever, but it is well-written, and better than most.

[EDIT] I reread this in May of 2017 not realizing that I'd already read it back in 2005! This is the first time I've ever completely forgotten something! I liked it better the second time around - giving it 4 stars instead of the 3 I'd originally assigned. I wrote a new review, too:

Mara Valentine is a model student and daughter and has her whole future mapped out for her when her “niece” V comes to live with her. V is almost the same age, and is wilder, freer, and more spontaneous than Mara could ever hope to be. And she’ll be attending the same high school. And Mara’s parents want Mara to help V adjust. Mara and V clash repeatedly, but eventually begin to understand one another and see something other than “perfectionist” and “loser” when they look into each other’s eyes. Having a stable home and structure and people who care about her and encourage her really brings out another side of V. Having V around and falling in love and slowing down the breakneck pace of her life really helps Mara start to identify what she wants. Their discovery of their true passions and the connection that forms between Mara and V is empowering and uplifting. Smart, fun, emotional, and funny – realistic fiction at its best.