Rating: 4/5

I acquired this at the same time as Pym's 'autobiography' A Very Private Eye, which Holt put together from Pym's diaries and letters following her death. I deliberately left a couple of months between the books as I felt that reading them back to back might be too repetitive.

In the forward, Holt says, perhaps understandably, that she hopes both books will be read as they 'compliment' each other. My personal view is that only one is really necessary, as they are both very similar - the only real difference is the Pym/Holt ratio in the writing! A Very Private Eye is Pym's writings strung together with brief linking paragraphs by Holt. A Lot to Ask is mostly Holt's writing, but with copious quotations from Pym.

I think this is by far the better book. There is an awful lot of repetition and a fair bit of silliness in Pym's private writings, especially as a young woman, and I found it rapidly became tedious in 'A Very Private Eye'. The obsession with clothes and the gushing over young men is still present in this book, but far less prominent. We hear about her various love affairs and her agonising over the writing of her novels, but again, it is covered much more succinctly. Holt quotes enough of Pym's own writing to demonstrate her personality, but not so much that it becomes boring. 

As with the autobiography, I do find Holt's attitude to Pym's 'detective work' very strange. Pym was obsessed with learning as much as possible about any man she fell in love with, and would often surreptitiously follow him or his family in an attempt to learn more - much of her behaviour would be termed 'stalking' today, so it's odd to read Holt's approving comments about it! 

My only other quibble with this biography is that Holt doesn't include the source of quotations within the text, only in the end notes, so one is left wondering if a specific quote is from a novel, letter or notebook. Not a huge issue, but it does sometimes spoil the flow of reading. 

Recommended to those who know Pym's work well and would like to learn more about her personal life - and definitely to be read in preference to 'A Very Private Eye'.