Rating: 4/5

“Tell ‘em one thing more. I thought Grey Molly was worth only one man. But I was wrong. They’ve done me wrong and played crooked. They come huntin’ me - with a decoy. Now tell ‘em from me that Grey Molly is worth seven men, and she’s goin’ to be paid for in full.”

Vic Gregg is tired. He’s been working all winter in his own mine, trying to save enough money to marry his betrothed and is going a bit mad with loneliness. When he decides to take a week off and head into town to see his girl and get some supplies and down time, he finds her in the arms of another man. 

Vic takes his sorrow to the local saloon and is a bit tipsy when the new fella strolls in. The two exchange words, throw down, and now Vic is on the run for murder. Only who should step in to hide him when he’s desperately evading the town’s posse? Whistlin’ Dan Barry. 

"The Seventh Man" (1921) finds our wild western superhero Dan Barry in a dangerous personal place. He is living on the mountain with his wife Kate and their five-year old daughter Joanie (who rides around on the tamed wolf Black Bart like it's a horse) when he saves Vic, and then falls into a murderous rage when Vic's horse is killed by a sinister posse.

It would be hyperbolic to say Brand is turning the western genre on its head (the western genre started with "The Virginian" in 1902 so Brand's writing here in 1921 is still in that early era) but it has that feel to it. Barry's connection to his horse Satan and his wolf Bart and to other animals he befriends takes priority over any connection he might have with humans, possibly even his own wife and daughter.

The posse is led by a bloodthirsty marshal - we don't actually witness any back-room dealings or payoffs or other likely criminal acts on the part of this lawman - but we can sense his desire to kill is greater than any obligation for justice.

Our main protagonist in this tale might actually be Kate, despite all the POV we get from Dan most of the novel. She’s kind of serving as that middle ground in the conflict between civilization and wilderness. How can she raise her daughter Joan in safety and contentment if there’s always the innate pull of the wild and innocently dangerous ways of her husband Dan? 

A thrilling chase narrative and family drama carry the final third, starting with a well-written fight pitting our heroic trio against an ambush that is later called the Killing at Alder, and then an ending that I can’t write about without getting spoilery. 

Verdict: "The Seventh Man" is a smart classic western with a tragically dangerous and just protagonist that hits hard. The 1920’s-era prose is a bit tough at times and it isn’t an easy read but it is a rewarding tale. 

Jeff’s Rating: 4 / 5 (Very Good)
Movie rating if made into a movie: PG