Rating: 4/5

John J. Nance knows his aviation from his years of covering the industry as a journalist. As a result, Blackout was probably the wrong thriller to read on a plane during my recent vacation. Nevertheless, Nance weaves together RealPolitik, hypothetical technological advances, actual technological capabilities, terrorist scenarios, and conspiracy into a tapestry juxtaposing courage, corruption, fear, panic, and disasters. For me, the quintessential aviation thriller was Robert (not to be confused with “Rod”) J. Serling’s The President’s Plane is Missing (made into a rather mediocre 1973 movie). Looking at the cover of the novel, I wasn’t sure if Blackout referred to: a) a lapse in electrical service (hence, airport lights?); b) news coverage blocked for security reasons; or c) an air disaster caused by a pilot blacking out from a stroke or something similar. It turns out to be a little of all of those, though “a” comes about a little differently than I imagined.

This is apparently either a sequel or one of a series involving FBI investigator Katherine “Kat” Bronsky. As with private detectives in mystery novels who have alienated police by showing them up, an early conversation in this novel indicates that Kat has shown up her male colleagues by solving a tricky case in the past. As the novel opens, she is lecturing on terrorism and civil aviation as, apparently, one way her director is keeping her in rather innocuous assignments till the jealousy settles down. Naturally, that is not to be, despite Kat’s decision to be as non-committal on the hot-button issue with which the book begins.

The book begins with an air disaster. The cause is unknown. A strange detail in the first chapter seems to have no relevance. A paranoid reporter for one of the nation’s great newspapers tries to pin her down on the hot-button issue. Yet, the reporter’s apparent paranoia seems to be more than that. A great “coincidence” seems to keep Kat out of another air disaster and yet pulls her deeper and deeper into danger and deeper conspiracy. Betrayal and the motive behind such betrayal looms large behind the events which cause her, the reporter, and other innocents scrambling for their lives.

Some of the events in Blackout seem highly unlikely to me, but I am not the aviation expert. Also, bear in mind that airport security is significantly different as we read this book than when Nance wrote it prior to 9-11. In fact, at least two years before the attack on the U.S., Nance’s character introduces a hypothetical question: “’So who’s next? Are we going to get a seven-forty-seven impacting the World Trade Center in New York because the two pilots were neutralized on take-off from Newark or Kennedy?’” (p. 359) Pretty haunting and pretty daunting! But the point is that the protagonist and her ally providing the sexual tension for the story are able to pull off some disappearing acts that seem considerably less likely in the present circumstances.

That being so, Blackout is an engaging thriller—even more so as I read it flying home from Europe on a commercial airliner. I can certainly affirm that I didn’t sleep on that trans-Atlantic flight. With a thriller, I suppose that’s okay. I certainly thought so.