Rating: 2/5

Jeffrey Masson attacks Freud for refusing to believe his patients' claims that they were sexually abused by their parents or others nearest and dearest to them. Freud claimed that these patients actually had sexual attraction to their parents that caused them dream of sex with their parents, which made them have false memories of being sexually abused. Masson says Freud covered up the truth because his friend Wilhelm Fliess was a pedophile who sexually molested his own son. Masson may be correct, but he goes off topic from his main thesis a lot and does not exactly produce a lot of concrete evidence to support his claims. My main problem with Freud is that I view his theories as non-scientific. So I have different reasons for rejecting Freud's ideas than Masson does. 
I think that Masson is not a very good scholar. He makes category mistakes throughout the book, for example calling Freud a psychiatrist. Freud was not a psychiatrist in any sense, he was a neurologist, psychotherapist, and psychoanalyst. He was not strictly speaking a psychologist either, but that distinction is splitting hairs, what Freud did was essentially psychology. Freud was not in any sense a psychiatrist though. Psychiatry is specifically the study, diagnosis, and treatment of mental disorders, generally on the assumption that they have an organic basis rather than a psychological one. Psychiatrists generally treat people with drugs, not with psychotherapy, talking, counseling, or free association. Although Freud did sometimes medicate his patients, his practice was primarily about free association, talking, counseling, and psychotherapy. So to call Freud a psychiatrist is a gross misunderstanding of what Freud's profession was. Masson also has associated with radical feminists in the past and that gives good reason to question his portrayal of Freud in this book. Masson portrays Freud in a very sinister light, as a Machievallian helping male dominated society cover up sexual assault of women and children, similar to the Cigarette Smoking Man on the X-Files who was helping aliens to colonize the earth. Masson's association with radical feminists is troubling because they view rape as a political act rather than a sexual one, which I think is a bizarre viewpoint and feeds into Masson's portraying Freud's rape advocacy and pedophilia advocacy as part of a broader oppressive strategy by male dominated society. I think Masson's view of Freud is ridiculous. Masson in another book titled Against Therapysuggested that Freud sexually assaulted his daughter Anna by quoting a psychiatrist named David Viscott who had suggested it, but provided no evidence that Viscott had said this, or description of what Viscott's evidence was, and also conceded that Viscott had no direct evidence. That is very bad scholarship on Masson's part. I contacted Masson about the claim and gave him the opportunity to elaborate and he refused to do so. So I'm forced reluctantly to conclude that Masson relies on interpretation and discounts direct evidence, just like the chief villain of this book who Masson so hates, Sigmund Freud.