Rating: 4/5

An acquaintance on Facebook asked “What is one thing you wish someone told you as a child?” I first said: Money, Nations, and Gods are the same as the Easter Bunny. (But in a nice, kid friendly sort-of-way.) (Thanks Harari!)
Then after seeing some more other replies I decided to write: 
"Following up-protect and encourage the skills that us sapiens have by default- social &amp; curious: show the importance of integrity; allow them to follow their curiosities; highlight the importance of self awareness as a guide, their pleasures will lead to discovery of purpose; teach them the importance of ignorance, failure, and perseverance; model collaboration and inclusivity as a problem-solving behavior; inject genuine optimism in the day to day!” Many of these words are the fallout from Mihaly Csiksgentmihalyi’s philosophies and research. I’m already utilizing these new memes.

While reading this book I was invited to give a TEDxMKE talk - And I’m honored beyond words. I’m using Daniel Pinks allegory of Mastery as an Asymptote (maths- two lines that get close but never touch). Pink’s argument is based upon Csikszentmihalyi’s research into autotelic pursuits. (from Greek autos ‘self.’ and from Greek telikos ‘final,’ from telos ‘end.’) Later Csiksgentmihalyi called this ‘self-final’ approach FLOW. I’m also using Kevin Kelly’s ‘Science as an exponential questioning mechanism. I’ll also talk about the 'NOW THAT' context we live in in order to connect these two thoughts. Not a lot of original thought- but connecting a lot in order to share my understanding of our world.

This book, Good Business, mixes two current interests: How to be a proper leader in a world in dire need of leadership, while simultaneously expanding on Pink’s descriptions of flow. This text mostly corroborate the ideas of Sinek - Start with Why/Leaders Eat Last. It’s a nice addition to my culture.

Assuming vision for the team’s pursuits have been communicated and trust established among the group, then the individuals in the group simply need time, autonomy, and resources in order to grow more complex. The groups leader then needs to establish the following: 
clear goals that are adaptable
channels of feedback for both leadership and members of the group
matching challenges to the group with the person with the best skills

In order to meet these needs the Leader doesn’t need to know everything. That, in fact, would be counter productive. Instead they need to focus on the three “P’s” of business:
People
Process
Product

Of course Csiksgentmihalyi talked about all of this ‘business stuff’ in relation to flow- which was super beneficial as I’m an individual that truly understands self-determined activities, boundaries, and self-imposed standards of evaluation. 

FLOW - the Cliff Notes:
These are moments when an individual is in a task that is in their ‘sweet spot.’ That spot is somewhere between ‘easy’ and ‘unknown’ and matches all aspects of their body and mind to the task. Running 100 meter dash at the Olympic Level and Neurosurgery were two examples cited in the book.
Moments of flow are qualified as:
-The focus of attention is on a finite task
-In that focus a sense of self fallaway, so too does the world/issues/external problems
-There is a sense of effortless control over mind and body (it’s not a struggle, rather it is a pursuit)
-Seconds, Minutes, and Hours are relative; often expanding (100 meter dash), or contracting (Neurosurgery) while the task is being focused upon. 

 I particularly enjoyed the ‘step-back’ moments in this text to talk about things like life, and soul. Psychic energy was another moment that got a lot of attention. The ‘If/Then’ that Csiksgentmihalyi sets up is this: IF we think of the brain’s ability to process a finite amount of information in a given life (bits), THEN we need to understand the economy of our focus. In order to develop behavior patterns that match our psychic energy, one must: Know Thyself. 

The entrance to the Delphic Temple in Greece (I get to say I visited this last month- yay!) has these words upon it. One cannot find flow if they are not approaching complexity. (This occurs when we mix our interests with our skills.) Self regulating your everyday actions based upon your interests and curiosities is critical for this to develop. They will need to pay attention to the moments that they are mentally active, and create a life that allows them to focus these energies with their talents. Their talents need to be honed over time, tested, and fostered. This is not an overnight effect, but the aggregate pursuit of their interests will culminate in an enjoyment of their time, attention, and psychic energy being bent towards their FLOW. 

Enjoyment and Pleasure were also distinguished in a new way (at least for me.) Typically I used these words as synonyms. Simplistically speaking: Enjoyment is the endorphin fueled pursuit, and Pleasure is the hollow dopamine bumps one gets with instant gratification. While there are dopamine ‘bumps’ along the way in the autotelic (with no chemical payoff we wouldn’t even try). Enjoyment leads to betterment of both oneself, but if applied to business, it will lead to a better culture. Then we get to enjoy the lasting serotonin and oxytocin of connections with our community. 

Make no mistake- Csiksgentmihalyi’s dynamic mechanism - FLOW - results in happiness. 

Favorite Quotes:
"Religions evolved to makes sense of certain values by creating a mythical framework to communicate those values.”

“More than we usually acknowledge we think that technology will lead us to happiness."