Rating: 3/5

Locked Inside isn’t a fantasy novel at all, which I probably would have realized sooner if I hadn’t read it two seconds after I set down Heir Apparent. Instead of Giannine, we have Marnie, daughter to the famous ex-gospel singer and founder of an almost-religion, Skye. Instead of virtual reality, we have what appears to be an MMORPG called Paliopolis. Instead of adventure and life or death situations, we have an all-too-real kidnapping and life or death situations. Marnie is, like Giannine, a character full of opinions, but she struggles more with her own identity and fitting in with others. Marnie uses Paliopolis as an escape and it’s only through reading the book that we truly understand why. I don’t want to give too much away, because this book is best when read without knowing too much about it.
The strongest points of the book were Marnie’s inner thoughts, her struggle to be someone she wants to be, and her (developing) relationships with other characters in the book**. I’m not describing her well, because I’m trying to avoid actually talking about her. Just rest assured that Marnie is complex and unusual in the best way. By the end of the book, she still isn’t who she wants to be, but she’s closer and, hey, who is who they want to be? 
The weakest point was, unfortunately, the strangeness bordering on complete implausibility of some of the situations. There are big implausibles that I don’t want to mention, but there are smaller, non-spoilery ones, too. Mainly, for me, the vagueness of Paliopolis. For something so important to Marnie, it isn’t described very much and, to be quite honest, it doesn’t sound like a real game.

I know I should give some leeway to Werlin, because she probably isn’t a gamer, and she was just trying to write a book about this girl, but I would like to repeat that Paliopolis is a significant part of Marnie’s life. Surely some more research or something could have been done? Heir Apparent falls into this trap, too, but I’m more willing to give Vende a bye since she’s assuming a future technology (and she defines some gameplay mechanics, such as the dying-and-sent-back-to-the-start thing, which Werlin doesn’t really do at all). I mean, I love that both of these books are about girl gamers, because most young girls nowadays do game and it’s always nice to have that represented. But if it rings false to me, I can’t help but think that it might turn off younger girls, who have a lot to potentially gain from these books.