Rating: 5/5

Written in a series of vignettes, partly autobiographical, partly fictional reminiscences as they flash out in sleepless nights about the places inhabited, places visited, mother, friends, maids, a prostitute neighbor (sad life), passers-by on the street, some cohereing into stories, others sprinkled disjointedly among vignettes, like flowing thoughts in sleepless nights, some in the form of letters usually addressed to M. (her friend Mary McCarthy?), others occasionally as quotes, (unattributed) stanzas, including those from her former husband Robert Lowell, referred to only obliquely but perhaps most powerfully toward the end, quoting Thomas Hardy’s last lines from the poem mourning the death of his wife, as Robert Lowell was also taken away from her life only two years before this work found its way to the readers… he was on his way to Hardwick’s apartment when he died of a heart attack in the taxicab (she took him on as a companion after he had deserted her after 21 years of marriage for another writer, only to come back to her for tender friendship, shortly before his sudden death - none of this is in this book as many had hoped for at the time of its publication (sensationalists?), just a hint in the quote from Hardy’s poem that instead spoke volumes). 

Hardwick’s sentences are marvels, enigmatic, assosiative, sometimes using objects to tell the story, to express the feelings, mysterious and (perhaps) revealing like De Chiricco’s paintings.

I read a few one-star GR reviews, some expected it to be a conventional novel (no, it’s not), others disappointed with the lack of what might be called an accessible narrative style (no, it’s not)… disappointments arising from false expectations. 

These quotes are from the first and last pages bookending this brilliantly unique work. If you are intrigued, read it, don’t wait, run. If not, then the book is not for you. No hard feelings, I’m sure would be Hardwick’s response. By all accounts, she had a generous heart.

From the opening chapter:

If only one knew what to remember or pretend to remember. Make a decision and what you want from the lost things will present itself. You can take it down like a can from a shelf. Perhaps. One can would be marked Rand Avenue in Kentucky and some would recall the address at least as true. Inside the can are the blackening porches of winter, the gas grates, the swarm. (A note about Kentucky: she was born there, then later lived New York City, Maine, Amsterdam… all of them featured later on)

and then toward the book’s end:

Oh, M., when I think of the people I have buried, North and South. Yet, why is it that we cannot keep the note of irony, the jangle of carelessness at a distance? Sentences in which I have tried for a certain light tone—many of those have to do with events, upheavals, destructions that caused me to weep like a child.
..O you could not know
That such swift fleeing
No soul foreseeing—
Not even I—would undo me so!
[…]The torment of personal relations. Nothing new there except in the disguise, and in the escape on the wings of adjectives. Sweet to be pierced by daggers at the end of paragraphs.

Sometimes I resent the glossary, the concordance of truth, many have about my real life, have like an extra pair of spectacles. I mean that such fact is to me a hindrance to memory.

Otherwise I love to be known by those I care for. Public assistance, beautiful phrase. Thus, I am always on the phone, always writing letters, always waking up to address myself to B. and D. and C.—those whom I dare not ring up until morning and yet must talk to throughout the night.

5 stars hands down