Rating: 4/5

Three andc 1/2 stars, really. Jane (actually from Philadelphia) grows up a rascally hoyden, under the kindly, but offhand guidance of her sensible and tolerant, but not particularly attentive, father--until she meets William, her physician father's attractive assistant. Inspired by him, and by her rivalry with the obnoxious Sally Biddle (think Rachel McAdams in _Mean Girls_), she attends Miss Hepplewhite's Young Ladies Academy. She learns all kinds of helpful tips, like how to behave while traveling, and how to talk to strangers, which she attempts to follow when eventually she travels by ship to the Northwest coast, which is just beginning to be settled by white homesteaders. Naturally, Miss Hepplewhite does not allow for all the exigencies of Jane's journey, like her being the only woman in a cabin full of flea-bitten settlers, and like her losing all her dresses to a hungry, but not very discriminating, cow.
The book has been criticized for its racist comments about the Chinook Indians who populate the Shoalwater Bay area, some of whom help Jane adapt to her desperately changed circumstances. It is true that upon arriving in Shoalwater Bay Jane describes the Indians as savages, and is reluctant to accept their assistance or advice. She reflects how shocked Miss Hepplewhite would be to know what Jane has had to cope with. However, she soon learns how to learn from them, especially Suis, who teaches Jane how to barter for what she needs, and Handsome Jim, who proves to be more reliable than most of the white men she encounters. As the novel progresses, so does her attitude toward the Indians. Teachers should be sensitive to the derogatory comments especially if there are Indian children in the classroom, but overall Jane's attitude toward the Chinooks becomes more open and intelligent as time passes. The writing is lively and humorous, and children will enjoy the irony between Jane's frequent reflection on her education with Miss Hepplewhite, and the direction her life has taken.

According to an afterword by the author, the novel was inspired by _Skulduggery on Shoalwater Bay_ a book bo poetry by Willard Espy about the Shoalwater Bay pioneers and Indians, and by an account by one of the settlers, James G. Swan, called _The Northwest Coast, Or Three Years Residence in Washington Territory_. Compare this to _Worlds Apart_, by Kathleen Karr. Curriculum applications: Multicultural books, Indians of North America, bullying, survival, humor. Lexile 690.