Rating: 4/5

I'll give this four stars. 

An interesting book, and a bit of an orphan when it comes to Bova's Grand Tour. Written in the 1980's and published in 1985 during the height of the cold war the book depicts a world in which the Soviet Union won the Cold War forcing the nations of earth to abandon their space faring aspirations. Only a few third world nations, Japan, and China continue to seek the economic exploitation of space in the face of the Soviet Union's determination to expunge capitalism from not just the Earth, but the solar system as well. The book has, quiet by accident, become something of an alternate history novel. Ben Bova could not have foreseen the end of the cold war just four years after the publication of this novel and the ultimate collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990's. The next Book in the Grand Tour "Empire Builders", was published in 1995 and not surprisingly, with the Soviet Union out of the picture Bova was forced to find a new antagonistic force with which to challenge his hero "Dan Randolf". And thus as the threat of the Cold War and Soviet domination receded from the reading public's collective consciousness, the themes of run away climate change and environmental collapse quickly come to the forefront as the factors motivating humanity to expand into the solar system in subsequent novels. It will be interesting to see what points of continuity exist between "Privateers" and "Empire Builders" given that "Privateers" was essentially left behind by history.

In regards to the story, I enjoyed it. I did find the inclusion of a romantic interest somewhat unnecessary to the overall plot. In the book the main character, Dan Randolf, competes with a Soviet Official for the love of a beautiful Venezuelan woman. The love triangle seems to exist mainly to illustrate the ruthlessness and moral bankruptcy of the Soviet regime. The female character is essentially two dimensional and only notable for her apparent beauty so other than being a point of friction between the the protagonist and antagonist she really serves no useful purpose. But other than that I enjoyed the book and look forward to the next story in Ben Bova's Grand Tour.