Rating: 2/5

I have complicated feelings about this book. Masson does a fantastic job of highlighting the misogyny of the medical field at the time (even though he avoids looking at the issue through a feminist lens), and it is highly disturbing how ready doctors were to discount disclosures of abuse as ‘hysterical lies’

My main issue, and something that really detracts from his arguments, is the blind acceptance of the validity of both the psychoanalytical method and the theory underpinning it. 

There’s no acknowledgement - even though Freud states it in a number of direct quotes Masson used to bolster his own argument - that Freud never heard spontaneous accounts of sexual abuse from his patients... they were all ‘repressed’, they were all things his patients could NOT remember but Freud decided they had experienced because it fit his theory at the time. Freud states explicitly in Studies on Hysteria that psychoanalysis is a method that is intended to reduce reliance on self report from patients, that he can determine the cause WITHOUT patients telling him because he can access their ‘unconscious mind’.

Masson believes in the unconscious mind and as a result he fails to address the main problem with psychoanalysis, not that it evolved into a form of interpretation that didn’t believe patients, but the entire premise of psychoanalysis is not believing what patients say. 

Freud didn’t believe patients when they told them they’d never been abused, because he knew better, he knew the memories were repressed and not accessible to the conscious mind. It just changed to Freud not believing patients when they said they didn’t have childhood sexual fantasies... because he knew better, the fantasies were repressed and not accessible to the conscious mind. Both approaches strip the patients of agency.

Freuds language about the seduction theory did change over the years, and when discussing it he did start to claim that the abuse had been self reported. But Masson is a Freud scholar, Masson would know that in his original writings on the seduction theory it was Freud, not his patients, that identified the abuse and insisted that it had happened even when his patients denied it.

Masson is a known critic of psychoanalysis and psychotherapy - but this book just gives Freud far too much credit for something that he never actually did.