Rating: 5/5

When I took a course in Shakespeare at the University of Utah as an English major, I was required to buy this edition. I remember standing in the university bookstore with my mouth hanging open from sticker shock. I love Shakespeare and was excited for the class, but I couldn’t help but think of the The Complete Works edition I already owned. My high school English teacher had already told me it wasn’t a great version, but how different could it possibly be? I also had a well-worn paperback of Hamlet and knew that I could pick up paperback versions of the five or six plays that I would read in class for a lot less than the Riverside would cost me. I really didn’t believe the professor would kick me out of the class for not having THIS edition of the book. But I am a rule follower by nature, so I swallowed the bile in my throat and bought the book. I justified the expense by telling myself that I would one day read every play and poem written by Shakespeare. I would get my money’s worth out of this book.

The Shakespeare course was great. And no, not everyone in the class sprung for the Riverside Edition. In fact, the guy I sat next to in class shook his head at me in derision for buying it. He had picked up all of his paperbacks at a thrift store for a couple of bucks. On the first day, the professor informed us that we would be reading some of the lesser read plays. He assumed that we would have already studied the most famous plays. (He was right. I had already studied Hamlet twice by that point, and almost every other literature course I had taken in high school and in college included one of Shakespeare’s plays).

For the course we read: Titus Andronicus, The Taming of the Shrew, The Merchant of Venice, King Richard the Second, Othello, and The Tempest. This experience reinforced my personal goal of reading all of Shakespeare’s plays. I hated Titus, loved Othello, and became more determined to read them all, hoping to find some gems among the lesser read works.

Even though I love Shakespeare, reading all of the plays and poems is a daunting task, especially when it’s not assigned by a professor who will help explain things as you work your way through the play, so I put off my reading challenge for a good long time. So long, in fact, that in 2015, when I decided to get serious about reading all the plays, I decided to reread those that I had read in school, since all I remembered about Titus was the blood and gore and all I remembered about The Taming of the Shrew was that it didn’t quite end the way all the adaptations do.

So, I decided to read them all, but in what order? The Complete Works divides the plays by category: Comedies, Tragedies, Histories, and Romances. I was intimidated by the histories, so I didn’t want to stack them all in a row for myself. For the same reason, I didn’t want to read the plays chronologically, knowing that many of the histories were written one after the other. As I examined the plays, my own categories formed: 

1. Plays that I hadn’t read that I was looking forward to reading (The Winter’s Tale, Twelfth Night)

2. Plays that I hadn’t read that I wasn’t much looking forward to reading (mostly the histories, but if I didn’t read them, then how would I know if there was a treasure among them? This, after all, was the point of reading them all.)

3. Plays that I HAD read and was looking forward to rereading (Hamlet, A Midsummer Night’s Dream)

4. Plays that I HAD read and was NOT looking forward to rereading (Julius Caesar, Titus Andronicus).

I seriously debated whether or not to force myself to reread the plays that I had not enjoyed. Even though I didn’t remember much about them, I had read them, so it wouldn’t be cheating to count them as read. But I wanted to review each play on Goodreads as I went, and I simply didn’t remember enough about some of them to give them a fair review. And what if my tastes had changed over the years? What if it was worth giving these plays another chance? So I included them, and once I divided all thirty-eight plays into those four categories, I noticed that they came out evenly: 13 plays each for categories 1 and 2, and six plays each for categories 3 and 4. Then I started to build my own order for reading the plays, balancing the ones that I wanted to read with those that I was reluctant to. I spaced out the histories. I spaced out the old-favorites. I started the list with Antony and Cleopatra, one I hadn’t read but was really excited about, and ended the list with All’s Well That Ends Well, because that felt like a cute thing to do.

My initial plan was to read one play per month, which would take just over three years, with the poems sprinkled in. In reality, it took me ten years. I started in January 2016 and finished December 2025. It still sounds completely reasonable to read one play per month, but I just didn’t do it. One reason is that the Riverside Shakespeare is HEAVY. Another reason is that I take notes as I read. When I sit down to read a play, it’s a whole project requiring a table, my Shakespeare journal (there are now four), a pen, and a highlighter. And toward the end of the challenge, I also needed bifocals to see the print. Sometimes, I would get on a kick and read several plays one right after the other. I only read two plays in 2019 and one in 2021. And the poems were more difficult to “sprinkle in” than I anticipated. I both loved and hated reading the poems and at times had to force myself through the sonnets. I often procrastinated, then gobbled up the long narrative poems.

I want to emphasize that I am not a Shakespearean scholar. I didn’t spend a lot of time in the footnotes. I didn’t crosscheck the history plays with the actual historical events. When I read Shakespeare, I’m reading it for the same reason I read anything else –I’m reading for a good story, well told. Many of Shakespeare’s plots are famously based on other works, but he adds in his own twists, often keeping the audience engaged and guessing. Of course, no one argues that Shakespeare’s language is stellar –his voice is distinct, his poetry is unparalleled, and he coined so many terms and phrases that we still use today. But what I really love about Shakespeare are his characters. The Nurse in Romeo and Juliet makes us laugh out loud. Ophelia’s downfall makes us cry real tears. And Viola. She is so brave, and spunky, and filled with love.

In the end, I accomplished what I set out to do. I read all the plays and poems that survive Shakespeare’s body of work (we know that at least one play is lost and surely there were others). I USED that Riverside Shakespeare (not only did I read it all, but I also used that giant book as a booster seat for toddlers, and a monitor stand for my computer). And I found some treasures that I don’t believe I would have ever read, if not for this ridiculous challenge. Cymbeline, Henry V, and rereading Titus, in particular, made this crazy challenge worth it.

A week after I completed the challenge, my dad, who knew I was reading all the plays, but didn’t know I had just finished, surprised me with a gift: a hardbound collection of The Complete Works of William Shakespeare that had belonged to his grandfather, Joseph Henry Stimpson. Dad had recently received them from his eldest sister, and he generously passed them on to me, even though he, too, loves Shakespeare. When I told him that I had just finished reading all of the completed works, he joked that I could start again from the beginning. My great-grandfather’s books are too precious and delicate to read, and I will never ever again read Timon of Athens, but I will reread many of the plays. Hamlet is too good not to.

I have reviewed every play and poem on Goodreads using the individual Folger’s editions (even those weren’t the versions I read), so I won’t review each play here. Instead, I’ll give a summary by category. (A note on my starred rankings: I reserved 5 stars for my absolute favorites and there was always something redeemable about a play to give it at least 2 stars –usually the language, if nothing else.)

Plays I hadn’t read and was looking forward to:

Antony and Cleopatra (January 2016) - ✰✰
Love’s Labour’s Lost (May 2016) - ✰✰✰
Henry VIII (January 2018) - ✰✰✰✰
Twelfth Night (July 2018) - ✰✰✰✰
The Comedy of Errors (January 2020) - ✰✰✰✰
The Two Noble Kinsmen (March 2020) - ✰✰✰
The Two Gentlemen of Verona (August 2020) - ✰✰✰✰
Much Ado About Nothing (February 2022) - ✰✰✰✰
Winter’s Tale (February 2022) - ✰✰✰✰
The Merry Wives of Windsor (December 2023) - ✰✰✰✰
As You Like It (February 2024) - ✰✰
Measure for Measure (June 2025) - ✰✰✰✰
All’s Well that Ends Well (December 2025) - ✰✰✰

Plays I hadn’t read and was reluctant to:

Cymbeline (February 2016) - ✰✰✰✰✰
Troilus and Cressida (July 2016) - ✰✰
Pericles, Prince of Tyre - (March 2018) - ✰✰
First Part of Henry VI (September 2018) - ✰✰✰
Second Part of Henry VI (December 2019) - ✰✰✰
Third Part of Henry VI (June 2020) - ✰✰✰
Coriolanus (December 2020) - ✰✰✰
Richard the III (January 2022) - ✰✰✰
First Part of Henry IV (July 2023) - ✰✰
Second Part of Henry IV (November 2023) - ✰✰
King John (January 2025) - ✰✰
Henry V (July 2025) - ✰✰✰✰
Timon of Athens (November 2025) - ✰✰

Plays I had read and wanted to read again:

Othello (March 2016) - ✰✰✰
Macbeth (June 2018) - ✰✰✰✰
Hamlet (March 2020) - ✰✰✰✰✰
The Taming of the Shrew (July 2021) - ✰✰✰
Romeo and Juliet (July 2023) - ✰✰✰✰✰
A Midsummer Night’s Dream (March 2025) - ✰✰✰✰✰

Plays I had read and did not want to read again:

The Merchant of Venice (October 2016) - ✰✰✰
The Tempest (January 2019) - ✰✰✰
King Lear (August 2020) - ✰✰✰
Julius Caesar (February 2022) - ✰✰✰
Richard II (December 2023) - ✰✰✰
Titus Andronicus (August 2025) - ✰✰✰✰

Excerpt of a play:

Sir Thomas Moore - ✰✰✰✰

The Poems: 

The Sonnets (1-154) - ✰✰✰✰
Venus and Adonis - ✰✰✰✰
The Rape of Lucrece - ✰✰✰✰
A Lover’s Complaint - ✰✰✰
The Passionate Pilgrim - ✰✰✰
The Phoenix and Turtle - ✰✰✰