Rating: 4/5

Quobna Ottobah Cugoano was a British, Christian, ex-slave in the late 1700's; this book is his contribution to the British debate over slavery.

Cugoano's voice is prophetic. He doesn't necessarily have the greatest, most fluid style, and he gets repetitive. But there's an incredibly force and an obvious ethos behind his words. How a book like this didn't end the debate is beyond me.

What hit me first was actually Cugoano's balance. He certainly has plenty of words against the west and their role in the slave trade, but he doesn't spare his own people. Of his own experience being sold into slavery, he says this:

"I must own, to the shame of my own countrymen, that I was first kid-napped and betrayed by some of my own complexion, who were the first cause of my exile and slavery; but if there were no buyers there would be no sellers."

In other places, he admits to other pro-slavery claims, like the more "advanced" state of European countries, and the fact that Christianity is good for the slaves. But he responds to the pro-slavery argument (that the move from Africa to European nations was better for the slaves) with simple common sense. Even if, in some cases, slaves are brought to a more advanced, more Christian nation, it is not for their benefit:

"But let their ignorance in some things (in which the Europeans have greatly the advantage of them) be what it will, it is not the intention of those who bring them away to make them better by it; nor is the design of slave-holders of any other intention, but that they may serve them as a kind of engines and beasts of burden; that their own ease and profit may be advanced, by a set of poor helpless men and women, whom they despise and rank with brutes, and keep them in perpetual slavery, both themselves and children, and merciful death is the only release from their toil."

And what of those who get their freedom? Well, they're not necessarily better off, being exposes to such hypocritical, cruel Christians:

"But amongst those who get their liberty, like all other ignorant men, are generally more corrupt in their morals, than they possibly could have been amongst their own people in Africa; for, being mostly amongst the wicked and apostate Christians, they sooner learn their oaths and blasphemies, and their evil ways, than any thing else."

Another nice twist is how he deals with the Canaanite argument (that Africans are descendants of Canaan, and so they are under a curse and deserving of slavery). He actually turns it back around on the slave owners:

"Many of the Canaanites who fled away in the Time of Joshua, became mingled with the different nations, and some historians, think that some of them came to England, and settled about Cornwall, as far back as that time; so that, for any thing that can be known to the country, there may be some of the descendants of that wicked generation still subsisting among the slave-holders in the West-Indies. For if the curse of God ever rested upon them, or upon any other men, the only visible mark thereof was always upon those who committed the most outrageous acts of violence and oppression."

And a nice, anti-British empire comment. He response to the argument that Britain has become great through slavery in this way:

"It may be answered according to the old proverb,
It seldom is the grand-child's lot,
To share of wealth unjustly got.
This seems to be verified too much in their present situation: for however wide they have extended their territories abroad, they have sunk into a world of debt at home, which must ever remain an impending burden upon the inhabitants."

Anyway, that's enough for a goodreads review. Read this book. It's full of interesting insight into empire, slavery, oppression, and plenty of details about the British slavery debate, as well as what slavery actually was like, at least for Cugoano.