Rating: 4/5

For most of us, the concept of flight is just a method of transportation. Nowadays especially it is a stress-filled way to travel, full of security checks, virus tests, ad-hoc pat-downs, drunken mayhem, and someone’s bare feet on your armrest. Perhaps that is why we look nostalgically at previous eras when flying meant getting dressed up and passengers were treated as royalty while flight crews had the full respect of the customers. But as author William Langewiesche points out in this thoughtful work, being up in the sky is a privilege, a way to see the world and nature in a whole new light. It certainly made me think about how amazing it is that man conquered the skies and beyond.

Flight’s greatest gift is to let us look around, and when we do we can find ourselves reflected within the sky.

Langewiesche uses the first one hundred years of human flight as the framework for the book, but it goes even deeper thanks to a poetic sense of wonder. The author is a pilot who tries to explain to us landlubbers about the way it really is up in the wild blue yonder. There is confusion. There is danger. There are landscapes of solitude. Originally, pilots just had to stay fairly close to the earth to overcome the vagaries of weather. Instrument flying then allowed the next level of safety, forcing the human mind to ignore what the mind thinks is safe in order to rely upon electronics which are safer. Think of John Kennedy Jr., who wasn’t instrument-trained and flew his plane straight into the ocean. Or the helicopter pilot who flew Kobe Bryant into a hill because poor weather had alleviated any visual advantages. If we try to fly by instinct through the weather, even the best of us will roll into spiral dives.

He tells the story of the Wright Brothers, who were not the first to get off the ground, but they were the first to be successful in actual flight control. They practiced and steadily improved the idea of banking, so they could turn their plane. This required a problem-solving process which made them famous and which is somewhat missing in today’s go-go-go world (I would use Boeing’s decline as an example of profits taking over a culture of quality assurance). When World War I eliminated the need for horses and cavalry, the new air force pilots became the knights of the skies. And yet, those skies are never really safe. We can stand on the ground and look up at a mountain and believe it is all clear at its top but a pilot nearing that peak may be engulfed in a white squall. Think of Dean Martin Jr., an experienced California Air National Guard pilot, flying his plane straight into San Gorgonio Mountain during a sudden snowstorm.

It is a small faith that allows us to fly so deeply into the sky.

Since the Wright Brothers, air travel has become safer, so when crashes do occur, they make front page news. In this book, a chapter is devoted to the Air India disaster of 1978. Just minutes after taking off from the airport in Mumbai, the plane fell into the Arabian Sea. If it is hard to believe that something as massive as a 747 can lift into the sky, it is harder still to accept, once it is engaged in forward flight, that something so stately and certain might come plunging back down. It was later learned that it was pilot error which caused the plummet, as it is in many crashes. The alien nature of a dark sky can cause mistakes in the most experienced pilots, as it did that night. Another chapter is devoted to bad weather and how pilots must somehow overcome incorrect forecasts. And most terrifying of all, a chapter on blatant human error and laziness, using the Valujet 592 catastrophe of 1996. I remember that one, because it was eventually determined that the crash was caused by oxygen canisters that had not been properly capped for safety. At every level, there was missed opportunity to solve the issue. It called the FAA into critical view and instilled more comprehensive safety checks for the new millennium. Think of the Space Shuttle Challenger breaking up because of a defective O-ring.

I was completely absorbed in the book, probably because I have never wanted to be a pilot, so it was a new way of viewing flight for me. The author writes with a passion for his profession and for just an overall love of life. Thanks to human flight, our world has grown smaller (easy-to-access travel) yet larger (private flights into orbit) and has allowed us to see things that previous generations of humans would never believe. The writing enthralled me enough to look for his book on the Sahara, which means this read was a success.

Book Season = Summer (close the unencloseable)