Rating: 5/5

Notes

Lead By Example:
Real leadership must be done by example, not precept. Whenever I could not get the
results I wanted, I swallowed my temper and turned inward to see if I was part of the
problem. I asked myself three questions:
1. Did I clearly articulate the goals?
2. Did I give people enough time and resources to accomplish the task?
3. Did I give them enough training?
I discovered that 90 percent of the time, I was at least as much a part of the problem as
my people were.
 Never forget your effect on people. Leaders need to understand how profoundly they
affect people, how their optimism and pessimism are equally infectious, how directly
they set the tone and spirit of everyone around them. Show me an enthusiastic leader,
and I will show you an enthusiastic workforce. And vice versa: If the leader has a bad
day, the whole organization has a bad day.
 Never fail the Washington Post test. I was always careful never to take any ethical
shortcuts. My self-test was simple, and it allowed me to decide whether to go or stop in
terms of obvious consequences. I just asked myself this: If what I’m about to do
appeared on the front page of the Washington Post tomorrow, would I be proud or
embarrassed? If I knew I would be embarrassed, I would not do it. If I’d be proud, I
knew I was generally on the right track.
 Getting somewhere is important. How you get there is equally important. Do the right
thing. Forget petty politics, don’t worry about whether you’re going to upset anyone or
ruffle anyone’s feathers; if it is the right thing to do, figure out a way to get past the egos,
a way to get around the bureaucratic infighting, and then do it. 

Listen Aggressively:
See the ship through the crew’s eyes. Find round people for round holes. Give me
performance over seniority any day of the week. Use the power of word magic. If
leaders back their words with action, if they practice what they preach, their words create
a self-fulfilling prophecy. Call it “word magic.” I wanted my people to believe that the
USS Benfold was “the best ship in the Navy.” I wanted my people to believe in
themselves. Sure, it was corny. But it worked, because confidence is infectious. If we
weren’t actually the best just yet, we were certainly on our way there.
Communicate Purpose and Meaning:
The whole secret of leading a ship or managing a company is to articulate a common goal
that inspires a diverse group of people to work hard together. We must give our
employees a compelling vision of their work, a good reason to believe it was important.
Make your crew think “we can do anything.” Our whole ship became a medium,
sending a message of achievement and can-do optimism to the entire fleet. Like any
other workforce, mine appreciated hearing from top management. Change frightens
workers, and their fears thrive in silence. The antidote is obvious: Keep talking. Tell
everyone personally what’s in store for him or her – new goals, new work descriptions,
new organizational structure, and yes, job losses, if that’s the case. Explain why the
company is making the changes. People can absorb anything if they are not deceived or
treated arrogantly. I found that the more people knew what the goals were, the better
buy-in I got – and the better results we achieved together.
Open up the clogged channels. I focused on creating communication that actually
conveyed information. There is a direct relationship between how much the crew knew
about a plan and how well they carried it out.
After creating a great brand, defend it. Freedom creates discipline. When people
saw me opening myself to criticism, they opened themselves up. That’s how we made
dramatic improvements. When people feel they own an organization, they perform with
greater care and devotion. They want to do things right the first time, and they don’t
have accidents by taking shortcuts for the sake of expedience. I am absolutely convinced
that with good leadership, freedom does not weaken discipline – it strengthens it. Free
people have a powerful incentive not to screw up. 

Look for Results, not Salutes
Take Calculated Risks