Rating: 4/5

3.5 ⭐

Master Sun said:
Ultimate excellence lies
Not in applying false subtext to my teachings
To suit your corporate self-help douche-baggery
But in defending their integrity
By acknowledging them for what they are
Military Stratagems, through and through

For the purpose of review, my edition of ‘The Art of War’ is the Penguin Classics Deluxe Edition. Edited, translated and with an introduction by John Minford. This was a really great way to experience this 2500-year-old military treatise. It begins with about a 50-page section reserved for the introduction, notes on text, list of dynasties and historical events as well as a list and description of the various canon commentators ranging from the Pre-Tang era (as early as 155-220) to the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911). You are then given the treatise, unadorned, to read and make your own presumptions as to it’s meaning, followed by the same treatise with extensive commentary.

Beginning with the work itself, as not everyone’s copy will have the commentary included, Sun Tzu’s treatise, in my opinion, is to be taken as nothing other than military strategy. The foundation of this work is exploitation and deception or “Success through cunning”. This is why I can appreciate its genius in the context of war and even individual combat (Bruce Lee applies many of the same underlying Taoist principles to his philosophy of ‘Jeet Kune Do’ with devastating effect) but can’t understand why anyone would want to introduce such dishonest tactics of subterfuge to their personal or work life. If I took anything beneficial from a personal perspective it was from the Taoist ideas which seem to permeate both Sunzi’s thoughts and those of the commentators. The treatise places huge importance on the planning and gathering of information through espionage, understanding the forms and dispositions of both yourself and the enemy army at any given time, unpredictability (formlessness), the benefits of advantageous terrain and both the virtues of an effective general as well as the pitfalls of a poor one.

I’ve seen Sunzi’s work taken out of context and used in countless personal and corporate self-help books. The idea of taking pure ideology and twisting it, almost beyond recognition, to suit your own needs is nothing new. In fact, even Sun Tzu himself abuses a number of the basic notions of Taoist teachings to support his own ideas. As did the so-called “legalists” (Chinese fascists) of the warring states period who derived a perverted justification for their Orwellian State through certain Taoist principles. 

One of the more horrifying examples of distorting well-intentioned philosophies are the Chinese teachings regarding the “Art of Love”. These somehow take the wholesome lessons of the Tao and use them to justify a “relentless quest for sexual power” in which women are reduced to “objects for the enhancement of male potency and long life”. Get a load of this insane shit:

   “The man should defeat the enemy in the sexual battle by keeping himself under complete control… while exciting the woman till she reaches orgasm and sheds her Yin essence which is then absorbed by the man.”

Well, ladies, if that doesn’t get you up and about, I don’t know what will. I mean, as long as you’re cool with being perceived as a sexual enemy by your loved-one, objectified and having your precious “Yin essence” absorbed, the rest sounds ok, right?!... Doesn’t sound like the Tao that I know.

 I was concerned but not entirely turned away by the fact that this kind of philosophical distortion might leak into the commentary of this translation but I needn’t have worried. The commentary given here is completely literal. A number of the commentators themselves were generals in the centuries closely following the time in which these stratagems were allegedly compiled. Minford compiles these commentaries brilliantly. At times he has ordered them so as to be a sort of commentary on commentary. One philosopher will comment on Master Sun’s work, followed by another philosopher commenting on what the previous commentator said. Often this reads like a multi-generational conversation between strategists which I really enjoyed. You also really begin to get a feel for the personality traits of a number of the commentators. For example, there’s Du You, lover of cat analogies, or Cao Cao, the brutal general and strict disciplinarian who was prepared to take his own life upon breaking one of his own trivial rules. These were the things I liked about the commentary.

On the other hand, there were times when the commentary became repetitive and at times felt redundant due to the fact that a lot of Sunzi’s information is quite literal and unclouded by metaphor. In stark contrast to something like the ‘Tao Te Ching’ by Lao Tzu whose teachings are infamously intangible and elusive. Sun Tzu already has a habit of repeating some ideas in an educationally beneficial manner. On a number of occasions, the exact phrase is repeated. Whether this was actually him or the way the bamboo strips have been compiled, I don’t know. The point is, when you pile on additional, unrequired clarification and expansion, it does begin to get a little tiresome after a couple of hundred pages.

Sun Tzu: ”Deadlock” means that neither side finds it advantageous to make a move.
Du You: What Sunzi means is that neither side finds it advantageous to move, and the situation remains deadlocked.
Sun Tzu: Yeah bro, that’s literally exactly what I just said! Du You even listen?

I enjoyed this, despite the last 100 pages becoming a bit of a battle of attrition, and am now really looking forward to reading the ‘Tao Te Ching’ and the ‘Analects of Confucius’ in the next month or so. Happy reading amigos! 

  ”Know the enemy,
Know yourself, 
And Victory
Is never in doubt 
Not in a hundred battles.”