Rating: 3/5

When the Most Terrible Monster Is Not the Whistling Outlaw, nor the Black Wolf Dog, nor the Psychopathic Sheriff, but the Loving Mother 

I enjoyed Max Brand’s pulp western Beyond the Outposts (1925), which is a little like A Princess of Mars crossed with Little Big Man, so was looking forward to reading another book by him, and The Seventh Man (1923) delivered in spades.

The novel opens with Vic Gregg working hard and alone to stake claims in the mountains to earn enough money to someday marry his schoolteacher sweetheart, Betty Neal, and then returning to their small town of Alder to take a break and see Betty, only to provoke and shoot an ersatz rival, and then flee back to the mountains just ahead of a posse.

This sets in motion the chain of fateful events that involve the real protagonists of the story, Dan Barry, his wife Kate, and their five-year-old daughter Joan. Dan is like Mowgli trying to live among people: he has a huge pet wolf dog called Black Bart and a huge black stallion called Satan, with both of whom he communicates and collaborates with near telepathy. Since the birth of Joan, Kate has been civilizing Dan, so that his eyes have stopped turning feral yellow, and his eerie whistling in the wind has ceased. Nonetheless, they live up in the mountains in a small cabin, far from any town, and one wonders how deep Kate’s taming of the wild man has reached and how long it will last.

Their five-year idyll ends when Dan rescues Vic from a posse led by the psychopathic sheriff Pete Glass (“Man killing came easier to him than reading”), who lives to hunt outlaws, always gets his man, and reckons that when the dwindling supply of bountied outlaws runs out, he’ll become one. 
And when the posse commits an atrocity (in Dan’s eyes) by shooting the horse he’s riding to draw them away from Vic, Whistling Dan Barry surfaces from beneath the veneer of civilization painted on him by Kate: a horse like Gray Molly is worth at least seven sneaking, slimy men in Dan’s moral calculation, so he starts serving justice on the seven members of the posse.

There are plenty of thrilling (if not wholly believable) western action scenes, much horse and gun lore, and a historical texture with famous outlaws of yesteryear and friends from the past popping up. There are some fixtures of the western genre, like the schoolteacher fiancé, the conflict between civilization and wildness, and the encroachment of technology into nature (the telephone plays a key role in the plot).

But there are also genre surprises, like the significant role played by Billy the Clerk (NOT Billy the Kid): “No one paid particular attention to Billy, and they never had. He was useless on a horse and ridiculous with a gun, and the only place where he seemed formidable was behind a typewriter.”

And I was surprised when Kate and Dan’s conflict over their daughter Joan starts driving the doom-laden plot. Brand creates a wonderful little girl in Joan, so innocent and loving! (I love the scenes where she rides the terrifying Black Bart like a pony, pulling on his ears and scolding him, “Bad dog!”) And Brand creates a merciless mother in Kate, who to keep Joan will do anything, from pleading and kidnapping to emotional blackmail and murder, even though the painfully divided girl would rather live with Dan and Bart and Satan.

Despite Dan’s demonic animal companions, yellow eyes, weird whistling, and unusual moral code by which an animal’s life is worth at least as much as a man’s, then, the scariest, most monstrous person in the book is Kate, a manipulative, self-centered, homicidally maternal woman:

“She don’t love Dan. She thinks she does, but down deep they ain’t a damned thing in the world she gives a rap about exceptin’ Joan. Men? What are they to her? Marriage? That's simply an accident that's needed so she can have a baby. Delicate, shrinkin’ flower, is she? I tell you, my boy, if it was necessary for Joan she'd tear out your heart and mine and send Dan plumb to hell. You fasten on to them words, because they're gospel.” 

The Seventh Man is about the impossibility of the wild and the civilized to coexist for long. Maybe for several years, but not permanently and not easily. As much as Dan loves Kate and Joan and would never hurt them or wants to protect them, living domesticated with them has been smothering an important part of himself. Society and civilization won’t let extraordinarily “natural” men like Dan live in peace. He’s an ur-outlaw, like his wolf dog, hunted by groups of men from every town around.
Brand wrote savory dialogue, like this:

“Who are you?” The big voice fairly swallowed the rather shrill tone of the sheriff. 
“I'm sheriff Pete Glass.” 
“You lie. Whoever heard of a sheriff come sneakin’ round like a coyote lookin’ for dead meat?” 
Pete Glass grinned with rage. “Haines, you ain’t much better’n spoiled meat if you keep back. I gave you till I count ten—” 
“Why, you bob-tailed skunk,” shouted a new voice. “You bone-spavined, pink-eyed rat-catcher,” continued this very particular describer, “what have you got on us? Come out and dicker and we’ll do the same!” 

For the reader today, Brand also wrote unpleasant touches from the late 19th and early 20th century, like casual racism. Despite the absence of any Hispanic characters, the narrator and characters negatively refer to “greasers” (e.g., “Captain Lorrimer was as dirty as a greaser; and like a greaser, was loose-lipped, unshaven”) and use “white” as a synonym for trustworthiness (e.g., “Stranger … you’re white. Damned white. Thats all.). The irrational hatred of wolves also crops up, as when Vic Gregg sees a wolf paw print and “grinned with excitement; fifty dollars’ bounty if that scalp were his!” Or as when a wolf’s howl sounds “demoniacal.”

Apart from such antique blemishes, Brand wrote exciting, thoughtful pulp westerns that hold up well today.

Robert Keiper, the reader who reads the Librivox audiobook I listened to, does a great job with the characters and narration, adding a lot to the experience.