Rating: 1/5

Warning: Mild spoilers ahead.

As I have said earlier, it is a dicey affair to one-star a classic on GR. Some people may see it as blasphemy: and maybe, one can expect a lynch mob. But what to do? I did not like this book: could not bring myself to finish it even; so one-star is the only option.

My only acquaintance with Patricia Highsmith before this novel was The Terrapin, a terrifying short story. So I was pretty sure I would like this novel, even though the story was familiar to me from Hitchcock's famous movie of the same name. I was prepared for some lack of suspense because I knew the story - but was not at all prepared for boredom, which is all the book gave me.

The movie itself has plot holes - only to be expected in any Hitchcock film, as he himself touts his use of the MacGuffin - but the director always gets away with it because of his masterly handling of pace and suspense. Well, the book is even worse. IMO, the story itself is a huge plot hole. Two strangers, Guy Haines and Charlie Bruno casually meet on a train. Guy tells Bruno about his unfaithful wife, who wouldn't give him a divorce. The clearly deranged Bruno suggests that he kill Guy's wife, and Guy return the favour by killing his troublesome father: a sort of murder swap. He refuses the screwy offer, but Bruno goes ahead and carries out his part of the plan anyway - then begins dogging Guy's footsteps to carry out his part of the "bargain", and from there onwards it's a descent into darkness.

The problem I had with this premise is the tenuousness of the case against Guy that Bruno could muster. It is true that he could cause some unpleasantness, but which court would convict a man based on the unsupported testimony of another, about an extremely dubious "contract", based on a drunken conversation in a train? And why doesn't Guy confide in Anne, his girlfriend, at the beginning itself? Can psychological guilt be so strong? For me, it was unbelievable.

Also, I found the writing to be ponderous and a chore to get through. Deep psychological examination of the characters' mindset would have been fascinating in a serious work of literature: but in a suspense novel, it became tedious after a while. I got seriously fed up with Guy's ruminations.

Maybe I'd have enjoyed the novel if I had come to it without expectations. Maybe I'd have enjoyed it if I had not seen the movie at all. Maybe.

But I doubt it.