Rating: 1/5

While reading the first chapter, all I could think was "Nobody talks like that, not even in 1940". It sounded like dialogue from a particularly bad 40s B movie. Elizabeth's parents allowed her to get out of control and torture her governesses for ten years but suddenly decide enough is enough and instead of dealing with their child's misbehavior, she needs to be send off to boarding school. Yes, boarding school will cure her. 

I was getting tired of the constant "Elizabeth cannot really be bad because she does well in her lessons and is beautiful". Ah yes, only ugly, unintelligent children can be TRULY naughty. Yes, I know, it's the 1940s. People probably did say "Aw, you, naughty? But you're such a pretty little girl" but when you added in the fact that Elizabeth was brilliant at everything she tried without actually trying, it was just too much. 

I did read Blyton's other school stories as a girl and though I wouldn't have wanted to go to those schools, they seemed okay to me. Whyteleafe feels like a communist colony to me. As someone who has been bullied at school, I couldn't help but feel like this was Lord of the Flies waiting to happen. The whole school could make the life of an unpopular child a living hell by collectively turning against him or her. The way the other students punished Elizabeth left a bad taste in my mouth. The monitors were creepy. They are basically kids spying on everyone else and reporting the other student's transgressions to the head boy and girl. Though that school would have been my worst nightmare as a little girl (I would have rather attended St. Clair's, where I'd have to serve older girls!), it's expected that all children love Whyteleafe school. There has to be something wrong with any child who does not.

On the day Elizabeth arrives at boarding school, she can't help thinking that sharing a room with five other girls would be exciting. This is a spoiled child, who just one chapter ago ranted about how she hates other boys and girls. She also gets excited about the gym and as times goes on, you get the impression that she is really enjoying school though most of the other children want nothing to do with her. 

"On another evening there was a small dance, beginning at half-past seven, for an hour. Elizabeth loved dancing too, and when she saw the notice on the notice-board, she was pleased.
No wonder the children were happy at Whyteleafe! There seemed always something lovely to look forward to, something exciting to do. "

Does this sound like a child who has no friends at school, HATES her school (which she claims she does) and just wants to go home? Looking at the way people treat her and the fact that she has never been away from home, Elizabeth should be miserable. A miserable child doesn't think "No wonder all the other children here are so happy". She doesn't even seem to miss home, her parents, or her pets

The only child who seems to miss her mother at all is Joan- whose mother ironically dislikes her and wants nothing to do with her until Elizabeth fixes that little problem. Seems a bit unlikely that a woman who never cared for her daughter would change her ways because of another child's interference.