Rating: 5/5

The Singing Sands is a manuscript that was found among Josephine Tey’s papers after she died in February 1952, and was published later that same year. It is therefore the conclusion of her Inspector Alan Grant series, and the end of what has been a wonderful reading experience for me.

In 2012, English journalist and author Peter Hitchens wrote that, "Josephine Tey's clarity of mind, and her loathing of fakes and of propaganda, are like pure, cold spring water in a weary land", and “what she loves above all is to show that things are very often not what they seem to be, that we are too easily fooled, that ready acceptance of conventional wisdom is not just dangerous, but a result of laziness, incuriosity and of a resistance to reason.”

I agree with Peter Hitchens’ observations, and believe that this is why Josephine Tey’s work is still so highly esteemed among both readers and writers alike – even after all these years.

In this, her final book of the Inspector Alan Grant series, we find the sensitive and intelligent Scotland Yard Inspector in Scotland on leave due to claustrophobic attacks leading to panic, at times. He stays with Tommy and Laura, his friends since childhood, and their two children. While he can’t bring himself to talk to Tommy about his debility, he does confide in Laura. She tells him she is not in the least surprised and that it is probably his psyche letting him know that he has taken on too much stress at work and too demanding of a caseload.

On the train to Scotland, a young man dies in a first-class sleeping compartment and Alan Grant helps the night porter settle the man so he doesn’t fall off the couch before the police can get there. However, he later discovers that while helping the porter he inadvertently picked up the young man’s newspaper and tucked it in with his own. Written on a blank space at the top is a short poem of eight lines with the 5th and 6th lines missing.

While with his friends, he fishes, shares dinners and conversation, and generally relaxes – yet he cannot get the young man from the train out of his mind. The story is about where his musings take him – mentally, physically, and emotionally.

This novel is brilliant – the storytelling and character development are exceptional and the plot definitely fulfills the maxim that many people are too easily fooled by the obvious – yet there are still the Inspector Alan Grant-types in this world who are curious, inspired, and tenacious enough to seek out the truth.