Rating: 4/5

An enjoyable reread. A well-written book that stands the test of time. It was written a while ago but still feels fresh. It follows on a few years after A Woman Scorned, and we do get a couple of nice little revisits with Cole and Jonet living their HEA. This book could be read as a standalone, but I think it would make more sense if you have read A Woman Scorned first.

This book focusses on David, Lord Delacourt and Cecelia, now the widowed Lady Walrafen. These two have a history together, but they have been avoiding each other for the last few years.

 I'm aware some readers don't particularly like David as the MMC. On the surface he seems arrogant and at times immature, a kind of boy-man. But when he was a young man just starting to find himself, some devastating family revelations took away all of his self-confidence about his place in the world. There are secrets that David cannot reveal, and they affect his life and behaviour. For me, the author explains things well enough that I can accept David's attitude and behaviour. It makes it all the sweeter when he is finally able to believe that he and Cecelia really do belong together. 

Cecelia is a likeable character - she is the titular 'woman of virtue' who, now that she has a little more life experience, is able to see through David's 'armour' to the vulnerable and honourable man he really is. 

There is also a set of enjoyable secondary characters: Cecelia's Cockney maid Henrietta, the reformed prostitute with her saucy insights into men and life; Max de Rohan, the enigmatic River Policeman (who has his own book in No True Gentleman); the supposedly wicked Bentham Rutledge, some of whose secrets are later revealed (he also gets his own book); and of course the ever resourceful Kemble, the gentleman's gentleman who has an interesting set of knowledge and skills that teeters on the edge of the law. 

There is an interesting mystery to be solved in the book, related to smuggling. We see the seedy underbelly of life in grimy inner London with its thieves, bawdy houses, and lowlifes. Carlyle has an excellent grasp of historical detail, and her book is clearly well-researched. This side of the book adds an interesting aspect that lifts it above your run-of-the-mill Regency.

And of course, through it all runs the love story of David and Cecelia, who are clearly meant to be together. A worthwhile and entertaining read.