Rating: 2/5

I had not read this author, Brendan Gill, before and will not read any more of his books--a shame really since he's certainly a good writer. The problem is he seems to be evening scores with some people by the act of writing this book, which goes way beyond "warts and all," I would say. While sharing his seemingly endless mental filing cabinet of The New Yorker's staff, personalities, wonderful black &amp; white photos, cartoons, events, quirks, and name dropping, definitely sustains interest and momentum through 395 pages, Gill cannot seem to stop his mean-spirited way of getting each of the entire gang of writers, artists, and editors into the palm of his hand to examine them and describe many of them in the worst possible terms, insulting even the appearance of each in the grossest of terms. 

There is no reason to hurl insults for Gill to comment in detail upon about his co-workers' appearance for at least two obvious reasons: 1) this book is about the writing, drawing, editing, or management expertise and habits of these people--all working for a literary magazine, not a fashion publication; 2) the author has supplied clear, close up photographs of every, or very nearly every coworker, rendering his denigrating commentary on aspects of their human appearance not only superfluous, but also making quite a statement about his egotistical and mean-spirited reasons for attacking people who have passed on and cannot defend themselves.

Gill describes, for example, John O'Hara: "I was startled by O'Hara's ugliness. He was in his middle thirties and had already grown heavy; his head rose out of an exceptionally thick neck and his ears stuck out bizarrely from fleshy cheeks. To make matters worse, he had a bad complexion and a mouth full of decaying teeth, which he was all too slowly having replaced. In spite of his looks and my awe of him, we got on." O'Hara, a highly successful author, might not have ever spoken to Gill again and regretted he ever had, had he known in what terms Gill would immortalize him in print after his death. After excoriating this man for his ego ironically, Gill included an accompanying photo of O'Hara showing him to be an average looking middle-aged man by the way, but it is clear that Gill had to be sure to put this successful man under his evil magnifying glass lest you believe O'Hara's achievements overshadow Gill's perhaps? He admits how thoroughly successful O'Hara was by any account. Every person Gill describes has his discolored or missing teeth permanently documented posthumously in literary history by the author, as well as any physical asymmetry, less than perfect clothing, education, etc. 

He repeatedly refers to women as "fat," and even goes so far as to insult one even reaching into future tense, to wit: "She hasn't gotten fat yet." (None but thin, attractive women have their photos included.) Only in one case among many pictured rotund (his word) men does he refer to a man as fat; that's reserved for women. The other men he terms "tubby," having "a big belly," and the like. Some of his minutely insulting descriptions literally took my breath away.

He omits any discussion of at least several highly important women who were central to the success, popularity, and personality of the magazine, such as Dorothy Parker. She was a vitally important, and constant, critic and contributor on The New Yorker, and a regular of the Algonquin Roundtable, yet although he mentions her name five times according to the index, he never once offers the smallest anecdote about her or her work, nor any sample of her work. He similarly disses Mary Petty, a prolific and highly talented artist on the magazine, mentioning her only as "the wife and fellow-artist" of another staff member whose art he does include and described at length. (If you look Petty up online you will see cover after beautiful New Yorker cover painted by her, plus cartoons.) 

Gill never fails to mention a subject's Ivy league degree or aristocratic pedigree since he himself had both, of course; however, and in every case, he feels compelled to reveal or at least speculate at length how much money each of his coworkers has. And there is endless commentary about how much each person hankers after more money or success, as though everyone must indeed be at least as obsessed with those aspects of life as he is. 

And he makes sure to describe the drinking habits of his coworkers. Although at one point or two, he does acknowledge in passing that he likes to drink too, he characterizes many as what could only be termed sloppy drunks. He obviously holds himself above such a defective appearance or absence of class. He calls one young writer, whom he says is "a homosexual" and a "poor fool" (as he judged and recorded him for posterity) claiming has literally damaged his brain by excessive drinking in such a way, that definitively he had thus sent himself back into childhood--clearly evidenced by his fondness fo toys. He judges another coworker in this identical fashion. It never occurs to him that these two men, for example, could be rape survivors self-medicating with alcohol, and that the toys are a symptom of each trying to relive a childhood stolen from them. This author not only had no sympathy, he had no knowledge of mental illness nor the simple perspective required to see maybe he didn't know what the problem really was, nor even to stop to consider other more compassionate perspectives. Remember that he is referring to life in the 70s, so it is not as if he is writing from the 19th century.

It would be interesting to know how much time elapsed from the first word Gill wrote of this book until the later chapters. He begins later in the book to offer more seemingly heartfelt compliments and to include himself as an errant human being along with his criticisms, but what does that mea culpa mean as he has gone to print anyway with his horrific descriptions and highly and minutely insulting summaries of his coworkers and friends. It's as though he wants you to let him off the hook for his vengeful and egotistical accounts by believing he wrote and published the book a few paragraphs at a time when he started at the magazine at 22 yrs. old, and was too immature to realize how jealous and fault-finding he was until he published it at "almost 50." If he wasn't a malevolent narcissist, why would he have sent this mean-spirited book to print? Why not soften the descriptions, if he did truly begin to feel more humane? It would be understandable to criticize their writing or art, but their weight and their teeth are irrelevant to the history of The New Yorker, in any case.

He could barely contain his hatred of James Thurber in his scathing descriptions of him, and even sounds childishly jealous that Thurber's talented drawings remained on the office walls decades after he drew them. It apparently bothers Gill that they are still there even though many are covered beneath coats of paint, because he mentions that fact more than once, even after Thurber's cartoons have been expunged. Notably, he even speculated that the only reason Thurber was kinder to him in later years must have been Thurber's as-yet-undiagnosed brain tumor! Perhaps Thurber had wisely matured when Gill obviously had not! Yet Thurber having a brain tumor was the only reason which Gill was capable of discerning to judge or attribute to Thurber's improved behavior.

It's truly a shame that this author distracts the reader, and equally detracts from his own talent, so thoroughly that this historical account of an iconic American journal of the times over decades becomes more like documenting the hundreds of painful paper cut insults you will have to suffer to get through his 395 pages. However, you can feel fortunate indeed to not have been a coworker of Gill's who has to endure character assassination in perpituity, and wonder if most people judge your appearance so harshly now that it has been horridly documented for posterity. Chalk this book up to an Ivy league educated, entitled, bully writing straight out his unprofessional immaturity with oddly no editorial voice of reason to hold him in check.

Also note that unfortunately I unknowingly bought this book as a first edition, which was not reflected in the price. Had I bought a later version, at least I might have enjoyed the added introduction by more recent staff who couldn't possibly have been as cowardly to write so ill of the dead.