Rating: 5/5

Absolutely spellbinding! I can't remember the last time I laughed over a book so much. Theroux's depiction of Naipaul's (Vidia's) scorn had me cackling with laughter. Naipaul's enmity knows no bounds. He hates everyone. No one can tell him anything he doesn't already know. I'm hard put to recollect other examples of such megalomania in either real life or literature. How could it have left him anything but absolutely miserable? Yet, one thinks, perhaps this was what he had to do to be able to write as he has (a view Theroux rejects). That is to say, ecstatically, brilliantly, for there can be no question about the quality of Naipaul's work. Theroux first met him in Uganda. It was 1965.I was just a young man in Africa, trying to make my life. He was one of the strangest men I had ever met, and the most difficult. He was almost unlovable. He was contradictory, he quizzed me incessantly, he challenged everything I said, he demanded attention, he could be petty, he uttered heresies about Africa, he fussed, he mocked, he made his innocent wife cry, he had impossible standards, he was self important, he was obsessive on the subject of his health. He hated children, music, and dogs. But he was also brilliant, and passionate in his convictions, and to be with him, as a friend or fellow writer, I had always to be at my best.

But, you'll want to know, is the book filled with damning evidence of Naipaul's cruel temperament? Good God, is it ever! The tale of his treatment of his wife while she was on her deathbed will set your hair on fire. But then it is also filled with Naipaul's moving, deeply considered proclamations on the beauty and deep satisfactions of literature. My only regret is that I've waited so long to read Theroux. I've just ordered The Great Railway Bazaar and if it's half as good as Sir Vidia's Shadow, I will be very happy indeed. The book is also a testament to the vicissitudes of the writing life; in that sense, it's essential. If you've read Naipaul's oeuvre, as I have, it may even be indispensable.