Rating: 3/5

3.5 This one opens with the heroine attending a biker's ball. 

"A couple strolled by in a jaw-dropping getup. She was wearing nothing but black leather boots and a black lace body stocking. It was obvious -- in that outfit -- that she was a natural blonde. It was also obvious she had serious muscles.

'Who's that?' I said, awed by the raw display.

'That's Stephanie, Ms. Gypsy Tour,' he said. 'She's the woman who handled her bike best at the trials. She comes by her skills naturally. She's an over-the-road trucker.'

'That's quite a pair,' I said.

'She -is- built like a brick shithouse,' Sonny said, and his crooked grin slipped into a leer.

'I meant Stephanie and her escort make quite a pair,' I said.

'Oh, him. That's her boyfriend, Crazy Jerry,' he said, and shrugged.

Crazy Jerry was nobody I'd shrug away. He had almost as many muscles as she did, plus a flawless tan. I could tell because he was wearing only a black vest, black leather chaps, and a black Harley G-string. I looked, then quickly looked away. Almost every woman in the room did the same thing. It wouldn't be good for our health to stare too much at Jerry's stuffed G-string. Stephanie looked like she'd decked more than one man and wouldn't hesitate to hit a defenseless woman."

Francesca Vierling is a columnist for the St. Louis City Gazette, hoping to get a story out of the biker's ball (but I think she wanted to go anyway). Judging the "leather and lace" contest just adds to the fun, and the evening is a delight until she ends up at a murder scene.

Sydney Vander Venter could not have been more out of place among the bikers, and after causing trouble on several fronts is found dead in the alley outside. Now Francesca must find out what really happened, both to help her friends and because of her own need for the truth.

This is the second book in an excellent new series. Francesca is a fun narrator because in addition to following her investigation of a well-constructed mystery, we also get many stories and anecdotes about everyday life. I suspect the author's background as a columnist is coming out here, and I enjoy it.