Rating: 4/5

Third book in the Pascal Trilogy, which is author Katherine Kingsley's most popular series. The second bk in the series - No Sweeter Heaven - is the most famous and probably the best bk in the series. I read No Sweeter Heaven 15 years ago and reading NBD, I am reminded of all the things I liked and disliked about KK's writing.

This novel features the only son of the H/H from No Sweeter Heaven and, if I include the Prologue, it covers a period of 16 years. It starts with 14 year old Andre vowing to love his childhood sweetheart forever and ever. When his sweetheart dies, Andre turns his back on God, his family, and his country, and roams all over Ancient Asia Minor writing history books. 

In Turkey, he comes across a sick urchin, Ali, and nurses her back to health. After she recovers, Andre keeps Ali as his servant, thinking she is a 12 yr old boy. Ali helps to alleviate the heaviness in Andre's heart with her laughter, her chattering, her intelligence, and her thirst for life. When Ali is discovered to be the long-lost daughter of Andre's mentor, he sends her away to England to be with her relatives because it is the right thing to do.

Ali, who grew up thinking she was Turkish and Muslim, deals with the culture shock of Victorian England. She meets with the H/Hs of the previous 2 books. She learns English and all the accomplishments of a proper English lady. But mostly, she waits for Andre to come back to England because she knows she is meant to be his wife. 

KK is known for the spiritual and otherworldy elements in her books. Spiritual faith is an important theme in this trilogy. I have never read an inspirational or christian romance so I dont know how this would compare but I would not call KK's tone preachy or zealous.

NBD is about 380 pages but it read like 450. It is a visceral read. I laughed. I teared up. I felt like I was put through the wringer. The prose is clean, but evocative. At times, it reminded of Patricia Gaffney (the Gaffney who wrote Wild at Heart and To Love and Cherish). KK and Gaffney both wrote for the same imprint (Topaz) during 1990s as well as many other excellent authors like Mary Jo Putney. I suggest that if you liked the Gaffney books I mentioned as well as some of the more New Age-y historicals of Putney, then you might want to give this trilogy a try.

Grade: B+