Rating: 5/5

I listened to this audio book right after visiting the Georgia O’Keeffe Museum in Santa Fe, New Mexico. This repeated a process of a few years ago where I listened to a biography of Frank Lloyd Wright by Ada Louise Huxtable right after visiting his masterpiece Fallingwater in Mill Run, Pennsylvania.

In my earlier review I stated that “I’ve recently come to the conclusion that nearly all male geniuses are assholes and Huxtable certainly makes the case of putting Frank Lloyd Wright into this system.” Unfortunately, after listing to Portrait of an Artist I may have to add a few women to my statement.

Let me say that I am a fan of O’Keeffe’s paintings, particularly her large flowers. I find then fascinating. As all great artwork, they evoke emotions and it is extremely easy to get lost in them. Her blending of colors, brushstrokes, and composition are excellent and yes, despite her denials, I do find many of them vaginal.

I am generally not into biographies. I like to focus more on a person’s creations rather than on their life. Of course, most of the people I am most interested in are scientists. Knowing about Einstein’s childhood really doesn’t help me to understand E=MC2 any better.

When it comes to artwork, I am not an educated viewer. I have no art background and would have trouble discussing cubism vs realism vs impressionism. As I have already mentioned, I do enjoy paintings primarily for the feelings they invoke. Contrary to science, there is the possibility that knowing more about an artist can help one to understand their work better. Which leads us back to Portrait of an Artist.

First, kudos to the narrator Grace Conlin. Her reading of the book was clear and easy to follow. Her narration was interesting and with feeling but it never overshadowed the author’s words or the subject matter.

Laurie Lisle did an amazing “deep dive” into O’Keeffe’s life. The details about O’Keeffe’s; family, living situations, relationships, appearance, conflicts, conversations, and emotional trials is extensive. By the end of this book I felt like I knew everything about the subject except for her shoe size.

Of course, more than details, what is important in a biography is the essence of the individual. Lisle presents O’Keeffe’s strengths and weaknesses and her demons and angels in a clear and fair fashion. O’Keeffe clearly viewed the world very differently than most people and she herself could not explain it with words. As she said, I can only communicate via my paintings. If you asked me to explain them, I would just have to paint you another painting, which would probably look just like the first one.

O’Keeffe was hard on her family, on her friends, and on her lovers. She was probably not a lot of fun to be around. Of course, this was due to her being hardest on herself. In my admitted limited reading of biographies, I have come to the conclusion that most geniuses are self-absorbed, egotistical, and self-centered. O’Keeffe was a painter who broke through the intense sexist barriers of the artistic world to present innovative artwork that exposed her inner feelings for all to see. Therefore, I have to give her a pass on her egotism, hard veneer, and anti-social lifestyle. I doubt that she could have survived without them.