Rating: 2/5

I don't think I've ever been so relieved to finish a novel, since it ate so much of my time. In my hardcover version, there are 658 pages of the smallest type I've ever seen in any other hardback. To say the least, it was painfully long.

Not that I care how long a book is. If a book keeps me interested enough, I'll be happy to read thousands of pages. But Incubus Dreams is painfully slow, simply because not much is going on. If you've ever read/heard an interview with Laurell K. Hamilton, you've probably heard her go off about how all her books are a "full meal" and such, but over the huge duration of this novel, she somehow manages to not resolve the main storyline: the vampire serial killer(s). She had plenty of room to resolve a fairly simple murder mystery, and somehow, she couldn't. That's not a "full meal" to me. And even if she did resolve it, the plot wasn't that interesting to begin with. Strippers in the area are being killed by vampires. By LKH standards, that's pretty dull.

Plenty of reviewers warned me about the large amounts of sex going on in this book, so I wasn't too shocked to find that Anita has sex with everyone. Pretty much every main character with a Y chromosome has sex with Anita in this book, along with a few extra men no one has even heard of before. But really, these "sex scenes" don't have a lot of sex actually going on. It's a lot of talking about sex before and after they do (for example, Jean-Claude, Richard, and Anita are naked in a bed and feel the need to talk about what they plan on doing for fifty pages before actually doing it). Oh, and of course, if Anita happens to have sex with a perfect stranger, we get a twenty-page narration consisting of, "Oh, that probably wasn't a good idea." I'm just tired of the whole idea of the ardeur (which is bad, since it was only introduced three books ago), mainly because it's getting in the way of the mystery/action/suspense plots.

And what was up with the terrible spelling/grammatical errors? I've never seen so many blatant spelling errors ever in a book. Do these editors not spell-check?

There's just something about this book that feels off. I'm not sure what it is, but this novel is definitely not up to par with others in the series. While I wouldn't recommend skipping it (there are some significant developments in relationships, Anita's powers, etc.), I would not go into it with high expectations.