Rating: 4/5

Unbeknownst even to his biographers, C.G. Jung was an obsessive fan of The Police: the popular British rock band active in the 1970s and 80s and known for such hits as “Every Little Thing She Does is Magic”, “Don’t Stand So Close to Me”, and “Message in a Bottle”.

Mesmerized by the hypnotic drumming of Stewart Copeland, the iconic, raspy vocals of Sting, and the captivating guitar riffs of Andy Summers, Jung would use the trio’s music as an aid for his active imagination sessions, whereby he would plumb the depths of the unconscious for self-knowledge. He studied the group’s music—as he did the work of Paracelsus, Hermes Trismegistus, Pico della Mirandola, and Jacob Boehme—to acquire insight into such matters as the connectivity of cosmos and psyche, the archetypes of the collective unconscious, and the relation of alchemical symbolism to the individuation process. 

Though his studies of The Police were immensely fruitful, Jung was perplexed by two songs from the group’s celebrated corpus: “Synchronicity I” and “Synchronicity II”. Finding the meaning of the lyrics impenetrable, he spent the final years of his life rifling franticly through ancient manuscripts looking for clues. What he discovered astonished him: in the two “Synchronicity” songs, Sting was developing a new theory about the nature of reality to compliment Einstein’s relativity theory.

The “triad of classical physics”—space, time, and causality—was missing a fourth principle necessary for a wholistic understanding of nature. Sting identified this “missing” principle as that of synchronicity; defined as connections of meaning (rather than physical cause and effect) deriving from an original or pre-existing unity of nature. Whereas Einstein unified space and time, commonly thought of as separate factors, into the composite of space-time, Sting thought a similar meta-concept was needed to articulate the essential unity of causality and synchronicity, the two connective principles. 

If the trinitarian logic of exclusion and distinction were replaced with a more wholistic, quaternal conception of reality, Jung thought, the mystical wisdom of the ancients and the empirical science of the moderns could be reconciled within a complete map of reality. Of course, this longing for the inclusion of a fourth into a preexisting three was a projection of Jung’s desire to become the fourth member of The Police, and his disappointment at being rejected by the band because they had no need of a marimbist. 

The idea of synchronicity—the notion that our psychological conceptions of meaning have some correlate “out there” in the physical world because meaning is as “natural” as cause and effect—was the assumed worldview of virtually every premodern thinker, from Lao Tzu to Leibniz, and was only denied its legitimacy in the West in the eighteenth century, when empirically-verifiable causality became the exclusive principle of European natural science.

Compare Sting’s “Synchronicity I” to Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching.

Sting defines synchronicity:

”With one breath, with one flow
You will know
Synchronicity[…]

A connecting principle,
Linked to the invisible
Almost imperceptible
Something inexpressible.
Science insusceptible
Logic so inflexible
Causally connectible
Yet nothing is invincible[…]

Effect without a cause
Sub-atomic laws, scientific pause
Synchronicity”

Lao Tzu defines the Tao:

”There is something formless yet complete 
That existed before heaven and earth. 
How still! how empty! 
Dependent on nothing, unchanging, 
All pervading, unfailing. 
One may think of it as the mother of all things 
under heaven. 
I do not know its name, 
But I call it “Meaning.” 
If I had to give it a name, I should call it ‘The Great.’”

The similarities speak for themselves. Even if we do not accept The Police’s theory of synchronicity outright, we must take it at least as seriously as I took the writing of this review. My props to Dr. Jung for his remarkable work of pop music criticism.