Rating: 5/5

4.5★

I enjoyed this charming romance a lot more this time around. I loved that  secondary female romantic lead &amp; the main male romance lead were both physically attractive characters who ended up with less attractive partners.

I loved Hester's sweetly gentle character &amp; I think the handsome &amp; kind Sir Gareth Ludlow may be one of my favourite GH heroes (yes, I know I have quite a few)There are some funny scenes &amp; the last chapters in that tiny village are delightful.

Why I've had to knock half a star off? Some of Amanda's adventures started to pall for me until the entrance of  Hildebrand, even though Fabian is an amusing villain. &amp;, not uncommon in GH romances, the hero &amp; heroine don't spend that much time together.

But this book is still nearly impossible to put down.

Edit: 5/3/19 Reread.
Still 4.5★ for me, even though I enjoyed this reread more than I've ever enjoyed this novel before.

As an older reader I really enjoyed Hester's blossoming as a heroine. She learns bravery from the rash Amanda. I would still liked to have seen Hester get another couple of paragraphs of page time.I'm married into a family that has a Fabian &amp; feel GH's portrayal of this unrepentant rogue was very realistic.

My main quibble is with Neil. He talks of  breaking Amanda of some habits. She is not a horse. My concern is that she will always be in a teacher- child relationship with Neil.

Read with the Georgette Heyer Fans Group

Edit: 1/3/24 Reread

This was the right book at the right time for me, &amp; on this read it may have even risen to 5★!

I particularly liked the scene setting at the start, where Gareth comes from a loving family (Trixie crying herself to sleep when she realises Gareth still loves Clarissa really touched me) is a great contrast to Hester's situation where she is an unappreciated drudge. This is very well handled.

&amp; I can't say more without yet more spoiler tags, but the last couple of chapters were so sweet &amp; touching. &amp; Neil didn't bother me so much this time.

5★ it is!