Rating: 4/5

"There are no moves that you truly make alone." This is one significant quote from the book that truly grasps the meaning of the book itself. This book would be a 5 out of 5 stars, but with one flaw that really messes up the book, I have to give it a 4 out of 5. The positive points in the book is what makes it really interesting and kind of fun to read. I really liked how in the beginning the main protagonist is explaining how he came up with the story and he was able to come together and write about this journey he was taking. I liked how in the book that takes place in North Carolina, just around the Civil Rights Movement shows the problems the protagonist Jerome Foxworthy faced. Being an African-American Child he was faced with many problems many of them being forced to integrate with a school he did not want to attend. I loved have well in detail the author of the book went into every "part" of the book, in each of these parts the author really took his time to truly capture the what is happing in the heat of the moment, for example when Jerome is seen playing basketball in the woods. The author goes into deep details about the surroundings and each little thing that can be heard. The author also goes into detail every time Bix or Jerome is playing basketball. From the "Left Jab, to the Back step into the jump-shot." I feel this really brings together the book nicely. One of my favorite thing about the book, the reason why it's a four star. Is the back and forth feelings/connections that the two protagonist have for each other. Even though, the story is told by the main protagonist Jerome, you can still fill the connection between him and Bix. Through the conversations, the facial expression that are so detail by the way, and the overall feel of the story. However, the main thing that really holds this story back is how they ended the story, to me if it just had another chapter it would have been 5 out of 5 stars, but without that ending it felt as something was missing. Some parts of the book were a little "iffy" or felt like they didn't fit, but what disappointed me the most is how they decided to end the book with a mystery that will probably never get solved.