Rating: 2/5

If there’s one book that has more copies in print than ‘The Bible’, it’s Paul Reiser’s ‘Couplehood’. 

“Go forth, my children, and spread this book far, spread it wide.”

“Yes, Lord Reiser. Your will shall be done.”

And so it was that every used bookstore and book sale across the world was peppered with copies of Paul Reiser’s ‘Couplehood’. His mug beamed up at readers everywhere, watching them, casting his eyes into their very souls, hypnotizing them to graze their fingers across the book’s binding. 

“Pick it up. You’re destined to, weary reader. The Universe beckons.”

That’s why I read this book, at any rate. It had become something of a running gag between a few friends of mine as we always noticed, without fail, that this book graced the selection of any used book sale we came across. Would I have read it otherwise? No. 

But what is this book, really? It’s a collage of short musings about life, relationships, and living the American dream (which seems to revolve around watching television). Though dated now, I don’t imagine this was all that funny when it came out. Sure, there were a few passages that made me chuckle, but for the most part, I glossed through this with a deadpan expression, the kind of solemn gaze one wears at some sort of memorial service. 

To Reiser’s credit though, this book is very conversational in style and can easily be read in his voice. Having known him from the James Cameron masterpiece, ‘Aliens’, I had the character of Burke in mind when reading this, imagining his unassuming, observational voice letting me know that if we got through this together, we “could all come out as heroes, and everybody wins!” 

That said, the humor is very clean-cut and safe. It’s the kind of observational musing about inanimate objects humans use on a daily basis that just doesn’t sit with me. I can make jokes about remote controls for television sets too, but there’s a reason I don’t. 

Maybe people into this type of humor will find enjoyment with this book, who knows? For me, even though the repetition of seeing this copy floating around everywhere finally made me cave in and buy it, I’ll admit that it was a “bad call”, friends. It was a baaaaad call.

That said, I’m going to go find solace away from this subpar cultural cornerstone. Got any advice, Mr. Reiser?

“Maybe we could build a fire, sing a couple of songs, huh? Why don't we try that?”