Rating: 4/5

MY RATING GUIDE: Nearly 4 Stars.

 1= dnf/What was that?; 2= Nope, not for me; 3= This was okay/cute; 3.5= I ENJOYED THIS!; 4= I LIKED THIS A LOT; 5= I Loved it, it was great! (I seldom give 5 Stars). 

This is the 5th of 6 books in MC Beaton’s Regency Matchmaker series and I am beginning to enjoy the farces, romps and light adventures. (I read DEBORAH GOES TO DOVER last - jumping ahead to read the last book early - and believe I enjoyed the last 2 books, DOVER and YORK, the best). 

1800, England ~ 
Miss Hannah Pym, 45, is the former housekeeper of a wealthy but reclusive man in Kenningston. When her employer dies, Hannah is bequeathed with a generous gift of 5000 pounds in appreciation of her 33yrs of service. Considering her sudden financial gain, Hannah decides to indulge a little. For a time, she will travel throughout England by stagecoach and finally experience what life has to offer through the sights and the people she meets. 

In DEBORAH GOES TO DOVER Miss Hannah Pym sets upon her 5th adventure traveling to Dover. The stagecoach heading to Dover includes a mixed group of passengers - a withdrawn Army Captain, a minister and his meek wife, a severe woman and her plain but marriageable daughter and Miss Pym and her footman, Benjamin. This journey contains surprises in weather and traveling difficulties, enemies from the past, a fight for honor, and 2 possibilities for matchmaking. And as always, upon her return to London Miss Pym looks forward to sharing her adventures with her former employer’s brother, Sir George, whose kindness and friendship she holds so dear. 

Comments ~ 
1) DEBORAH GOES TO DOVER can be read as a Standalone story or read out of order (as I did) but there is a small overreaching story arc that concludes in book 6.
2) I am always surprised when certain antics of Benjamin or proper Miss Pym cause me to snort or laugh out loud. Their antics can be quite amusing. 
3) Young Abigail is the proper young, downtrodden Miss so I rather enjoyed Deborah’s spunk. I cannot imagine the frustrations and dangers brought upon by the restrictions and difficulties of this period for women in general and especially for the urban lower classes. 
4) DEBORAH GOES TO DOVER further develops the relationship between Missy Pym and Benjamin and continues to explore both characters’ motivations. 
5) The final chapter when Miss Pym meets with Sir George is always one of my favorite parts of these books. I’m glad Sir George has a larger role in the last/next book. 
6) Helen Lisanti is wonderful with the various voices, male and female, as well as the accents. Her choice of voice for Miss Hannah threw me in the first book, but now I can see that it was the perfect selection for her. Excellent work! 
7) Now that I have completed this series, I can see myself listening again for the sheer fun. This is light adventure romance, quick and easy listening while gardening, commuting or completing chores. I plan on listening to the last book once again, now that Miss Pym has grown on me. 

READER CAUTION ~ 
PROFANITY - Yes. Miss Pym’s Footman Benjamin has a salty tongue and occasional oaths, slang and strong language is used. I didn’t find it excessive. 
VIOLENCE - PG. Fisticuffs. 
SEXUAL SITUATIONS - Not really. Very brief description of a loosely dressed woman.