Rating: 5/5

I seem to be on a bit of a Rose Tremain binge at the moment! And enjoying it immensely, I might add.

The Swimming Pool Season seems to attract more than its share of criticism here, but I admired it a lot. I'll grant that it will not appeal to shallow-minded people who want the hero to battle against insuperable odds, kill the villain, seduce the beauty and live happily ever after. No one lives happily ever after in this book. They mostly have lives of what Thoreau called “quiet desperation”, betrayed variously by their own weaknesses, their loyalty to others, their shyness, their unrealistic ambitions or their peasant obstinacy. No one is bad, for very few real people are. No one is really unpleasant, because in real life, we tend not to be. There is quite a lot of just plugging on with things, because that is what we do in the real world. 

It's a bit like a college writing exercise, actually. “Take several random characters and weave them into a novel: you must include a failed swimming-pool salesman, a minor artist, a Polish ex-pat, a French peasant, a genial German, a drunken French peasant ...” If it really was a writing exercise, Tremain would get an A-plus, because all those characters and more make a convincing and enthralling story which I found hard to put down.

However the real strength of the book does not lie in what happens, but in the way it is described. The dialogue is unstrained and natural, and the mangled English of Nadia the Polish lady is a delight. As usual in Tremain's work, settings, clothing, food and drink are vividly portrayed. And she has that rare and wonderful gift of the fortunate expression – the artful and artless combination of words that paints a picture. A simple example … feckless Xavier thinks about going to his departed lover's house and confronting her family: “... they in the warm house, polished and oiled and tended, he with the night at his back, out in the cold”. Xavier has nothing to offer, no skills, no language, no job, no family to speak of … he has the night at his back. If I'd tried to write that in one of my own novels, it would have taken me a whole paragraph to say what Tremain manages in eleven words.