Rating: 5/5

Madame Bovary is a gorgeous comedy of manners… The narration is flowery and almost baroque… There is no sympathy for the characters… The snide style of the novel is unique.
Gustave Flaubert begins from afar… From the school years of Charles Bovary – the future doctor and subsequent husband of Emma Bovary… Being already married one night he visits a patient and there he meets his daughter…
Charles was surprised by the whiteness of her fingernails. They were glossy, delicate at the tips, more carefully cleaned than Dieppe ivories, and filed into almond shapes. Yet her hand was not beautiful, not pale enough, perhaps, and a little dry at the knuckles; it was also too long and without soft inflections in its contours. What was beautiful about her was her eyes: although they were brown, they seemed black because of the lashes, and her gaze fell upon you openly, with a bold candor.
Nonetheless some mysterious spark flies between them… And his destiny chooses to set him free… So there is a new marriage…
Emma, however, would have liked to be married at midnight, by torchlight; but Père Rouault found the idea incomprehensible. So there was a wedding celebration to which forty-three people came, during which they remained at table for sixteen hours, which started up again the next day and carried over a little into the days that followed.
Charles is absolutely happy… But to Emma he is just a way station…
She loved the sea only for its storms, and greenery only when it grew up here and there among ruins. She needed to derive from things a sort of personal gain; and she rejected as useless everything that did not contribute to the immediate gratification of her heart, – being by temperament more sentimental than artistic, in search of emotions and not landscapes.
They relocate to another town… Her daughter is born… Their life goes smoothly… But she wants more… She wants to run away from everyday routine…
But she was filled with desires, with rage, with hatred. That dress with its straight folds concealed a heart in turmoil, and those reticent lips said  nothing about its torment.
Even the most innocent romantic dreams may lead one far astray.