Rating: 4/5

“I can't bear that they, and everybody, should think people wicked because they may have chosen to live their own way!”

This is my third reread in recent weeks of one of the four central Thomas Hardy novels; the first two were Tess and Far from the Madding Crowd, and I will also reread Return of the Native and (maybe) The Mayor of Casterbridge. Each of them feature strong, independent and passionate women who are flawed, but are seriously interesting in their challenging of Victorian mores. All of the novels are beautifully written, deserving of being named classics, and are (in some sense) all romantic tragedies, but this one, Jude, Hardy’s last novel, published in 1895 and like the others castigated for being obscene and immoral, is probably the most miserable of the three:

“Somebody might have come along that way who would have asked him his trouble, and might have cheered him by saying that his notions were further advanced than those of his grammarian. But nobody did come, because nobody does; and under the crushing recognition of his gigantic error Jude continued to wish himself out of the world.”

Boom!

Jude Fawley is a working-class young man, a stonemason, who dreams of becoming a scholar, is largely self-taught, and is denied admission to a school very similar to Oxford (Hardy was himself rejected by Oxford). The other main character is Jude’s cousin, Sue Bridehead, who is also his central love interest. The novel mainly addresses themes of class, education, religion, morality and marriage: 

“People go on marrying because they can't resist natural forces, although many of them may know perfectly well that they are possibly buying a month's pleasure with a life's discomfort.”

Jude early on marries Arabella, who leaves him; he introduces friend Sue to his (loveless) teacher and (for some unknown and completely baffling reason) she marries him (anyone who reads or writes romances knows: You don't marry dull; you may marry hot and rich and stupid and come to regret that, too, but marrying dull has its own punishment), though she truly loves the (legally married) Jude. They do live together for a time and have children together, but society condemns them, and Sue in particular, once the free, rebellious spirit, turns conservative and religious and actually, dutifully goes back to her unlovable husband (like Sue, Hardy's first wife went from being free-spirited to becoming obsessively religious as she got older).

Both Sue and Jude are complex characters. I “liked” Tess and Bathsheba better, but Sue is a more complicated woman. Here she is outlining the development of her feelings for Jude:

“At first I did not love you Jude; that I own. When I first knew you I merely wanted you to love me. I did not exactly flirt with you, but that inborn craving which undermines some women's morals almost more than unbridled passion--the craving to attract and captivate, regardless of the injury it may do to the man--was in me; and when I found I had caught you, I was frightened. And then I couldn't bear to let you go--possibly to Arabella again--and so I got to love you, Jude. But you see, however fondly it ended, it began in the selfish and cruel wish to make your heart ache for me without letting mine ache for you."

But Sue’s feelings for Jude change all the time, especially in the lead-up to the (hard) conclusion.
And so how does it all work out? Well, let me say, amidst lots of lively social commentary and debate, you will read about murder, miscarriage, suicide, despair: Misery. I needed something happier to read, probably, with the dark days of winter settling in, so I take a star off what is probably a five-star book. Allow me to have Jude summarize the book, in a way:

“Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, ‘There is a man child conceived.’”

But as bleak as it can be, it can be devastatingly majestic, too. Misery, yes, but within a sadly beautiful indictment of Victorian morality that crushes individual joy and happiness. Hardy is worth reading, for sure.