Rating: 4/5

This is an easy reread for me, prompted by a Goodreads group challenge to read a works about friendship. My favorite literary friendships include the of playful, lucky Captain Jack Aubrey and ship’s doctor, naturalist, and spy Stephen Maturin in Patrick O’Brian’s series of maritime adventures with the British Royal Navy during the Napoleonic Wars. It also includes the complex complementarity in the lifelong friendship between charming, lecherous, and literate Augustus McCrae and the laconic, stubborn, and violent Woodrow McCall in Larry McMurtry’s saga of a cattle drive across the West in “Lonesome Dove” and its two sequels. In third place as the most revelatory explorations of a friendship is that of Merriwether Lewis and William Clark, co-captains of the Jefferson sponsored exploration of the lands and Native peoples of the newly acquired Louisiana Purchase, which is masterfully told by Stephen Ambrose in his history “Undaunted Courage: Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American West”.

Highlights of the remarkable friendship of Lewis and Clark is the subject of one of the ten essays on the theme of comradeship. Others include the brotherhood friendships of Dwight Eisenhower and of George Custer, the warrior friendships the Sioux Crazy Horse and He Dog, Eisenhower and his commander George Patton during World War 2, and an American paratrooper lieutenant with his men (“Band of Brothers”) from D-Day to the Allied invasion of Germany. Another kind of friendship explored is the cathartic kind that formed between an American veteran at a key bridge battle after D-Day and a German officer who fought in the same battle. Richard Nixon, whom he came to know in writing his biography, is held up as an example of impoverishment in the area of friendship. Interpersed between these essays are four about friendships in Ambrose’s life, including one on his relationship with a brother, one on his bonds with his father, one on his buddies from college, and another on an academic collaborator and fellow adventurer in the outdoor wonders of the West. 

He draws life lessons and themes about the rewards and challenges of various kinds of friendship. There is no systematic treatment of the subject nor any high-level truths put on the table. The pleasure for me was as a personal and nostalgic kind of personal lens on Ambrose’s career and interests as an historian. In that sense, this 1998 book is a prequel to his last book written while he was dying of cancer, “To America: Personal Reflections of an Historian” (2002). I loved how in that book he detailed the whys and wherefores of how he engaged in each of the long projects that resulted in the wonderful books left to us readers. For example, the writing of “Undaunted Courage” was intimately connected with his ten or more years spending summers with his family camping along the Missouri River and other western sites connected with the Lewis and Clark journey.

I close with some nuggets gleaned from Ambrose’s study of Lewis and Clark, whose friendship came to an end when years after their journey Lewis killed himself:

Friendship is different from all other relationships. … Unlike lovers and married couples it is free of jealousy. Unlike children and parents it knows neither criticism nor resentment. …
Friends never cheat each other, or take advantage, or lie. Friends do not spy on one another, yet they have no secrets. Friends minister to each other, nurse each other. Friends give to each other, worry about each other, stand always ready to help. Perfect friendship is rarely achieved, but at its height it is an ectasy. For Lewis and Clark, it was such an ecstasy, and the critical factor in their great success. But even at its highest, friendship is human, not godlike. For all his efforts and attentions, Clark could not save Lewis. But they gave to each other everything that can be drawn from a friendship, including their finest moments. Through their trust in each other they put themselves into the top rank of world explorers. And they gave to their country its epic poem while introducing the American people to the American West.