Rating: 3/5

The shock discovery in Madeline Stern's superlative introduction
is that Louisa had to be persuaded to write "Little Women" and
she was much happier churning out tales of blood and thunder.
She wrote in a letter that she was extremely addicted to them. 
Seeing the correspondence between her and her editors she must
have written 23 hours a day!!! - the length of the stories in
this book varied from 50 to 100 pages and she was always being
pressed for more, more, more!!!
Louisa's father was extremely improvident so her popularity as
a writer of lurid tales was a godsend. In fact her first,
"Pauline's Passion and Punishment" was entered for a competition
ran by Frank Leslie's Illustrated News and was the eventual winner
of $100. "Pauline's Passion" is set in the very exotic location
(for 1862) of Cuba. You really find out the meaning of "purple 
prose" as Alcott leaves no adjective out in her description of
the pulsating Pauline. Profusely illustrated (my edition is a
Hogarth Press paperback, 1985) with pictures from the original
Leslie's Illustrated which set a precedent for not letting writing
get in the way of photos and illustrations, it told the story of
jilted Pauline who, with her faithful servant Manuel, goes to
extreme lengths to punish her fickle lover.
Louisa's love of Gothic romance was in evidence in her next story
submitted to "The Flag of Our Union" under the pseudonym A. M.
Barnard. Even though the paper was advertised as "containing not 
one vulgar word or line", it seemed to specialize in violent
stories usually peopled with convicts and drug addicts. In "The
Abbot's Ghost" the flowery speech was certainly toned down, making
it an easier read than "Pauline's Passion". This one features the
lovely Octavia, beloved by both Maurice who is forced by ill health
to live in a wheel chair and dark, brooding Annon (who seems to
undergo a personality change after Chap. 2). There is also
mysterious Mrs Snowden who seems to have a history with Maurice
and his brother.
Louisa was under increasing pressure to publish under her right
name and she did for "The Mysterious Key" which must have meant
she considered it a milder story she was not ashamed to own. Like
"Behind a Mask" this is an excellent one all about a young vagabond
who insinuates himself into a stately family but from the start
impresses with his noble air. But everyone has secrets and Paul is
inextricably entwined with them because of a secret in his past.
The title story "Behind a Mask" is far and away the best and has
more than a passing nod to Wilkie Collins "No Name" with a 
sprinkling of "Lady Audley's Secret" thrown in. Louisa must have
loved the sensation novels which were then taking England by
storm. This was a story that her editors from "Flag of Our Union"
were most excited about - it was her most ambitious story.
The story introduces Jean Muir, a homely little governess in the
best Jane Eyre tradition but she is no meek and mild Jenny Wren
- she is an actress and at the end of the first chapter there is
a horrifying scene in which she removes her hair and some of her
teeth!!! to reveal a haggard woman of 30!!!! She already has the
family intrigued as they try to discover exactly what the spell
was that she cast on Lord Sidney, son of her last employer and
it is not long before they are all under her spell - even the
proud Gerald which is exactly how Jean has planned it. The story
is full of holes!! Everything hinges on the family not having
any contact with the Sidneys but since they are neighbours and
the boys are best friends, I don't like the chances. Regardless,
the story is a real ripsnorter and the book is an interesting
observation on Louisa's great strides as a teller of super stories.