Rating: 4/5

This is another interesting story about Miss Seeton. All the action takes place in the village of Plummergen. It is summer and everyone is immersed in preparations for the upcoming cricket match with their natural enemies, men from the village of Murreystone.

All Miss Seeton's friends are involved. In fact, some of the men from Scotland Yard even arrive in the village the day of the match. They are there to observe the match but also to prevent mayhem and violence.

In the days leading up to the match, Nigel a terrific young man, meets his latest one true love. Her name is Annabelle Leigh and she is a traveling artist. A new man moves into the village. He is a retired Admiral who has naturally drawn the curiosity of everyone in the village. The gossip is going around is that he is a warlock, connected to Miss Seeton and probably has buried bodies in his garden. 

Other than the few new people, the characters are the regular citizens of the village. Living in this village makes people become completely immersed in the lives of their neighbors.

In the background there are worries from Scotland Yard. Some people have been creating counterfeit coins. Another group has been burglarizing different counties in the area of Plummergen and it is pretty certain that those same burglars will be in Plummergen shortly.

As always, there is a great deal of humor in this story. There is laughter but never at the expense of the characters. No one is made to look silly unless they are naturally silly or they are criminals. Everyone is entertaining. 

Miss Seeton is her own oblivious self. She sees things which others do not notice. And her drawings show scenes which make her friends at Scotland Yard get new ideas about crime. Of course she also draws people, not as they appear to the world, but as they truly are in their soul.

Although this is part of a series, it is readable as a stand alone. The background naturally unfolds, and characters are introduced and explained as the story progresses.

Though the Miss Seeton series has had several authors, but for a few exceptions, each book has been true to the original creation. I have enjoyed all but those few exceptions. This book is one of the wonderful ones in the series. 

The plots are interesting and filled with fascinating information. In this book, we learn about cricket. Each of the characters are wonderful people who have human foibles and vivid personalities. 

I received this book from the publisher through NetGalley in the hope that I would write a fair and honest review. All opinions are my own.