Rating: 5/5

““I had no difficulty in getting a comfortable room at the Station Hotel, late as it was. In the old days, an unmarried woman arriving alone at midnight with a suitcase would hardly have been considered respectable – what a wonderful difference one finds it today! I am grateful to have lived to see such changes, because whatever old-fashioned people may say about the greater decorum and modesty of women in Queen Victoria’s time, those who can remember the old conditions know how difficult and humiliating they were! […]’”

Admittedly, in comparison to Agatha Christie’s mysteries, Dorothy L. Sayers’s novels are far less plot-driven and infinitely more rambling because Sayers gives a lot more space for her side characters to unfold their stories and attitudes. It may not help, either, that in Strong Poison you may know very well after the first half of the book who the actual killer is whereas Christie usually keeps you guessing and wondering until the very last few pages. The quotation above is taken from a lengthy letter of Lord Peter’s female Baker Street Irregular Miss Climpson in which she tells her employer how she goes about securing a will that might hold the key as to who did away with Philip Boyes, and this little observation of Miss Climpson’s seems to be neither here nor there with regard to the outcome of her mission but it adds depth to the novel by pointing out the changes of mores and attitudes towards gender roles in Interwar Britain. It may also be an instance of Sayers’s voicing her own opinions by putting them into the mouth of a rather peculiar but by no means ridiculous character – a character, by the way, who might have served Agatha Christie as a blueprint to her inimitable Miss Marple.

The central plot of Strong Poison is actually quite simple: A young artist, i.e. a writer of mystery novels like Sayers herself, named Harriet Vane, is accused of having poisoned her lover Philip Boyes, an author of rather scandalous vanguard literature, and it is only due to Miss Climpson, who happens to serve as a juror, that in the first trial, where all the circumstantial evidence is against Vane, there is no judgment of guilty brought in. The trial, however, gives Lord Peter his first occasion of clapping eyes on Vane and of falling in love with her, forming the conviction that this remarkable young lady is innocent. Lord Peter now sets out to find the real murderer, an enterprise of great pith and moment, that is exacerbated by the fact that whatever trace he follows will eventually point at Miss Vane. It finally all boils down to proving that Boyes was killed at a dinner which was shared by three other people, a culinary kind of locked-room-mystery.

The setting of this carefully premeditated crime not only gives Sayers the opportunity to add yet another dimension to her hero Lord Peter, who now appears in the unusual role of a lover, and uses a rather unusual time and place to declare his intentions to Miss Vane, but also to introduce a female character whose attitudes might have not gone down well with the average contemporary reader. It must be said that, all in all, Miss Vane readily fulfils the role of the damsel in distress in the plot of the novel, ready to be rescued by the knight in shining armour and that her appearances in the novel itself are few and far between. Yet, Miss Vane is anything but the compliant female because she consents to “live in sin”, as the expression goes, with Boyes, and when he later shows willing to offer her marriage, she regards this as a betrayal of their free-thinking principles and as an offer à la “He tried me out and now deigns to legitimize our relationship in the eyes of a society he pretended to look down on.” In other words, Miss Vane has a head of her own and the guts to act up to her principles, which are quite high-minded in a certain way – and Lord Peter is ready to accept this, thinking that not only men should be given leeway to sow their wild oats. Apart from Miss Vane, the novel also has two other female characters that come over as resourceful, plucky and self-confident. One of them is Miss Climpson, to whose mental independence and personal courage the court’s first failure to bring in a verdict of guilty is due and who proves, again and again, clever and determined in the persecution of Lord Peter’s interests, and the other is another “spinster” named Miss Murchison, who does not fall back behind Miss Climpson when it comes to using her ready wit in order to help unearth the secrets hidden by the true murderer. All in all, it may therefore be said that without the help of these two proto-Miss Marples Lord Peter would never have been able to come to the rescue of Miss Vane.

Times have gone by since Sayers wrote Strong Poison, and this is what, with regard to gender roles, makes this a very daring and refreshing reading experience, giving us the chance to look into the past with the eyes of its contemporaries.