Rating: 3/5

This book is a collection of sixty-one columns culled from the huge number Peter Gzowski penned for Canadian Living Magazine and published at various times between 1993 and 1998. There is one new piece, an essay he includes in the form of an introduction to the book, titled “As Canadian As Possible”. In this piece he speaks about the things he believes are uniquely Canadian and makes a plea to have them left that way. He admits we all enjoy Walt Disney, Jerry Seinfeld and American magazines like Sports Illustrated, but we also like our Royal Canadian Mounted Police, David Suzuki’ hosting “The Nature of Things” and “Hockey Night in Canada”. He decries the invasion of Americana in the Canadian landscape, insisting we don’t need Mickey Mouse at the Calgary Stampede or Winnie the Pooh on Canadian postage stamps, voicing the opinion that the Canadians he knows, like him, want to stay Canadian. It’s not that we don’t like Americans, we do, but we don’t want to be them. We want to stay distinctly Canadian. 

Many of these essays are short, only a few pages long, but reflect the media for which they were intended. Writing a column for a monthly magazine means writing for a very different format than penning a piece for a radio program or a book. 

You can see some of Gzwoski’s favourite subjects in the choices he decided to include: his perennial favourite rural communities that stretch from one end of the country to the other, reminisces about childhood friends and talks he had with well-known Canadians like Justin Trudeau and Wayne Gretzky. Always known as someone who loved to cook as well as eat, Gzowski includes some recipes as well. 

Most of the selections focus on a number of things Gzowski believes are simply Canadian, about everyday people living in cities, towns and country roads in this huge Canadian landscape.

Known so well for his many years on Canadian radio in one or another iteration of his CBC program Morningside, Gzowski is his usual breezy, conversational self, but nothing matches his distinctive husky voice. Like his other books, there is much lost in the transition from the spoken to the written word. Still, he always gives readers something to enjoy and think about. He is a keen observer of people and life in general and is a skilled and intelligent writer. His simple stories often hold important truths. 

As this is a compilation, none of this material is original, but it does put these pieces together in one place between the covers of a book, for those who like to pick up something like this now and again for a comfortable read.