Rating: 2/5

This was my second Ann Tyler novel and I don’t know how much more I can take. Years ago, I read “The Accidental Tourist” which was barely okay, then saw the film which I liked even less. However, I was much younger then and she receives such good press that I thought I’d give her another try. Oh well…

My problem here is that I didn’t like either of the protagonists in either novel because they didn’t seem to grow, and I wasn’t too keen on the supporting cast; in a novel this light, you need to someone to like or hate because if the characters are shallow, there isn’t a lot to explore. Without meaning to offend anyone, this had “Women’s Sewing Circle and Reading Group” written all over it because there is neither an obscene word nor any sex in this novel so there’s basically nothing to upset anyone; what goes on behind closed doors in a dark room with the curtains closed, stays there, and there’s no need to wash anyone’s mouth out with soap. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t think these things are necessary to a novel, but in a novel about a woman running out on her family, you’d expect something less dainty. It was named one of Time Magazine’s 10 Best Books of 1995, and a NY Times Notable, but those were different times; the world has grown up a little since then and may be a little more complex.

So, the story: Delia has been married for more than 20 years to a doctor and has three children from late teens to early 20’s who, as my sister used to say, ought to act their age and not their shoe size; to put it bluntly, they’re a bunch of spoiled, whining brats and the husband is a condescending cold fish who treats any sort of protest from Delia as childish disobedience. (In 1995, I guess women were supposed to know their place and shut up about it.) So, on a family vacation at the Maryland shore, she takes her bag and a quantity of money, goes for a walk on the beach and doesn’t look back. She hitches a ride with a repairman and settles down in a small town picked at random and within a few hours, finds a job and a place to live. (Small towns are full of these, you know.) It’s only about an hour or two from her family so they manage somehow to keep tabs on each other and for 16 months, she starts and maintains a quaint new life while her own family is falling apart at the seams without her to keep it together because, after all, what family can survive without Mom and the Mrs.? See, perfect for the aforementioned reading group, confirming what they already know! Does she eventually go back? Are you kidding me? This is 50’s/60’s sitcom material. Does anything change? Well, she solves another orphaned family’s problem en route, brings estranged families back together, and everything works out to everyone’s satisfaction. Roll credits and go home with that warm, fuzzy feeling deep inside.

So, my defense of the book and the critics: 1995 is a long time ago and I think the issue of women underappreciated at home and being taken for granted was especially important then because the trend then was to undervalue what they did. They were “just housewives” if they didn’t have a “real” job outside the home. It didn’t matter if a family meant two jobs, this wasn’t taken into account, so the book was relevant then and still is now, but I think it was more of what we’d call a “trending topic” then than it is now and didn’t help because the message seemed to be, “your family needs you, gosh darn it, and don’t expect much in return – your place is there.” Personal growth equalled acceptance.

As is frequently the case, this book reminded me of another book, as well as a song. The song is Mary Chapin Carpenter’s “He Thinks He’ll Keep Her.” An underappreciated woman takes a hike. The book is “The Doctor’s Wife” by Brian Moore, which predates this book (1976) and was nominated for a Booker Prize. Another woman had had enough but this was far edgier and emotional, including rather explicit sex scenes and a lot of angrier words than “Ladder of Years”. Macho egotism raises its ugly head and she’s not so willing to take a lot of crap from any man who thinks she’s property. A highly-recommended book from a highly-recommended writer.