Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars.

Roald Dahl’s “The Umbrella Man and Other Stories” has received a bit of a lower rating for me in comparison with his other books I’ve read so far. Many of these stories were darker, and were honestly quite frightening. However, I did appreciate most of them because underneath the surface, they dealt with trickery, vengeance, and what lies behind the typical human experience. Many times, Roald Dahl’s endings were the clincher and he left you in a state of awe, shock...or worst of all, ambiguity! Sometimes, the ending was left unresolved on purpose, and that was the scariest ending of all because then the reader has to decide what happened to the characters.

Anyway, my favorite stories out of this collection were The Great Automatic Grammatizator, Mrs. Bixby and the Colonel’s Coat, The Way Up to Heaven, The Landlady, The Umbrella Man, Vengeance Is Mine Inc. and Taste. Honestly, all of them were fantastic, but these in particular blew me away. Here’s why:

The Great Automatic Grammatizator was a very fun story about two men who create a novel writing machine. This was my favorite story because I thought it was the perfect start to the book, and I also thought it was one of the scariest. I truly hope that a novel-writing machine never exists in reality.

Mrs. Bixby and the Colonel’s Coat deals with a lady who visits her aunt once a month, and who ends up having an affair on these visits. Once a mink coat comes in the picture, things get complicated, and the ending is what gets you! You never know that the very thing you are trying to hide may be right before your eyes the whole time...

The Way Up to Heaven was extremely dark. It talks about a couple and how the wife in this relationship never likes to be late to things, and how her husband almost always makes her late, on purpose. The tension and buildup in this story is remarkable and the ending reveals just how sinister the sweetest wife can be sometimes.

The Landlady is a story I read in high school, and one in which I recently reread in this collection. It is about a man who goes to a Bed &amp; Breakfast and when he speaks to a landlady, there is a stuffed parrot and a stuffed dog near her. He also sees the names of two men on the guest list who disappeared a few years ago. When the lady gives him some poisoned tea, this man will soon have a similar fate like the parrot and dog, similar to the two men who disappeared. This story was scary indeed!

The Umbrella Man was probably my second favorite story in the collection. It was about a clever con man who takes an umbrella from the coat rack of every bar he goes to, offers it to patrons on the street when it rains in exchange for money for a cab (he claims he can’t walk very well), but takes this money to another bar to get a drink instead. This was a very clever story, and makes the reader think, how does the man drink when it’s not raining?

Vengeance is Mine Inc. was also awesome. It was about two people who get tired of a columnist who always talks poorly about rich people in his newspaper articles. These people then offer the rich people to hurt this columnist in exchange for money. At the end of the story, these two people succeed in hurting the columnist, they get paid for it, and they become rich themselves. Guess who may be written about in the newspaper now, once a certain someone recovers?

Lastly, I thoroughly enjoyed reading Taste. This sorry was about two men making a bet. Mike bets that Richard can’t guess the name of a certain bottle of wine, but Richard is certain he can. Richard also wants to marry Mike’s daughter if he guesses correctly. This story’s ending, of course, is wonderful and reveals the power of deceit and what someone will do to accomplish whatever is necessary.