Rating: 5/5

”’The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the problem.’ Traceable to Nietzsche, like everything else in modern thought. 

‘Problems are not solved but outgrown.’

What in hell, he wondered (as always), was it supposed to mean?”

Peter Mickelsson’s life is full of ghosts. Dead philosophers come and argue with him, long dead residents of his country house in Pennsylvania who clatter about raising the hair on the back of his neck, and the living ghosts of the people he has disappointed, from his ex-wife, his kids, his colleagues, his students, all the way down the line to his friends. 

It is good that he has the crutch of philosophy to lean on because his life is coming unspooled like a Greek tragedy with monsters too large and growing in number for him to possibly hack his way to freedom. His unhinged ex-wife is trying to take every last drop of his income; an unbalanced IRS agent is trying to seize what little he still owns. A small town whore is trying to steal the pieces of his heart with each illicit screw; a student is on a collision course with suicide, and his “girlfriend,” Jessica Stark, the one with ”gray eyes like Homeric seas,” is under siege by the Marxists in her department.

On top of all this, the American public has lost its mind...they elect Ronald Reagan President of the United States. This is tragic on many levels, but probably the most damaging thing to come from the Reagan victory is the death of progressive ideas in the Republican party. If Mickelsson were real and alive today, I wonder what he would think about the mess we have now? 

He isn’t even really a good teacher. He sees the students as necessary evils. Fortunately, he is considered a celebrity asset to the university, due to his past success with publishing books. He is trying in fits and starts to write a best selling philosophy book (you can imagine the blank looks when he tries to explain this to people), but his ghosts, his life, his excessive drinking, his wild bouts of looping paranoia make writing impossible. 

Despite the fact that he is quickly sinking in quicksand with no discernible bottom, he does keep flailing away, trying to grab a root or branch. ”I’ve listened too long to your sensible people with your life-withering sanity. What do you do with the impetuous, dangerous torrents of the soul? You try to dry them up!”

Mickelsson’s financial situation becomes more and more untenable. He drops hot checks all over his small town. He even bounces a check on his whore, which is a good way to end up with a shiv in your spleen or a bloody beating in a back alley, but he craves Miss Donnie Matthews and her pale white body, so he settles his account with her before he does with the grocer or the mechanic. 
  ”Tears ran down his face. How many men’s sperm did that warm cave contain? That was Peter Mickelsson’s community: a thousand dark, writhing lives, unfulfilled, unfulfillable. He came, her legs from around him, and--this time, anyway--he did not die.”

It would be rather a fitting epitaph for Mickelsson’s life to have immortalized on his tomb...Death by whore.

It is hard for me to separate John Gardner from Mickelsson. According to sources, Gardner was struggling with alcohol, depression, divorces, overwork, and a lack of sleep, all of which contributed to that tragic motorcycle crash that took his life. Mickelsson’s Ghosts would be his final novel to be published. The spiral downward that the reader experiences with Mickelsson is coming from a deep well spring of Gardner’s own life. The bafflement, How did I end up here? The longing look at the shotgun by the door and thinking, Why Not? The financial struggles to maintain a reasonable lifestyle. The harassment of his ideas by his colleagues and students. ”The treacherous, ego-bloated, murder-stained hovel of philosophy.” The anger that his actions have inspired in the women he has known. All of this smacks of Gardner’s own trials and tribulations. 

For Mickelsson, the cost of trying to live a truthful life is proving to be more than even his larger than life figure can withstand. ”All truths are for me soaked in blood.” He begins to make a connection with his past, his father, his grandfather, when he starts to work on the house, when he begins to use his hands as they did. Building things, fixing things, might finally make things right in his mind in a way that philosophy never can. I do wonder if Gardner was on the verge of those truths for himself. Was he wanting to escape academia and return to a life more fulfilled by creating something more visually substantial than words, such as walls, roofs, or gardens? Like a lot of us, maybe what he needed was to find truth through a balanced life. Maybe then, he could keep a woman in his life. Maybe then, he could find peace. 

Rest In Peace, John Gardner. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten