Rating: 5/5

There are some people in this world who seem born to suffer.

The seventh novel in Zola's twenty-volume series of Les Rougon-Macquart focuses on Gervaise Macquart, the daughter of Antoine Macquart, the son of Adelaide Fouque who is the head of the Rougon and Macquart family. It’s complicated! I know! 🥴

In the first book Gervaise and her good for nothing lover Lantier leave the fictitious city of Plassans for Paris, the city of dreams.
 
In this book, we see them in a shabby rented room, with their two children Claude (the main character in The Masterpiece) and Étienne (the main character in Germinal). 

Thus the scene is set and the action begins when Lantier leaves Gervaise for another woman. 
After a while out of desperation, Gervaise marries the hard-working Coupeau and later gives birth to the famous or should I say infamous Nana.
 
She (Nana) was a charming combination of child and woman.

Borrowing money from a friend, Gervaise is even able to open her much-dreamt-of laundry shop. 
Everything goes well for awhile until Coupeau is injured in an accident and unable to work for a time, succumbs to idleness and drink.
 
Ah, what had she done to be thus tortured and humiliated? Was God in heaven an angry God always?

Hence, poor Gervaise’s struggles begin. 
She should work harder than before to provide food and drink-money for her worthless husband. 
But in spite of her hard work, it seems everything keeps going downhill. 

When one is starving is hardly the time to philosophize.

Things get worse when our charming Lantier returns and imposes himself on the Coupeaus.

But she saw none of these fascinations in him. He had changed, unquestionably, and the external changes were all in his favor. He wore a frock coat and had acquired a certain polish. But she who knew him so well looked down into his soul through his eyes and shuddered at much she saw there.

Maybe it is time for her to give up trying. 
Maybe it is time for her to join her husband at the drinking den.
Surly a drink or two would help expunge the darkness, the filth, the degradation and the squalor?

Behind her the still was at work with constant drip-drip, and she felt a mad desire to grapple with it as with some dangerous beast and tear out its heart. She seemed to feel herself caught in those copper fangs and fancied that those coils of pipe were wound around her own body, slowly but surely crushing out her life.

Focusing on the working-class, the main theme of the book is poverty in the slums of Paris, where one’s hope for happiness and prosperity shatters in the face of obstacles both social and environmental.

She thought how delicious it would be to lie down and never rise again—to feel that all toil was over.