Rating: 4/5

TMS: Tension Myositis Syndrome is relatively new term that few doctors are aware of, or want to be aware of. Thankfully Dr. John E. Sarno has brought this fascinating, frustrating mysterious condition to light. Dr. Sarno's 1998 book "The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain" functions in a very special manner, in that educates and heals at the very same time. It's value goes beyond traditional study of what makes a book good or bad, in that it is the equivalent of medicine via paper.

Dr. Sarno's theory, which has been proven as fact after years of practice and analysis, is that a fair majority of our traditional physical ailments are the result of a function of the brain, Each individual has both a conscious and unconscious mind. The conscious mind helps us observe, think, remember, see, feel, hear, touch and rationalize. The unconscious mind, however, is purely narcissistic, and completely irrational. What happens with TMS is that the trials and tribulations of life since childhood creates rage, stress, and extreme emotion in the unconscious, whether we realize it or not. Everyone has it due to the complexity of the psyche verses the selfish, irrational self hidden in the unconscious. It is this unconscious rage that triggers the brain to protect you from letting it all out. As a defense mechanism, the brain sends a signal to deprive oxygen from a certain part of the body, reducing the blood flow and this creating pain in affected area. The pain is real, yet it also serves its function as a distraction from the unconscious rage. That is the whole point of pain: to get your mind focused on your body instead of what's really happening inside your mind. In essence, pain is a trick of the brain.

Common TMS maladies include back pain, carpal tunnel syndrome, repetitive use injury, leg and shoulder issues, foot problems, ulcers, headaches, stomach-gastrointestinal problems, arthritis, and even auto-immune issues, and possibly cancer. Dr. Sarno is quick point out what TMS is, and what it is not, and that a self-diagnsosis of TMS (in general) should only be done after first consulting with a traditional doctor to make sure nothing is life-theaating. That said, traditional medicine too often misdiagnosis an issue without first examining the cause.

Dr . Sarno raises a fascinating, too-overlooked point: we, as humans, have not survived all of these thousands of years on Earth because we are weaklings. If our bodies were as fragile as current fashionable medicine proclaims, humanity would have died out years ago. Carpal tunnel syndrome, for example, was not identified as a problem until the last 20-30 years, and it is the current awareness of it that inadvertently creates the problem in the first place.

Reading "The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain," Dr. Sarno lectures on the same subject over and over again, in a variety of examples, covering the technical biological conditions and TMS symptoms in just about every part of the body, however the point is always the same: TMS is a practice of distracting your from unconscious rage, and that education and awareness can work wonders in healing and providing a permanent cure. However, as Dr. Sarno deftly points out, it takes some time and work to make the healing-cure happen, and each person has a different depth of unconscious rage to contend with. Some are cured just by reading the book, or attending a TMS lecture or two, others should get help with their unconscious rage through a psychiatrist or psychotherapist. No matter what the case, it all comes down to an individual learning about TMS, and buying into it one hundred percent.

"The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain" is not for pleasure-reading, nor is it meant to enthrall the reader with wonder. Instead, Dr. Sarno's book exists as an important tool for many of those who suffer chronic pain, and offers a solution that will change the way you look at both your body and your mind.