Rating: 3/5

The saga continues! Last December I looked at The Christmas Tree that Ate My Mother, the first in an epic series that wasn't that good. But I wanted to see how the series was later so we're finally here with part 2. I was curious to see how this played out.

And my thoughts are mixed...but in the end this was a mild step up. It was borderline but I somewhat liked it despite its big flaws. This time around, Lizzie has to take Booker trick or treating, which she whines about. Things aren't too bad though until they hit up a witch who makes Booker vanish when he touches a pumpkin. Yep, it doesn't eat him. Another lie. From there Lizzy is sent on a wild adventure in a spooky house to get him back.

Well, really it takes until like halfway through to get there. Before that it's antics at school and home that don't all add up. We get some mystery as this witch first appears randomly, as well as her shadow doing odd things.

The structure is less tight than before but I like some of the build up. Let's get the flaws out of the way. It takes a bit to get to the real stuff and there is some clear filler. Some of it pays off, but then you have her getting in trouble which is just there so that having to take Booker will be a punishment. Lizzy sadly is still annoying here, mostly to Booker.

She's just a jerk to him for no reason and that does drag down some of this, especially since the writing is clunky. And things don't make any sense. Why does this witch stat showing up and do what she does? What's with the shadows? We never get any answers, the way she is defeated just leaves more questions.

The wrapup is kinda decent but rushed as well. With that said, it does itself in a few ways. Lizzy gets in some good snark about the word around her that was fun, had a bit of a Junie B Jones vibe to me. She actually got development here as she does wanna save Booker and has a sweet moment with him. They don't undo it, this sticks, for now at least.

There's a bit of a moral about not beating yourself up for your flaws, which the villain feeds into, which is a bit half baked as it's not a thing Lizzy deals with before it becomes a big thing from the witch but is still a good lesson. It gets fun when we get into the scary antics, as there is a decent atmosphere to it and some creative bits. The witch is a fun enough villain too.

Halloween element is decent, lacking more in the third act but not terribly so. So it's a mixed bag. I can see most rating it lower but I think it barely evened out. Even with the logic and writting problems, the concept ending up being fun enough with more clear development and mild attempts at themes.

It doesn't come together all the way but it was enough to be a mild step up for me. There's also not much connection to the first one. The guy who sold them the tree shows up but he isn't important, he doesn't supply the pumpkin, just foreshadowing. Lizzy only has slight memories of what went down which is odd.

Overall, pretty flawed but has enough to barely get a Decent. Not the biggest endorsement but I'll take what I can get. With that, the Halloween 2022 reviews have begun. I spun the wheel and next time, it picked one I added last, as it's recent. Like, a couple months old if that, recent. And it follows up something I covered previously. 

See ya then.