Rating: 3/5

Print the Legend: Photography and the American West

By Martha A. Sandweiss (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002)

 

Martha Sandweiss’s beautifully illustrated Print the Legend describes the evolution of photographic technology, specifically in relation to the development of the American West.  During the nineteenth century, photography struggled to gain acceptance in the public sphere as a visual medium for narrating the story of the settlement of the West.  Imaging grew more sophisticated and photographers learned how to represent the West in ways that captured the American public’s attention. Meanwhile, railroads cut pathways through the remote landscape, enabling settlers to fill the space that was emptied of its Indians and to claim their Manifest Destiny.  Eventually, paper prints with accompanying written captions interpreted the Western scene and were able to be inserted into newspapers and magazines.  Photography finally found a niche in public discourse and began to shape viewers’ understanding of the West.  Just as the West had to be “won” for America, so photography had to earn the right to “print the legend” of the developing West during the nineteenth century.

Photographic history in the West begins with daguerreotype photographers capturing images of the Mexican-American War.  These men worked alongside lithographers, who were better able to romanticize the American victory and evoke nationalistic pride by embellishing scenes with patriotic symbols.  Entrepreneurs used daguerreotypes to capture early scenes of the West but were unable to compete with the scale and excitement of moving panoramas and live narration.  The federal government sent scouting expeditions, including photographers with bulky cameras, into the Western wilderness, only to sequester the resulting photographs in internal reports that never reached the public eye.  As photographic technology progressed to wet-plates, stereographs, and eventually film-loaded Kodak cameras, paper prints still struggled to compete with colored lithography for inclusion in type-set, printed materials and other venues that were intended for public consumption of images.  

            In addition to outlining the technical limitations of this burgeoning photographic technology in the rugged Western landscape, Sandweiss identifies two ways that the images were employed to control public perception of the West.  First, photographers had to create consumer demand for the images, which meant overcoming the perception of the medium as chiefly for private portraits.  Without acceptance by the public, there was no market for their product.  Sandweiss suggests that photographers wielded the power to craft American perceptions of the West as empty and historyless in order to “satisfy the economic agendas of their corporate patrons” (180).   The ancillary result was that Americans began to imagine the West as a place that could be conquered by settlement.  Second, the reproducibility of paper prints meant that the subject of the photograph lost control over the use of the image, as well as its interpretation.  Once captions were added to paper prints, and especially when half-tone prints were easily inserted into printed materials, photographers and editors controlled the message and meaning of the images.  One poignant example is the perpetuation of the vanishing Indian myth, which was reputedly substantiated by photographs of Indian ruins and accompanied by narratives extolling the Christianization of the formerly savage Indians as the nation expanded westward. 

By limiting her focus to the American West, however, Sandweiss loses an opportunity to cast the region as an extension of the East Coast, which would provide a more satisfactory interpretation of the sluggardly acceptance of photography in the nineteenth century.  She faults the shortcomings of the medium, the photographers’ lack of visual acumen with the new technology and the lack of captions that interpret the prints for the viewers but fails to address the shift in East Coast consumer taste from images of sublime nature to urban spaces.  And  Sandweiss claims that the audience east of the Mississippi River was unable to interpret the bleak, Western landscapes dotted with occasional soldiers or Indians without the help of captions, which would only be available late in the century.   Instead, Sandweiss might have emphasized the work that captioned photographs performed in creating a new visual market that demanded crisp, realistic depictions of the uniquely American landscape.

            Of more concern is Sandweiss’s dismissive attitude toward the daguerreotype, a medium that she views as problematic because of its scale and inability to be captioned.  In her attempt to describe the concomitant development of the American West and photographic technology, she repeatedly describes the daguerreotypes as having only instrumental use.  Further, she blames the dearth of surviving plates on consumer preference for images that were “better and more effectively conveyed through other media” (120).  Whether disposed of after creating a panorama or critiqued as ineffective mimicry of the multi-paneled panorama, the daguerreotype loses its importance in the genealogy of photographic development because Sandweiss is chiefly interested in publicly viewable images that tell a story and have commercial value.  This narrow focus precludes the admittedly dominant acceptance of daguerreotype portraits in the West, as well as in the East, and the artists’ preference for daguerreotypes when creating the initial storyboards for the popular panoramas of the West.

            Sandweiss makes a compelling argument for the symbiotic development of photography and the American West and challenges scholars to consider photographs as important pieces of documentary evidence that provide clues to the past.  Photographers were eager to test their mettle in the newly opened West, exploring both the rugged landscape and the limits of their imaging equipment.  Whether working with chemical applications on silver plates, wet-prints from glass plates, or rolls of film, photographers seized the opportunity to provide Americans with a glimpse of their expanding nation.  By augmenting photographs with narrative interpretations of the West, photographers created national meaning that was conveyed to Americans who only had indirect access to the region through images.  Photographs of gold miners, railroad workers, Indians, pioneers, and the landscapes they altered now claim a place in the historical record that was created during the nineteenth-century settlement of the West.