Rating: 5/5

A tribute to the charm and adventure of boyhood! 
 
Little wonder that Tom Sawyer, Becky Thatcher, Aunt Polly and Injun Joe have been elevated to the status of icons of American literature and culture.
 
Who among us, as playful children, did not scramble over a fallen down tree pretending to be swashbuckling captains of an English privateer scanning the Spanish Main for easy pirate loot? Who among us does not recall the first embarrassing onset of puppy love for a young girl in our class and the steadfast internal decision to not let our young male friends know about any such foolish feelings? Who among us does not recall playing hookey for a day, laying in a sunlit field staring at the moving clouds with a blade of grass between our teeth? Who among us does not recall running away from the yoke of parental supervision and realizing, probably within the hour, how lonely and frightened we really were? Who among us does not recall swearing blood oaths of eternal friendship with our closest mates and swearing to keep secrets even under pain of the direst torture? Who among us cannot recall the trepidation and almost overwhelming fear of overhearing an adult conversation to which we were not supposed to be privy? Who among us does not recall ever escalating games of "dare ya!" and "double dare ya!"?

While we all can recall, in some distant sadly fogged fashion what we experienced when we were children, only a master wordsmith such as Mark Twain could place us right back inside the mind of a young boy and so brilliantly re-create the charm and delight that was boyhood in frontier North America! No ... never mind that! THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER was set in frontier North America but there are some things that are timeless and universal. The experience of boyhood is one of them.

If, like me, you are one of those deprived, unfortunate few who somehow went through school without experiencing the joys of THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER, I cannot suggest strongly enough that you rectify that oversight at the earliest possible moment. Highly recommended. If you only read it as a child yourself, you owe it to yourself as an adult to re-read it and experience the joy again from an entirely different perspective.

Paul Weiss