Rating: 5/5

Sherman’s memoirs covers the military occupation of California in the 1840’s and 50’s, the battle of Bull Run and the organization of the union army, the western campaign from 1861-63, the drive to Atlanta 1863-64, the pillage of Georgia and South Carolina, the controversies surrounding the end of the war, his fights with the Secretary of War, Reconstruction, the Indian Wars, the impeachment of Andrew Johnson, and a short section covering the bureaucratic fights as lieutenant general and General of the Army. His writing is extremely clear and, despite the book running longer than 1100 pages, very concise given the amount of material covered. Like most memoirs, Sherman revisits all the great controversies of his life and why he was right and pure in his motives while his detractors were mistaken and occasionally malicious. The mistakes that Sherman admits are usually on minor points of judgment or preference such as failing to order a general assault when opportunity presented itself or misjudging the character of subordinate officers. Sherman’s memoir is an enjoyable read and noticeably different from others of the period for its lack of sentimentality or romanticism regarding war. 

Americans tend to think of the great Civil War generals as Grant, or Lee, or Stonewall Jackson. Sherman was mediocre as a tactician, he never understood how to utilize cavalry, and yet he consistently out-generaled his adversaries. When Europeans came to study the American Civil War, they would usually focus their attention on Sherman, who thought and fought differently. Sherman demonstrated how an industrialized nation can push a large army deep into enemy territory using purpose-built railroads and coordinated operation with naval forces. This feat was closely studied by Herbert Kitchener and replicated almost exactly in his conquest of the Sudan. It was later a stratagem employed to great effect on the eastern front of WWI. 

Yet, for all the ingenuity he had in establishing it, Sherman was content to sacrifice his road of resupply. When General Hood went west to attack it, Sherman struck east to the unprotected interior of the south, pillaging the land and punishing its inhabitants. The lesson of total war is what modern militaries learned from Sherman. As Sherman explained to the city council of Atlanta while expelling the entire population of the city: “War is cruelty, and you cannot refine it… I want peace and believe it can only be reached through union and war, and I will ever conduct war with a view to perfect and early success.” Compare with Helmuth von Moltke’s answer, when asked how to make war less cruel in the early days of WWI: “Make it brief.” Sherman example went far to convincing the world that cruelty in war is justifiable if it shortens the war’s duration. 

Sherman’s focus on industrial production, modern logistics, and defeating populations rather than armies would become notable in the late 19th century and characteristic of the total wars of the 20th, though Sherman’s punishment of the southern people was more restrained and more principled than most of his would-be successors could manage. Sherman’s example was actively used in the justification for concentration camps to control civilian populations in the Boer War. General Valeriano Weyler was a liberal administrator and an avowed student of Sherman in all maters military, and it was his Shermanesque conduct in Cuba that entangled the U.S. in the Spanish American war. Sherman’s example was used by General Pershing to justify his conduct in the Philippines. By the time of WWI, strategic bombing targeting industrial production and enemy moral was the rule. And George Patton receive a 6-month leave to retrace the path covered by General Sherman from Nashville to Columbia.