Rating: 3/5

This is a really hard review to write, because while reading it, I was enjoying it. It didn't blow my mind, but it was fine. And then the ending happened. I seriously thought about substrating a whole star just for that to be honest, but didn't in the end.

It was not a disaster when it came to the plot, but it was very unsatisfying regarding the most important relationship in this story.
Imagine a book dropping little hints here and there all the way through and you start to suspect things and get the meaning of some of the things said earlier.
And then, two pages before the end, it turns out you were right but now it's too late!?
In my headcanon Ryke stays with the young lord till he comes of age, but visits Errel once a year and when his job is finishes, he'll go live with Errel in Vanima. If there is fanfiction out there, someone please link me!

The author is not a friend of long descriptions or embellishing. Everything is short and to the point, which is why the emotions get shortchanged in moments that should have high tensions. I think there was only one moment where Ryke was allowed to actually feel something really deep, but it was weirdly in reaction to something pretty minor - understanding why he was reacting that way in that particular moment, doesn't negate that there should have been quite a few almost-break-down moments for several characters what with all the death and destruction surrounding them.

Nonetheless, I thought it mostly worked and actually almost felt a bit refreshing in a way.

I think my favorite thing about this book was the character of Errel, the prince our POV character Ryker swore to protect. He was capable and smart, but he had no taste for bloodshed, even when he knew it was inevitable. I kept nodding along with him every time he opened his mouth (while I sometimes disagreed hard with Ryker). The conlusion to his story made a lot of sense and I'm happy about it in a way. If only we could tweak it a bit.
I also enjoyed Sorren and Norres quite a lot, but saying anything more about them would be a spoiler. I was mostly happy with the ending they got.
Lastly, our POV character Ryker was... not likeable per se, but a pretty good character in general. He was pretty much the soldier-who-doesn't-know-how-to-be-anything-else trope, but with a twist. He also was in the middle of that intrigueing hinting-at-something-game the story played with us. Sadly, I was pretty dissatisfied with his ending exactly because of it. Once again, it kind of made sense for the character, but I will just make up my own sequel in my head to fix the part I hated.

Since the next books in this series has nothing to do with these characters and only shares the location, I will probably not read them. Neither the world nor the writing were that exciting and I already said that the ending annoyed me quite a lot. Not going to risk it.