Rating: 5/5

Pulitzer prize novels have been a mixed bag for me, so I approached this 1927 winner without high expectations, especially as the movie version I have seen a few years back, has been OK, but not all that memorable.

Well, I changed my opinion in only a couple of pages, as I kept picking post-it notes to put down ideas and quotes. First, I was attracted by the sparse elegance of the text and the quotable sparkling of the author's wit, but these estethical delights were soon overshadowed by the pain and suffering of the characters, both the ones that perished in the collapse of the San Luis Rey bridge, and those left behind.

The book opens with an introductory chapter, where the author - like a good teacher - sets up the homework subject for his students/readers. Brother Juniper, a Franciscan monk, is witness to the collapse of an ancient Inca bridge in 1714, and decides to divine God's plan for humanity by trying to find out why the five victims of the accident were chosen and not someone else:

 If there were any plan in the universe at all, if there were any pattern in a human life, surely it could be discovered mysteriously latent in those lives so suddenly cut off. Either we live by accident and die by accident, or we live by plan and die by plan. 

Set in a period of time when the Inquisition still dominates the Spanish World, it takes courage to try to figure things out by yourself instead of accepting blindly the dogma handed down from the leaders of the Church, but brother Juniper, like every one of us, has doubts and will spend six year combing through every little detail of the five lives that were cut short:

 He merely wanted to prove it, historically, mathematically, to his converts — poor obstinate converts, so slow to believe that their pains were inserted into their lives for their own good. People were always asking for good sound proofs; doubt springs eternal in the human breast, even in countries where the Inquisition can read your very thoughts in your eyes. 

The author has stated that the idea of the novel came from conversations with his own father about the nature of Divinity:  Strict Puritans imagine God all too easily as a petty schoolmaster who minutely weights guilt against merit, and they overlook God's 'Caritas' which is more all-encompassing and powerful  . This theme of trying to determine what validates a life and what purpose, what road is the proper one to pursue in a probably arbitrary universe, is one I can become fully involved with, even if I don't personally subscribe to any established cult.

 Some say that we shall never know and that to the gods we are like the flies that the boys kill on a summer day, and some say, on the contrary, that the very sparrows do not lose a feather that has not been brushed away by the finger of God. 

After the slightly academical introduction, the rest of the story leaves brother Juniper at his task, and concentrates on the character of the victims. Here the talent of the author really shines, both in painting a vibrant interior life in only a couple of paragraphs, and in going directly at the essence of each person's motivation, ignoring the trivial details that will hobble brother Juniper inquest. From the first story, of Dona Maria, Marquesa de Montemayor, and her companion Pepita, it becomes clear that the defining trait to be studied will be the capacity for love: in the case of Dona Maria - parental love, and Pepita - filial love. Later the theme of love will be replaced by the need for courage, for leaving behind selfishness and for honesty in admitting your own mistakes.

The second story is about brotherly love and passionate love, self sacrifice and the pain of surviving the loss of a loved one. Esteban and Manuel are identical twins, raised in a convent and later sharing adventures on the road as they try their hand at temporary jobs. Esteban is defined initially by his devotion to his brother, and later by remorse about things left unsaid and paths not taken.

The third story is my favorite : the tale of the born adventurer, thrill seeker, free spirit and libertine aesthete - Uncle Pio. he is an older man who has probably seen everything and tried everything at least once. He is weary and world wise, but entirely without bitterness :  His eyes are as sad as those of a cow that has been separated from its tenth calf.  . As a modern day Pygmalion, he finds a rough jewel of a girl singing popular songs in a taverna, and he will take her under his wing, train her and cherish her into a formidable career as the greatest actress of her time. When his protegee is turning away for him, he tries to start over with her son, the fifth and last victim of the accident, and the embodiment of the perfect innocent in this game of weighing rights and wrongs. From Uncle Pio comes my favorite passage, one that reminded me of Chance Wayne from  "Sweet Bird of Youth"  and his observation in the lighthouse about how there are only two kinds of people in the world. This is the same thing, coming from Thornton Wilder:

 He divided the inhabitants of this world into two groups, into those who had loved and those who had not. [...] He regarded love as a sort of cruel malady through which the elect are required to pass in their late youth and from which they emerge, pale and wrung, but ready for the business of living. 

I have mentioned the central characters in the drama at San Luis Bridge, but the survivors are as important to the story as these five. They are intermingled with the fate of the five, coming in and out of their lives in a game of "six degrees of separation" where everybody is ultimately connected with everybody else and part of the same tapestry.
 
- Captain Alvarez - endlessly travelling to the far corners of the world in order to forget the loss of a beloved daughter, friend of the Abbess, and guest of the Viceroy's late night parties. His advice about coping with pain and loss is worth noting :  We do what we can. We push on, Esteban, as best we can. It isn't for long, you know. Time keeps going by. You'll be surprised at the way time passes. 

- Don Andrés de Ribera, the Viceroy of Peru - bedridden by gout, epicurean in taste, apathetic and disillusioned in his exile from the intellectual pleasures of the metropolis, he is redeemed by his passion for La Perichole and by his philosophical meetings with Uncle Pio, Captain Alvarez and the Archbishop. The richness of the Spanish cultural heritage shines in their dialogues in a way that reminds me of another favorite author, describing Madrid cultural scene about 100 years earlier: Arthuro Perez-Reverte.

- Camila Perichole, born Micaela Villegas - uncle Pio's Galateea, the darling of the Lima theatre goers, talented and ambitious, charismatic and insecure in her success. She moves between the twin brothers, the Viceroy, Uncle Pio, The Abbess, like a liant to the disparate stories gathered that fatefull day on the bridge. For her, I have selected a passage describing travelling with Uncle Pio, an invitation to enjoy life and adventure:  They went to Mexico, their odd clothes wrapped up in the self-same shawl. They slept on beaches, they were whipped at Panama and shipwrecked on some tiny Pacific islands plastered with the droppings of birds. They tramped through jungles delicately picking their way among snakes and beetles. They sold themselves out as harvesters in a hard season. Nothing in the world was very surprising to them. .

- Abbess Madre María del Pilar - the rock anchoring the drifting lives of the other characters, the one the author will choose to close the novel instead of the clueless brother Juniper, with his slide rules and tables putting numerical value to a person's piety, usefullness and goodness. She is the dedicated worker for the poor, the sick, the abandoned, the lost souls, the one to emulate and admire for not giving up the thankless job of moving the world forward. Her closing remark about the power of love to bridge the chasm between the living and the dead is well documented, so I will end my review with another of her revelations:

 "Now learn," she commanded herself, "learn at last that anywhere you may expect grace" 

------------------------
There's a reason this book vas voted among the best 100 novels of the 20th century. My recommendations is to read it and find out why.