Rating: 5/5

Sometimes you read a book and it fills a need you didn't even know you had. 

The taxonomy of mystery books is a complicated one and not one I'm qualified to speak about. But my favorite mystery series are what, in my own head, I call "Big Man" books. It's a very specific sub-genre marked by a literal big man -- he's always big and always a man -- at its center. Think Travis McGee, Walt Longmire, and Spenser. What Jack Reacher wishes he could be.

Our hero is self-contained, tested and tempered. His moral compass is steadfast. The prose is by turns lush and spare, but always sharply observant. He's always well read, cultured, and insightful. He's an outsider, with an outsider's keen eye for human interactions. The setting is always vital and vibrant. The violence is elegant, brutal, and central to his appeal. 

And the women are problematic.

If you don't understand why women in these books are problematic, then this isn't the review or the series for you. But if you do... oh, do I have some books for you.

Because as much as I love Big Man mysteries, as a woman reader, they can be hard to get through. As a woman, you have to turn off all feminism to enter these worlds because this type of book takes place in a man's world and violence is a man's business. Women can be lovers, trophies, clients, villains, but we are always outsiders, there at the author's sufferance. 

Until I met Aud, I figured I'd never have a book that resolved the tension between my feminism and my love of Big Man mysteries. In fact, women are so inimical to the genre that it had never occurred to me to even imagine that such a book could exist! But Aud is a revelation. She moves with the same grace and muscularity, the same beautiful violence, through the world. She's a big woman and a keen observer of humanity and otherwise very very like the Big Men books. Just... a woman. And that makes a remarkable difference. 

Griffith came to my attention because of the exceptional Hild which was luminous and dense. I don't know why I assumed Hild was a first book but I did. But these earlier books are just as lovely, if dramatically different. The keen observations are the same, though, and the detailed nature writing. (If you think nature writing in the middle of a murder mystery sounds weird, allow me to commend Craig Johnson's books to you.) The prose is less dense, faster and more transparent, but still lovely. 

And there are women in this world! Fully realized women with depth and grace and motivations! It's exceptional! 

It's not flawless. She hits a few notes too hard, too often. And Aud is young enough to lack some of the self-awareness that marks a mature Big Man. But it's a first book for the character and Spenser and Walt grow, too. I'm very much looking forward to the next book in the series.