Rating: 4/5

Acknowledged as W. (William) Somerset Maugham's masterpiece, the popular writer who the critics disparaged. His reputation may be low, still few authors reached the heights he climbed, for so long , always though entertaining never dull many with better skill couldn't ever be his equal in that department...The book has a myriad of elements which are quite autobiographical , making it believable.
 The main intriguing character a rather shy medical doctor as was Mr....
Maugham and also an orphan raised by an aunt and uncle . But enough of the preamble , and lets get started. Poor boy Philip Carey loses both parents at a tender age, raised by a brother of his late father, William a cold uncle and Victorian Vicar of fictional Blackstable, a small village in England. By any sign shows him in every action being a blood relative is not enough sadly to love the nephew , however Aunt Louisa is kind and soon grows to love him . The boy born with a big problem a hideous club foot, is a fish out of water when playing with other kids, they are relentless in their bullying a nightmare situation for the child. Lonely the youth has no friends, his only escape from the pain of reality is like us, reading a ton, books are not enough. Nevertheless the grown man is a rolling stone never staying in one place, constantly changing his goals getting bored, when a student, painter, accountant and doctor. Moving from city to city London, Heidelberg where the famous university is located , then Paris , back to England alarming his staid uncle. Women are attractive to the unfortunate man, pity turns to genuine feelings. However a certain woman of dubious background Mildred, pretty to some yet lazy, with a sharp tongue the lovesick Philip can't see the obvious of what his passion will cost him , all he knows is his urges must be obeyed. Yet hate prevails it's more apparent than affection, frequent arguments, breakups follow and no surprise back together again. The poverty stricken student struggles, still trying to learn medicine at a hospital in London and finally , to be able to call himself a doctor. Readers suffering along are anxious and never able to predict the outcome, this is the joy of the novel.