Rating: 3/5

It amazes me that this book, which was once considered a competitor to the *Dune* (in terms of the ballot for the 1965 Nebula Award for Best Novel), has almost completely vanished from relevance today; Case in point, I'm a huge SF nut, and I've never seen anything about this book outside of searches I've run myself since I found and bought a jacketless Book Club hardcover of it while junking with my family. There's a good reason for its absence from contemporary discourse - this book is forgettable - but it's not without it's merits, and it's an okay, if not especially inspiring, first Anderson novel for me. 

*The Star Fox* begins with Gunnar Heim, military-spaceship-captain-turned-industrialist, stumbling across a drunken minstrel named Endre Vadasz who explains that he's a refuge from New Europe, a human colony which has recently been taken over and reportedly purged of human life by the hostile Alerionan race. Vadasz tells Heim that most of the human settlers had actually survived and fled into the mountains to wait for human assistance; now he's dismayed that no rescue efforts are being made, and his appearances on TV to support the cause have only gotten him labeled as a crackpot. Heim, disgusted that human politicians are getting ready to cede New Europe's inhabitants to the Alerionans in an attempt to stave off future conflict, takes Vadasz's story to his old politician friends and even Cynbe ru Taren, the Alerionian ambassador on Earth, in order to drum up support for the survivors before they die of starvation and mineral deficiency. Authorities fail to support him in favor of preventing further theoretical conflict with the aliens, so he teams up with a French diplomat and forges a plan to send a privateer pirate ship to disrupt material shipment between Aleriona and New Europe so they won't be able to set up strong space defenses before Terran sentiment waxes in the survivors' favor and spurs a genuine military effort. These efforts are set back by a "World Militants for Peace" cell kidnapping Heim's only daughter and trying to use her as a bargaining chip, but he eventually gets her back with the French diplomat's and Vadasz's help before he sets off to pilot the *Fox II* - named after his old command, the *Star Fox* - in efforts against the Alerionans.

All of that happens in the first part of the book, "Marque and Reprisal." The next part, "Arsenal Port," (first published in the Magazine of Science Fiction and Fantasy like the other three parts), shows us the *Fox II* making a pit stop on an alien world to prepare for its pirating. There's some interesting nuggets about the ship's alien chief engineer and the rest of the crew's flighty bigotry towards him, but the meat of this section deals with the crew of a human science ship whose crew lands on the same planet and contains Jocelyn, an old flame of Heim's, although not as fiery of one as the New Europe girl he met there when he was but a lad... anyways, Heim and a few of his crewmembers end up stranded and forced to trawl through the planet's alien environment when the other crew tries to capture them because, believe it or not, they're spies. The concluding part, "Admiralty," picks up months into the *Fox II*'s campaign on Alerionian shipping vessels, specifically at the point when Heim's crew intercepts an alien vessel with human captives aboard. They free them and go over the planetside situation, especially about how their lack of rations are opposing a weeks-out expiration date on their lives. Heim comes up with a plan: take a hundred or so women and children from the planet, send them back to Earth, and run a PR campaign to drum up the needed support. I feel like I might be misremembering because the timeline isn't really there, but either way, Heim went down to the surface and reconnected with an old flame and ended up face-to-face with Cynbe when tagging along on a covert operation that spiraled out of control and into a space battle above the planet between Heim's few ships and the Alerionans' few space vessels. The *Fox II* and co beat the odds and take back the planet, even if the final battle fades to black and is swapped out for a scene where Heim accepts an old friend for dinner and makes some veiled threats about how Earth better not mess with New Europe's independence before realizing that he can have his daughter and Jocelyn brought to New Europe to live with him. 

Many of my fellow Goodreads reviewers complain about this book's crappy characters or structural cohesion or even its sexism, but I largely disagree with those complaints. For example, I don't feel like I lost out on any part of the narrative because of its relatively simple, honest, straight-laced characters like Vadasz the ever-present bard or the good ol' survivors of New Europe. As far as our main character goes, Gunnar Heim is a noble, yearning bachelor who definitely feels cut from the same pro-war that 60s' Anderson was cut from (more on that in a couple paragraphs), but the fact that characters aren't usually written like that anymore endears him to me. I find readers' "sexism" claims a little more grounded - there aren't that many female characters present, and those that are are usually there to fulfill some of Heim's whims, - but this is a rather wholesome depiction of the "patriarchy," and it's interesting that this is now what we find sexist as a society. I was not bothered by it, but knowing Goodreads readers, I think you might be. On a more positive side, I think that Anderon's writing when removed from the quality of characters or dialogue (which was always competent, if not too enlightening) was good and rather subtle in some ways, such as in the way he slyly slides technological ideas into different sequences; when Gunnar's on the phone, he decides it's not the time to "play" a recording of his deceased wife which I believe acts as a holographic recording. The Alerionan aliens and New Europe's biosphere don't seem to be very well thought out, but in the confines of this story, that didn't really bother me either. 

I think that, literarily, *The Star Fox* (despite occasionally cool turn of phrase and the whole subtle worldbuilding I already mentioned) really only stands out for how good of a fix-up novel it is. There's no choppiness, just natural pauses and time-skips which an unknowing reader would probably assume are there to prevent Anderson from writing and us from reading unimportant events. It's a relatively easy book to read, and the division between "Marque and Reprisal," "Arsenal Port," and "Admiralty" helps in that regard. It does almost make me wonder if it would be more fitting to drop the "fix-up" label and classify those three stories as parts of a serial, but I have not read them in their original Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction form so I can't really argue that in good faith. 

Otherwise, I found the most interesting element of this book to be the moral and political assumptions behind both Gunnar Heim and the World Militants for Peace, especially since it was published towards the beginning of America's involvement in Vietnam in 1965. There's a great graphic out there from the June 1968 issue of Galaxy that shows which science fiction writers which were for and which were against America's stake in the Vietnam War, and Poul Anderon's name is 2nd to appear in the "Pro" column. This makes me think that the soiling of the World Militants' character as kidnappers of children is a direct response to those who opposed the Vietnam War. That, combined with Heim's station in life and the overall militaristic bombast of the subtext, makes this a relatively "conservative" science fiction novel in the way that only 60s/70s work can be. There's also a rather pro-human bent to it; the Aleronians only started invading human worlds because they saw us and our fast rate of technological progress as a threat to them. It's very of-its-time, which may turn you off. If you don't think it will, well, why not find out?

That all being said, after the book's had a little while to settle with me, it really stuck out that much. I haven't had much reason to think about it besides reading the follow-up novel *FireTime*, and it was easy to get lost in the big-picture plot when combat actually started happening. It just wasn't very impactful, and while it definitely served its purpose and provided a good story, the work as a whole just felt thin to me.

I mean, you don't have a whole lot to gain from reading this novel - it's never discussed, and there are certainly more popular and better-written Anderson books out there - but you don't have much to lose, either, unless you view reading outdated mores and varying viewpoints as a hinderance upon your time usage. I'm giving it a 7/10. I will be reading a 1974 novel that features Gunnar Heim in just a few weeks/a couple months, though, so that's exciting enough. Check back in if you want to hear if that novel (which was nominated for the '75 Hugo) is any better than this fixup; till then, have a good one, no matter your thoughts on one of America's least justifiable military conflicts, or their science fictional parodies, may be....