Rating: 2/5

You know all those books where the bad guy tells his plans when he has the hero at his mercy? Fortunately, you don't get that here... but only because here, instead, the bad guy reveals his plans when he *doesn't* have the hero at his mercy, because he "enjoying the thought of the hero knowing his plans but being unable to stop them". I let you guess how that turns out.

Then we have no less than THREE top secret groups that infiltrated the US government to such high levels that they have the: Director and Vice-Director of CIA, the Boss of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (or however is that position called), a Senator who is head of the Intelligence Committee in their pockets. Despite that, they need to outsource killing the President to some Islamic terrorists (and no, it's not the matter of them looking for a tool/puppet/patsy/scape goat, they do it because the leader of said terrorists is the only genius capable of devising a plan of killing the President). What else? Oh, any time the good guys get any sort of lead and pass it to their superiors, it turns out the person passing the information is a member of one of those Evil Organizations. That would stretch the suspension of disbelief already even if this organization was said to have hundreds of members but it's explicitly said to have only 25 people in the whole world and surprisingly all of them happen to be involved in that single operation. But that doesn't matter because after the boss of evil organization #1 dies (after monologuing to said hero), the rest of the organization leadership kill each other in the course of two days. Oh and the super-genius Islamic terrorist? The only way she can achieve anything is by threatening said Evil Organizations that if they don't do arrange everything for her, she'll have her buddies from Liban (who are actually Palestinians but really Basques and aren't Islamists at all) kill them. I mean, fanatic terrorists are no joke but it's explicitly stated that she has no idea about the identities of the people she's threatening. And those people she's threatening (the Director of CIA among them), how do they react? Do they lead her into a trap? Do they send assassisn/FBI/CIA/NSA against her? Nope, the Director of CIA, an old guy, grabs his gun and tries to meet and shoot her himself. Guess how that goes.

Despite these screwups, the good guys are so dumb that it takes them almost 700 pages to save them day.

Ugh.