Rating: 1/5

Read Dec 2021/Jan 2022

OK, admittedly, I SHOULD have paid more attention to existing reviews of this novel. Had I even bothered to read the Wikipedia entry I would have realised that the author himself admits it's not great: "I could see why it didn't appeal to a lot of people. It was an unpleasant story about unpleasant people. With hindsight, it was never going to be as popular as my other works."

But, I've loved every Hamilton book I've read to date. I've even read the Night's Dawn trilogy twice. I read Great North Road a couple of months ago, and Pandora's Star/Judas Unchained not long before that. So, before tackling the Void trilogy, I thought I'd read Misspent Youth, the first book (timeline-wise) set in the Commonwealth universe.

Which was a mistake, as I now realise. My fault. The warnings were there.

It's set in the near future. Jeff Baker, a 78-year-old inventor, is chosen as the first person in the world to undergo rejuvenation treatment. He's away for 18 months, then returns with the body/health of a man in his mid 20s, but the mind/wisdom/experience (more or less) he had before.

Which is an interesting concept, which could have been explored in many different interesting ways.

Unfortunately, Hamilton elects to explore the ramifications of rejuvenation from the point of view of Jeff Baker's penis. Which, as interesting as that might be if handled by someone with a defter touch when writing about sex, with Hamilton (whose sex scenes I've always found clumsy, embarrassing, and often puerile), it's all rather boring.

Although 'only' written 20 years ago, so much has changed in the sexual political landscape in those 20 years, that the long, repetitive passages about Jeff's sexual adventures really seem like something from a bygone age, the misogynistic 1970s, perhaps? We get extensive descriptions about nubile teenage bodies bursting from flimsy/skin-tight clothing. We learn how 'expert' these teenage girls are at doing what Jeff needs/wants. Etc etc etc.

You might think I'm banging on (pun intended) about the sex too much, but if you've not read this book (and I don't recommend you do), I'm not exaggerating. I had to skim read whole pages. Yeah, I get it, Pete. This 18-year-old girl has curves in all the right places, know exactly what to do, and can do it for days on end. Oh, and then she can rope in some other girl she's never met before for a five-day, three-in-a-bed sex romp.

The other mis-step in the book is the European/English political situation. Now, this WAS a little more interesting, read five years after the Brexit referendum. It was fascination to note how Hamilton had picked up back in 2002 that such a split in society would occur. The last 20% of the book concerns riots in London. And also interesting to see that Hamilton got things the wrong way around. (Can't blame him for that – it's just noteworthy, not a complaint). In Misspent Youth, it's the young people driving the movement for England to separate from the UK. In reality, in 2016, the youth were overwhelmingly in favour of the UK staying in the EU.

Oh, and the ending was a disappointment. As though Hamilton, too, had become fed up with the story and just decided to bring things swiftly to a close.

I love Hamilton's world-building skills. I've often become lost in his imagined societies, cities, landscapes. Months/years after reading his books, I often find myself thinking about a character, or a situation, or a setting. But he does tend to over-write things (everything). And I often think that, with the right co-author, he could produce something for the ages, something that would resonate for generations to come. Misspent youth – a normal-length novel for most authors – should really be considered a (bloated) short story. And, sadly, a bad one at that.

I've got another couple of books lined up, but then I'll tackle the Void trilogy, and I've every expectation that I will LOVE it!

2/10