Rating: 3/5

Gretchen and Philippe. Entertaining romance in Old-School style. 
Gretchen and her friend Maggie are travelling through the top of Africa, when Maggie must rush home to care for a dear friend. She talks Gretchen into taking her place at her new job for a young Sheikh. Gretchen has a chance meeting with an enigmatic man, Philip with whom she spends time and they pretty much fall in love... although of course, that won't be admitted to til much later. This first part of the story was sweet and humorous in an almost corny way. Philippe is not who he seems and Gretchen finds herself pulled into his world until she never wants to leave. But Philippe has ulterior motives and another woman, Brianne from his past that he can't seem to let go of, and who Gretchen happens to resemble... Yep, that's almost as bad as the hero saying another women's name in the heat of passion!.  his love for Brianne isn't returned but it was still very hurtful to Gretchen . The Hero isn't as much of an asshat as most of Diana Palmer's male leads. But by the end I was still bothered by some of his actions and felt that he didn't assure Gretchen nearly enough that she was the only woman he loved. This was also hampered by my introduction to Brianne who came across superficially sweet and very self absorbed. Philippe, Brianne and her husband Pierce have history from a previous book, 'Once in Paris' which I didn't read and really don't want to now. If a guy treated his wife that way around me, I'd no longer consider him a friend. I'd certainly have given him a piece of my mind! But she just smiles and is all happy for Philippe, like his jerk off actions mean nothing. It was down right galling!!! and left a bad taste in my mouth. If it weren't for that I'd have really enjoyed the whole book. The audio reader was good, but her German accent was atrocious! The ending where Gretchen saves the day was a hoot and if only Philippe had done a better job grovelling or Gretchen hadn't caved in so easily. I liked her, she's not really a doormat but when someone hurts your feelings and loses your trust, it would be impossible to forgive them so easily. But hey, like I said, this is old-school, turn the other cheek kinda love. I swear I am more annoyed with Brianne than I am with Philippe. I mean, where's the sisterhood??