Rating: 4/5

Prospero’s Children was a fun read, one that had a lot great elements that I like in fantasy (or genre) fiction; faeries, mythological creatures, Greco-Roman mythology, the feel of European folktales about the supernatural, mysterious deceased cousins who leave strange inheritances, lonely moors, ghosts, Atlantis, and time travel. 

Time travel? Yeah...I will get to that in a minute. The opening of the book is very strong, gripping even, a pretty much dialogue-free prologue involving a storm-tossed ship, a doomed but brave man, sea monsters, a mermaid (though not some beautiful pin-up-esque one but rather an alien, soulless creature that no sailor in their right mind would ever moon over), and a mystical object, one that is just ripe with potential, one that is clearly magical, of a mysterious origin, and that the reader just knows is going to lead to something else; a key.

Breaking away from the vividly described opening, we come to the present. Our main character is introduced, Fernanda Capel, along with her younger brother Will, and their father Robin. Fernanda – or Fern – is a 16 year old girl, used to acting quite the adult, helping her father manage the household, the finances, and chase away a series of would-be suitors to her father (who clearly does not know a good woman when he sees one, at least according to Fern, as they are all imminently unsuitable). When a long lost (and pretty much to them unknown) super distant deceased relation leaves them in a will a creepy Victorian era house out in the lonely, misty Yorkshire moors, Robin, almost acting the child (or at least the starry eyed optimistic) dreams at the very least of fixing up the place and selling it, though really would like to keep the place and make it a new home. Fern, for her part, knows her father has no head for money and is eager to get back to the real center of the universe, London. 

Fern appears to meet her match though as the house – and the person who left it to them – are mysterious and intriguing, equally enthralling to both Will and Robin and even Fern, despite her many attempts to make it clear that they are not staying, who can’t help herself and wants to uncover its secrets as well. Added to that mix is Dad’s latest suitor, a woman who – frustratingly for Fern – does not seem to recognize the 16 year old’s true role in the family or her maturity, who is using her good lucks to bewitch her father, and who just may have ulterior motives that have nothing to do with Robin. 

Bewitch is the right word, as Robin and Will begin to uncover the truth about this woman. Is she in fact a witch? If so, why is she here? What does she want? Had she been to the mansion before, looking for something? This part of the book I really enjoyed, as it had a great young adult feel to it, the lonely, windswept moors and the creaking, creepy Victorian house with all is nooks and crannies stuffed full with arcana and exotica from far-flung locales, the strange local inhabitants, some of which turn out to be not human at all.

After a time though I have to admit the book started to slow down for me. Not by any means did it get boring or unpleasant to read, but it just seemed to take its time and could have had better pacing. Clearly, as with many fantasy novels, Fern has some sort of mysterious and mystical inheritance coming her way, a destiny to fulfill, and a great and powerful evil to fight. Though she gets a mentor to help her along with some other allies, I think the book could have benefitted from more fleshing out of the mentor, a better explanation of the mystical and magical rules of the setting (though there were some; an important one is having to be invited in to a home), and more time spent showing just whatever powers Fern is going to develop. I never did get a truly satisfying sense of Fern’s abilities or her potential. However, given her character, I definitely bought her trying to use these fledgling powers far, far before she was ready, that was well done (also well done was the sibling rivalry/friendship that propelled Will’s and Fern’s explorations). 

Just when I thought things had started to slow down, a huge breath of fresh air (or maybe a second wind, that would be a better metaphor) comes in the book, the aforementioned time travel. I don’t want to discuss how it is done, why it is done, or certainly the outcome, but Fern travels back to ancient Atlantis. The setting of Atlantis itself was well done, with just enough touches of another language to give it an exotic flavor without bogging the reader down in needing a glossary (though one is provided). There are interesting characters in Atlantis – along with creatures – and the pace was fantastic, poetic writing yet well described action and engaging personalities. I don’t want to say too much but the events that occur there really add a great deal of depth to both the opening scene with the sinking ship, the key, and the mermaid, as well as the growth of the character Fern. 

All in all a good book, one that I enjoyed and I am glad I read.