Rating: 4/5

L'Engle has many good ideas and worthy reflections. And then sometimes her stories don't really back them up! I read this with a friend and we struggled with her inconsistencies and occasional misinterpretations. There also needs to be some middle ground between the geniuses and the rest of us when it comes to good art; not everything should be high. Folk art, simple beauty, and ephemeral expressions (like a well-cooked meal) have a place too. It can't just be Shakespeare and Bach (L'Engle's pets). Overall, though, I found much to glean and enjoyed my buddy read of this! Will certainly return to flagged passages when I need creative support.

"Christian art? Art is art; painting is painting; music is music; a story is a story. If it's bad art, it's bad religion, no matter how pious the subject. If it's good art...and there the questions start coming, questions which it would be simpler to evade." (4)

"...to paint a picture or to write a song is an incarnational activity. The artist is a servant who is willing to be a birth-giver. In a very real sense the artist (male or female) should be like Mary, who, when the angel told her that she was to bear the Messiah, was obedient to to command....the artist must be obedient to the work..." (8)

"The artist, like Mary, is free to say no. When a shoddy novel is published the writer is rejecting the obedient response, taking the easy way out. But when the words mean even more than the writer knew they meant, then the writer has been listening. And sometimes when we listen, we are led into places we do not expect, into adventures we do not always understand." (13)

"Not long ago a college senior asked if she could talk to me about being a Christian writer. If she wanted to write Christian fiction, how was she to go about it? I told her that if she is truly and deeply a Christian, what she writes is going to be Christian, whether she mentions Jesus or not. And if she is not, in the most profound sense, Christian, then what she writes is not going to be Christian no matter how many times she invokes the name of the Lord." (112)

"We draw people to Christ not by loudly discrediting what they believe, by telling them how wrong they are and how right we are, but by showing them a light that is so lovely that they want with all their hearts to know the source of it." (113)

"The Secret Garden....is more successful than Little Lord Fauntleroy, for instance, because it is a better piece of storytelling, less snobbish, and the message doesn't show, like a slip hanging below the hem of a dress." (114)

"Our work should be our play. If we watch a child at play for a few minutes, seriously at play, we see that all his energies are concentrated on it. He is working very hard at it. And that is how the artist works, although the artist may be conscious of discipline while the child simply experiences it." (159)