Rating: 5/5

I came to this book in a roundabout way – I had read Nick Tosches’ Sonny Liston bio many years before, and had enjoyed it, so I thought that by choosing it for the reading challenge, I would kill 2 birds with one stone.

Simply put, this might be the best bio I have ever read, music, film, or otherwise. Martin is so interestingly situated in twentieth century popular culture, and Tosches style of inserting himself into the vernacular and attitudes of his subject matter sweeps you along.

When you consider the era of the Rat Pack, the word cool was never so richly appropriate. The late 50’s and early 60’s were a time when Hollywood was King, television was in it’s infancy, and rock and roll was just starting to get ready to exert itself. The tentacles going out from the Pack reached the Kennedys, Marilyn Monroe, Elvis (who idolized Martin), The Beatles, and mob superstars like Sam Giancana. They stood at the center of it all.

Dean Martin’s story is first the story of Italian immigration and assimilation in America, and in this regard, Living High in the Dirty Business of Dreams succeeds where a lot of bios don’t – It makes the early formative years interesting. In this case, it illustrates Martin’s upbringing in the second-tier gambling hive that was Stuebenville, Ohio, and his early exposure to organized crime. As in the case of his contemporary and friend Frank Sinatra, the shadow of the mob has always been a part of Martins mystique. “Dino” is so engrossing because it knows names, dates, dollar amounts. It is unquestionable that Martin’s rise was abetted by his proximity to the right people and their clubs and casinos.

It would be inconceivable that a book about Dean Martin didn’t also prominently feature Jerry Lewis, and “Dino” really takes wing as it walks the reader through the Martin and Lewis years of the fifties. Tosches often refers to the team as the Monkey and the Organ Grinder, and the book is fascinating as it recounts the ascendancy of M &amp; L, all the while highlighting the tensions and the struggle for dominance between the two men. They were 2 large egos who both recognized that their chemistry together was special, and that got them through the tensions. For a while.

As far as Martin and his relationships with those close to him, there’s one point that gets hammered on time and time again – He did not let anyone inside, not really. Tosches makes a point of contrasting Martin with Sinatra, who he describes as an arrested adolescent who always craved validation. Martin’s self deprecating “I don’t give a shit” attitude towards his careers reminds one of another icon of the era - Marlon Brando, who Dean Co-starred with in 1958’s The Young Lions, and bonded with immediately.

One of the treats for me with this book, was grooving on Tosches’ irreverent, blistery style, cribbed from people like Hunter S Thompson. Much more than any other biographer that comes to mind, Tosches inserts his own attitudes into the narrative. It gives the book a feeling of being right there, in the moment. By basically adopting the language and verbal style of the era, he risks alienating some modern readers, but I though it was hugely entertaining. A couple of examples:

On Martin’s style of singing to the men in the audience:

“Other singers worked to seduce the women in the audience. To him, that came naturally. He wanted to seduce the men, winning them, bonding them to his side with the illusion of camaraderie. It was them he wanted, them he needed. And he got them. Night after night, they would come, without jealousy or intimidation, enjoying him as a man’s man, while their wives and lovers sat moistening beside them.”

On the emergence of the television in America:

“But now those ugly little devices were beginning to hum and flicker with gathering gales of gray insect fury, joy, and Plague, mediocrity and madness, from the vast funhouse of metastatic delights.”

Or on Martin and Lewis at their peak:

“The early 50’s belonged to them. It was the age of television, or whitewalled, tail-finned mindlessness; a world gone mad with mediocrity. Willian Faulkner, the winner of the 1950 Nobel Prize for literature, would have nothing to do with it; “Television,” he said, “is for niggers”. Ernest Hemingway, who won the prize four years later, was a made-for-TV character. Soon it would not even matter. Most people, like Dean and Jerry, would not even read.”