Rating: 3/5

Set in South Carolina during the late 80s or early 90s:
Raisin Stackhouse finds herself doing odd jobs for Miz Effie Pfluggins, the church secretary, and during this particular summer, Miz Effie asks her to help clean up the old church cemetery. At first, she's a little hesitant, but finds that what Miz Effie tells her about the old cemetery really peaks her interest. 

Raisin is determined to uncover the mysteries and deep, rich history that lies beyond the cemetery limits, however, Raisin wasn't really prepared for what she has unearthed. Can the cemetery really answer questions about the town's past? Does Raisin stir up trouble in the community or positive excitement? You'll have to read and find out!

I read this book several times as a child, but couldn't really remember why I read it over and over. As an adult, I wanted to figure out why. I love the premise of the book. I love the history, the mystery, and rich pride that the characters have in their heritage. The downside? I found that the author somewhat lost her path and went in too many directions that were unrelated to the main story line of the book. It felt like too many ideas in one book and this is what made the pacing medium to slow. With this being a children's/tween book, I feel it needs to be less complex in the direction of the story. (I now believe that I read it so many times because I kept trying to make sense of the main point of the story. I think I lost track and had to reread it in order to make sure I didn't miss anything.)

By cutting out a few parts that didn't make the story any better, I feel like this is a real winner. There's little characterization, but very descriptive and has a powerful emotional undertone to the writing. The character becomes closer to her family and even finds herself in the middle of an innocent budding romance-which I also liked. Other than the somewhat outdated pop culture terms (Prince, Michael Jackson, etc.), I would think this book would be relatable to young kids of all backgrounds, especially African American kids. It might even open up a door for them to want to learn more about their ancestors. One last thing to note, I really appreciated how the author synced black and white people together. I felt, for the most part, that the author stayed very sensitive to all races.

I would hand this book to kids in 5th-7th grade. I would definitely hand it to those kids who are interested in family history or genealogy. One last thing to note, the word "virgin" is used and there may be some parents that would be sensitive to that in their child's reading material.