Rating: 4/5

This is going to be a longer review for sure, tying together my thoughts on the series as a whole... but the TL:DR is that you should definitely give this series a try! It's a good way to get into Diana Wynne Jones, and if you've read a lot of hers but not this series, it is definitely unique among her works. Just be ready for some mental juggling!

Sometimes I feel like Diana Wynne Jones had a bigger image in her mind than she could put into words, not through any artistic lack, but that what she wanted to write was larger than life, and necessarily would either require absolutely loads of explanation, or a bare-bones explanation that the reader would have to fill in with imagination. She almost always goes for the latter. I feel like this quartet was her foray into more typical YA adventure fare, but in her typical style, she puts a unique spin on it that makes you grasp for the pieces. As a result, it either comes together beautifully for you, or you're left trying to figure out how all the pieces even fit together. To be honest, it reminds me a bit of a Christopher Nolan move such as Tenet or Dunkirk; she could have told the story in a linear, traditional way, but that's just not her style.

Maybe it's just that that Dalemark Quartet has been a series of stories all set in the same world but told from radically different points-of-view and in different times, ending with "The Crown of Dalemark" combining these characters AND a time jump. On top of that Jones starts telling the story from one character's POV, switches to a brand new character, and then as these two people come together, constantly flips between the two of them so that the narration will tells us they are wondering what the other is thinking, but makes sure we know what each one is thinking. 
Do you see the "Tenet" or "Interstellar" similarities yet?

Let's try a plot overview... some spoilers below.
Plot Overview: The story picks up with Mitt, the main character of book #2 Drowned Ammet, who has been living as a refugee in North Dalemark after his escape from the South. However, his patrons are not exactly kindly... they force him to take on a mission for them to assassinate Noreth, a young Northern girl who has recently gained popularity as she claims to be the daughter of the One and heir to the ancient throne of united Dalemark. Mitt is extremely reluctant to do this, especially once he meets her, and meets up with Navis (also from Drowned Ammet) to find a way around this. 
Noreth announces that she plans to travel the ancient king's roads and search for the lost crown of Dalemark, accompanied by anyone who believes in her. Mitt and Navis join, albeit for their own ends, and so does Moril Singer from Cart and Cwidder as well as another singer.

At this point, however, we get a time jump two hundred years into the future into a modern Dalemark. Here we meet Maewen, who is staying with her father, a historian, in the royal palace. She meets someone who is more than what he seems, and he sends her back to take Noreth's place, since they look so much alike, and she finds herself leading the expedition to find the crown of Dalemark. Hoping to just get it over with, Maewen adopts the new identity and leads the way, trying to make history play out as she remembers it.

Characters:
We have Moril, who is about 13 and who has an extremely powerful cwidder that he is in charge of. His family is scattered across the North and he is dealing with the fact that, using his cwidder, he killed an entire army. That's a lot for a 13-year old. He's a deep thinker, and he doesn't appreciate Mitt's sense of humor.
Then we have Mitt, a Southerner living in the North who misses the way of life he knows, and who is being exploited. He is forced on this mission- a mission to kill someone- because otherwise the only friends he has will be hurt or imprisoned. he doesn't feel he can trust anyone, and he doesn't know how the North works, but he is very aware of how much he sticks out. At least he has Navis!
Then there's Maewen, who really adapts well all things considered. She seems to be just going along with the flow, figuring that if she just follows out history, she can hand off the reins to the king when he appears. But at the same time, she is getting to know Mitt, Moril, Navis, and the others, and she is learning to be a leader. So, I guess she has some character growth and learns that people in history are more than just names in books(?).
And then there's Navis, probably my favorite character in this book. He's not a main character, but I just appreciate how he's a capable adult, traveling around with (mostly) kids while trying to scheme how to save his own children and apparently, plan on how to get Mitt crowned king and avoid capture himself. He is very capable, cool-headed, and I like his sense of humor. 

We do see some characters from the Spellcoats, although not all of them. 

Review: This book does require a bit of mental grappling. As I mentioned before, we are juggling a lot of elements, and several characters, none of whom know each other, some of whom are from different centuries, and even more who know things that we have NEVER been informed of. On top of that, several characters have multiple names, or are referred to with different titles. The simplest of these is that Maewen is called Maewen in narration, but all the other characters refer to her as Noreth. 
And then there is the fact that we now know that some of the Spellcoats characters are of the Undying, so they also match up with the legends we've heard in the previous books, but it's hard to keep straight who's-who. 
That being said, I found I did enjoy this book, once we got through all that. I enjoyed seeing the different characters have to mesh together in a way that only happens in a Diana Wynne Jones book. When reading a series, we get so used to the way the MC sees things and interprets them, but in this series we are invited to see things through multiple perspectives. This book does alternate between Mitt and Maewen, but we also do know a lot about Moril as well. I found myself enjoying the teamwork between these three (granted, it did take a while.)
I also liked the juxtaposition of past and future. Maewen was constantly trying to reconcile the country she was seeing with the future she knew and make it work out, which felt like a much more realistic way for time travel to work. If we suddenly were sent back into the past, even a history professor would struggle because not every single detail or name is recorded in history, and even if it is, who says it is correct? 
As a whole, I really did feel like this book was a puzzle, and we had been given all the pieces in the previous books and it was now up to us to try to fit them together (or see how it worked.) I remember that the first time I read it, I was somewhat disappointed with the ending  and Mitt becoming king, since I didn't like him at the time, but this time around I really liked how it all worked out.

What I really wish now was that Jones had come back to this series! At the end of my copy of "The Crown of Dalemark," there are pages and pages of glossary of characters, concepts, and places, showing how much thought went into this series. She even had planned out how many steps to the front door are typical in the South, where flooding is more common! I wish she had come back to this series and fleshed it out more, giving us more of the legends alive (like the tale of the original Adon, telling us more about King Amil the Great's feats, or the Spellcoats as adults.) And I think it's a good thing to leave the reader wanting more! I wonder if she'd ever planned to come back. 

It almost makes me want to do it myself!