Rating: 1/5

Once again, another book to add to my 'deserve a basilisk fang through it' collection. I felt no sympathy or any connection to any of the characters. Okay, some/most of the characters. 

Christopher is - and I really hate to put it this way, but is another Bella, only this time, it's a he. 

He is a whiny and way to angsty for a normal teen. Or either that, he has no backbone. All I could do was scream, "Stuff it, you whiny nincompoop and USE YOUR FUCKING BRAIN AND STOP MAKING EVERYTHING SOUNDS HARDER THAN IT NEEDS TO BE!"

Huh, too bad that advice never got through his thick skull. 

He has no common sense either. Who the hell go 'lynching vampires' with their brother and his friends when vampires EXIST and practically everyone in the United States knows it and not just their puny speck of a town? They are seriously asking to die. 

Then, there's the 'Chet the Celestial Being' incident. A strange man 'dressed like the FBI agents' comes up to him and supposedly ask him for help - this one thing that somehow 'he' can only solve. Anderson here have him in 'thinking-cap decision' but in the end, you know that "What the hell, I'll give it a shot." is going to happen. 

If he does this one task ask of him, Christopher's vampirism is cure. Already, this sound retarded. Dude, if there is a cure, don't you think the world would have less to none vampires? The promise of the cure sounds promising to him, so he agrees.

Then, Tom - his best friend - comes along then 'suggests' that they should go vampire hunting. Again, are you a moron? Vampires are running around and you want to go HUNTING? With insignificant strength and puny muscles, what the hell are you going to do? And armed with no weapons? If you want a cunning and suspicious character, the least you could do was make him believable. 

Let see, Jerk - his other best friend. Haumnnn, not an ass, but a blockhead regardless. Who knew high school dudes and gals were so retarded?

Thank goodness the trio eventually break up so that this stupidity would end. Unfortunately, it really didn't end. Chris cared for his friends anyways, regardless of their asshole attitude. Yes, let's give them a ride home because they're, like, my BFFs. 

Urm, how about ... NO. 

I felt that some characters should have never been needed. I felt like Rebecca, Tom, Jerk and even his brother Paul was worthless. I didn't get how their roles was supposed to play up into the big plot. Not that it was big anyways. This 'book' could have really worked better as fanfiction, but not a novel.

Chris assumes he has to kill to eat ... urh drink. To keep from attacking others, he attack his arm and drink rations from it. Urm, why can't you just take rationed amounts of OTHER PEOPLE'S blood? 

Chris, his brother and his brother's friends go to an execution of a vampire. This vampire was apparently caught with her fangs extended and/or without a reflection. And this, apparently is grounds for an execution, because for a vampire to be alive, they must have killed. I suppose that could be grounds for execution. But since when do towns have the jurisdiction to execute people? VAMPIRES THAT COULD KILL US ALL, doesn't that sound like a federal problem? 

When Chris calls the police and tries to warn them, they are convinced it's a prank call. Urm, I thought we established the fact that VAMPIRES ARE REAL and is a nationwide problem? 
 
Last words about this book: It was a very dark tale, depressing and would have made me cry if it was written better and more believable. The two things that made this book bearable was Chet and the witty narration. I'm a sucker for sarcastic and witty comments - wow, a pun right there.

Anyways, Chet is totally bad-ass and would make an awesome villain. He's cocky and arrogant, but he's smarter than any other characters in the book combine. 

Right, that reminds me, exactly why does he need Chris again? He can phases in and out like a ghost so that no one can touches him and yet, he need Chris to place the Arm in Tch'mungar's world - when Tch'mungar himself hired Chet in the first place? 

Urm, yeah, according to my knowledge, he zapped The Thing With The One Piece Hair into a pile of cinder. And Bat? Well, he died too within a few seconds. 

The guy is practically GOD. How the hell can a bunch of vampires stand up to his godly might?

So yes, the book was predictable. And very lame.