Rating: 5/5

Have you ever tried to fit in with others at school? Well, Alice has. The genre of this book is realistic fiction. In my opinion I thought this was a great and interesting book because it talks about Alice in the seventh grade. 

 The setting of this book is at Alice's school. The setting is important because it makes the book come alive. The type of conflict of this book is person vs. self because Alice wanted to fit in with other people at school. The theme for this book is friendship because even if Alice embarrassed herself in front of the whole school, all of her friends still like her. 

 This book is about Alice trying to fit in with others at her school. In the beginning of the book, Alice tells her dad if she could have her ears pierced because all of her friends have their ears pierced. Her dad said she could. Then, Lester takes Alice to get her ears pierced. Later on, one of Alice's friends, Elizabeth, asked Alice if she would like to be in her earring club. Alice said sure, and later that day all of the members of the earring club went to Elizabeth's house for a meeting. Also, Alice's school was having a talent show soon. Pamela asked Alice if she would like to be in her group for the talent show. At first Alice didn't want to be in it, but then she thought about it well and her final answer was yes. After rehearsing for a while, the day of the talent show finally came. Alice was going to do a magic trick. She was going to pull a scarf out of a hat and she would be wearing a Wonder Woman costume. When Alice was pulling the scarf out of the hat, something was pulling it backstage. It was a cat and then the cat came on stage. Alice felt very embarrassed. Everybody was laughing. 

 The 1st person point of view affects the story because Alice is telling us how she feels. For example, Alice tells us how she feels when she got her ears pierced. Alice felt excited to have her ears pierced because know she won't be left out of the earring club. Another theme that recurs throughout the book is bravery. This theme can be seen when Alice joins the talent show and she goes on stage to perform.

 I was surprised when Alice's dad told her she could have her ears pierced because Alice's dad really cares what Alice does and I never thought her dad would let her. I thought the ending of the book was funny because Alice asks herself a lot of questions. 

 I would rate this book 5 out of 5 stars because this was a good, funny book. I would recommend this book for anybody who likes to read realistic fiction books, and for anybody who likes to read funny books. Alice was trying to fit in with others at school.