Some of the stories were quite good and were really touching with a beautiful moral to it. Others didn't really hit home for me. None of the stories were particularly long or had much, if any, of a plot, though there were lots of unexpected twists despite this. Knowing from the note at the beginning of the book that the author sometimes was turning out a many as a story per week, it makes sense though that a lot of the stories were quick and not very developed. 

The Gift of the Magi: I forgot I definitely read this one in school. A sweet story. Nice moral. 

A young couple each sell their most precious item to buy a gift for the other. The irony is the gifts they bought for the other are now not very useful (she sold her hair, but he bought her a beautiful hair pin; he sold his watch, but she bought him a chain for it). 

The Cop and the Anthem: This story was king of depressing. You get all hopeful for the main character and then you get let down. I guess it just reflects how hard it can be to change yourself in real like. 

A homeless man named Soapy tries to get arrested on purpose so he can go to jail for the winter where he will at least be warm. He fails numerous time. Finally, when walking by a church he is inspired to change is life and get a job after hearing the music coming from the building. At that moment, a cop walks by and arrests him. 

Springtime a la Carte: This one was so improbable that I actually couldn't really enjoy it even though it was a sweet story with a cute ending. 

A woman works as a typist. Every night she types up the menus of a nearby restaurant. One night, she starts crying over the thought of her lover who has not written to her in months. A tear hits to menu card. Later, her lover comes to visit her. Not having gotten her letter with her new address, he was trying to track her down her new address in the city. He found her only because he had dinner at the restaurant that she types for and saw the menu card, mistyped: "DEAREST WALTER, WITH HARD-BOILED EGG." And thus, he found her.

The Green Door: I really like the idea in this story that embracing adeventure and being willing to try something different can really change your life and others'! 

A man embraces adventure when he has the chance and goes into an apartment building and knocks on a green door after being given a card by a man on the street. It brings a new person in to his life who needed his help. Turns out the card was actually just to advertise a play down the street. 

After Twenty Years: Just an okay story. Not much happened. Almost zero background info on these people, but I would've like to know more. 

Two friends agree to meet at the same restaurant years later. As one friend is there waiting, he chats with a cop, who then leaves. Turns out the cop was the friend he was waiting for, but recognized him as a wanted man and had another cop come arrest him. 

The Furnished Room: Another depressing one. Also, another story that might have actually been pretty good if we were given more background info on the characters. We aren't told anything about them or why they are in the situation there in. Why was he looking for? Why did she kill herself?

A man comes in search of woman. He rents out a room in a boarding house temporarily. While there, he swears he smells her scent. The landlady denies that the woman ever stayed there. He kills himself. Turns out the landlady lied. The woman did stay there and had also killed herself. 

The Pimienta Pancakes: A just okay story. Cowboy got what he deserved if you ask me. She was probably too good for him. He did threaten to murder another man for trying to court her. 

A cowboy falls in love with a young lady and attempts to court her, but a sheep farmer tries to move in on his girl. When the cowboy threatens to kill the sheep farmer, he convinces the cowboy that he only is trying to discover her secret pancake recipe and enlists the cowboy to help him. This of course isn't true. The girl believes the cowboy has some weird obsession with pancakes and she marries the sheep farmer. 

The Last Leaf: One of my favorite stories in the book so far. A very touching story. 

A sick girl is dying and becomes convinced that when the last leaf falls on the vine outside her apartment window, she will die. She's given up of hope of living and doctor declares without the will to fight, she probably won't make it. Her elderly artist neighbor, who despite being an artist, never actually paints anything, hears about this and goes out in the rain and cold to paint a leaf onto the wall the vine clings to. The girl gains hope and manages to recover. The old man gets sick and dies.

The Voice of the City: I didn't like this story at all. 

A guy walks around this city asking people what the voice of the city is. No one has an answer. Turns out the voice of the city is not saying anything? I don't know. I didn't get it, but I'm also not someone who's into poetry so maybe that's why. 

While the Auto Waits: This one was weird. Not much to say about it. It is what it is. Maybe the moral is that everyone lies? Don't judge a book by its cover?

A girl sits in a park and a young man comes up and starts flirting with her. She tells him she is rich but won't tell him which family she is from. He tells her he's a humble cashier. He follows her - turns out she works in a restaurant and he's the rich one. 

A Retrieved Reformation: I like this one. I belive I may have also read this one in school before. It's too bad the thief couldn't live happily ever after, but I guess that once again shows how if you don't live an upstanding life, it's not so easy to change, even if you want to. Almost as if there's nefarious forces working against it. 

An infamous burglar with a talent for cracking any safe is realeased from jail. He visits a small town and while there ends up falling in love with a girl. He commits to living a clean life, gets engaged to the girl, and starts a successful business in town. The girl's father, a banker, proudly gives the family a tour of the banks new safe where one of the children get locked in by accident. Everyone freaks out and the thief steps in and cracks the safe to save the child. The cop who was huting down the thief witnesses the incident. When the thief sees the cop, he offers himself for arrest, but the cop gives him a chance to leave. 

A Municipal Report:
This was a good story with an ending that felt both unexpected and satisfying. 

The narrator comes to Nashville looking for a writer by the name of Azaela Adair to establish a contract with her to write for a certain magazine. He finds her living in poverty with an obnoxious husband who squanders what little money they have. The husband is murdered presumeably by a carriage driver named Uncle Caesar - one of whose buttons from his distincly unique jacket having been found and subsequently removed from the murder scene by the narrator. 

A Newspaper Story:
Not really my kind of story.

A newspaper gets dropped by a man by accident. It travels around the city, gettting picked and left by other people. The course of events all around the city are changed by this one simple newspaper.

The Ransom of Red Chief:
Kind of funny I guess. 

Some guys kidnap a rich man's son. The son is super annoying and they decide they can't stand him. They try to ransom him to the father, but it doesn't work. They eventually paid the boy's father to take him back.

A Ghost of a Chance:
Weird. Imagine dressing up as a ghost just to kiss a girl who isn't even interested in you. Haha. 

Something about a house haunted by a ghost and a woman staying there having seen it. The ghost kissed her. Turns out is was a shy 29 year old man who dressed up as the ghost. 

Makes the Whole World Kin:
Kind of wholesome. A story about how you can find a friend in the least expected of ways. 

A burglar enters a house. The owner is there. The burglar commands the man to hold up both his hands, but the man has rheumatism and can't. They bond over this as the burglar also has similar issues. They end up going out for drinks together.