Rating: 4/5

Barbara Pym writes ordinary stories about ordinary people. Their daily routines, emotions, and thoughts grace many of her stories. These stories have no remarkable characters, like the Darcian young gentleman, the gallant Colonel Brandon, the sensible and grounded Mr. Knightley, or bold and beautiful Elizabeth Bennet. Nor are there dashing wild men like Mr. Wickham and Mr. Willoughby. Most of them are normal people from everyday life. Women who've lost their chances of marriage, old meddling ladies, irresponsible men, and religious men who struggle with their duties come to life in her stories. I know it sounds boring when expressed like that. We somehow expect to meet extraordinary characters when it comes to fiction. But let me tell you, Barbara Pym's novels are far from boring. They may not be exceptional, but they are fun reads. 

Crampton Hodnet is set in North Oxford, and we meet most of the standard Pym characters. Part of the story revolves around the University of Oxford, so fictional dons and pupils also appear in this story. The setting had a particular attraction for me. I love university cities. They have a vibrant atmosphere, and Barbara Pym captures it quite nicely in her tale. Her characters and story sit harmoniously with the setting. And however ordinary and unexciting the story may be, Pym has a way of seeing you through to the end. Here it was humour. The intended satire firmly binds the different threads and loose ends of the story. 

I'm not a fan of Barbara Pym. I have already expressed it in my other reviews of her novels. But there is a quiet charm in her novels that I won't deny. Perhaps that is why I keep coming back to her from time to time (although I'm careful with my choices). Everyone knows that she's regarded by many as the modern-day Jane Austen. While I personally disagree with the comparison, and there will be only one unique Jane Austen for me, I understand why such a presumption is made. Like Jane Austen, Pym uses satire to convey her social message, and her novels are comfort reads: light and fun. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/