Rating: 3/5

As this is a book in a trilogy there will be some spoilers as you know but...the back of the book and the first six pages will do that just as much as me telling you.

Indeed the first six pages "the introduction" summarize the last book and give its biggest spoiler.

At the party of former Mesa High students who are now Tabb High Students, Alice McCoy was found dead. The police rule it as suicide because a gun was found in her mouth and a hole bleeding out the back of her skull.

There was the sound of a gunshot which brought everyone to find the body. There was also some interesting things to happen because of this incident as we go into the second book.

Michael Olson doesn't believe that Alice killed herself but to some of the others, her personality of late suggest to them she was indeed depressed. Jessica Hart believed she never got over her parents' death from when she was younger. Her change in art style from warm and fuzzy and bright to dark and somber notwithstanding as she was under the influence of her artist "boyfriend" Clark with his more contrasting style.

Michael keeps looking into Alice's death to prove she was murdered. He took it very hard and it even caused him to argue with Jessica in her differing opinion. Two months later, they don't talk much as Michael moved to another locker but also for the fact that Jessica is more interested it seems in dating Bill Skater. Poor friendzoned Michael...

Jessica is also more interested in being voted Homecoming Queen. The Dance has now been planned for the beginning of the basketball season per Sara as SBP (Student Body President) planned out at the start of the school year. Maria Gonzales, Clair Hilrey and a girl named Cindy are the other nominees beside Jessica. 

Jessica and Clair are going at it to have them both win and beat the other so much that Jessica uses Polly telling her something offhandedly to ruin the blonde cheerleader's chances of winning as well as move in on her quarterback boyfriend, Bill.

Poor Polly McCoy. She has lost her parents, her baby sister and now her aunt is very sick, having had a heart attack at the news of Alice's "death". It doesn't look good but Polly is trying her best to take care of her Aunty instead of going crazy though she's on a thin line to getting there. Jessica and Sara treat her like glass and also notice that Polly has lost almost twenty pounds, surviving on carrots and Coke to stay up late at nights to care for her aunt.

Polly still has it really bad for Russ Desmond but Clark also comes back into the picture. He seems interested in Polly only because she has lost weight but managed to keep her huge breasts but Russ doesn't seem to be reading Polly's signs of seduction so the poor girl turns to Clark. Yet soon, Polly discovers that Clark is not as perfect as she thought and remembers how Alice told her at the party the exact same thing...

Sara Cantrell still can't help but be attracted to Russ Desmond even though everytime the two try to engage in pleasant conversation, it ends so badly. Sara found out where Russ worked and tried to ask him subtly and a little presumptuously to take her to the Homecoming Dance but the young man seems to be dense as a brick or just as volatile as Sara in his own temper.

Sara locks him in the freezer of his stock job at a grocery store and he ends up using an axe to free himself which gets him fired from his job. Russ decides to go to Polly for a place to say when that gets him kicked out of his own house. Sara gets her own karmic comeuppance in the worst way possible when she accidentally leaves her purse in the same freezer.

Three thousand dollars meant for paying expenses for the dance...stolen. With nowhere to go for a solution since Jessica believes Sara to be a moron, Sara turns to John "Bubba" Free to help her try and get the money to cover the costs...

Bubba seems to be getting really cozy with Clair lately but he still can't help but be attracted to fiery Sara. So when she comes to ask for help, Bubba says he will do this favor for her if Sara will pay him back with some...sexual favors. Sara is appalled but she really has no choice and when it seems that things are going to work out for her and Russ, this is not the only thing to hang over her head like a sword...

Bubba is also helping Michael try to find out about Alice's death, using his computer coding skills to try and break into the medical records of the coroner who did the autopsy. He also has his hand in other things because Bubba is not at all happy with Jessica for stringing along Michael or her spreading a vicious untrue rumor about Clair. I'm not sure if Bubba is really on the up and up but I can't help but find him hilarious in his overconfidence.

Nick is left trying to find another job. He lost the one Mike got him at the 7-11 because the bosses didn't seem to like the fact that he was held on suspicion for Alice McCoy's death. Shell-shocked from his former time in an East L.A. gang that resulted in a friend of his getting shot, Nick couldn't stand to see that gun in Alice's mouth so he removed it and got his fingerprints on it.

Nick, Russ and Kats were held the longest because of Nick's prints, Russ' temper at the fact that the gun was Kats' own weapon stolen from the glove compartment of his car. Maria's parents believe that since Nick is black and use to be in a gang he must have killed Alice and forbid Maria from seeing him. The only thing that looks up for Nick is that he joins the basketball team with Michael after his new friend convinces him he is truly that good to maybe even get a scholarship to college.

At first it's fine because no one gives Nick problems now that football is over and most of the dumb jocks moved to basketball...especially The Rock. When Michael however gets into it with the new coach, he quits and leaves Nick high and dry that the trouble looks like it will start up again. Since the team has given him a new purpose, Nick tries to figure out just why The Rock is hellbent on wanting to kill him. The reason is very dumb but the resolution to this feud is hilariously black comedy...

Bill Skater is basically boring and soon Jessica finds that out and tries to mend things with Michael realizing her mistake in treating him so poorly. 

The night of the Homecoming Dance arrives and what seems like a night of magic and miracles and happy endings turns into tragedy, disaster and death...

The cover of the book is misleading as there is a death but it just happens to coincide with that of what really happens at the titular dance. Pike is good at misleading us because it seemed for awhile that we were just going to get the same teenage high school drama before dropping the huge bomb on us...

By the time we get to the end of this book, I would say that Mike and Nick have my sympathy the most between the last book and now. Last book, I was kind of thinking Polly was just too much a stereotypical jealous and bitchy older sister but this book gives her such a hard time...I can't help but feel sorry for her too.

Jessica and Maria...my approval points of them have gone way down by the end of this book if I add some factors from the last book.

Clair, Bubba, Russ and Sara are still up in the air for me. They do things that seem redeemable and then do or say something stupid that they go back like three steps until they make me laugh that is or get another slap delivered in their faces.

The Rock gets completely changed for the better, Bill is still boring, Kats is a moron and Clark is still a horrible person...that's pretty much it.

I can only imagine just what sort of conclusion Pike will bring this trilogy to since I know it's always something different. Completely crazy, somber and bittersweet, vaguely hopeful?

Until next time your guess is as good as mine...