Rating: 1/5

I'm revising this review. I've never been able to fully keep the weight off by doing this diet. I inevitably collapse back into a carb binging that puts me right back to where I was before. Instead of this diet, instead I recommend the "Eat to Live" diet, which is extremely healthy and describes all the ways in which the Atkins' diet is not only not good, but is actually toxic. I'll leave a review of "Eat to Live" at some point, but I've already dropped 12 pounds in a month, and I'm excited for the first time in forever that I'll actually lose the weight and keep it off without cravings.

So, ignore everything I said below. Atkins does work for a little while until you fall off the wagon, and if you're able to stick to it, you'll be increasing your risk for heart disease and cancer.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Great book for finally finding a way to lose weight and keep it off. The whole high fat/high protein/low carb thing is counter-intuitive, but I promise it works.

2011/10/26 - I re-read this book again as I had gone off the diet and really need to lose about 40 pounds (I'm 6'0" and was 245 lbs). I've lost 6 lbs. in 10 days and haven't felt hungry at all. It's difficult to resist milk and bread, which I love, but I can work some of that back in once I get near my goal weight. I love that I can do this diet without feeling hungry and it also helps with my energy level as it keeps my blood sugar consistent. There's really a lot of great information about how the body works in this book, and I whole-heartedly recommend it.
I think it's important to dispel the notion that you can't have ANY carbs at all on this diet - that's not true. What *is* true is that there's a certain number of carbs everyone has (varies by person and level of activity) where eating beyond that number will result in weight gain. So, if your number is 60 grams per day, you can eat something less than that and still lose weight. This allows for things like some nuts, grains, and fruit.
The book is great and if you really need to lose weight, feel great, get your energy back and not be hungry, this is the best way of eating out there.
The way I figure it, if you're going to go on a diet, might as well do the one that works and also leaves you feeling satisfied. Yeah, you're going to miss those apple fritters, but you can't have those on any other diet either. Every diet is going to make you give up something, whether it's specific food items or the amounts you eat. At least with Atkins, you're not hungry and craving stuff all the time. And it also is less worried about counting calories and just eating until you're satisfied, which, you'll find, will be on less food than you thought.