Rating: 4/5

I've been reading Ms. Stuart older works and I have to say this one was so much better than The Houseparty. It's pretty cliche, but bear in mind that this was written in the 80s.

The heroine, Gillian is a spinster at 30 and she is serving as a sort of governess for her siblings. We've been told that she has money, but she needed to feel useful, hence, what better way than minding your siblings' children without pay (I don't get this, if you have money hence, you're not a poor relation, why not just set up your own household? Maybe it wasn't a done thing back then). Enter Ronan, who was banished from England due to a planned elopement with a married lady.  The married lady happened to be Gillian's sister-in-law, Letty. Phew, talk about entanglement. It was probably a love match on Letty's side, but not Ronan. This was not elaborated.  Ronan came back to England when he assumed the title. He met Gilly when her carriage broke down and it was a chance encounter. His sneaky friend, Vivian made a wager with him. If Ronan could seduce Gilly, he would win 1000 pounds. Ronan only wanted to bruise her a bit, not go all the way. He was honourable in his own way. The thing is he was attracted to her from the get go. There's also a secondary romance involving Gilly's niece, Felicity and a poor vicar, Liam. The secondary romance wasn't terribly interesting, but I believe this was imperative to the story since some of the scenes were only plausible with Felicity's and Liam's romance.

Ronan wasn't much of an anti-hero as Ms. Stuart other heroes. He was just a rake. Gilly was a typical spinster. Well fleshed out characters.

I do have a quibble, a minor one. The Americanism is obvious when the characters were partaking coffee, instead of tea. I don't believe coffee is a British thing. I believe tea was always the favoured British beverage (I might be wrong here, not being a Brit myself, but this is the impression that I got from the hundreds of historical romances that I've read).

Even though this book is shorter than your average historical romance novels, it's pretty packed. I would recommend this book to any Ms. Stuart fans.