Rating: 4/5

Tenth in the Inspector Roderick Alleyn vintage detective mystery series and revolving around this roving Scotland Yard detective in 1939. The focus is on the happy-go-lucky yet poor Lampreys. The story was first published in 1940.

My Take
Lemme get this out of the way — the title creeps me out! What's weird is that I actually like eating barbecued eel, but that idea of a surfeit . . . ick.

Whew.

The story begins with the set-up in which Roberta first meets the Lamprey family in New Zealand and becomes great friends with them . . . due to one of their many financial crises.

Marsh uses third person global subjective point-of-view from Roberta's, the Lampreys', and Scotland Yard's perspectives, allowing us to listen in on everyone. Somehow, though, Alleyn does a much better job of listening and putting those timelines together, sigh.

It's too funny how Marsh informs us of the Lampreys' financial crises from the rogue washing machine to why buying a second car was a good economic move. Thankfully, Lady Charles is going to pawn her pearls on her way to the manicurist. Won't the manicurist be pleased, lol. Alleyn has his own thoughts on their approach to money.

I can't really blame Uncle Gabriel from being so furious with his brother and his family. They are clueless and don't care. Lady Charles' comment about how expensive it is to travel certainly shows that attitude — and Uncle Gabriel has the proof of it, lololol. Then there's the family attitude about all the title changes. Nope, they simply do not care.

Part of their laissez-faire attitude comes from rescue showing up when truly needed. Of course, some of that "rescue" is from Uncle Gabriel bailing them out. It really brings home the difference in how much money it takes to survive today when you read how much money the Lampreys need to avoid the bailiff, lol.

I can't wait until the Lampreys learn that the constable sitting with them in the drawing room can speak French, lol. They think they're being so clever, *more laughter*. Fox is thrilled and wants to have chats with Gibson to improve his own French.

The Lampreys really do think they're putting one over on Scotland Yard, and then we read of Alleyn and company discussing their ploys.

Roberta's comment about the Lampreys being funny but not witty has a nice ring of truth to it.

Alleyn coughs up that he enjoys his work with his interest in people.

It's not so much action but the characters and their verbal interactions that move the story along. 

I must say I prefer the Lampreys' approach to life (not the financial aspect, though) to Uncle Gabriel's. He's so very depressing!

Hmm, I'm wondering if there's a surfeit of red herrings, especially when Alleyn refers to Tinkerton's lies. 

It's an unexpected wee hours conversation that tips Alleyn the wink. What Alleyn works out is so very plausible. And I'd obviously make a lousy criminal, lol. I'm just not that twisty.

The Story
It's a deeply saddening event that sends Roberta to England to live with an aunt. Fortunately, the Lampreys are crazy enough to do a haka to welcome Roberta to England — it cheers her up no end.

Moving to England hasn't changed the Lampreys. They're still amazingly "poor", and they're placing a lot of hope (and plots) to encourage Uncle Gabriel to cough up a rescue.

The Characters
Chief Detective-Inspector Roderick Alleyn is with CID at Scotland Yard. His mother's maiden name is Blandish. George is Alleyn's older brother. Nigel Bathgate, a journalist, is friends with Alleyn and the Lampreys.

Scotland Yard
Alleyn's team includes Inspector Fox, a.k.a. Br'er Fox; Detective-Sergeant (DS) Bailey specializes in fingerprints; DS Thompson is the photography expert; and, Dr Curtis is the police surgeon. The constables include Gibson and Martin and DS Campbell.

Roberta "Robin" Grey is a New Zealander who became friends with Frid Lamprey. Aunt Hlda in England has offered to take Roberta in.  Uncle George Alton became rector of Lumpington-Parva.

The Lampreys
Lord Charles Lamprey is a younger brother and has no clue about finance. Imogen, Lady Charles, a.k.a. Immy or Charlot, née Ringle, is his equally clueless wife. The children include Henry; Friede, a.k.a. Frid, who is Roberta's school friend and quite the drama queen; the plotting twins, Stephen and Colin; Michael, a.k.a. Potty; and Patricia, a.k.a. Patch. Nanny Burnaby has been with them forever, as has Baskett, the butler. Dent is Lady Charles' maid, and she knows a good pawnshop. Mayling is their chauffeur. The maids include Ethel and the nosy Cora Blackmore. Mrs James is the cook.

The combined flats on the top floor of Pleasaunce Court Mansions is the Lampreys' home in England. Stamford is the porter. Mr Gremball, Grimball, is the bum who's come to live with the Lampreys.

London
Uncle Gabriel Lamprey, Lord Wutherford and the Marquis of Wutherford and Rune, is the older brother and a real skinflint. Who knew this state could be inherited? "Violet", Lady Wutherford, (Glapeera Zadody, half-Hungarian and half-Russian) is his nutjob of a wife who is interested in the occult. Grace Tinkerton is Aunt V's loyal maid. William Giggle is their chauffeur. Deepacres is the family estate in Kent. The London house is in Brummell Street. The Moffats are the butler and housekeeper.

The extremely poor Lady Katherine Lobe, a.k.a. Auntie Kit, is another nut; she's also Lady Charles' second cousin and Lord Charles' aunt. I think Gibson is Aunt Kit's butler. Auntie Kit always wears Great-aunt Caroline's pearls. Cousin Ruth was another Lamprey savior.

New Zealand
The Tea Moana Collegiate School for Girls is where Roberta met Frid. Deepacres, a.k.a. Mount Silver Station, is the name of the Lampreys' estate.

A bum is a gentleman in a bowler hat who comes to stay until you pay your bills. The Lampreys frequently entertain bums, lol. Sir David Stein was a bad choice of business partner. Mary appears to be Henry's London girlfriend. One of the Lampreys' charades is of Jael and Colonel Sisera Blimp. Dr Kantripp is the Lampreys' London physician. Sir Matthew Cairnstock is a brain doctor. Isadore Z. Nathan, a.k.a. Uncle Izzy, is a pawnbroker. Aunt Violet believes she's protected. Marguerite Luondman of Gebweiler and Anna Ruffa of Douzy were medieval witches. The 
  Compendium Maleficorum
 is in Aunt V's library. There is a reference to a similar case, the American Crowbar Case with Phineas P. Gage, as well as Mr J Collyer Adam's case of the man with the knife in his forehead. The Frantock case is referenced. Old Lady Lorrimore had recommended the Nedbrun Nursing Home in Devon. Rattisbon is the Wutherwood solicitors. Messrs Hungerford, Hungerford and Butterworth are Violet's solicitors. Benham-Kaye, a.k.a. B-K, is a schoolmate in Mike's form.

The Cover and Title
The primary color of the cover is a reddish coral with its various areas of gradation. The upper block of color moves from the dark of the sides and top to lighter at the bottom and serves as the background for the title which gradates from white to a paler coral. The stretched banner across the middle is in a pale pink with the author's name in her trademark art deco font of deep maroon, textured lines, and white. The bottom is a slanting array of one-sided scalloped rays of white angling from the bottom out to the sides. In between those rays is a gradient of maroon to reddish coral. In the bottom center, the graphic has a deep gray green background with a gold-piped bed cushion on which a jeweled golden crown sits. Below it is a pale pink arch with the series info in white.

The title is a reference from Tinkerton regarding Nanny's raising up this Surfeit of Lampreys.