Rating: 5/5

This is surely the most important book I have read this year. Dostoevsky’s deplorable narrator in Notes from Underground has been entwined throughout so many great works I have read over the last few years. A few of many that surfaced during reading are to Nabokov’s unreliable narrator in Pale Fire, to James Joyce’s Ulysses in particular regarding the conversation with the prostitute, to Huysmans Against Nature as it responds to Romanticism and decadence, to Kafka’s Metamorphosis with our man’s alienation and detachment from society, to Jon Fosse’s deranged, misogynistic artist narrator in Melancholia I, and many more. All are derivatives and clearly influenced by the ‘underground’ unconscious development by Dostoevsky. It is his psychological power to recognize man’s irrationality, man’s inner torment, man’s fall from social grace and estrangement from polite society. These are no longer must be seen as his moral or religious failings, though surely many will view him through such a lens. Another view, like many of the references above begin to frame the man’s destabilization, his vanity, and his difficulty of seeing himself as part of society as a result of poor mental health, and in particular of social anxiety and status anxiety.

The part on the anthill, chicken coop and crystal palace emerges as a discourse of three models of utopian society presented in the first part. It must be revisited after completing the second part as nothing makes much sense upon the first reading.Man is irrational, capricious; he refuses to be categorized and limited, precisely because he is a man. The narrator scoffs and rails at "two times two makes four," "the wall," "piano key," the recurrent abstractions that stand for rationalism and scientific determinism, as they indicate to him an inhumanity, a reduction of the will, a finality that signifies death. He finds further symbols for man's social organization in three communal organizations: the anthill, the chicken coop and the crystal palace.