Rating: 4/5

Ladies Coupe is about Akhilandeshwari, who’s been leading a spinster‘s life and has just turned 45 years old. She is now at the crossroads of her life, realising the lost prerogative of leading a normal life. Akhila was a radiant young girl who grew into a stubborn, resilient &amp; organised woman, who likes her saree well starched and eats eggs, who ceded the love of her life and has lived her life under the fetters of a traditional Tamil-Brahman household abiding by all the social norms she is expected to, decides to set about on a train journey to Kanyakumari to abscond from the monotony of her life. 
In the ladies coupe, she meets five other women who share with her their own life stories. Akhila wonders if it is possible to be single and happy; Can a woman feel complete without a man?

Anita Nair’s prose was an expedition with Akhila and the women in the coupe, exploring their different yet similar lives and finding the answers to Akhila's own wonderment. While weaving each character delicately with intricate details, Nair swept my conscience with realisations. How the most unexpected turns, burn the idea of a perfect life down to ashes, a realisation that life goes on and it is hardly perfect!
The importance of doing things for yourself and understanding self-worth. But my favourite has to be the story of Mari. Her story broke my heart more than once! As much as the ability to bear a child is a blessing, it has long been used to ridicule the expanse of a woman’s worth. Mari lived through all the atrocities life brought upon her. She was not the embodiment of perfection, but of resilience. 
In Kanyakumari, Akhila spends her days like a free bird; master of her own life. But, the ending left me with a few questions unanswered. Did Akhila find her answers? How does her life change after returning? How did the lives of the other women go about?

The book, written in 1999, is way ahead of its time as Nair takes crafty pokes at misogyny and emboldens her characters into exploring their sexualities. Anita’s storytelling is excellent with detailed observations and flawless flow of language. There aren't a lot of books that crack me up, but this one did . Because humor is not a prominent theme of the book, its subtlety makes it even more attractive. Set in South India, for me it was a peep into a not so familiar culture. All the characters hail from a more or less common background which at certain points does come off as repetitive and hints at lack of versatility in terms of developing discrete settings. The common backgrounds though bred congeniality both among the characters and between characters and the reader, so perhaps that was what the writer wanted, but it still left me with a dual opinion. The book made me want to talk to more unfamiliar faces, listen to their stories, and most of all, to set for a train journey in a berth in the ladies compartment someday.

With recommendation from Khuswant Singh, this book is for everyone but might be more relatable to women, especially Indian women.