Rating: 3/5

Sometimes I remembered my childhood, sometimes I used to imagine what the rapid approach of the final moment before eternity would feel like. And sometimes I tried to finish off really old thoughts that resurfaced into consciousness. For instance, I thought about the question "Who am I?"

In ancient times it was myths before science. 

A head wrapped in foil, built into a model aircraft. The aircraft built to contain the plasticine figure. There's no door. A hatch drawn on the outside, and on the inside a couple of dials. Mitiok would like to find the person who made the aircraft and punch him in the face. Omon sticks the figure in an empty cigarette case and carries it with him into space.

Peripheral vision of a wide blue sky. Stretch your arms and do the airplane, buzzing in your head raring to go. Blast off! It is the airplane food trick and the stupid adult consumes the bite of chocolate pudding all by himself.

My adoring fans, the young cosmonaut takes off into space. Now the crowd goes wild. What will he do next?

The American Indians would have many names for the moon. The creamy corn moon. Runs with wolves, sleeps with the fishes. He who bike rides like E.T. phone home. I kept thinking about the loveable alien when the moonwalker device turns out to be operated by bicycle.
 
Omon takes the name of Ra when he mythologizes before he falls in love. His mouth hangs open as if he hung the moon, catching the thousands of tiny fireflies that go there when they pass away from glass jar asphyxiation.

Would you be willing to die for it? Yes. Wait, that was for real? I only said what I thought you wanted to hear.

I liked when Omon resents the hell out of his imminent death for his sleeping bear country (self decorated with stars and medals) and the thought that plagues him more than anything else is the fat thighs of his douchey superior officer in little white tennis shorts after he's gone. You tell him, Omon!

If Omon were a planet he'd be the planet that attracts lots of bad shit. Asteroids of rotten luck would always be landing on his space. Or, life long dreams of trips to the moon with no move to make the dream alive. Swallow it down like crappy camp lunches of bug juice. He would be interesting to astrologists for this fact alone. "Not much else is known about Omon. But a lot of bad shit happens to him." That he's a plot device made him not all that interesting to me. The moon rhapsodies were lovely, reminding me of the lyrics of Tom Waits. His eyes are saucers, and empty ones.

My favorite part of the book is when Omon talks to another guy on the ship who is really into Pink Floyd. The way he went all quiet when learning that Omon had had the unattainable Floyd record of his dreams. I could sense his heart fall into his feet. Dima quizzed the kid on what it sounded like, although the second hand listening experience was as if a ghost were watching a live person eat their favorite meal. "So what Pink Floyd did you listen to?" His persistence was pure obsessed fan. I thought he was my kind of guy. I used to have this dystopian model held up in my mind of poor Soviet inhabitants clinging to their precious Phil Collins cassette tapes. Another guy on the ship would shout into the intercom that Pink Floyd weren't any good. Not to rock the boat Omon crosses the river in paved in government issued reaper coins. It is as bad as a Genesis best of hit reissued for one new song. His classroom globes earth's view doesn't rock his world. I wondered how he couldn't have seen the beauty in the blackness of space. Weightless, and love handled senior officers shouting into an intercom couldn't make the dark side of the moon any less yours than what you could feel between you and between it. Omon hears the roar of the crowd. Blast off and lift off and.... don't fly.

 He said a lot of other complicated things, but what I remember most vividly is an image that struck me as amazingly poetical: a weight hanging on a chain makes a clock work. The moon is such a weight, the earth is the clock, and life is the ticking of the gears and the singing of the mechanical cuckoo.

The sequence in the school space camp that was the punishment for Mitiok's destruction of the aircraft model was another mesmerizing part of the book. Crawling on the linoleum floor in a gas mask. Time stopped, sweat poured down their faces like tears. The senseless bureaucratic crap to shovel down with their macaroni star arts and crafts lives. But when he gets into space and can't see what is right in front of him I didn't care as much about what was handed to him, no matter how shitty.

Through the film of my tears the earth was blurred and indistinct, and it seemed to be suspended in a yellowish void; I watched its surface draw closer from out of this void as I squirmed my way towards it, until the walls that were passing in on me parted and the brown tiles of the floor flew up to meet me.