Rating: 3/5

I am really struggling with how to rate this. Let me explain. 

This is the first book I have read where the thought occurred to me that it ought to come with a trigger warning. I'm not really the type that assigns trigger warnings to my books. Could be due to genre selection, it doesn't occur to me, or generally I don't feel knowledgeable enough to assign a warning for someone else, subjectively. However. There are some themes in this book that took me by surprise and I would hate for someone who may have experienced molestation to read this without warning. Especially, in light of how the characters treat repeated molestation. Also, there are vague references to spousal abuse and one overt instance where the husband slaps the wife, unexpectedly.

I heard about this on IG. I loved the pretty cover and photo placement. The bookstagrammer gave the impression it was about an idyllic summer before the war with cousins. THEY DIDN'T READ THE BOOK. (I'm quite put out by this betrayal.) It's absolutely not an idyllic summer and the book covers the entire war years and after as the characters make their way to the funeral of one of their own. 

Themes you should know about: attempted suicide, child molestation, spousal abuse, infidelity (if that bothers you in a book), war themes, sexual promiscuity, underage sex, demeaning comments towards women. It's clearly not about one last summer at the house with the camomile lawn as the blurb in the back of the book promises. 

Another point of contention: Sophy is spelled with a "y" throughout the text. Yet in the blurb on the back her name is spelled "Sophie". It seems rather big miss on proofreading for error. 

SPOILERS BELOW: 

I gave it three stars because it was well written. Though some of the themes made me uncomfortable, I was also drawn into the story hoping to find some redemptive qualities in the characters. Sex is a major theme. It starts out with the older cousin, Oliver, nineteen and freshly returned from the Spanish Civil War, being picked up from the train station by his cousin, Calypso. He promptly asks her if he can "f*ck her". She calmly demurs stating she plans on marrying for money and needs to remain a virgin. That really set the tone for the rest of the book. References to erections, a ten year old without knickers on and her bare bum, a flasher, Oliver's sexual desperation to sleep with his cousin, Uncle Richard repeatedly molesting young girls, a composer sleeping with a 16 year old because he was distraught, same composer having an affair with Helena calling her "phlegm" as his term of endearment... etc. I think the composer literally sleeps with every female character in the book. But the age of 16 is his threshold. Just messed up and so casually mentioned without any real stance on the wrongness of what was going on. 

Here is what made me irate: 

Uncle Richard repeatedly molesting young girls. It comes out that he sticks his hands up their skirts (maybe more but it isn't talked about). He confesses this to Calypso when she is in her twenties and had already experienced his attention when younger. He knows the wrongness but can't help himself. She sweeps it under the rug and then asks him to be her baby's godfather. (WTF.) Later in the book, she and Sophy compare notes and realize he did it to both of them. They then hurry to catch up to him as he's with two younger girls walking ahead of them. Then his wife mentions she knows he does this and was hoping his mistress, Monika, had cured him of it. Richard just mentions that Monika offered to shave herself bare for him. Just the casual acceptance of it is horrifying. I know this was during a time period where it wasn't talked about or hidden. But that doesn't make it right nor acceptable. And clearly Sophy has suffered psychologically from the abuse. 

Hector abusing Calypso. Several vague references to his violence towards her when he drinks. And he also slaps her across the face suddenly in a conversation where she was disagreeing with him. She accepts it as his due. Other characters know about it, yet nothing is done or said. 

It's a book full of intensely flawed characters with no redemptive qualities. I can't recommend it. I didn't get much out of it and didn't find it to be an enjoyable read.