Rating: 4/5

I suppose there comes a time when a writer reaching a certain age looks warily around at the nearest care home for those of advanced years and sees a place of incarceration and failing memory. Instead of seeing the staff as underpaid, over worked and poorly trained, yet always doing their best, the author imagines an authoritative prison camp commanded by an overbearing matron who loves nothing better than humiliating the inmates. For me having Shangri-La meeting that stereotype of mistreatment of the elderly is the only drawback to this novel. Other than that it is a wonderfully simple story of believable characters coping with trying times.

When Arthur Stevens' long lost father turns up one day it affects everyone in the family. Popsicle, as he's known, deserted his wife and son when he was a young man, leaving Arthur with a deep hurt and a distrust of the man. Arthur's wife and daughter know nothing of the history and can only see a lonely old man descending into dementia, so they take him in to be cared for. The author introduces the reader to the intricacies of the relationships piece by piece, so that even Arthur can eventually see that Popsicle has had his own harsh history.

The crux of the story comes when Popsicle has to be admitted into the Shangri-La care home after suffering a mild stroke and Cessie, Arthur's daughter, is able to find out where Popsicle had been living. Through that she is able to unravel the details of his past, part shameful and part heroic. Sadly what follows is the "escape" from Shangri-La, which brings a moving and beautifully told story of family into the world of an amiable, mildly amusing sitcom of misadventures among a group of pensioners. 

It doesn't quite work and for the first time in the story sentiment creeps in with tears, much hugging and forgiveness all round. It is a happy ending which kills off all the emotion that had been gradually building in an expert combining of the views of old and young and the different generations of family experience.