Rating: 3/5

An uneven marriage of fable and character study.

"The Spider's House" is Bowles's third book, though it reads a bit more like a first book, what with a central character who stands in for the author, a lot of discussion of personal philosophy, a flabby structure, and all of this overwhelmed by a story that is too rooted in symbolism.

Which is not to say that it's a bad book, necessarily: better than his fourth and final novel, though no where near as good as his first two or many of his short stories. There are some acute insights into the two main characters, John Stenham and Amar, and some well crafted passages. But these cannot save the book entirely, either.

The story starts out--as numerous commenters have noted--almost like a Graham Greene story, a high-end novel of espionage, with Stenham being escorted to his Moroccan hotel amid growing political restiveness. And there are fragments of such a novel, the ex-patriates and travelers holed up in the hotel that is increasingly isolated as political rebellion becomes increasingly violent and partisans fight with each other.

There is an escape from the city, Fez, and sneaking back in; there are threatening thugs and shadowy figures of unknown sympathies. There is a love affair made more exciting by the threats to life.

But this is a Bowles story, and his primary interest--as he says in the preface, and in the opening parts of the book, is not primarily politics. The problem is, it's not quite clear what his primary interest is, ad the book seems to serve too many purposes.

After the opening prologue, focused on Stenham, the novel turns to a long section on Amar, at least a quarter of the book, maybe more. He's a good character, Amar, and this section is a bravura performance in some ways, as Bowles seeks to represent the viewpoint of a young, devoutly Moslem adolescent who has lived his life under the subjugation of the French and is starting to chafe against his lack of control, and embrace a desire for vengeance in many forms.

The section, though, has no real organizing backbone, and the paragraphs are particularly long by Bowles's standard. A lot of his stories are without--or with little--dialogue, but this one focuses so intently on Amar's mind that Bowles seems to get a bit lost. Long stretches seem to be showing off, or unnecessary.

Which feeds back into the story of Stenham, who is very much stand-in for Bowles himself, an American writer in love with North African culture, hoping it won't change and realizing it is: that the ousting of the French will not bring back the Medieval culture he romantically valorizes, but set it on a different path to modernity. Here, Bowles is criticizing his own ingenuousness.

This criticism is in another fairly long section, as we meet with Stenham, some British ex-patriates, and a French-American woman making lives for themselves in Morocco, living off wealth and as disconnected from the surrounding culture as they want to be. Only Stenham and the woman, Lee, really like the aesthetic features of North Africa, and only Stenham has bothered to learn the language and something of the culture. The section focuses on the picayune contests among the group, but without the pay-off that comes in his earlier novels, The Sheltering Sky and Let It Come Down.

Even as the story catches up with the prologue, the The two Brits mostly are there only as scenery. They disappear soon enough, having performed minor plot functions, and without consequence. The weak attraction between Stenham and Lee is mostly a set-up for later in the book, without ay real interest here. As I say, there are some insights in Stenham, especially as Bowles seems to deconstruct his own beliefs, but for the most part the characters remain flat. There's none of the typical Bowlesian oddness, but neither is there much work investing them with even usual characteristics. To the extent that they work at all in the story, it is mostly t set at odds two different philosophical viewpoints, one a kind of bleeding-heart liberalism and one a rootless Romanticism at war with itself.

Soon enough the stories merge, and Lee, Stenham, and Amar join together and leave Fez as the violence becomes unbearable, and the fruitlessness of vengeance and violence makes itself known, at least in vague forms, to Amar. Here, the mountains away from Fez, they get a chance to touch something like Stenham's Romantic notion of Moroccan civilization, but they are also confirmed outsiders, and Stenham knows it will all change soon enough.

Amar makes his way back to the city, which sets the stage for the final section. He is confronted by the nationalists who want to modernize the nation--and secularize Islam--both to his horror. He sees the worthlessness of vengeance, and merely wants to reunite, again, with his family: harsh, in its way, but a model of Islam, too, unreconstructed by modernism. Here is where the book's title and epigraph come through: the nationalists are building a house on something other than the Koran, and it, like the spider's house, will be fragile--that is taken from a passage of the Koran. The spider's house also a web--this seems to be Bowles's addition--that has netted victims, and trapped the country.

The ending of the novel proceeds not from the characters, but works only on a symbolic level. (Bowles has written some fables, most notably "The Hyena," but even in it, the animal characters were more alive than Stenham and Lee are here.) Lee and Stenham meet up with Amar, and he wants them to take him to his family, which has decamped outside of Fez. Throughout the story, and prominently in the preface, Bowles used automobiles to symbolize the governing of statehood, and so there is a sense in which Amar wants Stenham, who alone understands and valorizes the true, Moslem, medieval North Africa that his family--alone--lives--Amar wants Stenham to drive him home: to make the un-modern Morocco.

But Stenham has hooked up with Lee--who has seen him in a new light, come to understand his hesitations as he has overcome those same stutterings: he has rejected that Romantic notion. He has agreed to live with a modern, Westenr woman, a kind loathed by Amar as brazen and against Islam. Stenham has left, and so cannot meet Amar where he needs to be met. And so he leaves Amar, on the side of the road--which makes no sense for Stenham as a character, and even less so for Lee to agree to it, but is done in the service of the symbol, the fable.

It's an awkward ending to an awkward book.