Rating: 3/5

Despite all the awards and claims, this is probably going to be a fundamentally disappointing book to anyone who is not a dedicated literature major.

Admittedly, it is only the first colume of an ambitious tetralogy but such a volume should make you want to read the next in sequence. My instinct was not to waste a mature life by doing so.

So what is wrong here? There is no doubt that it is well crafted (though with all the introspective confusions that seem to be de rigueur with the late twentieth century literary crowd) and it comes alive at moments.

Crowley can write exceptionally well when he wants to write well but the passages of lucidity are often subsumed in something that clearly demands four books, too much concentration and a lot of trust on the part of the reader.

In the end, the attraction of the book has to come down to the personality of the reader. It certainly can't be regarded as a classic fantasy but more an elaborate fiction about the concept of literary fantasy.

The literary component is well within the East Coast tradition of baby boomer narcissism and the fantasy element mere wistful posturing based on not having the courage to think the world other than it is without caveats.

It is a case of having one's cake and eat it perhaps - guardedly to embrace the fantasies of the past as if they were new discovered lands and yet embed oneself in a fictional working out of one's own life through literary evasion.

The book suffers from its era. The esoteric material that seems so exciting in 1987 is now widely available and in more interesting form on the 21st century internet. Few educated people now find Bruno or Dee an utter surprise.

Similarly, the gentle naivete of the baby boomer generation with its yearning for safe fantasy now looks more like a self-regarding irresponsibility whose effects have been dumped on their children and grand-children.

We start with Esalen and (at our best) with Martin Luther King and we end up with Hillary Clinton, perpetual warfare and low level economic gloom. This was the world the evasive fantastics made.

Wistful esotericism is the wrong sort of fantasy, an evasion based on words, instead of a deep insanely existential engagement with the other or a pragmatic facing off of the world geared to action.

Still, those of a literary cast of mind who have no sense of the fantastic - though every fiction is no more than a mental projection masquerading more or less as the 'real' - might find this an easy path to some otherkin thinking.

Personally, I would not dabble around the edges - I would leap straight into the radical fantastic and give up 'raffine' literary quality for more direct immersion in subversive thoughts and experiences.