Rating: 5/5

Some people may have seen the film loosely based on this book, I read this aloud to my daughter, who realised she had seen the film but as it turned out the book is quite different to the film.

Set in the Moonacre valley, a young girl who has recently been orphaned comes to live with her uncle who is Sir Merryweather owner of a wonderful house. When Maria is shown up to her room she discovers it has a tiny door with a tiny silver horse shoe knocker, only big enough for herself to go through. As with many parts of this book, the description of her room is wonderful and would really have captured my imagination as a child. We get to meet the various characters in the story and hear their stories which all interweave throughout the book.

Personally I wasn't so interested in the historical family feuds and good verses evil elements of the book but there was much we really loved. The animal characters in this book were wonderful. Wrolf who is Sir Merryweather's faithful hound who has been around for centuries and is large enough for Maria to ride upon  who is later revealed to actually be a lion an extra clever cat who has an ingenious way of communicating and Serena a hare saved from a trap that lives happily with the other animal companions and comes with them on adventures, and Perriwinkle the pony who comes inside for celebrations. We loved how appreciated these animal friends were, and I really liked the part when being chased up a cliff Maria who thought Wrolf had deserted them sees him waiting at the top so she can ride off on him stops to kiss him on the nose before escaping. We loved the way these animal friends were treated as members of the family and when treats were bought back for the human family members the animals were given some too.

The detailed descriptions were wonderful, the vocabulary was really good, the feeling of magic in the book and an enjoyable final chapter that told you what happened in the years following. I was suprised that Maria married at 14 yrs, although she chose this I would rather she was older but I suppose as this was set in the 1840s this could have been something that would have happened then. There are many times in the book I saw parts that had perhaps influenced others I have known and loved. I thought that Wrolf was reminiscent of  Aslan and another part mentions a yew tree man that she had been afraid of had now lost it's evil feeling, which reminded me of the children of Green Knowe, and it was interesting to read this knowing it was a childhood favourite of JK Rowling. 

 It's a pity that a unicorn is shown on the cover because it isn't revealed until page 238 that the little white horse is in fact a unicorn. 

A very absorbing book with wonderful animal characters and a subtle magic feel that was very enjoyable escapism!