Rating: 4/5

Read after seeing Peter Hitchens recommend it. Very good and provides insight into today's "Russia problem."

"By Western estimates, the Kremlin spends about 5–6 percent of its gross national product on health care, compared to 7 percent in America." Hedrick Smith, The Russians, p. 78. (I think we're currently over 17 percent!)

""Cynicism," observed a disillusioned mathematician, "is the ultimate method of control."" P. 498. 

"Nina Voronel told me about Andrei Sinyaysky, the brilliant Jewish satirical writer who settled in Paris after coming out of the Soviet labor camps where he had been sentenced for publishing works abroad. Someone had asked Sinyaysky, a man who had become the symbol of dissidence, which he found harder—his first six months in the camps or his first six months in Paris. "The first six months in Paris," Sinyaysky replied. "When I was in the camps, I was still in Russia." To which another Jewish intellectual who had also just emigrated to New York appended the shrewd observation that "people like Si-nyaysky, and there are many of us. left Russia not really looking for Israel or the West, but for Russia without a police state"" p. 488.

"Perhaps one reason that Westerners do not grasp such feelings and so readily assume that Russians are "like us" is that Russian life offers no obvious tourist exotica—women in saris or kimonos, figures of Buddha in temples, camels on the desert—to remind the outsider that here is alien culture, one which did not pass through the Renaissance, Reformation, and the era of constitutional liberalism which shaped the West. But here is a culture that absorbed Eastern Orthodox Christian-ity from Byzantium, endured Mongol conquest and rule, and then developed through centuries of czarist absolutism with intermittent periods of opening towards the West followed by withdrawal into conti-nental isolation. That pattern was repeated again and again. The forays into the West brought some changes but did not fundamentally dilute the strong authoritarian strain in the Russian body politic in any lasting way. If anything, Western innovations were simply used to reinforce Russian methods." P. 507.