Rating: 4/5

This has a couple of my warm favorites in the genre, stories I'll re-read for comfort and relaxation. Not all the stories are excellent, of course, and they're all short, but overall, it's a solid set of regencies.

It's interesting to read them in comparison to modern regencies, which are far racier. I'm not against sex in my reading, but something about having in regencies bugs me, given the real restrictions on social interaction in the period. 

Misteltoe and Folly by Sandra Heath: Cute enough, but a little bland. Classic trope; she rejected him years ago to marry someone else rich to save her family/home/something, and he's now rich and resents the rejection, but still loves her. Lifted out of total boredom by the complete idiocy of the 'other woman', who seems to believe that a serial cheater will change just for her. 

The Christmas Cuckoo by Mary Joe Putney: Lovely. Returning soldier with common name comes home to controlling matriarch because he's inherited the title. He rejects her micromanagement and, while escaping, is accidentally brought home by the heroine because her brother's best friend shares the hero's name. Everything turns out well, of course. The characters are kind and intelligent and no one has to be an idiot for the plot to work. 

The Best Christmas Ever by Mary Balogh: Another 'rejected hero', but in this version, he's got a 6 year old daughter with selective mutism from watching her mother drown. The heroine is a bit Fanny Price, but otherwise, it's nice and sweet.

Home For Christmas by Melinda McRae: Returning prodigal son befriends the left-alone-for-the-holiday governess, they fall in love in two days. Or as close as may be. This one is lifted by the fact that he's become a thriving merchant based in Salem Mass and he's offended that the woman he's fallen for is thought of as lesser just because she's got to work for a living. Pleasantly forward thinking, without the weird Modern Morals thing that became really common for a while.

the Dark Man by Edith Layton: Great idea - the hero's known for always doing the 'correct thing', and somehow this pisses off his fiance, the heroine, so she dumps him. He pretends to be unconcerned, but is (of course) quite distressed. But then he hares off to after her and covers himself in soot to be a 'first footer' on NYE and she (of course) forgives him. Somehow, it just didn't gel for me. I never really get a sense that the male character gets what the problem is.

Anyway. Cute stories, decently told. Good for spending a short bit of time reading.