Rating: 3/5

The short-short version of what became my review: A gripping spy thriller that brings back all that Cold War Nostalgia; but Tom Clancy has obviously never met a lesbian before in his life.

---

Perhaps it goes without saying, but Tom Clancy's work is not high literature. He will never rank up there with Ernest Hemingway [1] or David Foster Wallace or Angela Carter. He'll be published long after his death as an historical literary study, a snapshot of late-stage Cold War Paranoia--but those are elective seminars in the History annex, and not part of the upper-division English rubric. That is totally fine though; this is why we bother cracking the covers on a Tom Clancy novel--for the thrill ride that is his particular flavor of military/political techno-thriller. His schtick is to razzle-dazzle his readers [2] with the nitty-gritty details of this or that weapon (real or hypothetical) and to go on tangents that involve world history as told through the lens of the Military-Industrial complex and/or to speculate on (then) contemporary socio-political machinations as told through the lens of world history as told through the lens of the Military-Industrial complex. We're not in it for the metaphors, we're in it for the bombs. And the lasers.

My first exposure to Clancy was in the late-80s or early-90s, starting with 
  Red Storm Rising
 and working my way through his books. At some point between ages 10 and 14, I read The Cardinal of the Kremlin. [3] Having re-read RSR back in 2006, I thought it might be worth re-reading another Tom Clancy book. A re-read 20 years in the making, I thought to myself. I had only two memories of this book, one vague [4] and one specific [5], and thought that, if nothing else, at least it would be like reading a book for the first time.

So I borrowed my Dad's paperback and queued it up for a January read. [6] My vague recollection (footnote #4, vide infra) turned out to be pretty close--so at least that much was memorable, but I'd forgotten some of the other depth. Though calling it "depth" is maybe too generous? What Clancy does with this book is go bonkers with the espionage and counterintelligence business. He goes out of his way to include every facet: the analysis and speculation, the field operations, agents, double-agents, counter agents, double counter agents, spy satellites, submarines, extractions, kidnapping, disguises, botched missions, and the kind of at-the-highest-levels manifestations of what can only be boiled down to extortion. It's all in there.

And/but I had completely forgotten about the whole sub-plot with "the Archer" and all the Afghan mujahideen stuff. The spy junk that makes up 70-80% of the book is great--but it would have been a completely two-dimensional arc. It helps to be reminded that the conflicts between the super-powers did not take place in a vacuum, and what was it that Archimedes said about long-enough levers?

But there was also a huge let-down here. The big Act Two climax that bridges us into those closing chapters had a bizarre and almost nonsensical setup. Clancy presents us with Bea Taussig who works in the administrative staff at the Tea Clipper project and is a lesbian who has fallen in love with Candace Long, one of the scientists on the project who happens to be engaged to the brilliant lead scientist on the project, Alan Gregory. On the surface, the whole "secret unrequited love" bit is not all together awful or implausible. What's awful about it is that it seemed hastily tacked on to give her a motivation for her treason--only it doesn't explain it all. There is a bunch of narration in there about how Bea dislikes Alan Gregory, and how her friend Candace can do better--but it's all framed pretty hetero-normatively: as though Bea were simply a prissy spoiled brat who looked down on "the geek", and that same narration is lacking any sort of outward disdain for men in a general sense. [7] But even if an outward disdain for men in a general sense were a good marker for us that Bea were a lesbian (and I'm saying that it's not) then we still have the problem of motivation--because why would she sell state military secrets to the Soviets? to a totalitarian regime--even one in the middle of liberalizing itself--that had a history and an active policy of sending queers to labor camps? Was it then just the money? If she were motivated simply by the money, I could get by on that--I could give Clancy a pass. Now: clearly Bea is not motivated by ideology (because there is no evidence in the text for that, and because we're assuming that she is motivated first by the money) and maybe-just-maybe she is motivated by the excitement that comes with the danger of spying (there's some evidence in the text for that, too), but we still have that long last-mile to bring us up to that final mark where she assists in Gregory's kidnapping. Suddenly we go from "spoiled materialistic chick with a mis-guided sense of adventure" to "lovesick-to-the-point-of-delusional lesbian accomplice kidnapper"; passing microfilm with state secrets in the dressing room is one thing, but assisting in a KGB-sponsored kidnapping is quite another. Especially since the follow-on was for her to start awkwardly groping Candace (with Federal agents right downstairs) not 24 hours after Gregory is reported missing. And even if you were still on board after that, you have to then accept that she would completely fold/break-down and spill everything to the Feds about her crimes. Right: the woman who was in it for the thrill, the woman who didn't bat an eyelash when the KGB proposed an on-American-soil kidnapping, was going to hastily and predatorily move in on her distraught friend, and then (and then!) just spill everything? I'm sorry but I'm just having too tough a time making that leap with you there, Tom.

The whole Bea-Candi-Gregory not-quite-love-triangle bit aside, the novel was a fun read and full of every kind of semi-kinda/sorta-mostly realistics it-could-happen spy business you could want. It certainly tickled my Cold War Nostalgia.

---

[1] And I don't even particularly like Hemingway.

[2] Largely males ages 18-65? Largely white? Largely dudes who self-report their favorite movies as "Top Gun" and/or "Rambo" and/or "Red Dawn"?

[3] Yes, I was effectively a child.

[4] I knew it was about spies, and SDI lasers.

[5] I remembered the scene where Mary Pat Foley scribbled "Let's give these microphones a hard-on!!"

[6] I had to get through 
  Neanderthal
 and 
  The Untouchable
 before that, first.

[7] And/but/which would still not paint a picture of Bea as a lesbian, though that might have painted a picture of her as a lesbian as seen through the lens of the Conservative White Male. Maybe.