Rating: 3/5

Loving - 3 stars

I've only read the first novel, Loving, in this Green compendium - and have to say I'm left puzzled. Green is often talked of as a writer's writer but I'm not seeing where that label comes from. This book is gently stylised in that it's predominantly dialogue with a bare minimum of exposition or authorial intervention - but rather than that seeming to me to be modernist or experimental in making the old idea of an omniscient narrator disappear, it reminds me of the standard technique of drama, including scene switching and multiple conversations taking place at once with people misunderstanding and talking over each other.

Set during the second world war in a 'big house' in Ireland, there's a gesture towards the 'upstairs, downstairs' genre but Green doesn't seem overly interested in analysing class in any innovative way. A valuable ring disappears and reappears, the two young housemaids conduct love affairs as does the married daughter-in-law of the mistress, there are peacocks, and unrequited desires and some gentle fiddling of the household books and a drunken cook. Fear of a German invasion and what that might mean for the women is balanced by a fear of Irish Republicans. It all unrolls without urgency and the most vivid scene, replayed repeatedly, is of Mrs Jack being discovered naked in bed with her lover when the housemaid brings in the morning tea. 

In contrast to writers like Virginia Woolf (who published Green via her Hogarth Press), Katherine Mansfield or Jean Rhys, this is concerned with exteriors, not interiority: what people say and do is paramount, we don't know what they think or feel other than through these external actions. And the end is summed up with an ironic (?) they 'lived happily ever after' despite our eloping couple going to an England at war and suffering, it seems, the Blitz where Charlie will be called up on landing. 

I'm left puzzled both by what this book thinks it's doing and why Green aficionados adore him...