Rating: 4/5

We shall have nothing to say in regard to our own death

For a long time, this sentence had been going around and around in the aged maestro’s head

He did not dare write it down. He was afraid that consigning it to paper would make it real, with fateful consequences

He had dedicated his life to music — the least annoying of noises

He spent hours concentrating on one object. He liked to imagine that by touching something, his morbid thoughts would dissipate

Holding on to an object would give him earthly gravity, specific weight

It was a seal

A seal of crystal. Perfectly circular and perfectly whole

We are all both victims and executioners of the short-term memory

Long-term memory is like a castle built of great blocks of stone

Could this round seal be the key to his own personal dwelling? Not the physical house where he was living in Salzburg

Could it be the original space, the intimate, inviolable, irreplaceable circle that contains us all but at the price of exchanging sequential memory for an initial memory that is complete in itself and has no need to consider the future?

Inez. He repeated the woman’s name. Inez

In the crystal, seal the maestro hoped to find the impossible reflection of both: Inez and a return to a time before the years prohibiting his love

Light in silence. Lyrics without voice

Seal, create thyself! And the seal was

Music of the seal, music of the spheres, the celestial symphony that regulates the movement of all times and all spaces, never-ending, simultaneous

I betrayed my art, I deceived everyone who depends on me, the audience, the orchestra, and most of all, the composer

The architect of Salzburg had invented a tangible nature for a city filled with the intangible sculpture of music

Between the city and him, between the world and him, existed this object from the past, which did not vacillate before the course of time but resisted and reflected it

Was it dangerous, a crystal seal that perhaps contained all the memories of life yet was as fragile as they?

The crystal seal would be his living past

It would survive him

Almost hoping to transform life into an inanimate object: a thing

Beyond death

Memory was something that was distilled, transformed, with each new experience

The temptation to love the crystal seal so much that he would destroy it forever with the power of his fist

He looked at himself in the mirror and searched in vain for some trace of the young French orchestra conductor renowned throughout Europe, who when the war began broke with the fascist seductions of his occupied country and left to conduct in London

To love Inez, to love her to death

Growing old is a crime. You can end up with no identity and no dignity, sitting around in a nursing home with other old people as stupid and disinherited as you

What are they playing in my honor?

The Damnation of Faust by Hector Berlioz

Black horses racing through the skies

Tonight in London we are rehearsing during a blackout

Chorus of voices that will silence the bombs

Cry out like animals lost in the forest

The best way to hide something is to leave it out in the open. If they come after us, thinking we’ve disappeared, they would never look for us in the most obvious place

The sign of a good musician is to know how to listen to many things at the same time, and to pay attention to them all

The war changed the times of everything

Music is the image of the incorporeal world

Sound box of a place without time

Calendars are superfluous

A musician collects too many things

Piles of scores, notes, sketches, costume drawings, reference books

What happens on that coast is a battle

The land defends itself against the sea with its ancient stone

For me you have no name or nationality

Who crossed my path one night. A woman without age

The simplicity of the house, the rough whitewashed brick. The few books in the living room — most of them French classics, some Italian literature, several editions of Leopardi, of Central European poets. A broken-down sofa. A rocking chair. A fireplace

Voices flourish, if we know how to listen

He always liked long, mysterious disappearances

Envy is poisonous

Jealousy is generous — we want the other person to be ours

He lived through me and I through him

The universe was alive in every moment and in every object. From a stone to a star

Does time appear and reappear the way the tide rises and falls so punctually at two opposite points on the earth? Is history replicated and reflected in the opposing mirror of time, only to disappear and reappear by chance?

Listen to the sea, listen with the ear of the music I conduct and you sing

Music is the midpoint between nature and God

Don’t gaze off into the distance like that. There’s nothing there

There’s an island hidden in the fog. There’s nothing

When you don’t have any information about someone you love you imagine him in every possible situation

The important thing about him wasn’t the name, but his instinct. Do you understand? I have transformed my instinct into art. I want music to speak for me

The freedom he wanted was the search for freedom

There is no destiny without instinct?

Where does inspiration come from, energy, the unexpected vision you need for singing, composing, conducting

He chose the cage himself and has confused it with freedom

It’s possible to imagine anything

I wonder whether men really love us; what they want is to compete with other men and beat them

Pictures sometimes lie

A photo doesn’t live and die

Our memory of most things lasts no longer than seven seconds or seven words

To me the past is the other place

Everything seems primed for the farewell. Road, sea, memory

The face of the beautiful blond youth was his heritage. A lost country. A forbidden country

Forget and remember, facing the sea, there will be two moments in your head difficult to tell apart

He had always loved people who were open to surprise. Nothing bored him more than predictable behavior

In contrast, a spider and its web: doing the same thing but never repeating… It was like a repertoire

Berlioz possessed a boundless power to astonish

Maybe he could compare Inez’s body to opera itself. Making visible what the absence of the body — body we remember and body we desire — gives us visibly

The music would fulfill its eternal mission of hiding certain objects from view in order to deliver them to the imagination. Would music steal words as well, not merely vision? Was music the great mask of paradise, the true fig leaf of our shames, the final sublimation — beyond death — of our mortal visibility: body, words, literature painting? Was only music abstract, free of visible ties, the purification and illusions of our mortal bodily misery?

Music is an artificial portrait of human passions

Music is artificial. But human passions aren’t

The passions we keep inside can kill us, blow up inside us. Song liberates them, and finds the voice that characterizes them. Music would be a kind of energy uniting the primitive, latent emotions you would never display. The melodic tone of the voice, the movement of the body in dance, liberates us. Pleasure and desire come together. Nature dictates tones and cries: these are our oldest words, and that is why our first language is an impassioned song

Imagine music as an inversion of time

Emotionally naked. Slave to a memory. The memory of another youth

The boy who had disappeared from the photograph

Singing beside the celestial spirits

The postponement of pleasure is a principle of true eroticism, at once practical and sacred

There are so many possibilities in an unknown future

Tt was because of forgetting that you and I came together, the memories of a man and a woman who meet again are not the same, one remembers some things the other has forgotten, and the other way around, and at times we forget, because the memory is painful, and we must believe that what happened never happened, we forget what is most important because it may be the most painful

Tell me what I have forgotten

Maybe it’s only the body that ages, imprisoning youth forever within that impatient specter we call soul

They knew about the professional careers, both brilliant, both independent of each other. Now, like Einstein’s parallel lines, they would finally meet at the juncture of the inevitable curve

Love might bind her to a fate that wasn’t hers and, maybe, selfishly, not his either

Who knows exactly if the words in a memory were really said or only thought, imagined, spoken under the breath

We’re fading away like ghosts

There is never a story without its ghost

A failed love affair must immediately be put out of mind

This affair wasn’t over — however often they both might say not only that it had ended but maybe in the deepest sense that it had never begun? 

What was it between them that thwarted the continuation of what had been and prevented the occurrence of what never was?

The first passion is never recaptured. On the other hand, regret stays with us forever. Remorse. Lament. It turns to melancholy and lives in us like a frustrated ghost. We know how to silence death. We do not know how to quiet sorrow

Passion is gone

Don’t worry. Everything is in order

The second story is a different life

Whose existence you’re denying?

I wanted to make her my eternal, my one thought

Now there is no warning, there are no fears. Now there is the fullness of love in the instant

Now whatever may happen in the future must await, patient and respectful, the next hour of the reunited lovers

CARTAGENA, COLOMBIA, JANUARY 2000