Rating: 3/5

The place is Ithaca, a fictional small town in California's San Joaquin Valley. The year is 1943 and World War II is on-going. The Macauley family, just like any other families, is taking the brunt of war: the father is dead, the eldest son Marcus is in the war front, the mother is working in a factory, the daughter has left the school and is looking for work, the 14-y/o Homer has taken the job as a telegraph messenger to help support the family including his younger brother, the 4-y/o Ulysses.

This children's book is semi-autobiographical. I've read several children's book and this is the first one that is mostly based on real experiences of the author. William Saroyan (1908-1981) was an Armenian American dramatist and writer. Ithaca was actually Fresno, California where his parents settled upon arriving from Turkey (under Ottoman Empire). Saroyan was born in Fresno but when he and his sister lost their father when Saroyan was only 3 years old, they were placed in an orphanage in Oakland, California. Years later, when their mother Tahooki got a job in a canning factory, she got them back they were all reunited in Fresno. Saroyan dedicated this book to his mother.

This 192-page book is divided into 39 anecdotal short stories told from the points of view of the family members. Since they are based on actual events, they are very engaging and interesting. Three years ago, prior to my reading of John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath, the image of the USA in my mind was all milk and honey. It was a shock to learn that there was a part of the American history when people experienced starvation and hopelessness. I am talking about the Dust Bowl, the Great Depression of 1939, etc. Here, in this book The Human Comedy, the setting is still California. While the Macauley family is not as poor as the Joads, they belong to the second generation of poor illiterate immigrants from Europe so they struggle to make ends meet especially because of the on-going war.

Since this is a children's book, the language used is direct and simple, i.e., devoid of big words. The sentences are short and crisp. The stories are very insightful with most of them having either a moral lesson in the end or will leave something with you to ponder on. The example of the thought to ponder is the image of a black man waving at the 4-y/o Ulysses. Saroyan says that the image will be something that the small boy will remember forever. I wonder why: was it because California at the time was mostly composed of white people and a black man riding on a train waving at a 4-y/o white child was a rare event? Coming from an a non-American (I am an Asian), I am just curious.

Even if the book is composed of short stories, the plot is still complete and tight. I was engaged through and through and my jaw literally dropped in the end because of the twist. Very adept storytelling. Again, another proof that we should not discount children's books since they can still be interesting for us adults. This book has a bit of history and a bunch of lessons on how to be a good human being even if it says comedy in the title.