Rating: 3/5

My uncle took me fishing when I was a child. He did all the fishing while I just hung around, observing. During one such trip, I had a fishing rod in my hand but didn't want to catch anything. The thought of catching a live fish was unbearable. I was a fearful and imaginative child, prone to melodrama. And then it happened. I felt a strong tug on the rod. It was the worst experience of my life. I just stood there, frozen, unable to reel in the fish. My location felt like Amity Island, and the catch was no different from Jaws (I told you I was melodramatic). I was scared and felt sorry for the fish at the same time. Worst of all, people were staring at me. 

  

It was not my destiny to be a master fisherman. I wish Captain Ahab had come to the same realization as I did. His pride ultimately led to his downfall.

Moby Dick is the ultimate tale of man versus nature. What could be more formidable than a sperm whale, the ocean's largest predator? A being so powerful that not even the mighty orca, the ocean's most skillful killer, can defeat it. Who would dare hunt such a creature?

Humans.

  

The name orca comes from the Latin phrase Orcinus orca, which translates as 'of the kingdom of the dead.' Great white sharks have the word 'great' as part of their name. Then there are sperm whales. Couldn't they think of something more dignified? I understand the reason behind their naming, but I still find it ridiculous. Dark humor - instead of calling them sperm whales, they could have named them waxy whales or oil lamp whales.

Whaling was a highly lucrative business. Bloody and dangerous, but lucrative nonetheless. Told from the sailor Ishmael's perspective, the story follows Ahab, captain of the whaling ship Pequod, who embarks on a quest for vengeance against a giant sperm whale who maimed him. 

Ahab is a man who doesn't know when to quit. I would have noped out of there after the first encounter, but that's not Ahab. He's not like other girls. He wants to kill Moby Dick, no matter the cost. Despite the risks, Ahab's ego fuels his dangerous quest. He is consumed by his desire to defeat the white whale. 

I have mixed emotions about this novel. While I acknowledge that it's an important piece of literature, filled with metaphors and double entendres, it's not my cup of peppermint tea. 

  

Why was the whale called Dick? He's just swimming in the ocean, snacking on squid, sharks, and fish, minding his business. He sunk a few ships, but only because he was defending himself. Ahab is the 'Dick' of the story. 

I find the real story of Moby Dick much more fascinating than the fictional one. Moby Dick was inspired by a real-life white sperm whale named Mocha Dick, whose story is both fascinating and tragic. 

Is the ocean a harsh mistress, or are some people just foolish?

My advice would be to check the weather forecast before going sailing, avoid hunting giant marine mammals, wear sunscreen, and listen to Bobby Darin's "Beyond the Sea."

P.S. I want to give a shoutout to the Iberian orcas sinking yachts off the coasts of Spain, Portugal, and Morocco.