Rating: 5/5

I can't believe how few of my GR friends have Small World on their shelves. Of course, we all know what's wrong with the genre, and many people instinctively shy away from reading yet another novel by a lecturer at an English department, describing what it's like to be an English lecturer who's writing a novel. The first time you see someone try to crawl up their own ass, it's kind of interesting. The tenth time, you know in advance that they'll get stuck somewhere in their lower intestine, and come slithering out after a while, having learned the hard way that the sun doesn't shine out of that part of their anatomy. Enough already.

So, now that I've convinced you that I know exactly what you don't want to read, I will give you my word of honor that Small World isn't like that: what we have here is the exception that proves the rule! Instead of running the same tired old recursive formula, David Lodge had a better idea. As he tells you in the introduction, academics are today's clerics, and conferences are their pilgrimages. So, what would be more natural than an updated version of the Canterbury Tales? That, pretty much, is what the book is, and he's done a fine job. If Chaucer's read it, I'm sure he felt flattered.

The arrangement isn't quite the same; since it's a novel, or, to be exact, a Romance, all the stories are mixed up to some extent. None the less, you recognize the stock figures as they make their entrances. Among others, we meet the Graduate Student, the Plagiarist, the Publisher, the Publisher's Secretary, the Structuralist, the Wealthy Marxist, the Blocked Writer, the Professor Who Sleeps With His Students, and, last but not least, the Maiden Aunt. (Watch Sybil Maiden carefully. There's more to her than meets the eye). When I finally got around to reading Chaucer, I was quite surprised to discover how modern he is, and Lodge has no trouble at all in adapting him to the late 20th century. 

Just as with Chaucer, one of the first things you notice is that there's a lot of comic sex. Lodge's sex scenes really are very funny. My favorite was the bit where Fulvia attempts, not completely successfully, to show Morris how much fun bondage can be; in terms of low comedy, I thought this stood comparison with, for example, the ass-kissing scene from the Miller's Tale. I only have two criticisms to make concerning the sex. First, I didn't think he was quite as good as Chaucer at portraying strong women who are confident about their sexuality. I know almost nothing about the private life of either writer, but I get the impression that Chaucer was more of a ladies' man than Lodge, and that this may have something to do with it. Second, Lodge is, oddly enough, rather less filthy than his august predecessor. If you're concerned with accuracy in homage, or just like filth, this might bother you, but I was quite happy with his mildly sanitized version. Of course, Chaucer is one of the all-time greats at both strong, sexy women and amusing filth, so I'm not being very hard on Lodge when I say he isn't as good.

Again following Chaucer, the other main theme is social satire. Chaucer is displeased with the complacent, corrupt Church, and can be quite vicious; the Pardoner, in particular, gets a very rough ride. Lodge satirizes the world of academic literary theory, and this is the part of the book that I enjoyed most. He can also take people apart, as in his treatment of the Plagiarist. But most of the time, even though he enjoys showing us how ridiculous the academics are, he describes them and their bizarre society in loving detail, with a sympathy that leaves you amused rather than disgusted. They're bitchy, dishonest, vain, obsessed with smut, and generally far more interested in creating an impression than in actually understanding the books they keep talking about. None the less, you can't help loving them. I wish I could hang out with people like that! If you feel the same way, you're going to like Small World.