Rating: 4/5

Led through the rise and fall of what became Britpop, Harris's narrative often focused around the litmus of the Anderson, Frischmann, and Albarn triangle...until that Burnage fellows come around and revolutionize cock(ney) rock for a brief spell. 

The book does a great job framing British music in and around the Britpop scene, though it focuses too heavily on its central characters (Suede, Blur, Oasis, Elastica) when there's copy to be made about some of the outliers and coattail riders of the time. Sure, some print is reserved for Manswear but little more than mentions of bands such as Echobelly and Sleeper are made. Radiohead, P.J. Harvey, and some of the more likely shoegaze and pop acts of the time also crop up, but it would have done the book justice to frame those movements as well (such as Kula Shaker's psychedelia, Reef's surfer optimism, Jamiroquai's house and funk tributes, etc.). It could have also been well served to discuss how the Acid House movement of the late 80s that helped launch British indie music into the mainstream also began to resurface (notably, stuff like Space Monkey's "Sugarcane" and the like was bastardized Happy Mondays without the rocking drone). 

Yet Harris's book is rather complete. It doesn't even touch too hard on Blur's self-titled album other than to use it as the point when one of Britpop's biggest bands -- and arguably one of its inventors -- made their own move away from the genre realizing there was more fertile artistic journeys to travel. It all gets bogged down in heroin, a changing mainstream marketplace, and inevitably that, like all scenes that came before and have come since, will eventually eat itself by changing the game and then becoming hampered by their own rules. 

This was a quick, easy read that makes you long for the days when you could get into a posh downtown center in any major global metropolis for $350k and it not be the size of a closet. The music world moved on and there's still plenty of great music to be found despite the sad state of affairs in the mainstream, but the all-encompassing scenes that came with American Grunge and the UK's Britpop fascinations feel so far away and removed from our modern world despite being 20-25 years ago.