Rating: 2/5

Unlike Douglas Erwin's 
  Extinction
, which I read two months ago (and which also focuses on the end-Permian mass extinction event), this reads more like a memoir than a pop science book, in some ways. The primary focus of the book is the author's personal and professional journey in regards to his quest to solve the question of the extinction.

The end-Permian extinction is probably the most debated extinction. Just a few decades ago, scientists assumed all mass extinction events were gradual, happening over millions of years. But after the question of the end-Cretaceous extinction (dinosaurs' extinction) was solved by the father and son Alvarez team in the late 1980s, and it was revealed to be an asteroid impact that probably caused the extinction in a matter of just a few years. With that information in hand, some scientists began wondering whether other mass extinction events were also shorter in duration. The most hotly debated extinction is the end-Permean event, which killed off the mammal-like reptiles, including the titular Gorgons (huge saber-toothed carnivores). 

Ward, just as Erwin, devoted his career to solving this question. This book chronicles his search for evidence in the Karoo Desert of South Africa, causing his personal (family) life to suffer. I think Ward was trying to make this book, in part, of the nature of obsession, but it's something he just sort of repeats ("Why did I keep abandoning my toddler and my wife to fly halfway around the world to endure shitty living conditions and do hard labor chipping at rocks in a desert?") without really digging into it further, so that was unsatisfying. 

Other than the first few chapters, where Ward gives us the lay of the land of the extinction, not a whole lot of the book is related to the actual science. The exception is the final few chapters, where the author reveals his own hypothesis as to the cause: dropping ocean levels exposed sediment that oxidized in the air (i.e. it rusted--as evidenced by the vividly red rock found in that strata all over the globe), in doing so using up oxygen molecules in the air across the world. Oxygen levels dropped, carbon dioxide went up, and plants and animals struggled from the lack of oxygen. He posits that the reason dinosaurs' ancestors survived this extinction is because, like their offspring, the modern bird, dinosaurs had air sacs as well as lungs that allowed them to survive in low oxgyen (birds, for instance, can fly over Mt. Everest with seemingly no problem with the lack of oxygen). 

However, that entire theory is laid out in like, 3 pages of the book. It was rushed and didn't explain itself very well. I'd have given this a higher rating if the majority of the book had been dedicated to that, rather than constantly re-iterating how unpleasant it is to stay in crappy motels or roasting tents while on a dig.