Rating: 4/5

It is quite difficult to separate a person’s perceptions and preconceived notions from experiences that seem alien and unfamiliar. Divergent concepts and beliefs become a source of paralysis and combustion that blind and obfuscate the person’s judgment. The contemporary, western mind- unrestricted and fostered by liberal and radical principles- habitually turns a prejudicial eye towards anything that challenges the idea of individuality and freedom, rashly judging before trying to understand the source of variance. Through the advent of women suffrage and liberation, the world slowly began to change and with it, the perceptions of the populaces. Therefore, it has become a stark realization that in the Muslim world, the sharaf (honor) of the woman is preserved through the male population, the man of the household the warden of the family’s integrity. While the modern woman attempts to throw off the shackles of the patriarchal society, the Muslim woman must rely on the men to protect their honor, a value shaped through social perception rather than individual merit. The world expects uproar, yet in the Islamic community, patriarchal control is so deeply embedded that woman can only hope to transcend this grip through their imagination, their storytelling, a position that is familiar and yes, comfortable to their society. With the Islam religion the focus of existence, the source of variance is entwined to their way of life and beliefs.

The code of modesty is the ethic by which Muslim women live by. They are expected to be shy and quiet with their heads lowered and eyes downcast. By never crossing the threshold of their front door and leaving their domicile, the integrity of the family is maintained and the woman’s honor is secured, for the hearts of humanity are rapacious and the flesh ravenous. Thus, they become a captive of their own home out of fear of defamation and misguided observations. This is seen in Sa’diyya’s tale “The Birthmark,” in which the wife is fearful of leaving her home and inadvertently ruining her husband who is away, gambling on her integrity. In her book Behind Closed Doors, Monia Hejaiej declares that “famil[ies are] an instrument of socialization and control” (69). All the female knows is her family and from a young age, the code of modesty and patriarchal control is instilled. Women are an accessory, a supplement to the core, an annexed country reigned by her sovereign- the father, brother, or husband. The wife in the story’s birthmark is the catalyst for her husband’s woe. Through courage, shrewdness, and loyalty she redresses the wrong and brings balance to her domesticity. She is by no means a meek woman; she becomes the savior and the bearer of her family’s integrity. Yet, the tale’s moral is simple, a woman is raised to be prudent and chaste, to disgrace herself is to disgrace the family leading to total ruination. This moral no doubt shapes the inherent values of the women.

The veil, hair, and silence. The veil protects the woman from the licentious eyes of men, becoming a symbol of her modesty. Likewise, the woman’s hair is also covered, the volume and body of the uninhibited mane a source of enticement and desire. These two elements lead to yearning, a fire that smolders and menaces decorum. To the Muslim community, these two represent human sexuality which is a danger to society. These ideas are also seen in “The Birthmark,” where the men are seen gambling and talking about the woman of their lives and how their bodies are covered from head to toe, living cloistered within the walls of their homes. This suggestion influences and forms the minds of the females, modesty maintained by the veil and the casing of their hair. To even see a bit of skin on the body, much less a birthmark, is a great violation that shames and razes the domestic sphere. To the western mind, these elements are forms of control. Yet, to the Muslims, these are forms of protection, a safeguard of the family’s honor. And then, there is silence. A woman is expected to be quiet, even in the face of adversity, never voicing their anxiety and discontent, and they are to speak softly, their voice a “soft melody” (64). This muteness and softness soothes the home, negotiating an otherwise tempestuous relationship. Sa’diyya’s telling of “Ftaytma” disrupts the convention. She turns the expectation of silence towards the male when she lops off the tongue of a father-in-law, turning the table of control towards a male-controlled society. This turn of narration represents the storyteller’s transcendence of social conventions and preconceptions. Through Ftaytma, she rejects male control and takes the power for herself. Hejaiej proclaims, “We are born with sex but we become gendered” (83). This suggests that humanity is nurtured to be men or women, roles, expectations, and spheres shaped and cultured through social variance. When the female protagonists take on the role of men, such as in “Lulsha and ”The Birthmark,” the storyteller abandons the tenet and becomes a man, finding freedom if only for the duration of the tale.

Despite what the western world perceives of the Islam community, these codes have maintained the integrity of Muslim families. What we see as control, they see as protection. What we see as meekness, they see as modesty. One’s tenets are not the others, thus one cannot even begin to judge and admonish. In the end, all one can do is try to understand. Who are we to push our ideas and unrests upon them?