Rating: 5/5

This is a powerful and beautiful love story with a tremendous emotional impact. It is a book that stayed with me long after I had finished reading it.

Comanche Heart is the follow up to Catherine Anderson's much loved Comanche Moon and is often compared unfavourably with that book. I have, therefore, tried to be objective in my review judging the book on its own merits.

The story of Amy Masters and Swift Antelope begins in Comanche Moon when Amy is twelve and Swift sixteen. Having been abducted by a band of Comancheros and brutally raped, she is rescued by her cousin's Comanche husband, Hunter. He takes her back to the Comanche camp where she is befriended by a young warrior, Swift Antelope and, with his help, she gradually recovers from the terrible trauma – "He made her feel clean again, and whole." They become betrothed under Comanche law but then have to part, Amy to return to her family's' farm and Swift to join his people's fight for freedom. He promises Amy that he will come for her as soon as he is able.

Comanche Heart opens 12 years later and Swift has come to the Masters' farm to fulfil his long ago promise to Amy but learns from her stepfather that she died 5 years earlier of cholera. Heart-broken and, with nowhere to go, he becomes a drifter, adopting the name Swift Lopez. He soon gains a reputation as a gunslinger and joins a band of Comancheros. However, an incident involving their leader forces Swift to leave Texas and he travels to Wolf's Landing, Oregon, a small gold mining community, set up by his friend, Hunter. There, he is shocked but elated to find Amy very much alive. Having found her, he wants nothing more than to start a new life with he, but first he has to break down the protective shell she has built around herself.

I really felt for Swift when he constantly tried to regain Amy's trust with such determination and patience, only to suffer her scorn and constant rejection. The scene where he is humiliated in front of a classroom of children is truly heart-rending. I couldn't understand, at first, why he would put himself through all this. Later it is apparent that building a new life in Wolf's Landing with Amy is his last chance to escape his past which he knows will ultimately mean his death at the hands of someone who is faster on the draw - "Do you think I rode two thousand miles on a whim? I was running, dammit, running for my life!"

I love the way he tells Amy how much he loves her and wants her:

"That's an L, as in love, and I love you more than I'll ever be able to tell you with words. I want to tell you in other ways. In the way I kiss you. In the way I touch you. In the way I hold you. Won't you let me say it my way, just once?"

So romantic!!

When he discovers the terrible secret Amy has been keeping buried for so many years, he is willing to leave rather than cause her any more pain, knowing the possible consequences for him. This is where I really fell in love with Swift's character because he is willing to make such a great sacrifice for her.

I felt for Amy because of all she had suffered but I was so annoyed with the way she constantly spurned Swift. I wanted her to see beyond his outer appearance and recognise he was still the Swift she knew and loved and trust him enough to take a chance. Once I learned the shameful secret she had been hiding from everyone, her reactions to Swift and what he represented did make sense.

When Swift tells her he is leaving, I could feel the turmoil she is going through - this is what she wants but, without him, her life will be empty. It is such an emotional scene when Swift sees her running after him and she finally has to admit she loves him and wants him to stay.

The scene in which Swift first makes love to Amy is so beautiful and sensual, a testament to Catherine Anderson's wonderful writing.

There are some really very funny scenes in the book which help to relieve the tension. I particularly enjoyed the one where Amy is trying to evade Swift and climbs out of her kitchen window, only to get stuck half way. The dialogue between the two had me laughing out loud.

Catherine Anderson really impressed me with the emotional depth of her writing and I could fill a notebook with all the memorable quotes. I cannot recommend this book enough and it is definitely a keeper for me.

http://www.theromancereviews.com/view...

This review was originally written for The Romance Reviews