Rating: 4/5

When I took the Road Scholar course, "The Art of the English Murder Mystery," TRENT'S LAST CASE was cited as the novel that made the "story twist" popular. It was also famous for another concept that had been explored by other writers before such as Arthur Conan-Doyle in his Sherlock Holmes stories. Still, I will not mention more because it reveals a Huge Spoiler which I wish that I hadn't known going in ... although I also probably wouldn't have read it if the idea hadn't intrigued me so much.
 
TRENT'S LAST CASE was still a most enjoyable read, even knowing the "concept" beforehand. The amateur detective, Phillip Trent, would much rather spend his time painting. However, his eye for detail and his ability to put clues together to form a cohesive "whole" has made his services in solving mysteries sought after by others. In this case, it is a newspaper that wants him to provide his thoughts about a very high-profile death. Trent reminded me often of the Dorothy L. Sayers character, Lord Peter Wimsey. And, indeed, the mystery has many whimsical aspects that would be appreciated by fans of the two "Knives Out" movies.
 
Having very recently read THE GOLDEN AGE OF MURDER (a book I highly recommend to fans of classic detective fiction), I learned quite a bit about the writer, E.C. Bentley. He was a fascinating person who I'm certain I would have detested if I met him in person ... a feeling he would have certainly reciprocated. His obsessions, prejudices, and life choices found their way into his works with great regularity. In TRENT'S LAST CASE, these aspects would include his opinion of Sayers' writing and his obsessive love for a married woman. That latter theme would appear time and again.
 
It really isn't a Spoiler to mention that the book ends with a discussion between two friends condemning capital punishment. The argument is very one-sided, although it did contain considerable "food for thought."
 
If I'm remembering the details correctly, the title isn't accurate. Bentley would return to Trent in one of his late stories. However, the reception was generally poor, and it was apparent that Bentley's heart just wasn't in it. That doesn't diminish TRENT'S LAST CASE, however. I am very pleased to have read it.