Rating: 4/5

This is a great story demonstrating the power of talent and pressure, and I imagine it's a story that repeats every year thousands of times as children who are exceptional at something keep at that thing and parents push them harder at that thing until they themselves may feel emotions higher and lower than the children. Take these two snippets from this book:
David came out of the building with a toothy smile. I asked if he had won. He nodded yes and said something about Josh’s having fallen for a trap. Then Josh appeared, his face looking washed-out. He was attempting to be casual and trying not to cry, but he looked defeated, as if some of his life had been taken away. I put my arm around him, gave him a kiss and said that it didn’t matter. Later I realized that I repeated this a few times as if it were a question, until he nodded yes, it didn’t matter.
One would think that an eight- or nine-year-old could no more defeat a master than beat an NBA player in a game of one-on-one. But it is an unexplained and wondrous phenomenon that in chess, as well as in music and mathematics, a gifted child is capable of the creativity and genius of an exceptional adult. The parent of one gifted little boy said that when her son played brilliantly she felt as though she were the mother of Jesus.

Throughout this book, the author showed the tug-of-war he had with knowing his son's chess play didn't matter but also being entirely consumed by it. The author delved into the social aspects of brilliant children, too, and how others perceive them. He writes a lot about chess itself and how it is perceived as a cognitive barometer, even though perhaps that's not true. For the Russian children the author writes about who play chess like 10 hours a day in place of school--is it worth it? Does the process of perfecting chess lead to life lessons not learned in traditional schooling? I haven't a clue, but this book poses these interesting questions.

This is a fast, great read, and offers a few moments of real reading emotion. My one gripe is with the book's premise--the literal search for Bobby Fischer. I could do without it. For me, he's not important to this story, and I'd have enjoyed the book more with that being a figurative rather than literal quest.