Rating: 4/5

Straight-talking, wise-cracking, story-telling, back-chatting poetry from the alleys and lanes of England. There's a punchy tone and a plain grace to Simon Armitage's poetry that is very compelling.

Some have the distinct shock and feel of the shortest, sharpest short stories or character studies – more than a little James Kelman-esque. Like Brassneck or About His Person:

Five pounds fifty in change, exactly,
a library card on its date of expiry.

A postcard, stamped, 
unwritten but franked,

a pocket-size diary slashed with pencil
from March twenty-fourth to the first of April.

...

No gold or silver,
but crowning one finger

A ring of white unweathered skin.
That was everything

Others are deeply engaging miniatures of emotion and connection, like To His Lost Lover or ankylosing spondylitis. My wife (who, along with Armitage, suffers from ankylosing spondylitis) burst into tears when I read aloud the poem of that name – a deeply felt plea for love and connection to help overcome the fear and constriction of physical decay and loss. 
ankylosing meaning bond or join,
and spondylitis meaning of the bone or spine.
That half explains the cracks and clicks, the clockwork of my joints and discs,
the ratchet of my hips. I'm fossilising – 
every time I rest
I let the gristle knit, weave, mesh.

My dear, my skeleton will set like biscuit overnight,
like glass, like ice, and you can choose
to snap me back to life before first light,
or let me laze until
the shape I take become the shape I keep.

Don't leave me be. Don't let me sleep.
Armitage captures voices from the underside impeccably, with a kind of pugilistic aggression that drags you in: "I said no, no,no,no,no,no,no. OK, come on then." or "Because the worm won't know your make of bone from mine."

And his plain, no-frills style also provides the perfect platform for play – there's a lot of wicked humour and metafictional fun in this collection. A stand-out for me is the wonderful meeting point of tall tale and stretched metaphor, Song of the West Men:
To the far of the far
off the isles of the isles,
near the rocks of the rocks
which the guillemots stripe
with the shite of their shite,

a trawler went down
in the weave of the waves,
and a fisherman swam
for the life of his life
through the swell of the sea

which was one degree C.
And the bones of his bones
were cooler than stone,
and the tide of his blood
was slower than slow.

...which builds its tale up through these rough-hewn comparatives and superlatives to its bleakly compelling encapsulation of life in these isles.

As with any selection of poems there are those I love and those which didn't quite hit home. But it's a great collection over all.