Rating: 4/5

This turned out to be a timely book to read for me given the re-ignition of war between Palestine and israel on the day I finished it. Writing in 2003-4, MI seeks to form an ethicist's understanding the problem of terrorism for liberal democracies. The heart of the book is the idea of the lesser evil: that terrorism as a strategy forces democracies into choosing lesser evils. He discusses things like detention, pre-emptive war, targeted assassination, torture rendition, and so on. He argues that defeating terrorism requires the use of force, but that usage must A. be within certain moral boundaries (torture is never justified, rendition rarely, pre-emption only under a strict set of circumstances) and B. be subject to public adversarial review.

This latter point is the key theme of his argument. Of course, governments cannot tell the people everything they know about terrorist threats, but they also cannot adopt a pose of "if you only knew what we knew" or "just trust us." THeir claims about the severity of the threat and the necessity of a certain responses must be evaluated by Congress, the media, the courts, and ultimately the people, which can provide a variety of checks on potential abuses. I think this is a valid way of thinking about liberal/democratic control of counterterrorism policy, although I'm not sure US institutions functioned this way (or they did but with a major time lag). There was a wide period where the shock of 9/11 made most Americans highly deferential to gov't action. The information advantage of the executive enabled them to manipulate public opinion on issues like iraqi WMD and pull the US into an unnecessary conflict. Congress and the media exposed certain programs and abuses, but some programs (like PRISM) required the actions of whistleblowers to expose. I'd love to hear more now about whether MI thinks the US passed the test of adversarial review in the GWOT, although he makes the very valid point that terrorist groups themselves do not have such institutional checks.

This is not a war-mongering book at all but a sensitive and nuanced treatment of the dilemmas of fighting terrorism while maintaining one's values and identity as much as possible. MI believes that ultimately terrorism cannot be totally defeated without taking care of the oppression, poverty, and indignities that drive many people to become terrorists in the first place. However, he is clear that terrorists more often than not are trying to use violence to prevent peace deals from becoming possible and to achieve goals that are essentially impossible to fulfill for the targeted state (like Hamas' goal of eradicating Israel-nothing but Israel's destruction would ever stop their violence completely). He confronts the challenge of apocalyptic terrorism with WMD head on, arguing for a multilateral strategy that includes force but also non-proliferation, political reform, and multilateral cooperation. This is a pretty classic liberal version of the GWOT, which overlaps with but is much less unilateral and militaristic than the neocon version.

This book is short, readable, and thoughtful. I have found big problems with a lot of MI's commentary on the War on Terror, but this is a worthwhile philosophical text for people interested in terrorism, ethics, and law.