Rating: 1/5

Ok so I started this years ago and never finished it because the MC's got on my nerves. Patty, the heroine started off in the first chapter by crying her eyes out over the H from Land Of Enchantment. That was just too annoying. Patty was so obsessed with Lije ( LOE's hero ) and and was eating herself up with jealousy because he'd married a gorgeous model. I really had little patience for Patty's self pity party. Patty had no self esteem and everything she had done in the recent years had all been because of Lije. She had become a trick rider in the Rodeo Circuit just because it had given her a chance to always be near to her precious Lije. I know Lije is hot ( I loved him in LOE ) but there's this other hottie Morgan ( the H in this novel ) and Patty keeps fighting with him and insulting him. He keeps insulting her too. That level of snark wasn't for me but I kept reading for a little while until I got to the part where Morgan and Patty are in a bar with Diana and Lije and other people from the circuit.

I got fed up with both MC's because Patty kept mooning over Lije's hunky good looks and casting jealous glances at the bombshell blonde Diana. Then Patty almost had an inner meltdown after Lije tells everyone how proud he is that he is going to be a daddy. Morgan makes me want to kick him in his teeth when he whispers to poor plain Patty that she's just a freckle faced little Annie Oakley while Lije's wife is the goddess Diana. Wtf ? I loved Diana from LOE and yes she was fabulously beautiful but I didn't want to read about the heroine in this novel being belittled because she's a plain mouse compared to the other woman. It irritated me. And Morgan is supposed to this H who has felt a secret love for Patty all these years. I guess maybe Morgan was trying to be cruel to be kind since he was jealous of Patty's obsession with a married Lije, but I couldn't keep reading this story after this point. I just gave up. A part of my giving up also has to do with the fact that I get bored reading about plain heroines and wallflowers in regency romances. I prefer BOTH my MC's to be very attractive. Yeah, superficiality is a little flaw of mine...