Rating: 2/5

People seem to either love this book or hate it with a passion. Is it ok that I'm just meh/bored with it?

This is a "historical fiction" novel (I put it in quotes because the only historical things thus far were petticoats and carriages driven by horses.), a story of Scarlett O'Hara/Marquise Isabelle de Merteuil type of protagonist who is a) horny, b) loves her land and c) is a manipulative psychopath.

This is my first Philippa Gregory and it's her debut which is interesting. I love debuts by established genre fiction writers because even if they can become formulaic later on in their careers, debut is often creative and shows their passions. 

In her introduction she said that she wrote this when she was finishing her phd and read a lot of sexy books of the 19th century and decided to write a pastiche, so that's why she used incest as a big plot point of the story. And I agree with her, I've noticed myself that for 19th century folks incest was a popular naughty kink. Is it because young people were isolated in their homes? I don't really know.

And that's where my problem lies with this book. It's a trashy book with murders and incest and it's not trashy enough! For crying out loud, there's The Monk written by a young adult man long ago and it's more fun and ridiculous than anything Philippa Gregory is doing here. There's victorian erotica on project gutenberg that's more crazy than this.

So I'm too bored, I've read/skimmed 200+ pages and stopped when she got pregnant with her brother's child and his young bride said she will raise it as her own (she doesn't know who's the father).

Then I tried to give it one more chance half a year later after seeing good reviews, and I have exactly the same quibbles with it that I had the first time. The writing is not atrocious but it's very self-indulgent and repetitious, page after page we get her monologues how much she loves her land and will do whatever to keep it (it's a first person narration). It's not beautiful or immersive, I was noticing I was skimming passages so I don't have to read her another passionate pledge to her land. So I failed again. But then I went to wikipedia to read the plot summary and it goes exactly the way I expected it to. And that's just the amount of attention and effort this book deserves.