Rating: 4/5

“Perhaps chance and destiny are interdependent, in that the latter cannot be fulfilled without the casual intervention of the former. A craggy rock placed at a distance from the water will never be worn smooth” 

This book is a special Booker Prize winner – winning the “Best Of Beryl” Prize in 2011 – where the public was asked to choose between the five shortlisted books of the “Booker Bridesmaid”.

A detailed plot guide can be found here:

http://www.bookrags.com/studyguide-ma...
Although a succinct introduction to the characters is contained in the following musings by the geologist Dr Potter, one of our three point of view narrators, when he muses on the events that have thrown the other two point of view characters – the foundling turned favourite turned lover and surrogate mother Myrtle, and the street performer turned photographer’s assistant turned lover Pompey Jones, in orbit around the eponymous surgeon and amateur photographer George Hardy.

   “Myrtle is an interesting subject – in regard to the question as to whether fate or chance holds the upper hand. The ifs are numerous. If Beartrice had not shown an affection for her, would she not have vanished into the orphanage. What if Pompey Jones’s unfortunate arrangement of the tiger’s head had not ended Annie’s hope of motherhood? If old Mrs Hardy had woken that morning in a cheerful mood, would Myrtle have been required to follow George down to the town. Then there is the matter of his returning to Blackberty Lane by a different route than was usual. If the woman’s screams had echoed unheard in another street, what then” 

And this passage also introduced one of the key themes of the book – as covered in my opening quote. This is a book which relies on extreme chance and co-incidence but not as a plot device but more as a way of examining the role of chance and coincidence when set alongside fate/destiny. Reading this work I could not help seeing it as a form of literary antecedent of the work of Kate Atkinson – whose early Jackson Brodie detective novels relied heavily (perhaps too heavily) on coincidence as an explicitly acknowledged plot device, but who then went on to examine this theme meta-fictionally in books like “Life After Life”.

I also wondered about the influence of this book on Sarah Perry’s “The Essex Serpent”: in the Victorian setting; the fascination with geology and the challenge of the work of Charles Lyell to previously religiously held conceptions and certainties; but also in the way in which all the characters seem drawn to another character, an attraction (including a sexual one from both sexes) that does not convey itself to the reader – with George hear being an even more distant figure than Cora. 

Photography is another clear theme – the Crimean War was the first to be widely photographed and Bainbridge chooses to have three photographers in the book (George. Pompey and an unnamed war photographer) and to have the six chapters named after and written around six photographic plates (which are dated and described but not shown). 

This idea captures the nature of the book – built effectively around six set pieces Interestingly whereas these chapters feature some seemingly memorable scenes – for example: the attempts to cover up the nature of Mr Hardy’s death; an operation to remove the cataracts of an ape; a dramatic fight in a theater based on a deceived sense of honour; fire eater at concert amidst squalor and disease; a man caught in a blast who ends with a missing ear but regained memory: some of these scenes actually fade from the memory, a little like the “regrettable tendency” of George’s photographs to fade to black after being taken. Instead what lingers in the memory more is our growing understanding of the complex dynamics between the characters and more importantly the themes of the book.

Bainbridge I think is also consciously exploring two related themes here via her photographic plate device: 

Firstly photography as a medium for capturing reality and contrasting it both implicitly and explicitly with literature and its ability to capture thought and motivation as well as image:

   “There’s something of black magic in the photographer’s art, in that he stops time ….. I don’t know that I think much of the camera. It appears to hold reality hostage and yet fails to snap thoughts in the head … The lens is powerless to catch the interior turmoil boiling within the skull” 

And secondly and more widely, the idea of differing perceptions of history, and of myth. 

As we switch between the three point of view characters we gradually become aware of differences in their interpretations of past events:

   “I reckon memory is selective ….. I tried to get Potter to discuss what it meant when events were recollected differently. He said he wasn’t in the mood and had enough lapses of his own without fretting over other people’s” 

As an example, late on Myrtle realises 8 years later that her first glance of Pompey, as an unknown “Duck-boy” carrying out an unheralded “Christian-act” was actually a failed street-scam. 

Photography itself exposed the true horrors of war and shattered some of its mythical nature. 

And we also have Dr Potter who increasingly in his horror at the reality of war turns literally to history and myth – taking refuge in allusions to classical history and literature, rather it has to be said to the disdain of our lower class narrators Myrtle and Pompey “his frequent quotations .. first spouted in a dead language and then laboriously translated, become wearisome” . 

In the same way the concept of war – as celebrated in “nauseating displays of patriotic fervor” by politicians and generals in London and in those who are influenced by them in Istanbul, in Potter’s own words “those buffoons who, by reasons of solely of wealth and title, control both government and army”  differs from the horrific reality experienced by working class soldiers, including at the end Pompey.

Overall this is an excellent book – a deserved winner of the “Best of Beryl” Booker albeit one which should have rendered that competition unnecessary by defeating “Amsterdam”.