Rating: 2/5

It shows the tortoises in wooden boxes, and I wondered where they got those at. It turns out they’re living in someone’s shed, and there just happens to be three boxes for each tortoise to sleep in. It implies that the homeowner made the boxes and knows there are three turtles in his shed, and is okay with them hibernating there all winter. I guess he doesn't need that space in the shed...

The cat looked entirely too like the Cheshire cat in Alice and Wonderland. It was oversized, and had a big smile in a big face. It seemed to be modeled after that cat. It was also way bigger than the dog for some reason.

The turtle has thoughts, but they’re put in quotations like he’s saying them out loud. Unless he was thinking out loud.

It was really unexpected how the turtle would end up proving all the animals wrong. She hit a patch of ice, and went faster than the dog or cat, and hit a bump and flew like a bird.
She ends up sliding across the pond and landing in front of the shed, but it’s covered up with ice. It’s very unrealistic that it would ice over in the minutes or hours Shelley was gone, yet wasn’t iced over before, considering how much snow is on the ground. It was done for convenience sake so she could leave the shed without trouble.
The duck heckles her again, saying she doesn’t have a beak to break through the ice with. This is when Shelley realizes she does have a shell she can break the ice with. So she bursts through the shed, back into her home. 

The noise wakes her mom up, who asks if she was outside. She replies with “a tortoise out in winter?” and falls asleep before she can say “ridiculous.” It was sort of cute to end on the theme that’s been in the entire book, with everyone saying ridiculous to a tortoise being outside in winter. But it became repetitive after a few times. 
I was also a little disappointed in the ending. I was expecting the tortoise to find her purpose outside, which she sort of did, learning what she could do similar to the other animals in here, and was able to get back at all the animals who made fun of her, but I just expected more out of the ending. 
I didn’t like how she didn’t tell her mom she was outside. Or that she didn’t really have an adventure and enjoy winter. If she hadn’t accidentally fallen, I don’t know what would have happened. It was more about proving people wrong, and it seemed like there also could have been some fun involved, too. Tortoises don't belong out in winter, and she discovered that, but I thought she'd end up finding a purpose or find she could go outside in the winter and would enjoy it.
Maybe the lesson was realizing where you belong, or home and family. 

The illustrations were cute. Shelley was cute when she slid down the hill, in the one frame with the dog. Her limbs are sticking out, her eyes are wide, and her boggin is flying in the wind. She was also cute when she came busting into the shed at the end.