Rating: 4/5

This reminds me of why I love Jim Harrison’s writing – it feels and moves like autobiography (in fact I can’t recall the narrator is named). It’s hard to imagine that it could be written without a great deal of personal experience. And therein lies its pathos – these 3 people were truly messed up at the outset and over a few days of a rollicking roadtrip out west they imbibe a vast quantity of uppers, downers, pot and alcohol. The whole concept was concocted on a passing remark the protagonist makes in a bar in the Florida Keys to a Vietnam vet stranger. They decide to blow up a dam out west and take off in an intoxicated roar, picking up Timmy’s (the vet) girlfriend Sylvia. She is a major part of the story as a naïve, natural beauty along for this truly insane ride. He is entranced and repelled, but mostly sexually driven, by her innocence and keeps lapsing into fantasies of love. Her boyfriend (Timmy) is off the deep end, so jacked up on speed he doesn’t see her anymore and can’t perform – so this odd threesome have some peculiar encounters along the way. This book has a brilliant climax, almost unpredictable in its unpredictability – it reminded me of Abby’s The Monkey Wrench Gang in time and place and social construction.

The story is told entirely and tightly within the mind of the narrator with frequent reveries backwards and forward fantasies interspersed. Harrison is very skillful with this, and he speeds and slows and blurs and sharpens the narrative in perfect tune with the narrator’s states of mind (often fueled by drugs or alcohol, regrets and/or epiphanies). This is what makes Harrison so prescient and his tales so readable for me. But be warned, he will not temper his intemperance or make himself any kind of hero – he is that brutally honest sort that lays bare his animalistic libido, misogyny, and shocking venality. He is not a good many and you will not like him. His road his narrow and alternates between bliss and horror. Amazing he had the calm to ever write, but maybe those were times like the nature days, when he removed himself for periods of time from his obviously wild lifestyle. I refuse to read about him until I’ve consumed all his art. 

My interest in Harrison was when I lived in Michigan and once traveled the west coast in his old stomping grounds. He is a man of nature, and his fishing interest and descriptions are immaculate (I an connect there). It occurred to me that he is like his character Tristan (Legends of the Fall) who can live away from civilization for long stretches to get right, then come back into town for massive excesses of whoring, drinking and eating; followed by a return to the purity of nature. He must have been like that, RIP o troubled one.

Here are some memorable quotes:

On Timmy the Vietnam vet (p. 42): “His time in Vietnam had changed things. When she visited him in the hospital in San Diego he still liked and wanted her but he had been through too much shit, too many drugs and Saigon whores for it to ever be quite the same again. She kept bringing up the idea of marriage until he became more and more abusive. It occurred to me that I had done something similar a number of times: You have ceased loving someone but you are still hanging on, so you begin to mistreat them.”

On his superiority complex… (p. 69): “It was all very pitiable in a way. These two didn’t seem to below to the twentieth century although they bore so many of its characteristic scars. I’ve always wondered how people who don’t know anything about history get by, but I realized if you are ignorant of history you are not lost in it. Sylvia was only intent, it seemed, on some age old mating procedure and felt a certain desperation in having given over six or seven years to a man who’s conception of a proper life must have come from an old Errol Flynn movie. So simple and almost charming if you didn’t know and care for them, a particularly curious country song set into action. And she would out of an almost biological drive probably return home and marry finally someone she didn’t love at all but have children she did love.”

On revealed misogyny behind “love”… (p. 156): “’You’re just like him and I couldn’t go through that again’….I began to deny this but she turned and walked up the steps and through the tavern door. I smoked a cigarette and felt a kind of palpable sleaziness that I hadn’t known in years. Perhaps I was like him. I thought of myself as much smarter but that made no difference to her or to me for that matter. I stood there trying to pull from airy nothing, from the exhaust of passing cars, some real difference between Tim and myself that I could use to assure her that my love was solid and that I would take care of her. But I couldn’t and I never really intended to. I wanted to have her for a year. Or less. ……….I knew in my drunkenness that I had lost any remnant of control and would somehow merely have to wait and see what I would do.”