Rating: 3/5

Apparently I have read this before! I had vague senses of deja vu at the various reveals, and even at some of the jokes and now I know why! I kept dismissing it bc there was so much I didn’t remember- including the ultimate solution thank goodness. This just goes to show you when I don’t write a review it all fades from my mind.

My three star opinion is a bit changed. With context and many more Wimsey books under my belt and a few more years in age, I’d want to give it another (I won’t for a reason I give below, but I’d like to). I suspect that my three star opinion was based on the pacing, the fact that this goes on rather (as Wimsey himself would say), and is a bit too fascinated with what I expect she’d call local color for someone reading many decades and a continent away. I wasn’t hearing the accent she was trying to evoke, and the slices of country life and characters she sketched in passing are done so frequently in interwar novels that I read that it did not feel worth the time she gave it. I also felt that she did let Peter spin out a few too many full “here’s how it might have happened, but didn’t” red herring stories. 

Undoubtedly clever, all of it. Turns of phrase that made me smile. The best of that sort of thing was when she let her writing just be pages of free association allusions, threaded through Peter’s speech and her narrative structure. If you’ve raised yourself on Brit lit classics, it’s quite a lovely performance. The best part was when she did that bit with them on the shore as Russian novel dialogue. That was my literal LOL of the book- because unlike the provincial characters she sketches, I can hear that and hear the layers under it, but I don’t think I would have needed to to find it funny. The part where she lets herself talk about the impossibility of casting Richard III and the part where Wimsey makes up rhymes for the policeman to remember. The same. The codes part was great. There were several of those bright spots I loved. 

Not to mention there’s some very female gaze scenes where Harriet is allowed to appreciate Peter’s body openly in addition to his mind. And the fight they have about why he came down to help her felt like they may as well have been speaking naked. He reminded me of a couple of extremely smart men I dated or almost dated in high school and college, and how when the feeling switch flips... the kind of people underneath are often incredible. I know the core of this guy, with a few less tinsel decorations on him.

But again... all the things I said above are true. I found myself impatient by the end. And here we come to the other reason I’m not raising the star rating: There is also, you should be aware, a very casual use of the N word early on, and by a character who we’re not exactly supposed to respect as the sharpest, but who ends up on Team Good, with enough merit in him, were that excused, to be regarded with fond tolerance. Which is, indeed, how the characters regard him. To be fair, she also goes out of her way to make fun of xenophobic and yet pro-empire people in the court scenes at the end, and on a couple of chance witnesses in between. I don’t love that it was very much in the spirit that some northern Democrats speak about southern stereotypes in the south, but for her class and education, seems about par.

Anyway. Some dazzling, lovely moments. Delightful to see Harriet again. I love her more and more as I age. When she’s loose and free and has had a few, or is completely buckled down laser focus with Wimsey, I love it. It’s just the rest, you know. You can’t discount it.