Rating: 5/5

Amalia Gomez: She looks like Ava Gardner, some people say. Or Maria Felix, the great Mexican film star. She’s living in a cheap bungalow in Hollywood. Trying to steer clear of gangs and drugs and violence and raise her two youngest children right after the tragic death of her oldest son, caught up in one of those very gangs. 

John Rechy, more well-known for his sexually charged tales of gay desire and cruising, gives us a different portrait of loneliness and longing in Amalia Gomez (but there are a clear parallels, which I’ll get to later). 

In Amalia Gomez, Rechy has given us an extraordinary literary creation. She is the portrait of the Modern Woman and Mother: Overflowing with love for her children; a striver, working her fingers to the bone to provide in the cold shadow of a man’s absence; she is beautiful, too; and capricious and cruel, and strong-willed, arrogant; but so, so weak, at times. She is a great lover of beauty, filling her modest home with artificial plastic flowers and draping herself in fine clothes (which she makes herself).

A Mexican-American Mildred Pierce of the 1990s, you could say (to return to the classic cinema theme). 

The story begins one morning when Amalia wakes to see a silvery cross hanging in the smog of the Los Angeles sky. It’s just an illusion, of course. Something with the light and the clouds. Or perhaps a skywriting plane. Or is it? The rest of the book follows this uncertain vision as Amalia Gomez leaves her apartment, sets out on a walk through her neighborhood where she encounters strangers and neighbors, reminisces over her past troubles and current worries. 

When Amalia Gomez sets out that morning, her mind is clouded by by the guilt of a hangover. She’d never drink more than two beers in one setting — but she had three the night before after arguing with her lover, Raynaldo, who’s not actually her husband even though that’s what she’s long told her children. 

Raynaldo has run out on her, the latest in a series of misfortunes, heartbreak and savage cruelty that have marked Amalia’s love life. Her first crush on a boy resulted in her rape in an alleyway, then a pregnancy, then a miscarriage. She’s worked at a sewing sweatshop and cleaning houses, putting up with handsy bosses and jealous housewives. Born in El Paso, Texas, she always has her papers as trump card, but she watches the women she works with fall prey to the depredations of both coyotes smuggling in relatives and la migra. Her son is dead, her not-husband has run off and her two remaining children, now both teenagers, are suddenly both keeping secrets from her. 

She frets about all this as she walks through her declining neighborhood, the big HOLLYWOOD sign looming over it all. The setting is almost as much as a character as Amalia herself: cinematic Technicolor watercolor—hellscape—that is Los Angeles. Like Oz, some parts of it are beautiful and many parts of it aren’t very nice at all. Rechy describes it all with such lush care, even the ugliness attains a certain level of exquisiteness. 

Out on her walk that Saturday, Amalia eats at a Carl’s Jr fast food joint where coarse Middle-American tourists recount their recent trip to Universal Pictures theme park, which has a new earthquake-themed rollercoaster, and then crudely joke about the “Big One,” seemingly unable to distinguish between disaster and amusement. 

She visits a church, where she confesses her transgression eating away at her — going home with an attractive young man from the bar after her fight with Raynaldo — and discovers the priest pleasuring himself in the little booth a she divulges her sins. 

Still troubled by guilt (the bigger sin in Amalia’s mind being that the attractive young man turned out to be a coyote, a betrayer—a predator—of his own kind), she gets her fortune told by two pitiful old frauds who run a business out of their homes offering consultas, promising the secret to a happy life but offering only easy platitudes. 

She visits one of the women from the sewing sweatshop, the rather inaptly named Milagros, who lives in a one-room decrepit apartment building with bars on the window, an apartment where the children play on the bed all day because it’s too dangerous to go out and play. 

Violence always lurks. On her way home, Amalia sees a young man playing basketball — shot dead in a drive-by. 
 
 
“Now he was bouncing the basketball — tap, tap tap. Then, with a graceful twist, his brown body shot up into the air, reaching up to the net and —

Ping!

A gunshot!

Blood erupted from the boy’s chest.

The basketball, poised on the rim for seconds, dropped into the net. 
	
The boy fell to the concrete. 
	
…
	
Not able to move yet, clutching the plastic flowers she had just bought, now Amalia could only stare at the playground where the shirtless young man lay sprawled in a growing blossom of blood.” 

Throughout it all, there’s a sense of danger; a smoggy cloud of paranoia hangs over everything, like those crude tourists laughing about the Big One. Amalia is afraid of earthquakes, afraid of the gangs taking over her neighborhood, afraid of the police, too. 

There’s something very 90s about this book. The feeling of cultural exhaustion; a sense of neurotic pessimism. The sense of an inevitable breakdown, that things cannot stand. 

In its tone of cultural lament, the novel prophesizes the cultural conflagrations to come later – the deep cultural schisms over race and policing that erupted after the Rodney King verdict. 

Published in 1991, at the very beginning of the decade, the mood Rechy captures here prefigures other fictional 90s nervous breakdowns, such as that depicted by Michael Douglas in the 1993 movie “Falling Down.” Amalia Gomez, unlike Michael Douglas, never snaps. She’s a woman, for one thing. She bears her suffering.

Place in the Rechy canon

The book may be seen as a departure from Rechy’s past work. But there are clear parallels. 

In its compressed timeline—all taking place on a single Saturday, from sunup to sundown—it resembles some of the other great novels set in “real time” Rechy is a master at, such as “Numbers,” where the beautiful (aging) hustler Johnny Rio is looking to score as many tricks as he can in ten days, or “The Coming of the Night,” which follows a kaleidoscopic cast of characters—porn stars and priests—as they prepare for and meet an LA night, full of sex and danger. 

There are other parallels with Rechy’s work. The lower-class Latinos in early 1990s Los Angeles that Rechy writes about here, like the gay men of a pre-Stonewall era, are people living on the margins, abused by the authorities, clawing for a place of dignity in an indifferent and even cruel society. 

And another parallel: Amalia Gomez like the hustlers in “City of Night” is a seeker, possessed by a longing deep in her soul. Her long walk through the neighborhood also represents a kind of cruising, marked by the same sort intense scrutiny as is found in the sex-hungry eyes of a hustler. It is a search for beauty. Amalia buys artificial flowers to brighten her humble home. She takes pride in her dress and, in fact, her body and her beauty are those of a much younger woman. She is starved for the ecstasy of beauty in the same way as the chiseled hustlers who go out sex-hunting every night. 

 While the protagonists of the more traditional Rechy narrative are hemmed in by a rigid, moralistic society, the threat of police impunity and even their own psychology, the fetters on Amalia are different: Paycheck-to-paycheck poverty as a housecleaner; the discrimination faced as a Latina in Southern California; the suffering meted out to women down through the centuries. (The suffering of gay men is a denial of their masculine privilege, a withdrawing of their inheritance as men in a patriarchal society; the suffering of women is the fulfillment of their destiny as women.)

Throughout this singular day, the title of the novel hangs over the events of the story, like the cross Amalia saw in the sky. A miraculous day. But where is the miracle? What event or events will make the day miraculous for this middle-age Mexican-American woman with scars on her soul if not on her body and a seemingly boundless reserve of dumb hope. 

Is it the Lotto she’s always playing? Will she have the winning ticket? Is it a big payout by the city for the death of her son who was found dead in his jail cell after being arrested for his involvement with one of the very gangs scourging Amalia’s neighborhood. She remembers watching the old TV show “Queen for a Day,” in which women of little means—housecleaners and scullery women—were showered with money and prizes simply by the luck of the draw. 

Where is Amalia’s miracle? Earlier in the day, during her visit to the church, Amalia had prayed before the statue of the Virgin Mary, but it wasn’t a supplication: I demand a miracle, she defiantly says. 

In the end, the day is ending. It’s night-time and Amalia has wandered to a flashy new huge shopping center full of luxury stores — another kind of church, the temple of consumerism and capitalism—where she is confronted with a shocking act of violence. A big grand blood and guts spectacle, something out a 90’s blockbuster or a Tarantino film.
 
Out of this sudden Technicolor explosion of violence, Amalia’s faith is restored. But as with the huge silver cross she saw in the sky, that astonishing omen that pulled her out of bed that morning, is she only seeing what she wants to see? Well, maybe that’s hope, anyway.