Rating: 3/5

This is my 7th Ishiguro and I am happy for two reasons: (1) I am now an Ishiguro completist and (2) unlike a couple of his earlier books, I actually liked this one. I almost rated this with 4 stars but I could not do that because I found the first half of the book unbelievably boring. However, Ishiguro managed to make the book’s last 50-70 pages truly engaging that I thought I was able to squirt some tears from my eyes when the boyhood friends were back together. It was one of the most poignant scenes that I read this year and it will stay with me for a long time.

Like is other 5 novels, this one is also told by an unreliable first-person, Christopher “Puffin” Banks. Like his other narrators, Banks also chooses which memory he would like to recall. Like the other novels, the storytelling also is nostalgic and silent. The plot could be deceiving: the prose is easy to read and at times uneventful (translation: boring) but if you read between the lines or if you persist up to the end of the book, you would know that there are reasons for the boring first half.

However, unlike my favorite books of Ishiguro, Remains and Never Let Me Go, this book has many loose ends that Ishiguro left hanging similar to what he did in Pale View. For example, how come the mother did not know that the father was trading opium when they were still dating so she could have avoided him? So what happened to Sarah Hemmings after Christopher left Shanghai? Why did she go to Shanghai in the first place (I thought that going there to be with Christopher was a flimsy reason). What is it that Christopher thinks that he will save by looking for his parents after 20 or so years? (I think Christopher is so stupid to think that his parents are there in the house when WWII is about to begin and the Chinese and Chinese soldier are already killing each other). 
 
The other small complaint that I have is that the voices are almost similar throughout except when Akira is talking. The Chinese and Japanese people in Shanghai talk like British and when the shooting began, they still (including Christopher) talked calmly as if they were in a palatial British estate and talking to the lord and the ladies. Needless to say, Christopher’s narration reminded me of Steven, the butler, in The Remains of the Day.

This book, When We Were Orphans is refreshing because it has a mystery-suspense flavor. I read The Remains of the Day (GR Avg 4.05 with 36,526 ratings) in 2009 and I fell in love with Kazuo Ishiguro. This love was cemented the following year, 2010 when I read Never Let Me Go (GR Avg 3.74 with 98,101 ratings) followed by his collection of short stories Nocturnes (GR Avg 3.34 with 3,603 ratings). Never has a sci-fi flavor and his collection of stories has music as motif so I thought that Ishiguro indeed was a novelist who did not rewrite himself.

This year, since our book club read Remains last month, I decided to read all his other books. I began with A Pale View of the Hills (GR Avg. 3.68 with 3,507 ratings) and I thought it was almost the same as Remains and Ishiguro did not know how to end his story. Then I followed it with An Artist of the Floating World (GR Avg 3.70 with 3,718 ratings) and aside from the same complaints, the books was not able to elicit any emotional reaction from me particularly because the characters were caricatures. 

However, the next book Unconsoled (GR Avg 3.46 with 2,663 ratings) was almost like a total departure from his other books. It is more dreamlike like Andre Breton’s Nadja and fearsome in its approach in storytelling and so I liked it. 

This being not a rehash of his other books was the primary reason why I liked this book, When We Were Orphans  (GR Avg 3.40 with 6,417 ratings). Ishiguro admitted that this was his least favorite among his works but notice the number of ratings; this is his third most read book here in Goodreads. This was also shortlisted in Booker 2000 (it lost to Margaret Atwood’s The Blind Assassin). I am still to read that Atwood book but I think this book deserves the Booker nomination especially because of the last 2-3 chapters.

My ratings for Ishiguro’s books:

4 STARS (I really liked these!):

  
 and 
  

3 STARS (I liked these):

  
, 
  
 and 
  

2 STARS (These were okay):

  
 and 
  

Not bad really. Since Ishiguro is still alive, I will still buy and read all his incoming books.