Rating: 5/5

My copy of Martin Duberman’s Stonewall has sat on my bookshelf unread for almost twenty years. What prompted me to finally read it is two-fold: I realized that I knew almost nothing about the Stonewall Riots, and as a gay man, I should know; my next novel will end with this very important piece of gay history, so I needed to read this book as research. I was not disappointed and wish I’d read it years ago. Duberman’s book is an exhaustive history of that era of burgeoning gay rights. He cloaks his history in the stories of six diverse people who were right there in the midst of it all. Each of them is a person to whom we can relate, for though they are very real people, they also represent distinct types that people the gay community. There is the wealthy older man who wants everyone to remain “civilized” and demand their rights, yet not rock the boat. There is a young actor with his delicate good looks and flowing blond hair. There is the black woman, fighting for lesbian rights in the midst of the struggle for racial equality as well and having a hard time feeling like she fits in. There is the young scholarly athletic woman who resents being expected to declare herself one of the prescribed lesbian categories of the time—butch or femme. There is the founder of the Oscar Wilde Bookshop who seeks to form an organization that will fight for gays to be anything they wish to be, but most of all, out and proud. And there is the street prostitute, transvestite, drag queen who starts her life on the streets at the tender age of eleven and never looks back. The six of them cross paths many times in this journey to gay equality. Duberman, in using the very personal stories of these six, turns his story from a dry history to an intimate biography of an important time in history—not just Gay History, but American History as well. For when the drag queens at the Stonewall Inn finally fought back and refused to be denigrated by the corrupt and brutal police that early morning after Judy Garland’s burial the previous afternoon, they changed all our lives, gay and straight.