Rating: 3/5

Years - the first book in this three book anthology. 3.5 stars.
This is the first book I have read by this author, and was quite surprised at how much I enjoyed it. This story takes place in 1917 in a small farming community of Alamo, North Dakota. Linnea Brandonberg arrives as the new teacher in town. She feels rather out of place in this close-knit Norwegian community. Over time, however, they take her under their wing as she learns about rural and farming life. A romance blossoms throughout the course of the story, and we are witness to some of the hardships that life over one hundred years ago brings to the Westgaard families. Spencer brings an energetic and vivid writing style to the story with hints of both humour and seriousness.
I most certainly look forward to the second book in this anthology.
Twice Loved - the second book in this anthology. 3 stars. 
This story is set in 1837, on the island of Nantucket. Laura Dalton has believed for five years that her husband Rye went down with the ship Massachusetts. To her utter surprise he arrives back in Nantucket, ready to take up life where he last left it. Laura must explain to him that in this time she has had his baby ( a now 4 year old named Josh), and married Dan Morgan ( one of their very best friends). Somewhat comical, and often frustrating, Laura must make a decision on which husband will be hers forever. As with the first story, Spencer has crafted a vivid and interesting take on the life of fishermen and whalers back in the 1800s. 
Ready to take on book 3 of this anthology.
Spring Fancy- the third book in this Spencer anthology. 3 stars.
A more current timeline of early 1980s, we follow Winnifred Gardner, young, single, employed as a physio therapist. While fulfilling her role as maid of honour at her good friend’s wedding, she is introduced to best man Joseph Duggan. Only problem is, Winn is engaged to another man. The remainder of the story centres around this conflict, and the decision that she must make. A rather cute story. I enjoyed all three of these stories, my favourite being the first one “Years”.