Rating: 5/5

I just finished reading - Thinking in Time: The Uses of History for Decision Makers by Ernest R. May and Richard Neustadt. This is a very in-depth, academic read about how to use history and information to make decisions. I really benefited from this read and hope to read it again in the future. While the book is for decision-makers, it's also helpful for staff to identify and focus on the relevant information and illustrations. This book helped provide me with a new paradigm for thinking through developing situations. I recently used Known, Unclear, and Presumed methods at work to great effect. I read this book while also reading a biography of Marshall, whom the authors saw as someone who visualized time as a stream. My only criticism was the sole focus on presidential and political issues. I believe their argument would have been fuller had they provided business, military, or community issues. Highly recommend it to anyone who wants to make better decisions or help their organization do the same. 

“It is about how to use experience, remote or recent, in the process of deciding what to do today about the prospect for tomorrow.”

“Success owed something to the fact that the decisive actors saw their choices as part of a series starting long ago and continuing for years to come.” 

“Better decision-making involves drawing on history to frame sharper questions and doing so systematically, routinely. 

“the significant items Known, Unclear, and Presumed are those which make the situation different now from what it was before, when it did not require attention.”

“Seductive analogies should be examined and reexamined for those reasons and one more: to gain protection against supposing that a problem is what I used to be when, in reality, conditions have changed.”

“Analogies also helped preserve consensus.”

“When a manager comes to me, I don’t ask, ' What's the problem?' I say, ' Tell me the story.” That way, I find out what the problem really is.”

“Remember that its only purpose is to produce a better working guess, a more sophisticated conjecture; the result is still a guess, a hypothesis, and it may be wrong.”

“ask what new evidence might change a current presumption.”

“Plainly, the more history one carries in one’s head about more centuries or countries - or institutions, issues, individuals, whatever - the less, one has to scramble in these ways when need arises.”

“visualizing issues in time streams.”

“books are a storehouse of vicarious experience, the ready source of reference points for inventory and context.”