Rating: 2/5

This was such a disappointment! I like institutional politics, apparently I like British courtroom dramas written by barristers (see also: Rumpole), because the scenes in the courtroom and in conferences with clients, judges, and solicitors were the best bits of this book. They were also objectively good. The twists and turns of the court cases were genuinely unpredictable: Oh, other barrister is a rising star and a publicity hack without scruples? In a predictable book he would end up prosecuting the case against our hero barrister; but in this book they end up working together (sort of) to defend their clients who are all being charged in the same case. That resulted in a very different dramatic tension than I expected. That was great! Instead of having the central trial turn on who makes a better case--prosecution or defense--instead we have a three-way prisoner's dilemma situation. Awesome! 

The problem was that every other component of the book was hackneyed and terrible. The writing was clunky. The dialogue was predictable (we even had the following exchange: "how long have you been listening?" "long enough". Good grief). There is a rape trial subplot that plods through all the points of excuses that cause rapists to go free when they are brought to court, without doing anything novel or interesting with the plot point. And with rape, you have to do something pretty damn novel and interesting with it to justify it in a novel, because I am so over using sexual violence as a plot motivator in novels. 

To be fair, this book was including rape to make the point rape is badly treated in court because of societal attitudes to pervade juries and the justice system as a whole, which is a little better than let's rape a lady to motivate a dude's character arc, but only a little. And then, the rapist goes free, so the complainant solicits the help of an old school friend, who is apparently now a trans woman (except she's described with 'he' pronouns), and whose trans-ness is really crucial for luring the rapist with her womanly-appearing wiles, until she turns into a strong violent man and cuts his genitals off. Which, to be fair, is a satisfying revenge, but did you really need to portray a trans woman as a violent actually-a-man predator in order to do it?

Other revelations also come out of nowhere in ways that are just frustrating. Lawyer protagonist's boyfriend is threatened by crooked villain, and although kudos for making the male love interest a non-entity who is mostly off the page and whose sole existence is to be threatened for the female protagonist's motivation, it's still a frustrating plot device, even if the stereotypical gender assignments are switched. But when she begs him to come home from his tour, where he's in danger, and he refuses and then has to hang up the phone because of artificial time constraints, it makes no sense for him to suddenly decide to come home after all in the dénouement, and makes it transparently clear that his earlier refusal to come home was just a stupid attempt to ratchet up the tension. Likewise, the pupil is treated as the head of chambers's niece for a long time, until it later turns out that she's sleeping with him and calls him 'uncle' for sexual reasons (because he's bad at his job, you see)--except if you look at those other scenes where the dialogue makes it seem like she's his actual niece, it turns out that none of it makes sense if it's just some sexual quirk thing. Head of Chambers has no reason to be concerned at getting caught in nepotistic pupil-assignments if she is not actually his niece and there's no familial connection to be observed! When we first see them together I worried that Head of Chambers was being a creepy old man, and when it turned out he was her 'uncle' I was actually relieved, because it introduced a different type of character connection betwen them that was more interesting and less predictable than 'pervy old dude perving on young coworker'. So the later revelation that it was exactly what I thought it was was all the more disappointing.

The best parts of this book were the stuff about the law; and the rest of the book was stupid and predictable and badly written. I would happily read other books or stories set solely in the courtroom by this author, but it's pretty clear that she has things to say that are relevant outside the courtroom. And, I agree with the things she has to say, I really do! I'm sympathetic to what she wants to do with this book. But unfortunately, she is not a good enough writer to say these things in ways that I want to read.