Rating: 3/5

This is a strange one. I watched the animated movie several years ago (which was dubbed, very terribly, in English), and the thing was absolutely bonkers. I quickly learned that it was a German book and, to my surprise, part of a series. I've wanted to find an English copy for ages and never got around to it until recently, wherein my library managed to track down the novel. Two others are apparently translated into English, but this is the only one I could get my hands on easily enough. 

I wondered if it would be as crude and gory as the movie. Presumably, the dialogue would be a bit better, but maybe not. My curiosity was higher than my bar. 

Well, it is certainly as crude and gory as the movie, and yes the dialogue is better--with a caveat: the cats use slurs sometimes. Francis' movie counterpart is more likeable, I suppose because we are not subjected to his meandering and constant internal bitching that is obviously a joke on the whole "pretentious cat" stereotype, but the little bastard really is insufferable for large sections of the book. These sections, in my opinion, should have ended up on the cutting table. They made this rather short story feel longer than it needed to. 

That said, the story is nuts. There are cat murders and murderers. There are cat computer programmers. There are cats who read biology textbooks and have opinions on modern home renovation techniques. Some of the cats are also nazis, which other cats have problems with--having learned the author's particular bigotries (which seem to be literally all of them), I found this pretty funny. Did he read what he wrote? Does he know these cats would challenge him in hand to hand combat and kick his ass? Then again, certain statements in the book (largely about disabilities, but he was unable to resist a homosexuality comment too) make a terrible amount of sense when you know who wrote them and what he thinks about these topics in reality. 

Anyway, the journal entries section and the final confrontation are really quite good. Francis' sadness is portrayed elegantly. 

However, if you don't have any baseline for the Felidae book or movie, know that "oh it's really dark" has a different meaning here than when people apply it to, IDK, Watership Down. There's intense and upsetting animal torture through laboratory experiments and very gruesome slaughter via a serial cat killer, so know what you're getting into. I would largely consider this a horror novel.