Rating: 3/5

I somehow made it to 30 without reading anything by Beverly Cleary, so I'm glad I remedied that now. Overall I liked this book, but did have some mixed feelings about it. Full disclosure: I have SIX younger siblings, so maybe it's due to years of being a live-in babysitter that I have a low threshold for "children behaving badly" literature. Still, I have to admire authors that tackle sibling relationships -- it must be very difficult to walk the line between portraying reality and giving credence to the real and conflicting feelings that children have, without either glorifying the behavior itself or becoming overly moralistic or heavy-handed as a result.

So needless to say, I mostly identified with Beezus, but I still thought many of the aspects of Ramona's portrayal were spot on too. The first chapter which described her riding around and around on her tricycle while breathing in and out on her harmonica was SO relatable. Ramona is portrayed as many four-year-olds are -- curious, wanting attention (often to the point of "being a pest"), and the sibling conflicts that result seemed quite realistic to me. 

I guess I have more of a problem with the way Ramona engages in behaviors that aren't as easy to simply write off -- she repeatedly takes things that aren't hers, does dangerous things (sticking her doll in the oven??), etc., and I don't see at any point where she's encouraged by the adults to develop empathy -- to truly grapple with the way her actions affect others. Surely if she's old enough and clever enough to act out the things she reads in stories, she's old enough to at least begin learning how to put herself in others' shoes, but her behavior is instead spoken about in broad terms as simply "being bad" and mostly given generic punishments (if anything). So in that sense this book was a bit of a let-down.

It's funny reading reviews of this because some people think Ramona is insufferable and others seem to think she's simply looked down on way too much. I have to wonder how much a reviewer's birth order factors in! Either way, I appreciated a lot of aspects of the writing and portrayals, and I'd be interested in reading some of the later installments in the series to see how things change as the girls grow.