Rating: 2/5

Wow. What a relief to have that out of the way ... I have been painstakingly pushing my way through this book for a while now. Having said that, I always thought that The Swiss Family Robinson was just the type of story that I would like. Going into it, my expectations were high and I think my enthusiasm barreled me past the first few chapters without so much as a literary bump. But just like trying to race up Everest, you lose steam after the first hundred yard sprint and the rest is pure drudgery. The unfortunate thing is that there was no sense of satisfaction upon finishing The Swiss Family Robinson as there would be in peaking Everest, only relief. 

Here is the problem as I see it, and I will use the narrator's own words towards the end of the novel to explain it: "It is needless for me to continue what would exhaust the patience of the most long-suffering, by repeating monotonous narratives of exploring parties and hunting expeditions, wearisome descriptions of awkward inventions and clumsy machines, with an endless record of discoveries, more fit for the pages of an encyclopedia than a book of family history." Wow. Couldn't have said it better myself, Mr. Robinson--though your realization of those things was about two-hundred and fifty pages too late. 

While I can't say it better, I will sum it up: nothing happens. Oh, sure, they keep building these paradisaical, tropical mansions, lacking only in electronics and internet because those things haven't been invented yet, but what--exactly--is happening? Nothing. The biggest conflicts they have are brought up one paragraph and resolved in the next. And then there are the characters. I originally loved the idea of a family being the protagonist, instead of just some single, adult male like in most stories. But I think Wyss could have put more personality into a single, adult boulder than he did in this entire family. That's not to say that there aren't distinguishing personality traits. The chief one of the narrator is that he is annoying, smug, and wholly unbelievable. Every idea he tried, he immediately succeeded at accomplishing, even if the whole human race had been trying the same feat, unsuccessfully, for thousands of years with plenty more resources. Any animal or plant he saw, he immediately knew the scientific classification, background, and general usage for it as if reading out of the page of an encyclopedia (an interesting study would be to find the Swiss encyclopedias of the time and find out which ones Wyss plagiarized from, probably verbatim in most instances, in order to piece together Mr. Robinson's immaculate naturalist knowledge). 

Perhaps I am being harsh ... okay, yes, I am being harsh, especially for a book meant for children. But I think that even children have a right to expect simple things like PLOT or DEVELOPED CHARACTERS as part of their reading experience. However, I realize that the book is up against some pretty stiff prejudices of mine. You see, before reading this, I had also read The Mysterious Island by Jules Verne. This one also has castaways on a destitute island who are able to create amazingly advanced machines, technology, and shelters with very limited resources (more limited than the Robinson family's, even). Yet, I did not balk at incredulity when Cyrus Harding moved from one advancement to another, or accessed astonishing amounts of information using his memory alone. The reason why? I believe it is because Verne actually knew what his characters were talking about. Rather than slapping something from an encyclopedia entry and passing off haphazard hypotheses, Verne had actually thought these things through, understood the implications and context of each thing, and put forward a fascinating, but credible solution. 

Besides The Mysterious Island, I had also seen the Disney movie, The Swiss Family Robinson. Such a great, great movie--one of my all time favorite, in fact. How did it attain that status? It made realistic characters that you could believe in and distinguish, one from another. It truly made the family the protagonist. It cared about the characters first, and the cool treehouse secondary (although, you have to admit, the treehouse in that movie is AMAZING). And finally, there was a plot! The characters were constantly working with an underlying conflict, and it culminated in a worthy climax. In short, the movie fixed everything that was wrong with the book ... and they excelled at the few things the book got right (such as the treehouse, the appearance of another character later on in the story, and the references to pirates). Going into the reading with these expectations, it is little wonder that Johann Wyss is getting the brunt of my frustrations here, but in reality the book is harmless. Long, boring, and redundant ... but harmless. It is a great idea, some unique settings, and some simple fun. It is just a matter of sifting through all of the drudgery to get them.