Rating: 3/5

1930, Dorothy L. Sayers &amp; Robert Eustace
Epistolary novel concerning a possible murder, and the lengths a son goes to, to find out what really happened; slow-moving classic tale, not one of Sayers' best - three-and-one-half stars.

Told from a variety of viewpoints via letters and court documents, this is the sad tale of a mis-matched married couple, and the neighbors who turn their lives upside down. Mr. and Mrs. Harrison are a nice suburban couple - he rather older than she, and neither understanding the other's point of view much. Mr. Harrison is set in his ways, and his much younger second wife is finding it hard going living with him, but things seem to be ambling along in their lives fairly decently, until two young men move in upstairs - a moody would-be novelist, and a charismatic young painter. Together they, and the Harrison menage, get very mixed up and upset concerning "relationships", and the end result isn't good for Mr. Harrison. 

We get to see the four main characters through the eyes of each of them via correspondence with the others and some court documents, and of a couple of the peripheral characters as well, beginning with the loopy "companion/help" for Mrs. Harrison - she's a middle-aged, quite repressed spinster lady with peculiar ideas about romance. Although she manages to stir up a great deal of trouble, she and Mrs. Harrison get on very nicely, and it's her account of the young men that we first see. Her perceptions of the situation from her quite partisan viewpoint sets the tone for what evolves into a rather peculiar story, extremely slow-moving and moody, but interestingly constructed nonetheless. 

Near the end of the novel Ms. Sayers spends one enormous chapter expostulating on The Meaning of Life, Spirituality, Chemistry, and The Universe" amongst several academics and one of the main protagonists, and this is stultifyingly boring. It's meant to show an important clue to the solution of the mystery, but is so complexly set out that it's entirely bewildering. I gleaned the intent from the later information in the story, and wish she'd mostly eliminated that chapter - it was very wearing! 

Anyway, various odd things happen in the inter-relationships between Mr. and Mrs. Harrison, the companion, the artist, and the novelist, and later with Mr. Harrison's son Paul, who questions his father's peculiar death. Beautifully plotted, and mostly smoothly written, this is still awfully boring - tremendously boring in spots, particularly the medical/biological information necessary the authors felt necessary to solve the mystery is obscure and convoluted (presumably this was Mr. Eustace's contribution to the book). It really drags the pace (and the plot) down, and almost sinks the book. 

It's an interesting attempt at a different sort of story for Sayers, and almost works, but not quite. Perhaps it seemed a better story when epistolary novels were rather more popular? I am admittedly not much of a fan of them (excepting Dracula, of course). DOCUMENTS is somewhat entertaining, in a mild and quietly interesting way, but not anywhere near Sayers' best work.