Rating: 1/5

the final installment of C.S Lewis' Christian sci-fi trilogy. This is one of the biggest flops of a trilogy i can remember. After out of the silent planet i was determined to finish the trilogy even if all signs pointed towards it finishing badly. 

Out of the silent planet was such a promising start. Set on mars Lewis adds in Christian theology and sets the stage for an epic battle of good and evil. Perelandra was basically a retelling of Adam and Eve. In That hideous Strength Lewis takes us back to earth which let me be clear is a mistake on a grand magnitude. C.S Lewis appeal is his ability to create imaginative worlds. I will make a rule to never read works by him based on earth, that's of course if i ever read any of his works other than a Narnian reread again. First problem is his patented descriptive narrative style. that has teachers spouting the mantra "Show don't tell"! Second is it's almost related entirely in 1 on 1 philosophical debate. that right they sit around a talk ALOT, like all the time. all the interesting stuff happened off screen as it were. So there is interesting things happing but the reader only hears about it by the planning or discussing how they feel about it. That hideous strength is a big commentary on what at the time was modern marriage. The modern couple is Jane and Mark Studdock and they find themselves on different side of the battle of good and evil. The plot is basically a Nazi like party arises in England. but the group is not content with secular power and thing get weird. they are looking for merlin..... yeah merlin and Dr. Ransom is named the pendragon. The celestial powers are invoked and ends with Venus causing a animal orgy and our married couple reconnect. Its start out very secular then pseudo spiritual than all mysticism. If that sounds confusing it was. to make it worse Lewis' message is loss in a lot of pointless talk. leaving me (a average reader) sketchy on the beliefs he was tiring to convey. Which makes it a ultimate failure! 

Never have I read a book that had so much going on and was still boring as shit! I would not recommend this to anyone. Happy to be done with it TBH.