Rating: 4/5

3.5/5

It's always odd reading a book set in so close a proximity to my own spatial life. I'm more used to settings on the East Coast and beyond the borders than I am to in text references to UC Berkley and SF and the Bay Area, perhaps because I'm used to letting my imagist muscles run rampant. Names of places that I've exhaustively traversed means I must reconcile rather than construct, which amps up self-reflexivity at the cost of escapism. Thus, the fact that I didn't enjoy this as much as other works doesn't render it any less necessary a read, as it's my sordid backyard that's on display for once. Reader, know thyself.

Working in a test prep facility means dealing with multifarious cases of testing mentality, and one topic that has come up every so often is that of affirmative action. In moments of college gossip, my students (I've only ever taught one black student, and not for very long) bring up black students having a much easier time of things when it comes to getting into the Ivy Leagues, and likely continue on that envious and antiblack train of thought while not in my classroom. Coming across repeated instances of the main character being able to get into UC Berkley scot-free brought back these conversations to my mind, but having the surrounding context of homes with no running water, white supremacist assault in grade school, and abusive homes and relatives makes such residual jealousies pointless. The fact that the students I teach have parents that can afford to shell out for the brand of option tuition I'm involved in means none of them run as great a risk as Cecelia when it comes to falling through the academic cracks. Add in the history of Cecelia's ancestors and her own bildungsroman, and you have a picture of disenfranchisement centuries older than the terms of postcolonialisms and settler state where the post- never came and the settlers never left. The book ends in the 80's, which means Cecelia's story ends before Native Americna Langauges and rights to voting are confirmed by law. I understand the value of her ultimate resolution to live, but Reagan controlled time is as bleak as place as Trump controlled time, and a sequel involving Cecelia's future would be hard to write.

It's amazing how differently stories of realistic and contemporary woe are treated when the dominant reader demographic doesn't feel like the hero of the story. Much as the facts of Hidden Figures were twisted in the movie to give the white dude some cred, this book receives poor ratings because the average reader can't relate or found the subject material depressing. It's hard to conceptualize that a happy ending would require that you give up your country, but plenty have had to give up that and more for less righteous reasons. The fact that the US has been propagandized into such an inviolable state has only made the calcification of structural genocide all the more volatile. It may seem stable now, but I'm sure some would say the same of the western Roman Empire when the rich had just begun to refuse to pay their taxes.