Rating: 3/5

Lethem is a clever writer, audacious in his blending of genres (especially good at incorporating Raymond Chandler’s mannered Marlowe-esque narrator into any setting), and he integrates high- and low-culture elements with ease. I have liked some of his novels quite a bit (Girl in Landscape and Gun, with Occasional Music) and admired others for their more literary ambitions (The Fortress of Solitude and Motherless Brooklyn). 

In this collection of short stories, cleverness appears to be Lethem’s fall back position; if there is nothing else going on, at least one can say of a story that it had an interesting/offbeat premise/slant. 

—The Vision begins with an appealing invocation of nostalgic recollection, proceeds through some interesting contemporary social interactions (party games), and then ends portentously with declarations that have no meaning for anyone but the narrator. 
—Access Fantasy does a good job of creating a peculiar world predicated on traffic jams, a tiered society, and continuous advertising/consumption. By the time the narrator discovers that his search for a murderer will end in more murder, the appurtenances of this new world have become irrelevant. 
—The Spray offers up another gimmick reality, one in which an aerosol mist that lingers for 24 hours is used by the police to detect things that are missing. The further twist in this story is that each character reveals infidelities. The imagery is fascinating, but I found the revelation little more than whimsical. 
—Vivian Relf returns us to the past-meets-present sensibility of The Vision, and a sequence of chance meetings accrete significance only to be shattered by the nasty pettiness/jealousy of a husband. 
—In another invocation of past-meets-present, the cartoonist in Planet Big Zero finds that he and his friend have grown apart, but in this case, it’s more a case of doppelganger or secret sharer, and the alienated/disaffected friend is a slow-to-be-discarded aspect of the narrator himself. 
—In the story The Glasses, Lethem tip-toes around the concept of racism cum customer service represented in an account of an optician who attempts to appease a customer who will not be appeased.
—The Dystopianist imagines a job where a guy has the job of envisioning things that will point up how things are fated to go wrong in the world, and it turns out that his greatest nemesis is a former childhood acquaintance (they were both the victims of schoolyard bullies) whose role in life is to describe how perfect the world is, which in turn makes a reader feel his own failure. In the midst of a session of inspired torment about suicide, the moment is interrupted (a la Coleridge and Xanadu) by a knock at the door.
—Super Goat Man is another nostalgic evocation of growing up with the “literature” of comics and superheroes. The lives of a resigned superhero, Super Goat Man, and the narrator are entwined, and at many milestones, the narrator confronts Super Goat Man’s presence and its meaning. In their final encounter, the narrator—to assuage feelings of doubt, impotence, and unworthiness—in front of his wife mocks the frail superannuated husk of Super Goat Man. 
—The National Anthem is an epistolary short story, with a single letter establishing a dueling duality with a life-long friend, evoking the divergent paths they’ve taken and shallow-buried resentments.
—Kafka is paid homage in The Shape We’re In, and it’s in a slow revelation through quotidian detail that we’re made aware the characters are living inside a giant three-dimensional representation of a lion, which, a la the Trojan Horse, has finally, after thirty years, been pulled into the center of their foe’s happy community. Shaking off rust, the inhabitants of the lion prepare to overwhelm their foes…
—Another tribute to Kafka is Interview with the Crab, where the journalist narrator recounts in mock-serio form his celebrity interview of the reclusive, rich star of a hit tv comedy, a giant crab so large it has to upend itself sideways to get through doorways. Despite the journalist’s attempts to praise the crab’s influences, the crab is more crabby than comic.

As I say, lots of clever stuff, much of it “nerd” stuff that disguises and stands in for the common social world (schoolyard, neighborhood, sports) the narrator/author/nerd missed out on. The affective range in these stories (considerably more limited than the cleverness) makes me wonder if Lethem is not perhaps trying too hard to prove that he can fashion a real, thinking/feeling adult out of one’s childhood legos.