Rating: 4/5

James Burke came to my attention by way of my English dad, who fondly recalls watching Burke present 1970s science edutainment TV programming that today plays like a tribute to / combination of / inspiration for Carl Sagan, Sir David Attenborough, Rick Steves, and Bill Nye. 

There's something simultaneously charming and reassuring about Burke's Britishness. His works, Connections among them, reflect on history and science with the tone and structure of an Oxbridge lecture. Burke also (delightfully) demands a bit of erudition, and certainly attentive focus, from his audience — he treats the layperson like a smart rookie employee, showing up to the first day on the job with minimal technical background but all the tools needed to quickly learn something useful.

Connections was first written in 1978 as a textual accompaniment to the BBC documentary program of the same name (Can you imagine a Nat Geo or History Channel special or limited series releasing basically a textbook to go along with a program today? They should!). The central thesis Burke explores casts the history of science as a nonlinear progression of accidents, influences, inspirations, and stop-start jumps of innovation, spurred on by advances in other fields, societal pressures far removed from the world of science and technology itself, and the ever-motivating forces of fortune, fame, and military preeminence. The final chapter sets this argument out by quickly reviewing all the looping narratives we have read in the 9 previous chapters, each of which "connects" a modern technology to a seemingly unrelated earlier technology by mapping the process by which individual adaptations and cross-applications create the forward march of history.

Though the subject matter, and even more so the style, of the book is somewhat outdated in the present day, some of Burke's warnings are also quite prescient as we stare into the belly of a 21st century of perhaps even greater dynamism (this is up for debate, considering especially how different were the years 1900 and 1999). In any case, Burke's celebration of the scientific, technological, and commercial communities, as opposed to the archetypal lonely inventing genius of other baseline historiographies of science, and his emphasis on the intellectual environment and cultural foment that birthed these remarkable insights leaves the reader with a greater appreciation of the realities of innovation, and perhaps the inspiration to draw widely on fruitful investigations between the sciences and the humanities in the quest to keep moving humanity into new ages of material and social flourishing.