Rating: 4/5

This has been on my list for years, and I suppose I have been delaying my reading of it as I thought I would already know most of what will be said. It turns out that a lot of it I was already aware of, but, there were some really intriguing parts in here that I'd never really considered before. 

First off, I'll thank Betty Frieden for having this book published and for having the bravery to do so. Thank you for giving women a voice. 

This book is fairly heavy going, so it isn't one you'll do in one sitting. It is one you need to take your time with, appreciating each section. There is a small amount of repetitiveness, but for me, this wasn't an issue, as each chapter was new, interesting and fresh. 

Frieden claims that she isn't laying into housewives here, but really, she actually is. She is, in a nutshell, telling women that being a doting wife and mother while mopping kitchen floors isn't what women were made to do. She is telling women to get out there, get that degree you've always wanted to do and grab that job of your dreams. On a personal level, she's right. There is definitely more to life than being in the kitchen all day cleaning, obeying one's spouse and cooking at one's beckon call. We were made to do more. 

It was interesting reading about sexual intimacy and the female orgasm, because of course, even now, it may be wrongly assumed that it's only the male that needs a release, and females exist just for that release to happen and to give a child life. Well no, some of us actually enjoy sex and orgasms are pretty important to us. 

If it wasn't for inspirational women like Frieden I probably wouldn't be where I am now, and I may have gone backwards, and not forwards. And yes, there are still problems. We still have males that are blatant misogynists, and are able to publicly slate women, but apparently get away with it due to their power and position. This will not falter us, and they will only make us fight harder. 

This is an important book, with the strong message present that women can have it all, a marriage, children, and a successful career. It doesn't need to be one or the other. 
 
"I think the energy locked up in those obsolete masculine and feminine roles is the social equivalent of the physical energy locked up in the realm of E = MC²-the force that unleashed the Holocaust of Hiroshima. I believe the locked-up sexual energies have helped to fuel, more than anyone realises, the terrible violence erupting in the nation and the world during these past ten years. If I am right, the sex role revolution will liberate these energies from the service of death and will make it really possible for me and women to make love, not war."