Rating: 4/5

Rose Rent is the 13th in the Brother Cadfael series. It takes place in England, near the Wales/England border, during the Spring of 1142. I am very fond of the Brother Cadfael series for several reasons: (a) this is a smart series, (b) feminist issues and perspectives are frequently/always at the books' centers, and (c) justice wears more humane and compassionate clothing than often seen in the contemporary US. 

In Rose Rent, one of the central characters is a young widow who is still mourning for her dead husband. She ran her dead husband's business well, although without much interest. Much to the dismay of many, she left her marriage home to the abbey for an annual rent of one white rose, which needed to be paid on Saint Winifred's feast day. A well-intended decision, but one with negative consequences. Several men in town had their eyes on Judith, although she did not want to remarry. 

Judith was in the lucky position not to have parents or an older brother who could pressure her to marry – although was also without their protection. In a period where a woman's virtue could be sullied if she were kidnapped, and when she could be forced to marry if raped, Judith's position was precarious. 

As is common in Ellis Peters' books, Rose Rent is as thoughtful and measured as is her protagonist. Peters articulates a distinctly less modern and a more appealing (to me) form of justice. When the assumed murderer was dead, one character commented, "What point in blazoning forth guilt where there can never be a trial?” (p. 151). Later, when considering whether to disclose Judith's kidnapping, another character declared, "Justice is a very fine thing, but not when it does more harm to the victim than to the wrongdoer" (p. 180). (That statement should be emblazoned on the walls of some courtrooms.)

I'm not saying that these were always kinder and gentler times – Peters' characters may have needed to state these conclusions because they were not the common conclusions – but I nonetheless enjoyed reading a contextualized and compassionate style of justice. It reminds me that there are options.