Rating: 5/5

I will confess that my obsession with Balzac in my early twenties equalled Père Goriot's unconditional and quite blind love for his daughters!

When I read Père Goriot, quickly followed by Les Illusions Perdues and many other novels in the Comédie Humaine, I lacked the complete cynicism to understand a Rastignac or Vautrin and the mechanisms behind the tragedy of exploitation of those who love with a passion by those who celebrate their own self-indulgence and instant gratification most of all.

Therefore, I read Balzac with a sense of surreal pain, stunned by the outlandish ruthlessness of his main characters, taking what they needed when they needed it and leaving pain and destruction in their path. Truly, in my eyes they were pirates in the charmingly mythical and colourful sense of a Jack Sparrow.

Fast forward twenty years: I have lived through my share of the human comedy by now, and what I took for literary exaggeration has morphed into deep understanding of Balzac's knowledge of the human soul, or lack thereof, as the case may be. A Père Goriot can't help loving his daughters any more than they can help falling for the villains of the world, having been spoiled to the point of losing their hearts and their empathy.

That is the paradox of the tragicomedy of life. You can destroy as much by unconditional love as by hatred or indifference. If you remain blind and emotionally dependent in your personal relationships, predators will sense that and make their moves without ever stopping to consider your position. Tragically, a loving and caring person rarely understands the fact that there are people who actually do not have empathy. Therefore, they set themselves up for victimhood over and over again, expecting others to think like they do themselves. The strength of the predator lies in his or her carelessness.

Balzac wrote a masterpiece of parental failure based on overprotective and helpless love. And he wrote a masterpiece of soulless exploitation of the weak links in society as well. Rastignac is Dorian Grey's portrait walking the streets and celebrating its ugliness!