Rating: 4/5

Why review a Jefferson biography that's more than a quarter century old, when anyone interested in Jefferson is likely to seek out a newer interpretation from the likes of Meacham or Boles, or a classic from Malone or Peterson? For precisely that reason - because Willard Stern Randall's book might get overlooked, but it shouldn't.

Randall provides a very thorough, readable account of Jefferson's formative years that no other single volume on Jefferson that I've read comes close to matching. Jefferson himself didn't care much for legal work, so his legal career is often given cursory review or overlooked altogether, considered a mere stepping stone to his political career - Jon Meacham's biography, for example, devotes a scattered few paragraphs to this time of Jefferson's life, in an apparent rush to get to the "good stuff" of the Revolutionary era and the Declaration of Independence. But Randall devotes chapters to this period, and in so doing, he offers important insights on how Jefferson's legal work influenced his thoughts on everything from the separation of church and state, to his interest in expansionism and settling the American West.

Later, Randall devotes more time and attention than others do to Jefferson's actions as Virginia governor and his day-to-day activities during his time in France. It's an insightful but leisurely journey, as Randall takes his time setting the scene and telling his story, in an engaging way that never leaves you feeling impatient for what's coming next.

And then Randall hits fast-forward and races through the rest of Jefferson's life at breakneck speed. A single chapter devoted to Jefferson's two-term presidency hits all the highlights - look, it's the Louisiana Purchase! The Lewis and Clark expedition! The Embargo Act! - then there's a final chapter on Jefferson's retirement, with one paragraph about his renewed relationship with John Adams (about which entire books have been written), two paragraphs about his founding of the University of Virginia, and then he's dead. The end.

I've long been looking for a "perfect" one-volume biography of Thomas Jefferson, and the deeper I got into this book, the more I was hoping this would be it. So it's a terrible shame that Randall was either rushing to wrap up his book, or was simply less interested in Jefferson at the peak of his political power than he was in earlier, well-described events such as Jefferson and Adams' pleasant tour of English gardens, or Jefferson's travels through Italy, which together occupy nearly as many pages as Jefferson's entire presidency.

The brevity of this section also prevents Randall from offering much analysis of Jefferson's thoughts and actions, or making any attempt to get inside his head. What some see as Jefferson's contradictions or outright hypocrisy, Randall explains away as political pragmatism. What some see as Jefferson's failures - he was wrong in stubbornly favoring France, he was wrong on the issue of nullification, he was wrong in opposing the Constitution, he was wrong in favoring a weak central government - Randall doesn't really explore at all. I don't mind a hagiography so much if the author at least acknowledges and argues against opposing views, but Randall makes no attempt to refute criticism of Jefferson because he doesn't really introduce any criticism of Jefferson.

Finally, there's the issue of Sally Hemings. I knew this book was published in 1993, long before new scholarship and DNA testing changed the way that part of Jefferson's story is told, so the book was bound to be a bit dated in that regard. But if Randall had simply said, these are the allegations and we just don't know the truth, it would have been easy to give those passages a pass as a product of their time. But he's so vociferous in his outright dismissal that Jefferson could possibly have had a relationship or relations with Hemings, that it's very distracting and very outdated. And it colors his later analysis of Jefferson's position on slavery - he gives Jefferson credit for freeing some of his slaves, but now we know why most of those he freed were Hemingses, and that his motivation wasn't benevolence or a sudden epiphany about the evils of slavery. More modern analyses of Jefferson's views on race and slavery come to very different conclusions than Randall, who gives him the benefit of the doubt that he really didn't like slavery or care for owning slaves, and at least he did that "good deed" by freeing some of them, so good for him.

So this was not the perfect one-volume Jefferson biography I had hoped it would be. But if you were to pick up another biography that does a better and more thorough job exploring Jefferson's political thoughts and presidency, then you could do worse than to pick up Randall's book for an excellent, insightful and well-told story of Jefferson's early life. The two together just might be as close to a perfect Jefferson biography as is possible.