Rating: 5/5

Rose Tremain writes a story about our yearning for love and passion and all her characters are ready to drop everything in their pursuit of the unattainable. But love proves elusive.

She takes a full cast of characters, mostly middle aged, from two distinct walks of life, Oxford academia and rural French village, and all share a yearning for love. Marriages and relationships are examined and if not moribund most are certainly devoid of passion. 
Each character has fantasies and, some, wild desires, showing they haven't given up on again enjoying those first exciting tender expressions of love, and each achieves a varying degree of intimacy.
Marriages might be grown stale, protagonists seem weary of life but fanciful thoughts still surface fuelling sensual longings and carnal desires, and soon each character seems hell bent on some reckless activity and daring choice that can only lead to chaos in their well ordered lives.

From the wide eyed innocence of Agnes to the disillusioned experience of Larry and Miriam, each character reveals their own dissatisfaction with their present day lives reflecting upon opportunities missed, or choices made with misgivings and regretted later, or simply unrequited loves. Lives lived without passion or meaning, but with bitter acceptance. Torment and disappointment fuel whimsical day dreaming and memories surface of desires unfulfilled. 

The story has great resonance for any reader, similarly ‘middle aged’ as through the intimate consciousness of strangers and through examining the inner lives of others we learn more about ourselves. 

Spoilers alert

So in the small French village of Pomerac, Nadia now 48 dyes her hair champagne blonde burns a candle for the widower Herve Priere, Pomerac’s doctor, having packed her elderly husband Claude off to a nursing home in Northern France. 

Herve’s niece Agnes has come to stay and this young lady beguiles all the men she meets. Agnes befriends Larry, an Englishman abroad, and failed business man in a stale marriage to Miriam who is conveniently summoned home to Oxford as her mother is dying. Agnes sees an opportunity and views Larry both as a surrogate father and an experienced lover. She is soon asking him very personal questions as to whether she should sleep with her fiancé, Luc, when he comes to stay. Her virginal state sets the cat amongst the pigeons and first, Larry imagines their unsatisfactory first sexual experience as Agnes surrenders her virginity to an unpractised lover; and then Xavier is seduced as Agnes wants a wild fling somehow knowing her marriage will in all probability lack the passion she desires. 

In this engaging steamy novel our author depicts differing sexual appetites, and relationships imbued with varying degrees of intimacy, ‘The lines of love or longing, if you drew them, they’d criss-cross Pomerac like a tangle of wool.’ Certainly Agnes is not to be denied and she wants to know passionate love before her marriage robs her forever of such euphoria, and others in the French village, or in Oxford, are looking for one last fling before decrepitude sets in.

The elderly Mallelou, grumpy and brutish, used to work as a signalman on the railways but progress overtook him making him redundant, and now he lazes away his days on a small farm holding leaving his long suffering wife, Gervais, to do the heavy duty work. Gervais is celebrating her 49th birthday, and finds plenty of time to reflect upon their moribund marriage now devoid of any intimacy. Gervaise is in the milking shed and besides her cattle she is ''a little stick of a person beside them, so meagrely fleshed, her breasts lie flat on her ribs like soft purses.’' But in Gervais passion burns brightly and her dark desires ensure she is far from chaste seizing any opportunity to take her mysterious and younger lodger, Klaus, to her bed for passionate sex. Meanwhile her husband Mallelou remembers his sexual prime and likes to boast to his son, Xavier, of his German wartime romance with Marisa, ‘ I use to bugger her. Come in her arse. That’s what she liked.’

Miriam returns to England when her mother, Leni, has a fall and is admitted to hospital in Oxford. We soon learn that Dr Oswald Carlton Williams, ‘Doctor O,’ has had a long term romance with Bernice Atwood that is far from passionate but suffices for both of them it would seem until Miriam returns home and the elderly Dr O admits to her that he has always loved her. This is doubly unfortunate as Bernice suspects that after all these years she might be pregnant just as she realises that Dr O doesn’t love her as much as he had upped he might. Meanwhile Dr O is reading the first graphic sex manual ‘The Joy of Sex’ to see if he can inject his sexual activity with moe passion.

One by one all the relationships are examined and found wanting and there is a sense of dysfunction spreading thorough the sleepy little village of Pomerac. It is apparent that each character is unfulfilled in some way and is looking for more from life than their current relationship affords. The village is a seething vortex of affections and jealousies, and longings and unrequited loves, and carnal desires that are, only with great difficulty, suppressed.