Rating: 4/5

Well here it is, the last Campion novel written by Margery Allingham, although it was actually finished by her husband. 

Like the previous book in the series, we're leaning on the Campion is (not) a spy plot. (Unlike the pervious book, we have returned to normal genres, so that weird science fiction jaunt really was a blip.) Campion worked for Intelligence during the war but returned to civilian life afterwards, however he has in the past acted a lot like a spy anyway, being hired by someone important and anonymous to fiddle around with events to stop a bad guy getting some item or land or whatnot, and in this and the previous novel his old spy boss calls on him to help out. So he's not a spy, but he basically is a spy.

Anyway, as happens in all the Campion books that I don't like so much, Campion keeps dropping out of the story to let some boring headstrong love-mad young man take the lead. These characters are all the exact same (see The China Governess and Hide My Eyes for recent examples) and I don't know why I am expected to want to spend time with them rather than Campion who is much more interesting. In this case our surrogate lead is Morty, an American who knows Campion's son. No, we can't see Campion's son. The last three books all dealt with situations or characters who could have been Campion's son but weren't. I don't know why Allingham wouldn't write about him. If Campion is too old to be the hero then surely his son makes more sense than some rando. 

Anyway as it turns out, Morty is just here to hide the fact that as often happens, Campion is working in the background investigating, calling on contacts and setting up traps and if he were in the forefront and we were allowed to see what he was doing then the story would be much shorter. But I KNOW Allingham COULD write stories where Campion was at the centre of the story because I have read them. My two favourite books in fact are the two that are entirely from his perspective (The Case Of The Late Pig and Traitor's Purse). 

The mystery that needs resolving here is similar to the one in the previous book in that the resolution is that there is much less of a mystery here than you thought. An anti-climax if you will. Kind of a let down really, but hey, at least both Oates AND Lugg show up, so if you can ignore boring young Morty, it is almost like old times!

Anyway, I will go on to read the two novels that her husband wrote after this. I am hoping that maybe he actually wanted to write about Campion? You know, as the main character? We'll see.