Rating: 5/5

MY RATING GUIDE: 5 Stars. I find certain Space Opera and Fantasy novels fascinating fun; especially a few of the older ones like SWEET STARFIRE, which was originally published in 1986.

1= dnf/What was that?; 2= Nope, not for me; 3= This was okay/cute; 3.5= I enjoyed it; 4= I liked it a lot; 5= I LOVE THIS; IT’S AN OLD FAVORITE! (I seldom give 5 Stars). 

SWEET STARFIRE ~ 
Occasionally Harmonics are born from Wolf couples &amp; non-Harmonic offspring (Wolf children) are born from Harmonic couples.

Inter space cargo shipper “postman” Teague Severence is a lone Wolf and a man of his word in the 4 deadly worlds in which he operates. He is well known and respected among pilots and port businesses alike as he hustles jobs between the planets of Lovelady, Renaissance, QED &amp; Frozen Assets. But after over a dozen years in the business, Severence has learned from experience not to trust anyone. He prefers his solitude while flying and calls very few people, friend.

Cidra comes from Clementia, Lovelady, a lovely city where the peaceful and highly educated Harmonics live and work. Cidra arrives in Port Valentine and approaches Severence after he has dropped off freight and is picking up his next. Although he is not thrilled to carry any passengers ever, Cidra convinces him to take her on for a price. Cidra is determined to begin a search for certain artifacts historically connected to Harmonics and is willing to go wherever Severence’s next deliveries send them. Yet Severence is aware that each destination further into space becomes less civilized and increasingly dangerous. Accepting Cidra as passage, Severence wonders what will kill her first, the risks on one of the planets or him - from lack of privacy. 

Quotes ~ 
&gt; When Severence asks Cidra what she wants delivered: “I wish to mail myself.” Cidra 
&gt; After Severence has spent a few weeks in space with Cidra: “A postman could do worse than to go into space with a woman who was willing to risk her life for the mail.” Severance 
&gt; “I’m the best crew mate you’ve ever had, Teague Severence. I’m loyal, trustworthy and intelligent. If you had any sense you’d realize just how lucky you are and get down on your knees in gratitude.” Cirda, during an argument aboard their very cramped aircraft

Comments ~ 
1) SWEET STARFIRE is bk1 in Krentz’s Lost Colony fantasy trilogy. I enjoy reading CRYSTAL FLAME &amp; SHIELD’S LADY, bks 2 &amp; 3, around the same time but it isn’t necessary. Each book can be read as a Standalone title as their worlds do not intersect. Each is set in a fantasy world, separate from earth, with adventures, strong characters, antagonists and HEAs. Angst-filled moments and misunderstandings are minimal (which I appreciate). The 3 books in the Lost Colony series are favorites which I return to as fun palate cleansers and Pick Me Up reads.
2) I have read SWEET STARFIRE a good number of times since it was first published. I feel it has held up well over the passing of the years. I would purchase an audiobook copy, if it became available. This type of Fantasy suits my humor, my desire for adventure and fantasy perfectly. 
3) Amanda Quick/Jayne Anne Krentz/Jayne Castle is one of my favorite authors. Dialogue drives her stories - with quips, tongue-in-cheek humor and spirited connections between the main characters and a much earned HEA. The novels are perfect when I’m looking for a Pick Me Up read. 
4) Quick’s male characters are not “Pretty Boys.” Rather, they are determined, bold, driven, loyal men who often face difficult life challenges and/or are imperfect, but through sheer focus and intellect accomplish much. The men live by a certain code of honor and they never break it. They are not intimidated by complex women, rather they appreciate them (sometimes it just takes awhile). 😉 The women MCs tend to be independent, spirited, complicated, intelligent, resilient, loyal and opinionated and they prefer men who are strong enough to accept them as they are. This pattern holds true in SWEET STARFIRE and I found myself identifying with both the main characters and understanding their differences as individuals. I loved their adventure.

READER CAUTION ~ Not recommended to those who prefer Clean fiction.. 
PROFANITY - Yes. Strong language is used.
VIOLENCE - PG. (OST). 
SEXUAL SITUATIONS - Yes. Sweet, yet Hot and Steamy scenes occur so fair warning.