Rating: 3/5

This was an okay book for a spooky night or for Halloween. I liked over half the stories that was in this book, but the three I didn't like dragged. Below is summary of the stories, give it a try you might find them better than I did.

The first poem of the book Fright Night started the book out and it ended with some recipes you might have during Halloween time of the year. 

The first story in the book was called Good-Bye Miss Patterson about kids getting rid of a teacher. I didn't find it to be the best story in the book, but it was alright.

The second story was The Phantom Train which I found fascinating and the ending gave me chills. It was my favorite one in this book.

The Bed by the Window I did not get, which is why I did not like it, but if you read and understand you might enjoy.

Man-Size in Marble was the fourth story, but fifth writing in this book. It was the first one that I really did not like at all, I almost skipped it because it started out slow and even though was slightly creepy I did not care for it.

On Halloween was another poem the second one in Fright Night and I really enjoyed it as well. 

As Gay As Cheese was another story that I just did not understand and couldn't get into. This one I had to skip few lines because it bored me almost to tears.

A Spider On The Floor was more of a song than a poem, but I liked it and found it funny. I have fear of spiders and if one got on my face or head I would be shouting and knocking it off not letting it crawl up my body.

A Ghost Story I found creepy and oh so sad. I wished it could have ended better, but wouldn't have been in this book if it had.

The Witches' Chant I really enjoyed because I loved Macbeth in high school. Might even have find it and reread the story one day. Excellent add to this book.

The Stay-Behind was nice and I really liked the way they described what a Stay-behind was. I felt sorry for the woman though never having married or had kids of her own.

The recipes at the end of this book looked really yummy and come Halloween I might just have to try some.