Rating: 5/5

When I spied this book on the paperback rack years ago, and then looked closer to see my favorite author Stephen King endorsed it as a 'terrifying and original novel' on the cover, that was all I needed to know and I bought it. Okay, depending on the circumstances, I'm easy. But I trusted in the King, and my trust was validated when I read Rex Miller's first novel, SLOB. Like Stephen King's best-known works, this is horror that feels believably, street level real...Miller also gives us a villain unlike any ever seen before in the history of horror literature.

The villain in question is a repulsive mountain of a man who was born Daniel Edward Flowers Bunkowski, and the narrative explained him in part this way:

He has had extremely violent sexual fantasies for as long as he has memory. Because of his unique childhood they predate puberty. He fantasized in pitch-black, locked closets, inside a stifling metal box, chained under a filthy homemade bed, in a cell called the hole, a thousand places, on Death Row in The Max, in The Nam on a hundred night patrols, on his lonely, wonderful one-man ambushes, on foot, in cars, in countless hiding places. He has the gifts of patience and stillness, and in his long, still waiting times he fantasizes unspeakable things.

From an unspeakable childhood to night patrol in the military under the callsign CHAINGANG to federal prison and horribly, terribly free, his life formed him into a serial killer unlike any other. Even when he killed for his country, it was said he killed a man for each pound of his weight, and he was huge, breaking the scale at 500 pounds. For him, normal civilized society might as well be an alien land. He's a hunter-killer, death in stinking, repulsive flesh, as brilliant as he is insane, a murderer unlike any other who can kill in a thousand ways but favors his coil of tractor-strength safety chain. He's killing his way across Illinois, and a very human, achingly ordinary Chicago police detective named Jack Eichord is fated to stand in this nightmare's path...

Talk about books that aren't for kids! SLOB is almost relentless in its very contemporary horror about a fictional serial killer...indeed, Miller's prose is often at its most gripping when he focuses on Bunkowski and his terrible exploits. It's fascinating to be given a glimpse into a how a monster's mind works, and you'll be tempted to cringe when he commits one horrible murder after another; this novel isn't shy about bringing every ugly detail of his acts to life. That makes it all the more comforting, even a source of relief, when the focus shifts on Jack Eichord, a very human detective and former drunk just doing the best he can. Watching them on their separate paths and seeing how they come together in a brutal, kill-or-die collision course glued me to the pages...just be warned that this novel is a darker, bloodier ride than even I can say in this review!