Rating: 3/5

Brian Parrish, a brass gay cartoonist, leaves Comet Comics for a new seven figure salary at Bang comics, where he is assigned the task of changing a non seller old comic book--Princess Paragon--into a new best seller by turning her lesbian. 

His boss, Heloise Feritay, assigns him a lesbian editor, Perpetual Cotton, to help him deal with the transformation. 

The first issue is out and it's a best seller. But it causes a loser "comic-phile," Jerome T Kornacker, to get extremely angry because of what a pervert is doing to his heroine. 

Rodi takes us to a comic convention where Jerome describes the type that reads comics as: "In one sense he (Jerome) wasn't hallucinating, though nearly everywhere at the convention there was a misfit of some recognizable type. Jerome had never seen such a number of them, stuffed into ill-fitting clothing, peering out at the world from beneath stringy pubic-fuzzy hair."

Parish is presented as a prick and refuses to appear in the Bella Martinez Chicago talk show. Because when Brian learns that the originator of Princess Paragon, Roger Oaklyn, is to appear with him, he has a fit and kicks Mr. Oaklyn off the show. Anyone who is from Chicago recognizes Bella as Oprah, and NO ONE pisses Oprah on her show, so Brian pays a steep price. The taping goes terribly for him.

Meanwhile, Brian is confronted by Jerome and is beaten pretty hard by him. Jerome gets scared and Brian decides that he'll make Jerome pay by invading Jerome's home and making him his servant until he writes the next chapter on Princess Paragon.

But Jerome has plans of his own. He takes the finished copy from Bryan's hotel and rewrites it to fit his view of what Princess Paragon should be and faxes it to Bang Comics with Brian's signature.

Brian's adventure ends really bad when he is stuck in Jerome's old work site (he was a nightwatchman at Carter Foods). Jerome is fired and Brian is stuck there until they have a second confrontation because Brian learns what Jerome has done to him. 

This time Jerome throws a gun at Brian's face and ends up in the hospital with a broken jaw. There he finds out Jerome is not the only one who is jobless; Bryan has lost his job to Perpetual. 

As he leaves the hospital he goes to a bar and is approached by Mr. Oaklyn who gets his revenge from being thrown out the show. He learns how bad Mr. Oaklyn had it, after creating Princess paragon he sold the perpetual rights for four hundred dollars at age 23, and was never able to have a comeback.

It is at the bar, after two drinks that Brian realizes that "Jerome and Perpetual had exactly as much right to Princess Paragon as he had--which was no right at all. By any moral reckoning, she belonged to Roger Oaklyn. It was as simple as that. As plain, and terrifying as that."

This is the first Rodi book in which Chicago is not one of the characters of the story. Most of the action happens in NYC. Although the book is an easy and fun read, I missed his old form--making fun of an aspect of gay life with Chicago as the background.