Rating: 4/5

Cinnabar is unique in that the entire book is about a beautifully crafted cinnabar laquerware box, the meaning behinds its depicted symbols, and the lives that it impacts throughout generations between 1900 and the 1990s. A Gao family heirloom, it is also key to finding the family fortune of Chinese artwork. The box “has the power to kill, and also the power to save.” Despite extreme secrecy, it is coveted by several powerful individuals when it resurfaces in the 1980s in New York.

The artwork was hidden prior to 1900 to preserve Chinese culture as well as protect the family fortune, during the time of the Boxer Rebellion, as the family head foresaw future political upheaval. Indeed, the timespan of the book includes the fall of the Qing Dynasty, the May Fourth Movement, and ongoing struggles between Nationalists and Communists. There is a small amount of rather graphic violence in the book, along with suspense and an uneasy sense of release of suspense.

The cinnabar box reputedly has the power to give salvation to someone who works to understand both its meaning and himself. Enter a non-tenured 1980s Columbia professor who recently lost his young wife in an accident. His well-off wife, through an inheritance agreement, left Roger with only the box, which cannot be opened, and a mysterious letter. He must go through a rite of passage, travel across continents, let go of his identity, face his enemies and personal demons, and engage in teamwork in order to solve the mystery of the box, and indeed to save his own life.

The descriptions of China throughout the 20th century and before—its art, culture, and architecture—make the book’s setting fascinating. The sense of danger and unexpected plot twists make it exciting. It does have somewhat the flavor of the 1980s during which it was written—for example, marathon running had much more popular appeal in those days, plus a few of the male/female interactions seem a bit dated.

Fans of 20th century China and/or old cinnabar boxes will enjoy this book, provided that they can take a bit of violence—and it would be impossible to depict the era accurately without it. Anyone who wants to read a good 1980s mystery that also touches on Chinese historical events and culture will enjoy trying to anticipate what was (for me) an unexpected ending.