Rating: 3/5

DAW Collectors #42

Cover Artist: 	Kelly Freas

Name: Pournelle, Jerry Eugene, Birthplace: Shreveport, Louisiana, USA (Birthdate: 7 August 1933 - :8 September 2017)

Alternate Names: Wade Curtis

It is rumored Jack Vance might have provided the template for the scout service.

Pournelle won the first John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer in 1973. He collaborated with Larry Niven on "The Mote in God’s Eye", "Inferno" and "Lucifer’s Hammer"

His first SF publication, “Peace with Honor” in Analog (1971), launched the sprawling CoDominium universe: "A Spaceship for the King" (1973), "West of Honor" (1976), "The Mercenary" (1977), the collection "High Justice"(1977), "Exiles to Glory" (1978), "Prince of Mercenaries" (1989), "Go Tell the Spartans" (1991)

Here the future-history focus is on Prince Samual's World- down-at heels planet that's been contacted by the CoDominium Imperial Navy from the outer galaxies. The World is about to be made a slave state, mainly because it has fallen into a technological Dark Ages. But working to save his World from this fate is Colonel Nathan ""Iron Pants"" MacKinnie--who is persuaded by the world's King David to disguise himself as a trader and go to the planet Makassar, where he might be able to steal the knowledge for building a spaceship: if King David's people build a spaceship, then their World will not enter the CoDomiium as a slave state but rather as a classified world. So MacKinnie arrives with his special crew on the planet of Makassar--having been transported there by the Imperial Navy with a load of primitive weapons, armor, gold and platinum, liquor, spices, trinkets--and he finds himself involved in wars there that require his expertise in battle training based on Roman Legion tactics. He also falls in love with his secretary Mary Graham, a liberated ""freelady."" Does Prince Samual's World build its ship and get status? Yes, it does, and MacKinnie and Mary also get exiled: to their pleasing planet Makassar (its tech level is very low), where they will be big fish indeed. Space opera with a dab of civilization conscious theme weaving.