Rating: 4/5

Mid-20th Century North American Crime Readathon
BOOK 30
HOOK=2 stars: A mother and father (Colonel Blackwell) argue about their daughter's (Harriet) choice for a husband. This age-old trope simply isn't original.
PACE=4: Solid and steady but not quite a page-turning thriller. At over 115,000 words, this stretches the limit of the genre, but MacDonald is so close to pulling off a one-sit read anyway.
PLOT=5: It appears that a man named 'Burke Damis' has killed and taken on the identity of the dead 'Quincy Ralph Simpson', who was killed with an ice pick through the heart. Did Davis do it? If so, why? And why was the body buried at a certain, specific place, and where does Harriet fit in? And why does Davis have a toilet kit with the initials of "B.C." Does the B.C. in anyway relate to Colonel Blakwell? Or does said kit really belong to a Bruce Campion? Or is it owned by Bruce Campbell? And when we learn several of these characters served in WW2, we want to know if something that happened on the war front has surfaced again. And all this is within the first 100 pages. This is a beautifully done plot, with red herrings and twists and turns all over the place. Dame Agatha Christie would be proud: she used initials often as plot clues/red herrings.
CHARACTERS=4: Harriet has reached adulthood per her age, but is still a child. Harriet's mom sees herself as the Queen of All Things. Burke Davis is a passionate artist, and passionate lover, but a user in many ways. MacDonald goes deep into numerous mental issues including said artist suffering from PTSD. Very good characters, but I only remember Archer.
PLACE=5: The morning haze burning off the beaches of Malibu. Sleazy dives in Mexico where anyone from anywhere in the world can walk in and do anything, be anyone. Lake Tahoe melting into spring. These are a few of my favorite things (honest). Beautifully atmospheric.
SUMMARY- 4.0: It's true that Lew Archer, our detective, simmers on a back-burner while Hammett's Spade and Chandler's Marlowe take the front burners. But Archer outwits both. And how can one NOT pull a book entitled "The Zebra-Striped Hearse" off a library or store bookshelf? (Yes, there is indeed such a hearse in this book, and it leads to the denouement.) But this book, as stated above, at 115,920 words surely tested the limits of any crime/noir editor. Still, MacDonald holds it all together beautifully.