Rating: 5/5

This is the book that is responsible for making the three surviving members of The Doors rich beyond their dreams. When this came out way back in 1980, The Doors were a band many people had heard of but in general (readers please note i said 'in general') were not one mentioned in the same breath as The Who, Led Zeppelin, The Rolling Stones, and The Beatles, probably the four biggest, most famous, and ultimately most respected and durable bands to come from the '60s. Certainly the sales of their back catalogs bear this out. 

But in 1980 after we had been thru the big fade of the huge arena rock dinosaurs (i.e. Zep and The Who would lose original members about this time and while it would effect both while oddly the Stones never were affected by death or desertion of members), after we had been through Punk and the great anti-major-record-label-establishment-rock bands it gave birth to (which for the few bands that made it big such as The Clash soon enough came to find that the excess and pampering they had bemoaned the established dinosaur bands for wallowing in was actually something they liked very well too and wallowed in it blissfully as their music softened like a neglected sharp tool to be left in the middle-of-the-road where major record labels are most happy and would make these post-punk slags filthy rich and filthy lazy just in time for MTV to help make this easily digestible pap more marketable still and them even richer still), and as the cold-sweat horrors of glam/hair metal was just starting to be spat out from the bowels of the major record labels' A&amp;R divisions and gaining purchase on the concrete paths of said-Morrison's beloved Sunset Strip and which no doubt would have the corpse of said-Morrison retching and convulsing with dry heaves in a Paris cemetery or perhaps in a shallow grave outside of Jackson, Mississippi, where years after his alleged death in a Paris bathtub he was ultimately and gleefully stomped into oblivion by a group of good ol' boys wrecked on broken chromosomes, methamphetamine, and Pabst Blue Ribbon Beer, we were lost, all of us, in times that had no direction or clarity and through that fog we witnessed the birthing of the plasticine bust of Ronald Reagan and his bobble-headed second wife (whom he had 'traded-up' for from his bobble-breasted first wife) and at bottom what we truly needed was a four-day weekend of drawn curtains, cable TV, and Quaaludes.

And then came Jim Morrison stumbling, swaggering, shaman-dancing back onto the scene. I would estimate that ninety percent of the people who read this book at the time could not identify a Doors song even with the threatened loss of their limbs on the line. Perhaps, 'Light My Fire' was playing on a radio station somewhere in the United States late at night once a month by some DJ claiming to have drank with the lead singer of that band but other than that The Doors were not news and were relegated to the back racks of Top Forty-driven chain record stores such as Tower, Coconut's, Sam Goody or, for Chicagoans, Flipside and Rose Records where teens would occasionally pull out an LP and turn to their friends with a stoned-stupid laugh and utter with convinced-cleverness, "Look ... The Doors ... where's The Windows?" and his companions would join him in a group stoned-stupid laugh at the cleverness of us and the dumbness of them. 

But by the time this book came into paperback, those same teens had a much-read, much-underlined, and much-passage-memorized copy adding heft to the sagging back pocket of their single pair of Jordache jeans as that copy of the book made the rounds like the town pump. The Doors albums went back into the charts, their songs were played hourly on the computer-assisted playlists of every Metromedia music-format radio station across the country and suddenly Jim Morrison was on the cover of Rolling Stone Magazine with the ever-accurate headline, "He's Hot, He's Sexy, He's Dead" ... leave it to Jann Wenner to spell correctly. And The Doors were back in the spotlight and just as it was the first time around, the second spin of fame had Morrison far outdistancing the other three "backup musicians" in the interest-quotient among the new fans of the band. Not that I think they minded. The royalty checks hitting their mailboxes every month or so must have looked like typos to Krieger, Densmore, and Manzarek, the three who stood behind Morrison as he cavorted through his short life. And suddenly teens were posturing just as the book described ... cheeks sucked in, hips pushed out, and a far-away vague look that gave the lil girls a shiver deep down there. 

While the writing I suppose was fairly sophomoric, the authors' writing that is, it was a perfect fit for the stoned, mouth-breathers whose lips beat out the tame and timid tempo of the words. But one can never just blame the authors as I am sure the poor put-upon schlub appointed to 'edit' the 'rock bios' that come through most any publishing house no doubt are instructed to 'dumb it down' to the fourth grade reading requirements of say the Alabama Department of Education. Rock fans can't be expected to read above that level certainly and so sitting around stoned with friends as the one who nearly made it into the honors courses of shop class read aloud to the others as Morrison moaned stoned and beautiful in the background, the new disciples cotton-mouthed and hanging on every word of either the singer or the reader since attempting to include both among the frayed, arcing, and sputtering synapses would have been a multitasking death wish for this crowd. But it got the story across and ultimately that is all that matters unless you're begging to be Ernest Hemingway or Judith Krantz. 

So for the stories, the myths, and more, this book hit home for a new generation that would later blushingly admit to their roommate in the repressed homosexuality of a frat house bedroom as they tried to decide whether to pop their collars for that night's date rape that they, yes, they, the cool and effeminate boy exchanging loving looks in the one mirror in said bedroom "were into The Doors for a summer" whilst again the Lizard King clutches at the memory of his bloated heart considering the prospect that his work was ultimately judged by the same selfish swine that caused the S&amp;L crash a short time later.

However, at bottom and in the end beautiful friend The Doors climbed that ladder of fame nearly to the level of the 'Big Four' from the '60s while securing themselves a hallowed place in the fable of American Rock Music. Well above Grand Funk Railroad but too weird to pry-bar their name alongside those faces on the big rock. As for now, well they recently received a classy documentary effort shown by no less than PBS American Masters and narrated by that acting-oddball of a self-proclaimed Doors' fan Johnny Depp (the more you know about him, the more you gotta like him) ... sadly this leaves them somewhere near the middle of the road though please note that it was just PBS and no doubt was financed through the sales of hash brownies amongst the employees.