Rating: 3/5

Re Time Out Of Mind - this one is a bit squicky, but remarkably absorbing nonetheless. I did have to check a few times to make sure I was reading KT instead of Anne Mather - but if KT was doing an AM impersonation, she did a good job of it.

The squicky comes in when the H targets the h for seduction while she is married to his half brother. She has an affair with the H while her errant hubby is off wandering around, so if infidelity is a deal breaker and the half brother thing may be a major deal breaker as well, HP travelers might want to give this a miss. For those who have the Captain and cookie stash fortitude to forge through this one, it was rather surprisingly good. I had forgotten over the years just how interesting KT can be. 

This one starts with the h not knowing who she really is, she suffered a physical attack two years earlier with a head injury and has no memory of her past at all. She guesses her age to be around 24 and she works in a London department store as a clerk. On her way to work one morning, she jaywalks and almost gets hit by a car. She is running late, so in her hurry she does the handsy sorry gesture and gets herself into her job. Later on, she is shocked to see the man who almost hit her wandering around the store looking for her. She makes a formal in person apology and explains that she was running late. The man seems to like what he sees and he asks her out. She declines. He waits around until she gets off of work and asks her out again, this time she accepts. Something about this dishy stranger is very appealing to her sensibilities.

Over dinner she finds out the H is from the Virgin Islands and owns a large estate there, he had a half brother who was the product of his mother's affair, but he died a few years back and so there is only the H, his sister and their mother. The H explains that the dead son was the mother's favorite, when he died the mother sank into a deep depression and since she was always distant from her two other children, she spends her days mourning her favorite son, and isolating herself from everybody else.

The H and h really like each other, he claims she looks a lot like a lady he knew, and the physical passion is intense. They get into a heavy lurve moment when the H notices a distinct birthmark on her chest and calls her by another woman's name and accuses her of horrible things. The h takes the time honoured HP h reaction in times of distinct stress and passes out. 

When she comes to, she explains that she doesn't know who she is and tells the h about the attack and the last two years of memory loss. The H explains that it was thought that she died with his brother in the car crashed that killed him, the car caught fire when it wrecked, so the bodies were pretty much unrecognizable and it was assumed that it was her because she had been seen earlier with the brother and the passenger was female.

The H insists that the h now owns half his estate because he had made his half brother a partner in the place in an effort to make him settle down. He insists that the h needs to go to his island with him and get things sorted out. The h goes, cause at this point her woozy spells around the H are making her really nervous and she wants to know the full story and maybe get her memories back. So it is off to a British Virgin Island we go and things start to get intense.

The h asks the H about her marriage and her dead husband and if the H knows anything about her life before that. The H tells her she was apparently an orphan, she had been raised by an elderly aunt who had passed away. After the aunt died, the h went to Switzerland on a ski trip and met the H's half brother. She wouldn't go to bed with the brother when he tried it on, so he married her after two weeks and then brought her to the family island. The marriage went bad pretty quickly, the H says they started having problems right away and they were only married two months when it was assumed they both died in the crash. 

The H and h arrive at the family home and the sister is shocked to see the h alive, but seems to be pretty happy to see her and they quickly establish a new bond. The h is feeling out of place because the H has issued an invitation to a woman he was dating before he found the h and the mother isn't happy to see the h at all. 

 The h is reeling from the weird jealousy see feels when she thinks about the H and his OW and reels even more when the mother accuses her of arranging the car crash that killed her son. The mother tells the h she was nothing but a gold digger who latched on to any rich man she could find and when it did not work on her favorite son, she went after the H. The h doesn't think that was really in her character and the sister is pretty assuring that she did not act like that at all, but she does admit the marriage wasn't working - mainly because the brother wasn't keen on island life.

There is some poking around the h's old things and her rooms from before in the hope of prodding her memory and the H starts to issue invitations to the h to go sailing with him. The H puts on the big smooth seduction moves over the course of a few sails. The h falls in love with the H pretty quickly and after the H tells the OW not to take up his invitation, he marries the h. She is sure she is in love and the H seems to care a lot too and the lurve clubbings result in mutual transcendent ecstasy, so the h is pretty happy. The sister has two potential suitors to choose from, so she is having a little romance drama of her own. 

 The only one not happy is the mother, she no longer accuses the h of causing her son's death, but she is still adamant that she is a gold digging tart and the only reason the H married her is to keep control of the whole estate - she inherited the dead son's half when he died and the H isn't taking any chances. The h dismisses the mother's claims, it is obvious she is very grief stricken and tries not let it worry her too much, the mother is leaving the island to go live with her sister anyways.

The scene with the mother triggered something for the h tho, she goes to drive into town and in the car, her memory returns. The h did marry the brother in whirlwind romance on a ski trip. She had lost her professor father and her mother when she was very young, lived with her aunt until she died and then took the legacy money her aunt left her and went on a nice little trip. The brother picked her up her second day and pursued her relentlessly, she was young and infatuated and so when he proposed she said yes. 

They married and went to the family home, but the mother entirely disapproved and the H was pretty harsh as well, they both thought she was grabbing for the gold. The sister was the only one nice to her and her husband started spending a lot of time off island and claiming he wanted to be alone. After a month, the H finally accepts that she really is a nice girl at heart and he has been feeling the lust since she stepped on the island, so he takes the h sailing and seduces her. They start an affair and the H tells the h he will arrange for her to divorce the brother and marry him.

Then the mother tells the h that the H is leading her on to break up the marriage and get her off the island. The h believes this after some consideration and when her estranged hubby suddenly pops up, she asks him to start the divorce and get her on the plane to England. The h did not have a lot of money from her aunt's legacy left - she has been paying for herself this whole time, so he buys her ticket and takes her to the airport and gives her a bit of cash to start her off with. The h gets to back to England and then gets attacked in the train station and robbed and loses her memory. 

The husband had to go to the airport anyway to pick up his current mistress. So after he saw the h off, he picked his married mistress up from arrivals and that was who was in the car with him when he crashed and they both died. The mistress's husband had thought maybe she just ran off or something. The h feels a bit bad for him.

Then the h recalls her own situation and is trying to hide that she has her memory back. She loves the H dearly but thinks he does't love her and so is amping up the wattage on the tower of power rides and using all her kittenish tiger skills to entice the H into baby making. That all changes when the h and H almost crash and die in the same spot the brother did. There is a tricky curve with bad light and tree in that spot and the H panics and confesses that he couldn't take losing her again. He grieved when he thought he lost her the first time, and rushed her into marriage so she couldn't escape him and the h pretends the second car crash restored her memory so she avows love at first sight too and they wander off to a tropical sunset and the rosy baby making HP HEA.

This one was interesting in that H's meanness and suspicions and his eventual h chase for the hair dragging back to the family yacht actually occurs in the h's memory restoration flashback, which means that it happens fairly late in the book. We get to see the nice and wooing side of the H first, so we don't really wonder about his motivations until almost the very end and it is a pretty effective tension producing few chapters too. We get the full effect of the h's fears that she is being deceived and it certainly keeps the pace up. 

Plus KT really does make you wonder if they actually had an affair or not while the h was still married for quite a long time, she makes it seem very out of character for the h to have done that. By the time we realize she really is a cheatin' jezebel, we know the dead hubby had pretty much abandoned her and the H swears that he coerced and seduced her into an affair when she was vulnerable. 

KT actually makes this work, we can easily blame the cheating brother for being a cheater first and then we can blame the H. Who is only doing what HP H's do when they see their destiny and the h is pretty much an innocent lamb led to the big bad wolf, except she did jump on that tower ride pretty quick. Still the rules of HPlandia are pretty much followed, no divorce, a dead spouse and the marriage was pretty much over for him by the time the h gets with the H the first time anyways. 

 The h never really likes the lurve moments with her hubby either, so she is as good as a virgin as it gets - cause the hubby apparently did not take enough time for the h to experience the rapture of transcendent physical bliss and the H gets it on the first go - must have been the motion of the ocean helping her find her rhythm as it happened on the H's boat. 

Give this one a go if you can overlook the squicky, it is just close enough to HPlandia rules to be conformable but it has a fast pace and a pretty decent story and KT does a good job of making the h seem almost innocent as opposed to the heartless tarts some of Anne Mather's h's come across as being.