Rating: 5/5

Jung had noted in his life a tendency for certain meaningful coincidences to cluster together. He gives an account of an experience regarding fish (meaningful as an archetypal symbol), where he either saw an actual fish, is told about a fish, sees a drawing of a fish, etc, all within a short space of time. The likelihood of such a clustering happening is incredibly improbable; and because these incidences couldn't have been attributable to a specific cause, he saw them as acausal, but still pointing to some meaningful connection between them. Jung termed this kind of occurrence synchronicity. 

This book recounts some experiments regarding synchronicity and his rationale behind the theory. Jung discusses astrology, the I Ching, and various other subjects that are seemingly relevant. In my own life, I have experienced similar meaningful coincidences regularly. I concur that synchronicity is a genuine occurrence. My conviction is that these are usually indicative of a spiritual substrate to reality. I feel the same way about archetypes. 

One thing I wanted to comment on here is a story that Jung relates on page 27 - 28. Jung notes that interesting details may become slightly confused in occurrences of synchronicity. What's interesting is that people have a tendency to confuse the exact same detail. The term Jung uses is paramnesia. Upon investigation, I found that this term goes back to the psychologist Emil Kraepelin, and was used to describe a condition where a subject may confuse, or misremember, some detail when fantasy or delusion is influencing the memory. Jung relates a story here about how a name, Ericepaeus, that showed up in an Orphic text he was studying, he repeatedly misread as Ericapeaus. A woman he was treating had a dream where someone handed her a piece of paper and it had the name Ericipaeus written on it. Obviously, it is interesting that this woman patient had a dream relating directly to Jung's studies, but equally interesting is that she also made an error regarding the fifth letter of the name, just as he had. In the actual text, the letter was an E. Jung misread that letter as an A, and the woman misread it as an I. Jung found it interesting that the mistake was regarding the same letter. I think Jung stumbled on to something profound here. I think the current hype regarding the Mandela Effect is an example of a mass delusion, but it does point to some tendency of the human mind to mistake the same details across swaths of the population. One of the so-called examples of the Mandela Effect is that many people remember the series of children's books titled The Berenstain Bears as the Bernstein Bears. I too remember it as the Bernstein Bears. One should probably keep in mind that both variants are related Jewish surnames. Bernstein is the far more common variant, and that could easily explain the mass confusion. Whatever the case, it does point to the human mind having memory issues when it has recourse to variants; often choosing a simpler variant when given the choice. This does seem to happen unconsciously. Almost all Mandela Effect examples seem to relate to this issue of paramnesia. What is incredibly strange is that when this tendency is finally noticed by the population at large, instead of attributing the issue to an error in the human mind, people would rather explain it as an error of reality and the universe. I think we can Occam's razor any such explanation right off the table. As I said, I think the hype regarding the Mandela Effect is an example of mass delusion, but Jung pointed to its roots in synchronicity and paramnesia. I think the solution is to be found there.

I think this book is incredibly interesting. Jung was not opposed to investigating subjects like the paranormal and the occult. Certainly, synchronicity would fall into such a category. Nevertheless, I attest to the occurrences that it addresses personally. I think this is an essential work of Jung and recommend it as such.