Rating: 5/5

5★ 

꒰ ° 𝚆𝚑𝚎𝚗 𝚙𝚎𝚘𝚙𝚕𝚎 𝚍𝚘𝚗'𝚝 𝚎𝚡𝚙𝚛𝚎𝚜𝚜 𝚝𝚑𝚎𝚖𝚜𝚎𝚕𝚟𝚎𝚜, 𝚝𝚑𝚎𝚢 𝚍𝚒𝚎 𝚘𝚗𝚎 𝚙𝚒𝚎𝚌𝚎 𝚊𝚝 𝚊 𝚝𝚒𝚖𝚎. ꒱ 

: ̗̀➛ This short book follows Melinda Sordino, a freshman in high school hated by her peers for calling the police at a party over the summer. Her friends abandoned her, her parents were disappointed, her grades are slipping, and she’s got a secret. A secret that silenced her voice and stole her life. She was raped by Andy Evans. 

˚୨୧⋆｡˚ ⋆ “𝙄 𝙬𝙤𝙣𝙙𝙚𝙧 𝙝𝙤𝙬 𝙡𝙤𝙣𝙜 𝙞𝙩 𝙬𝙤𝙪𝙡𝙙 𝙩𝙖𝙠𝙚 𝙛𝙤𝙧 𝙖𝙣𝙮𝙤𝙣𝙚 𝙩𝙤 𝙣𝙤𝙩𝙞𝙘𝙚 𝙞𝙛 𝙄 𝙟𝙪𝙨𝙩 𝙨𝙩𝙤𝙥𝙥𝙚𝙙 𝙩𝙖𝙡𝙠𝙞𝙣𝙜.”

: ̗̀➛ This book is about Melinda, but despite the fact that she spends the majority of the novel being mute, it speaks to everyone. When you’re a child, you’re told to use your voice. You’re told that people care what you have to say, and that when you need help you should ask for it. That is, until you actually open your mouth. So, when something happens and you wish you could scream about it with your entire being, you end up silent. So while this book tells the story of this adolescent girl, it also tells the story of every person who has ever crushed something down to stop the pain but crushed yourself as well. It’s about the silent struggles people go through daily, the blindness people have to other people’s pain, the ignorance we all obtain when we judge people without knowing who they are. And then the silence we obtain when we get judged. 

˚୨୧⋆｡˚ ⋆ “𝘾𝙚𝙣𝙨𝙤𝙧𝙨𝙝𝙞𝙥 𝙞𝙨 𝙩𝙝𝙚 𝙘𝙝𝙞𝙡𝙙 𝙤𝙛 𝙛𝙚𝙖𝙧 𝙖𝙣𝙙 𝙩𝙝𝙚 𝙛𝙖𝙩𝙝𝙚𝙧 𝙤𝙛 𝙞𝙜𝙣𝙤𝙧𝙖𝙣𝙘𝙚.”

Melinda 
╰┈➤ The reason I gave this book five stars was because of Melinda, she was the type of character that makes you FEEL, and that is the key to a good book. It may be hard for people to feel for Melinda, but I had no trouble. She wasn’t “bland” or “boring” she was a shell of a person because she lost herself and the point of the book was her to find herself once more. The book starts with her choosing not to speak, and the book ends right when she decides to open up and finally talk. It wasn’t a big bang, no cinematic ending, it ended right when she decided to speak 

˚୨୧⋆｡˚ ⋆ 𝙒𝙤𝙧𝙙𝙨 𝙛𝙡𝙤𝙖𝙩 𝙪𝙥. “𝙇𝙚𝙩 𝙢𝙚 𝙩𝙚𝙡𝙡 𝙮𝙤𝙪 𝙖𝙗𝙤𝙪𝙩 𝙞𝙩.”

: ̗̀➛ LET ME TELL YOU. This book made me so so mad. I spent the whole book waiting for someone to be on Melinda’s side because she has literally nobody. Her parents are mean to her because she’s changed, her friends hate her, and the entire school despises her. But DAVID PERTRAKIS IS MY NEW HERO. I loved the parallel between David and Melinda, she refused to speak up and he never considered sitting silently for even a second. He stood up for what he believed in and always used his voice to do so, and that’s why Melinda was immediately intrigued. And he was exactly what she needed in a friend, because even though he believes in using your voice, he fought for her silence. Melinda was asked to do an oral assignment, which wouldn’t be a big deal if the teacher who assigned it hadn’t been picking on her the entire year. Plus, he didn’t tell her prior to the assignment. He gave her the assignment, she wrote the essay, and when she went to turn it in, he insisted it must be read to the class. 

˚୨୧⋆｡˚ ⋆ 𝘿𝙖𝙫𝙞𝙙: “𝘽𝙪𝙩 𝙮𝙤𝙪 𝙜𝙤𝙩 𝙞𝙩 𝙬𝙧𝙤𝙣𝙜. 𝙏𝙝𝙚 𝙨𝙪𝙛𝙛𝙧𝙖𝙜𝙚𝙩𝙩𝙚𝙨 𝙬𝙚𝙧𝙚 𝙖𝙡𝙡 𝙖𝙗𝙤𝙪𝙩 𝙨𝙥𝙚𝙖𝙠𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙪𝙥, 𝙨𝙘𝙧𝙚𝙖𝙢𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙛𝙤𝙧 𝙩𝙝𝙚𝙞𝙧 𝙧𝙞𝙜𝙝𝙩𝙨. 𝙔𝙤𝙪 𝙘𝙖𝙣'𝙩 𝙨𝙥𝙚𝙖𝙠 𝙪𝙥 𝙛𝙤𝙧 𝙮𝙤𝙪𝙧 𝙧𝙞𝙜𝙝𝙩 𝙩𝙤 𝙗𝙚 𝙨𝙞𝙡𝙚𝙣𝙩. 𝙏𝙝𝙖𝙩'𝙨 𝙡𝙚𝙩𝙩𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙩𝙝𝙚 𝙗𝙖𝙙 𝙜𝙪𝙮𝙨 𝙬𝙞𝙣. 𝙄𝙛 𝙩𝙝𝙚 𝙨𝙪𝙛𝙛𝙧𝙖𝙜𝙚𝙩𝙩𝙚𝙨 𝙙𝙞𝙙 𝙩𝙝𝙖𝙩, 𝙬𝙤𝙢𝙚𝙣 𝙬𝙤𝙪𝙡𝙙𝙣'𝙩 𝙗𝙚 𝙖𝙗𝙡𝙚 𝙩𝙤 𝙫𝙤𝙩𝙚 𝙮𝙚𝙩.”
𝙄 𝙗𝙡𝙤𝙬 𝙖 𝙗𝙪𝙗𝙗𝙡𝙚 𝙞𝙣 𝙝𝙞𝙨 𝙛𝙖𝙘𝙚. 𝙃𝙚 𝙛𝙤𝙡𝙙𝙨 𝙩𝙝𝙚 𝙜𝙪𝙢 𝙬𝙧𝙖𝙥𝙥𝙚𝙧𝙨 𝙞𝙣𝙩𝙤 𝙩𝙞𝙣𝙮 𝙩𝙧𝙞𝙖𝙣𝙜𝙡𝙚𝙨.
𝘿𝙖𝙫𝙞𝙙: “𝘿𝙤𝙣'𝙩 𝙜𝙚𝙩 𝙢𝙚 𝙬𝙧𝙤𝙣𝙜. 𝙄 𝙩𝙝𝙞𝙣𝙠 𝙬𝙝𝙖𝙩 𝙮𝙤𝙪 𝙙𝙞𝙙 𝙬𝙖𝙨 𝙠𝙞𝙣𝙙 𝙤𝙛 𝙘𝙤𝙤𝙡 𝙖𝙣𝙙 𝙜𝙚𝙩𝙩𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙨𝙩𝙪𝙘𝙠 𝙞𝙣 𝙈𝙄𝙎𝙎 𝙬𝙖𝙨𝙣'𝙩 𝙛𝙖𝙞𝙧. 𝘽𝙪𝙩 𝙙𝙤𝙣'𝙩 𝙚𝙭𝙥𝙚𝙘𝙩 𝙩𝙤 𝙢𝙖𝙠𝙚 𝙖 𝙙𝙞𝙛𝙛𝙚𝙧𝙚𝙣𝙘𝙚 𝙪𝙣𝙡𝙚𝙨𝙨 𝙮𝙤𝙪 𝙨𝙥𝙚𝙖𝙠 𝙪𝙥 𝙛𝙤𝙧 𝙮𝙤𝙪𝙧𝙨𝙚𝙡𝙛.”
𝙈𝙚: “𝘿𝙤 𝙮𝙤𝙪 𝙡𝙚𝙘𝙩𝙪𝙧𝙚 𝙖𝙡𝙡 𝙮𝙤𝙪𝙧 𝙛𝙧𝙞𝙚𝙣𝙙𝙨 𝙡𝙞𝙠𝙚 𝙩𝙝𝙞𝙨?”
𝘿𝙖𝙫𝙞𝙙: “𝙊𝙣𝙡𝙮 𝙩𝙝𝙚 𝙤𝙣𝙚𝙨 𝙄 𝙡𝙞𝙠𝙚.”

: ̗̀➛ So what does Melinda do? She goes to the one person who would help her, David. Together they make copies of the assignment for every student to read. David stands up for Melinda’s right to not talk, even though he didn’t agree with it. It was such a breath of fresh air, someone finally supporting Melinda and being in her corner after an entire book of having nobody. 

˚୨୧⋆｡˚ ⋆ “𝙄𝙏 𝙝𝙖𝙥𝙥𝙚𝙣𝙚𝙙. 𝙏𝙝𝙚𝙧𝙚 𝙞𝙨 𝙣𝙤 𝙖𝙫𝙤𝙞𝙙𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙞𝙩, 𝙣𝙤 𝙛𝙤𝙧𝙜𝙚𝙩𝙩𝙞𝙣𝙜. 𝙉𝙤 𝙧𝙪𝙣𝙣𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙖𝙬𝙖𝙮, 𝙤𝙧 𝙛𝙡𝙮𝙞𝙣𝙜, 𝙤𝙧 𝙗𝙪𝙧𝙮𝙞𝙣𝙜, 𝙤𝙧 𝙝𝙞𝙙𝙞𝙣𝙜.”

: ̗̀➛ Maybe this book doesn’t have the best writing. Maybe it’s not the style everyone likes, or maybe you hate all the characters. But the point is, this story deserved to be told for all the people who have been sexually assaulted. There was a message, it needed to be heard. The world tells you to speak, but when you do, they yell at you. 

˚୨୧⋆｡˚ ⋆ “𝙄 𝙘𝙖𝙣'𝙩 𝙙𝙤 𝙚𝙫𝙚𝙧𝙮𝙩𝙝𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙛𝙤𝙧 𝙮𝙤𝙪. 𝙔𝙤𝙪 𝙢𝙪𝙨𝙩 𝙬𝙖𝙡𝙠 𝙖𝙡𝙤𝙣𝙚 𝙩𝙤 𝙛𝙞𝙣𝙙 𝙮𝙤𝙪𝙧 𝙨𝙤𝙪𝙡.”