Rating: 3/5

When Spanking Wasn't 'Fun:' BORDER BRIDE by Amanda Scott 
http://fangswandsandfairydust.blogspo...

Amanda Scott's ability to insert me into 16th century Scotland is remarkable. Equally amazing is how I can empathize with her young heroine's, and the reality of being a woman in the "age of reason." With all the emphasis these days on spanking, it's easy to forget that hitting in the bedroom wasn't, and isn't, always a consensual act.

In fact, besides the historical themes and story telling it's the anthropological details and themes that drew me in to the story. Mary Kate is a Highland woman, aside from Queen Elizabeth I, she has some of the strongest rights in Christendom. But, not enough to give her the right to deny her father in his agreement to marry her off to a man she with whom she has had a bad experience. Nor is a woman able to prevent being disciplined by husband, father or church via beating or other humiliating punishments. At the time, as Amanda relates a woman could be stripped and publicly decried or scourged for having lustful thoughts of another man. Scott tells us that Highland women are respected, allowed to own property and serve as chieftains. But while young women technically have the right to refuse a husband they would do so at the peril of their hides. Border women are not treated as well and must obey their husbands in all things; failing which may result in humiliation and beating as a sanctioned form of discipline.

For me, this story is about love, trust, court intrigue and politics, but also about the seemingly endless struggle women face for self-determination and for freedom from domestic violence. As a historical romance, certain things are going to happen in the story and they free the author to explore these themes and because the characters are sympathetic we can identify with them. I find the romance storyline to be somewhat naif, as jejune as the young bride -- which is perhaps the point. It's not sexually explicit; certain actions are described but most activity is off page. Many reviewers have found the domestic violence aspect off-putting, but in this context it is culturally acceptable and, as far as the men in the story are concerned, to be encouraged.

In the book, Mary Kate is beautiful, brash, immature and fully expects to teach her new Border-lord husband a thing or two. She learns a few things herself, one of which is that she is subject to his decisions and that's it. Granted, he is high in court and her personal decisions have a wider impact. When she decides to flirt with another man at court because her husband is not paying any attention to her she is only seeing the event as between the two of them. She doesn't see the wider implications for his standing among his peers, and thus, their future.

Culturally, in that society and at that time that is how it was. But while I bristled at Mary Kate coming around to the reality of her life, I could see where this important theme highlights the struggle women have faced, and continue to face, to be free of legal domestic violence in the form of discipline. Scott doesn't vilify the practice, nor the men practicing it; she even points out the gentry would see a difference between a spanking as punishment and a beating delivered by a drunken lout. But it certainly throws the differences between the life and rights I enjoy and those of a woman in the sixteenth century into stark relief. 

Because, at the time, Scotland still had a largely tribal/clan based society, it also brings up the conditions for women today who still live where life is tribal. The conditions at the time, with the strict behavioral codes of the Calvinists, were not completely unlike those under some cultures where religion and strict patriarchal rules place anything that happens to a woman at her feet. At least in the case of a rape the men are punished and the woman treated kindly by Mary Kate and her husband, although she is treated as damaged goods by her fiance.

But it was also a time when Border raids and skirmishes were common and a woman taken in a raid might be raped as a matter of course. But, where our hero and heroine first clash in the bedroom, and Mary Kate fears he will rape her, she eventually accepts partial blame for because she was flirtatious. I don't think Scott is saying she actually would do so today, but she is reflecting what would have been the way it was seen in that time and place.

As historical romance goes it's pretty well made, and exciting, with a lot of momentum from beginning to end. It would be a challenging for most women not to identify with at least one of the characters. While technically it is an adult romance, I certainly read works more explicit in my teens, and teens today certainly see more revealing subject matter in prime time television and certainly on the premium channels.

If you like the historic romance, especially of the Scottish variety you will probably enjoy this; I did. I highly recommend BORDER BRIDE for it's research, its thematic development, story and romance.