Rating: 2/5

Began reading this book with many hopes of it being a great read, but from the first few pages it became quite clear that I wouldn’t be enjoying it as much. Nevertheless, I continued reading thinking it might improve, but I was unable to sympathise with the protagonist despite the ordeal she goes through — and this is disappointing! There were only few moments where I rooted for her. For a book told majorly from Akhila’s, our protagonist, point of view, we don’t really get to see who she really is. If anything, she’s a silent observer of her circumstances and only lets us in to her thoughts very rarely.

Ladies Coupé is a book which sheds a light on various hardships that women go through in form of Akhila and her interactions with fellow women of different ages. Akhila is a 45 year old unmarried woman whose life seems to have passed by while she was making sure that the rest of her family lived. Becoming the breadwinner for her family at a young age put a stop to many of the things that Akhila might have achieved otherwise. However, after years of sacrifice, she’s now finally ready to stand up for herself. And all of this comes from her tiring of her surroundings and the people around her, with just enough push from the stories of women she comes across.

Within the first few pages of the book, we are immediately introduced to classism. Akhila and the rest of the women quickly judge the sixth passenger based on the way she is dressed and looks and are glad when they don’t have to interact with her when she isolates herself. Throughout the journey, that character is ignored and only towards the end we see her life story shared and even that is told in a very matter of fact manner as if the sole purpose was getting her story out and nothing else. The rest of the stories that the women in Akhila’s coupé share are more or less similar. They describe the mundane things of women’s lives which are deeply rooted in patriarchy and how each woman has tried to fight it in her own manner or accepted it and defends it. Though I usually love reading books which highlight such issues, I was unable to with this one. Another thing that was a major turn off was the constant mentions of caste purity throughout the story. It’s never Akhila who indulges in it and she stands up to it a couple of times, but the repeated reinforcement of the thoughts in form of her mother’s words and the rest of her family’s doesn’t really help much and it might be triggering.

After reading LC, I’m not sure I want to explore any more of Anita Nair’s books. I wouldn’t really recommend this either. Maybe one can read it between two great books, but it turned into such a lethargic experience for me that I wouldn’t even suggest that.