Rating: 1/5

(sexism, premarital sex, incest, pedophilia, nudity, homosexuality, prostitution, alcohol/smoking, gambling, violence, domestic violence, violence against women, murder, abortion, suicide, lying, stealing, technically inaccurate errors that could cause harm)

I got this book thinking it would be a good non-fiction resource. Instead, it is poorly researched and filled with rumors instead of facts. There are few in-line citations, so when she says something that is blatantly wrong, you don't know which source to blame (or if there is a source). I did not take the time to check with the endnotes, especially since these are listed by chapter and page number without any link to the text, and the citations are not always complete--apparently, once you figure out what the note is referring to, you are then supposed to cross-reference the abbreviated citation with the bibliography! The e-book doesn't have page numbers. Even worse, since she frequently uses quotes without citing their sources in-text, this is plagiarism because there is no easy link to the source. 

There are so many wrong things. For example, she states that women did not wear "knickers" in the 1700s. This is false. There are records of women wearing "drawers" back in the 1600s, including records in Samuel Pepys' diary talking about his wife wearing them. She talks about the practice of "bundling" without really explaining it. The problem is that this was unique to Pennsylvania Dutch communities in the United States--correct era, wrong place. In relating things they did in midwifery, the author defends midwives while acting like the Feverfew they used to expel a dead child from the womb would not work (it would, based on modern medicine). In the same way, she states that if the midwife ruptured the membranes early, it would slow labor--it would speed it up based on modern medicine practices. She gives the impression that the month-long waiting period after a woman gives birth was a silly 1700s practice--it is an important practice that is used today to prevent uterine infections. 

She does not stick to the year 1700--instead, she wavers from 1600-1800. 

She quotes fiction and satire works from the era as if they were non-fiction, and sometimes 90% of the page is a direct quote from source material. She purportedly references and quotes court cases, but I could not find the ones I was looking up in British online records, and again, they are not easily cited. Presumably, she is drawing on records in the sensational books put out by the Newgate chaplains--again, not a very reliable source. There are also typos all over. Then, there is the repetition of the same material. For example, in the chapter on marriage, we are told that people in the 1700s married for money. Then, we are told this again later in the same chapter. Sometimes she will be talking about one topic, move on to an entirely different topic, and then go back to the first one. 

Of course, she has dug up every bawdy sexual reference she could find. I understand, based on another title of hers, that the sex lives of people past is extremely important to her, but it is useless to me--especially when the rest of the book lacked substance and the sex sections seemed like tidbits pulled out of context to titillate the reader and justify modern behavior. 

I wanted to use this as a historical resource, but the only thing it is good for is the Bibliography, which gives a list of books and primary sources the reader could use to explore the history of the era. Unfortunately, she seems to have only a few favorite sources (Daniel Defoe's political pamphlets and the chaplain's books with "final confessions" are two that stand out). In addition to huge quotes from these, you will also get copied recipes, long lists of things like how much sheets cost, and fabricated teasers at the beginning of a chapter filled with "maybe"s and "probably"s. I find it disgraceful that a traditional publisher, known for academic books, would put this kind of click-bait garbage out.