Rating: 4/5

These stories are delicious. 

But with "Behind the Mask," Alcott veered from her traditional path of 'wholesome' writing. The book has four novellas, most of which were published anonymously at the time as what Alcott called her "Blood-and-Thunder Tales." Modern 'literary' readers probably consider these potboilers trash. Alcott's primary goal in writing them definitely was for financial gain. 

But Alcott's own shadow, her frustration at the plight of the poor, and particularly of women inspired her. 

The first one is the best- "Behind A Mask" follows a young governess appointed to serve the Coventry household. You just know something's not right as soon as she walks in- she acts peculiar with the young, good-looking men of the house. That, plus the hint of a muddy past makes the story go fast- and the ending is brilliant. 

There is melodramatic dialogue and a bit of purple prose but that doesn't hurt the overall effect. The story stays with the reader. The issues of class and patriarchy (marriage and 'saving' reputations being the primary goals of life) are interwoven, so that this ranks higher than a simple 'blood and thunder tale.' 

"Pauline's Passion &amp; Punishment" is a classic tale of woman's revenge against a false lover. Well-paced writing- an ending that probably made those nineteenth-century readers gasp with shock. Well-written, but lacked enough depth and too drawn out to be my favorite. Melodrama at its peak. 

"The Mysterious Key." Just the title brings images of a raven hovering outside a library on a rainy night. Here, we have the Lady of the house widowed at age eighteen, and the secret of her husband's death casting gloom over the castle for over a decade. The question is, what's the secret? More importantly, what are the repercussions of the secret? 

"The Abbot's Ghost" is the last of the tales- here we have two good-looking bachelors- sadly, one is left crippled after an accident and is no longer 'marriageable' as a result (this was the very un-PC 1800s). Maurice is his name, and yes, he's got a terrible secret too. 

As wonderful as these tales are, as a whole, one thing struck me- bothered me, to be more specific. The characters' lives revolved around three things- fame, money, and lust. Nothing outside of these things matter to any of them- nothing higher than themselves appeals to them. I wonder if Alcott was making her statement on society right here by characterizing this way. She did a good job.