Rating: 4/5

The Quiller family meet up for a reunion on the remote Winchfield island off the coast of Maine. One of the main characters is nineteen-year-old Tammy who has psychic abilities. She was very close with her father and when he died five years earlier she became catatonic and was sent to a psychiatric hospital/boarding school. Now she has to accompany her mother, Dorothy, and her mother's new husband, Jim Quiller, to the family getaway. While there, they learn about the history of the island and the Winchfield family who used to run a schoolhouse there. The locals had found out about some sinister goings-on and decided to take the law into their own hands and punish the Winchfields. The building on the island has been abandoned ever since...until the Quiller family arrive. And it turns out that the Winchfields aren't the only family with a dark past. 

I would describe this as a gothic family drama with horror, paranormal and mystery elements plus a little romance. If you're a fan of V.C. Andrews's work then you might want to give this a try. Speaking of V.C. Andrews, yes there is incest here too. Also: murder, suicide, cannibalism, rape, child abuse.

There was a lot I liked here and while some of it was cliched it was well written and still made for a compelling and entertaining story. The isolated location was very atmospheric and added to the tension as the story developed. There are a lot of characters here with there being twelve in the family reunion alone plus some more side characters but the author did an excellent job in detailing them all well enough and early on enough that I didn't find it difficult to remember who was who.

One of my favourite moments was when Nigel, the long-lost grandson (because of course there's a long-lost grandson), helms a topic of conversation after dinner one evening about the possibility a of murderous tendencies being passed down genetically. He brings up some real true crime cases and I thought the way they were woven into the story was really well done.