Rating: 3/5

Sadako Sasaki was 12 years old when she died of leukemia. This was due to the radiation from the atomic bomb that was dropped by an American pilot in her hometown in Hiroshima, Japan during World War II. She was 2 years old then and had no memory of the war whatsoever. This 1977 book, Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes by Eleonor Coerr, a Canadian-American, was published twenty-two years after Sadako’s death. To explain the title, there is this belief in Japan that if you are sick, fold 1,000 paper cranes and you will get well. According to this book, Sadako Sasaki was only able to fold 644 before her death. 

She and her thousand paper cranes are now among the symbols of world peace in Japan. During the annual Obon festival, students from all over the world visit her statue in Hiroshima and leave paper cranes at its foot. A plaque on the statue reads: "This is our cry. This is our prayer. Peace on Earth." This book has been translated to many languages and is now being used in primary schools around the world to teach children the importance of world peace. (Source: Wiki). This is how her statue looks like:
  [image error]
On the other hand, her more popular namesake, Sadako Yamamura is this fictional antagonist in the 1991-Japanese horror film, The Ring. Unlike the peace-loving Sadako Sasaki and her thousand paper cranes, this Sadako is pure evil particularly in her ghostly state. She haunts and kills everyone who comes in her way when she wants to take her revenge on people who saw this VHS tape showing some kind of water well that when covered takes the shape of a ring. She first calls up the viewer who rented and watched her VHS not to announce the he/she won a prize like when you are spotted by a camera watching a certain TV series but to tell him/her of his/her death in the next 24 hours. This is how she looks like when she goes outside the TV to kill the viewer of her VHS:
  
Sadako's name is Japanese for "chaste child" (sada: chaste and ko: child). I am not sure if Sadako is a common name in Japan but I thought that the novelist Koji Suzuki who wrote the book The Ring (Ringu) somewhat dishonored the memory of Sadako Sasaki but naming his antagonist based on a well-loved symbol of world peace in Japan. I might be mistaken though because Mary (or its variants like Maria, Mari, Marianne or Marie) is so common that many people, regardless whether saints and sinners, have adopted or affixed the Mother of God's name to his or her own. 

Anyway, this is a thin and easy to read book basically relating the last 9 months or so of Sadako Sasaki’s life on earth. Heartfelt story with a subtle message from Japan to America when the author, a Canadian-American, wrote this line: “We keep on saying that we remember Pearl Harbor. Remember Pearl Harbor. However, let’s not forget Hiroshima and Nagasaki.” Prior to the start of my reading, I knew that this was a sad story. However, I thought that the book’s 63 pages were too few for Coerr to be able to fully develop her characters so I would be able to forge sympathy with any of them. I was wrong. That portion when the dying Sadako was hearing her mother’s rubber slippers was able to squeeze few drops of tears from my eyes literally.

Normally, when a book is so good that it was able to make me cry or laugh, I automatically give it a 5-star rating. However, I am giving this a star less. Reason is that I have a newer and more comprehensive version of Sadako Sasaki’s story, 1997-published book by Takayuki Ishii’s One Thousand Paper Cranes and he debunked several aspects of Coeer’s version.

Still Ishii’s version talks about the saintly Sadako Sasaki and not the evil Sadako Yamamura. Now we all know which is which.