Rating: 3/5

This was a tough one to rate, because at first glance it seems kind of low considering the amount of information contained in the book, and the incredible descriptions of such an interesting and alien land. With the journal entries themselves I have very little to criticise, and indeed the emotional impact of the whole thing is very heavy. Even when things are going well for them, we all know how the story will end -- it's so frightfully unfair that they should have come so close and then died because of circumstances that were, for the most part, completely out of their control. Nothing brings home the power of nature more than those final pages of entries.

I did, however, find this a chore to read at times. It was disappointing because there is so much about it that's fascinating, but there are so many footnotes and appendices and the footnotes have footnotes and the appendices have references and just... man. I got a bit lost sometimes, or I'd find a reading groove and then have to be flicking back and forth every other paragraph, and it wasn't enjoyable. I know there's a lot of context and a lot of things that might feel odd to not mention, but a lot of the footnotes weren't strictly related and considering this edition is a fairly recent one, I kind of wish it had been a little more streamlined and kept to only the essential footnotes. Anything else I could have found out myself if I was curious or confused, and that's my preferred way of reading such things (I made notes in the margin or in a notebook and Google everything later). Of course this is a very personal preference, though -- I'm sure others have no issues at all, but this kind of thing just does not work well with my reading style and as a result I found it hard-going at times.

Needless to say, in the interest of a fair review, this book is a goldmine of information. Practically everything you could wish to know about the expedition is contained and elaborated on in this book, and it includs biographical information on Scott both as an introduction and as an appendix; there's also an admittedly interesting history of the publication of his journals. There are extensive notes and references, as well as a number of photographs which are very good for helping to visualise the environment, as well as being fascinating glimpses at the very real people you're reading about. Scott's journals are through to an incredible degree, and he has his moments of dry (thoroughly British) humour; his writing, along with all the extra information, manages to give solid personalities to everyone present as well as the various ponies and dogs there. There's a strong sense of community which makes the inevitable ending all the more tragic.

As I mentioned, I recognise my major complaints are born of personal taste. Even so, I would recommend reading. It's a remarkable look at an important part of history, and if you're like me and prefer to contextualise things in your own time, it's certainly easy to do so. We are very fortunate that Scott kept such an intensely thorough account.