Rating: 3/5

synopsis: a noirish adventure in Europe, mid-19th century. The psychic Lazare captivates the upper classes of Paris. The redoubtable Inspector Picard is less than captivated.

William Kotzwinkle is perhaps most well-known for his World Fantasy Award-winning novel Doctor Rat, or for his novelization of E.T. (gotta pay those bills, right?). I know him for writing an early favorite of mine, Jack in the Box, that is long overdue for another visit.

Fata Morgana was a swell read. It was nice to be in the capable hands of a professional who knows all about pacing and spending just the right amount of time in varying, vivid environments and wowing the reader with a surreal, twisty ending. The book was written like it was meant to be a movie, and occasionally that's not a bad thing. Kotzwinkle wants to entertain but happily his prose doesn't aim for the lowest common denominator. One caveat: every now and then the perspective switches from third person to first person, sometimes mid-paragraph; at first I thought it was an interesting stylistic choice but later it felt like sloppiness. And that's it for the complaints, now back to the praise. 

The protagonist was well-characterized: Picard is strong, bearish, big-bellied; he's thoughtful and melancholy, contemplative of his past and also fretful about his too-rich diet; he has a sweet fondness for whores and an implacable drive for justice. He lurches here and there, sometimes furious, other times lost in thought, but never forgetting his manners. I really rooted for him. The narrative opens in media res during Picard's pursuit of elegant serial killer Baron Mantes, then quickly proceeds to the main story, which unfolds in three parts. The first and third parts depict confrontations with the Inspector's new nemesis, the magician and acrobat Lazare (and the equally formidable Madame Lazare), and the lengthy middle section - the strongest and certainly most evocative part - is a tour of the parlors and villages of diverse European countries as Picard untangles Lazare's sinister past. I especially loved the focus on toys, deadly and otherwise. The story satisfied and the world was so well-described that it made me want to stay there even longer. All in all, a very pleasant affair.