Rating: 5/5

Simply incredible. Who knew history could be this interesting? Who knew that descriptions of battles could still communicate military detail without endless repetition? Who knew dates and names could be rattled off regularly without making me yawn? 

I was skeptical when it was gifted to me, assuming it was a laborious academic tome. Whilst it's by no means short on fact and detail, it's far more hybrid in nature - just as compellingly entertaining and engaging as it is interesting and informative.

The writing is just beautiful; elegant, paced and sumptuous without being over-bearing. Centrally, it's evocative - and that's really one of the most clever things about the book. It at once completely evokes the spirit of the Empire; the excitement and energy of a country that day-by-day was making leaps of discovery and progress. But at the same time it adopts a tone that is understatedly contemptuous of the motivations and methods that were employed. 

Its condemnation of the concept of Empire is inherent but not aggressive, often delivered with a gentle irony; letting many of the atrocities speak for themselves, and giving a healthy sense of fulness to the peoples that were inevitably steam rollered. It gives good (though uncontested - though like I said, it's not an academic work per se) explanation of how many of the ideas of empire came to be; the charisma of key stakeholders and an attitude of benevolence and calling that only latterly devolved into greed and power.

I am, ultimately, shocked that history is this interesting, and shocked that it can be written as such, to such a degree.

I'm almost tempted to dock a point though - simply because of the frustration - and envy - this book caused. To hold such expertise and knowledge and write so well as Jan (as well as climbing Everest and being involved in pioneering gender surgery), when I won't be able to remember the name of a single historical figure or the date of a battle even one week from now is very, very humbling.