Rating: 4/5

I guess I was destined to “discover” Armistead Maupin in 2017. Although, to be fair, he’s hardly a secret – he’s been writing for four decades and has generations of loyal readers.

Back in the spring, I gave a favourable review to the documentary The Untold Tales Of Armistead Maupin. 

A few months after that, the galleys to Maupin’s memoir, Logical Family, arrived on my desk. I’d already read his stand-alone (and excellent) novel Maybe The Moon, but it seemed to me that in order to appreciate the memoir (and avoid any spoilers revealed in it) I’d have to read at least the first of his famous Tales Of The City books.

So I began the nine novel cycle. And, as friends both IRL and on here had told me, the writing was so much breezy fun - the literary equivalent of eating candy – that I tore through the first book quickly. After reading the memoir, I finished book two.

It took no time at all to get caught up in the adventures of the denizens of San Francisco’s 28 Barbary Lane: bright-eyed 20-something Mary Ann Singleton, newly arrived from Cleveland; jaded bohemian Mona Ramsey; Michael “Mouse” Tolliver, Mona’s gay best friend who soon becomes Mary Ann’s good friend after Mona disappears; Brian Hawkins, an apparently “woke” ex-lawyer who now works as a waiter and is a notorious womanizer; and of course their eccentric landlady, Anna Madrigal, who has, it turns out, chosen each one of her tenants very carefully. 

Maupin has admitted that it took him time to discover the right pace and tone for the book, and to become a decent writer; he also had constraints from the publisher of the San Francisco Chronicle, where the book originally appeared in serialized form. (As we're told in the documentary and the memoir, Maupin was told to keep a chart of the book's gay and straight characters, to make sure the former didn't outnumber the latter.)

True, some chapters feel loose and vignette-like. But once the plot gets going – involving sex, lies and a secret dossier on one of characters – it’s impossible to put down. Maupin has lots of fun with his characters, whether they’re looking for love and relationships (Mary Ann, Mouse), tired of their marriage and looking elsewhere for connection (Mary Ann’s lecherous, bisexual boss, Beauchamp Day; Beauchamp’s boss and father-in-law, Edgar Halcyon, who has a big secret and is also having an affair with one of the main characters).

There’s some savage satire in here, especially involving well-to-do characters: a coterie of “A-list gays”; the “ladies who lunch” society women who compete with each other to bring famous artists to the city and who hold patronizing consciousness-raising rap sessions about “serious” subjects like rape.

One of the characters, a former girlfriend of Mona’s, has a storyline that was far ahead of its time, as Maupin points out in his memoir. I have to admit that when I read the big revelation, I laughed out loud, it was so brutally funny. And other social observations still ring true decades after Maupin wrote them. This series really was way ahead of its time.

But it’s not just satire or the book's prescience that keeps us reading; it’s the hopes and dreams of its characters and the friendships they form under the gabled roof of their unique abode; it’s the sense of fun and excitement that you get in moving to a new city and meeting cool new people – even if you’ve only moved there as a reader.

So go ahead and add me to the huge list of Armistead Maupin fans. Can’t wait to read the other books in the series.