Imagine you were a detective just in your office, and just waiting for a case to be solved. Then a dwarf comes in your room and gives you five hundred dollars to look out for a package. The genre of this book is mystery. My overall opinion is that this book was great and I loved it.

The setting of this book is in London, there is no time period in this book. Its relevance to the story is that one of the most dangerous criminals is in London and is trying to kill Tim and Nick Diamond. This book is about how a guy named Johnny Naples who barges into the detectives office while looking like he's being followed. Then Johnny gives the detectives five hundred dollars and an envelope to look out after. Then he leaves in a hurry. Then the next day Johnny is found dead and all the criminals in London want it. The conflict of this book is person vs. person. A few examples are " 'My number,' he went on. 'I am a patient man timothy. I can wait all of forty-eight hours. But if I haven't heard from you in two days, I think you may wake up to find that something very unpleasant has happened to you.' " and "Gott was standing at the top of the stairs. He was holding a gun." The climax is when the police come to rescue Nick and a shootout happens. "There was an answering shot. Lenny was blown off his feet. His gun glittered to the ground." The resolution is when Tim found a diamond inside a chocolate, "The last of the chocolate had crumbled away. I was left holding a diamond the size of a peanut" The theme of this book is that you should watch who you are with.

The title relates to the book because the book is about the a box of Maltesers and the title is the falcon's malteser, "I doubt if you can fit five million dollars worth inside." This shows that the maltesers were really important."` The author builds bad tension in the book when a bomb is thrown into Nick Diamonds room and he almost dies, "The grenade hit the bed and bounced back toward the window. Then it exploded." This proves that Nick could have been injured or even killed.

I thought the ending of the book was really good when Nick finds a diamond, " The last of the chocolate had crumbled away. I was left holding a diamond the diamond size of a peanut" My favorite part of this book is when the police come to rescue Nick. "There was a crackle in the air. Then a voice boomed out, amplified by a bullhorn. 'This is the police. Stay where you are. You're surrounded.' "

I rate this book 5 stars because I thought it was funny and that it was the best detective story I have ever read. I recommend this book to people who like detective books. I would have watched the package until the dwarf came back.