Rating: 4/5

Yikes. Did I just read that? Or did I dream it?

- thoughts just after finishing The Comfort Of Strangers

3.5 rounded up to 4. 

After reading three Ian McEwan novels, each one different but all rather elegant and civilized, I thought I’d try one of his early books, written back when he had the nickname “Ian Macabre.”

The Comfort Of Strangers (1981) is a chilling psychological thriller about Colin and Mary, an attractive, if rather self-absorbed, unmarried couple who are vacationing in an unnamed city that has all the old-world markers of Venice. One night, while looking for a restaurant, they get lost in the narrow, labyrinthine alleys and run into Robert, a gruff older man who grasps them a little too tightly and leads them to a bar. 

After a long night at the bar (which it turns out Robert owns) and a surreal early morning spent wandering around in a daze, they once again run into the man. Coincidence? Creepy? Whatever. Robert appears friendly and invites them to his spacious home, which he shares with his nervous wife, Caroline, who’s got a mysterious disability. 

I won’t reveal what happens next, but I will say that you’ll be reading between the lines, questioning the older couple’s motives and the younger couple’s naivete. A weird whiff of sexual and erotic menace hovers over much of the second half of the book; at one point the tourists wake up naked in a strange bed and Colin’s forced to either wear a woman’s nightie or a towel. 

This book threw me off-balance. Several times, especially from the midway point onwards, it felt like the narrative ground beneath me was shifting. It didn’t help that Colin and Mary seemed to have no one they could talk to. It made me wonder whether this was an allegory about relationships and alienation. And you might want to consider the title of another famous novella set in this same city. (Hint: it’s written by a Nobel-winning German author.)

I’m not convinced this was the best use of McEwan’s talents. (Of course he would go on to much greater acclaim a few years later.) But there are a couple of sequences - including a long, extended story that Robert tells about his father, and the horrific climax, which we’ve been dreading for chapters - that are simply transfixing. 

I’ve only been to Venice once, but if I ever return, this sinister book will be rattling around in my head if I ever find myself lost and trying to get back to my hotel. Mio dio I hope that never happens.