Rating: 3/5

I'm a bit conflicted on how to rate this. I picked this up because I've never read any W.O. Mitchell, and for a person born in High River (where he lived for many years) and living in Calgary (where he also lived for many years) who loves Canadian literature, it seems like a travesty to be ignorant of his works.

Mitchell sets this book in 1950s Shelby, a pseudonym for High River. My favourite part of the book was recognizing the people and places I already knew. Some of the names he changed, and some he kept the same, and he did do a good job of building a little town where the prairie meets the foothills.

But then he didn't do much with it. I'm often happy reading books where not much happens, but this seemed to plod along. I also see why he was renowned as a humour writer, but they seemed to be the only parts of the book with any liveliness.

Also, given that this book was published in 1990, it's mostly just nostalgia. I suppose you can't blame Mitchell. He was clearly writing about his friends and neighbours, and if he was to give them faults, they needed to be forgivable. But for me, the framing of the book (an eastern sociologist coming into town to cast a critical eye over good, honest folk) changed the book from love letter and tribute to a nostalgic lionizing. And the unfortunate consequence is that the characters are flat and doll-like. Only the definitely fictional main character and newspaper editor Matt Stanley is allowed to develop.

So I am giving this three stars partly because of vanity. We all like to read a book that immortalizes our surroundings, and I really did enjoy figuring out his code. (Eden Valley is changed to Paradise Valley, for example.) I was also thrilled that he mentioned the two guest ranches that comprised one of my thesis chapters. But I wouldn't recommend this book to anyone who didn't live here. Instead, if you want a good portrait of High River, you should read Paul Voisey's High River and the Times: An Alberta Community and Its Weekly Newspaper, 1905-1966. It's a study of the same small town, mentions many of the same things, and is also seen through the lens of the real High River paper.

I'll be picking up more W.O. Mitchell. I know this was published at the end of his career, and may therefore be out of step with Who Has Seen the Wind and the other books he is most well known for. So if you're curious about him too, don't start here.