Rating: 4/5

My reading experience of the sixth Chronicle of Brother Cadfael is peculiar. In a mystery novel, my first focus is the mystery plot. I want it to be the dominant feature of the story rather than secondary. So, I wasn't too pleased to see that the murder-mystery was just a backdrop in The Virgin in the Ice. Of course, the murder-mystery was resolved, and the criminal was neatly apprehended at the end; it was only a platform to build the story. However, to my surprise, despite my slight disappointment, I actually enjoyed the story.

The main reason is that I saw the novel as an important one in the Cadfael series. I cannot reveal it without spoiling the story, but anyone who'd read would understand my meaning. The Virgin in the Ice made me realize the significance of reading the series in order. Although I have been doing that, I didn't think it was necessary until this one. So, anyone who wants to read the Chronicles of Brother Cadfael, kindly take note and try to read as much in their publication order.

My whole enjoyment of this novel is attributed to the characters, action, and Peters' writing. Ellis Peters has this amazing quality of making her characters likable, even the villains! I remember feeling the same about her portrayal of villains in the previous chronicle, The Leper of Saint Giles. Her character presentation is excellent, so you feel them as real. She seems to have had a good understanding of human nature. Emerging writers have much to learn from her. I have always enjoyed the Beringar-Cadfael union in their adventures and solving mysteries, and I was not disappointed here. I also liked the new characters, the Hugonin children and Olivier de Bretagne. I get the feeling that I'll meet them yet again. 

The Virgin in the Ice was full of action, perhaps more than any other chronicle I've read so far. It was fast-paced and a page-turner. Ellis Peters must be given her due for bringing characters and their actions to life with her beautiful prose. I particularly enjoyed how she captured the winter season of medieval England. I was almost transported to the scenes and enjoyed the white beauty of the snow. 

I'm becoming quite attached to this series. I'm not the sort of reader who can devote herself to an entire series, although the series of Sherlock Holmes, Poirot, and Miss Marple have been exceptions. I get a feeling that Brother Cadfael may join them.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/