Rating: 3/5

Picked up second hand in Hay-on-Wye during the Literary Festival mainly in order to escape a wretchedly poor banjo-picking busker duelling with himself and annoying everyone else. It was with some relief I handed over my £2 and made my escape while commiserating with the trapped shop owner. Settling down in a deckchair to read and waiting for Jeremy Irons and Sinead Cusack to read first world war poetry to me (and 1600 others) I was delighted to find that the story (originally published in 1963 as Mute Witness) is set in New York where we are shortly to visit and will undoubtedly be all the safer for having Lieutenant Clancy (rather than Frank Bullitt and his Ford Mustang) cleaning up the 52nd Precinct whatever that is... surely not a boring 1960's shopping centre? Oh, a police station. The atmosphere is well invoked by the film version and the plot very similar. Clancy is held in higher regard by his bosses than is McQueen, and his colleagues, Stanton, Kaproski and Doc Freeman provide sturdy support while Clancy goes out on a limb to hide a dead murder victim while he figures out what on earth is going on. No one gets to eat or drink while Clancy is working. In between his exhaustive and exhausting hours on the case there are little glimpses into his character and no shortage of humorous interludes while he ponders the variations in the contents of a washing line visible from his office window; a puzzle he also solves.
He stared out of the window, disappointed in Kaproski's lack of success. The clothesline caught his eye. One day that line had been empty and he wished he could remember when. Christmas? New Year's? St Patrick's Day? He turned back to his report, giving up on the problem. And how, he suddenly wondered, facing the pages before him, did the police department ever manage to function before the invention of the typewriter, and the pencil, and the pen? Especially the ballpoint pen? Lots of commas there too. Now I need an anthology of WW1 poetry.