Rating: 5/5

Loving books about cats but wanting a break from Warriors, I decided to give this one a go. I also love fantasy, so all things were looking good. Then I read the large amount of mixed reviews. I wasn't in the mood for a slow book, so I hesitated reading this at first. Luckily, once I'd started, I found it hard to stop. This took up the majority of my free time over the four days it took to read. Even in these cold winter months, I found myself getting up an extra ten minutes early just to fit in a chapter before work. Needless to say it was gripping, and gripping me hard. The Catswold Portal involves a fantasy place called the Netherworld, here a married couple fight over control of the kingdom, but the queen wishes to take over the whole Netherworld. The world is filled with wonderful creatures such as griffons, harpies, and the odd dragon (though they are nearly extinct). The first thing that struck me about this book was how easy it was to envision the magical world, without the use of excessive descriptions. Perhaps playing Skyrim so much has aided my fantasy world creation part of the brain. In this world there is also a young girl named Sarah that wishes to discover about her past and is soon in the middle of the king and queen's mind games. Meanwhile, in the upperworld (our world) a young artist mourns the death of his wife. The two worlds are brought together and the adventure begins to stop a war from erupting in the netherworld. The book is very dense and certainly has a lot going on. At first the upperworld sections seemed to drag a little, but only because the netherworld chapters were pretty intense. Once the worlds met, it became more centered on the real world. Some may find this disappointing, but by then I was so invested in the characters I couldn't really complain. The heroine is a very strong young girl, but also has a very vulnerable side. She is exactly like a cat, being both independent and able to hunt, but also needs the care of humans too. Siddonie is a great evil character. Having been so hateful since a young age, her actions are always carefully thought out. The best thing behind the whole story is the battle between king and queen. Neither is particularly likeable, and both are schemers to the extreme, but there is charm in there little games too. Especially as they don't always revert to violence. My biggest complaint was that it wasn't long enough. I wish this had been a series of books. The final war is handled rather quickly, and big plot points are summed up by other characters. This also makes the pacing a bit too frantic towards the end. Being disappointed about a book not being long enough is a big compliment in my books, at least when the book is sizeable in length. The book is romantic, exciting, and at times scary, as a young boy filled with hate starts to terrorize his small community. A fascinating place that I would love to visit again.