Rating: 4/5

When The Rack was first published in 1958 it was hailed as a literary masterpiece destined to take its place among the great novels of its age, and yet its author, Derek Lindsay never wrote another book, and today it’s a little known novel. So did it deserve such lavish praise? In a word, yes. 
The novel is so immersive, telling its story with such a painful, brutal intensity and accuracy that it leaves you longing to escape the endless cycle of hope and despair, yet clinging, like the protagonist, to any chance of release.
The Rack tells the story of Paul Davenant, an unremarkable young man stricken with TB, who has arrived at a sanatorium in the Swiss Alps with high hopes of a full cure and a normal life. As the weeks and months pass interminably by, Davenant undergoes endless tests and torturous medical procedures, all the while facing the possibility that his case may be hopeless. Despite the pain, indignity, and tediousness of these brutal procedures before effective antibiotic treatments were available, Davenant never loses sight of the outrageous, absurd and farcical side to his situation. He never gives up.
I was not surprised to discover that the author bears many similarities to the hero of his book. Derek Lindsay who wrote using the pseudonym A E Ellis was born in 1920. He was orphaned at 3 and brought up by an aunt. After serving in the Second World War, he returned to England and attended Oxford University. When he became ill with tuberculosis, Lindsay was sent to a sanatorium in the Alps, where the years of his slow cure provided the inspiration for his first and only novel, The Rack. Happily, however, Derek went on to live a long life and died in 2000.
It may be coincidental, but it feels like a timely re-release of the book because reading this in 2022, it’s hard not to see some similarities to the ups and downs, the fear and dark humour, the hope and despair, of Covid and its effect on the nation’s morale and mental health. One moment thinking we’re through the worst, only to be repeatedly hit with new variants and restrictions on our lives. A roller coaster of emotions which has really taken its toll. 
This book is a powerful read. It can feel like heavy going in parts, thanks to the almost unbearably painful and detailed descriptions of Paul’s barbaric treatment, the repetition, and the bizarre editorial decision to include large sections of narrative in French without providing any translation. (Unless that’s just the ARC?) But, overall, these criticisms are minor, and the story of man’s capacity for love and hope against all the odds, sticks with you despite the bleakness of the tale.
With thanks to the publisher and NetGalley for an ARC in return for an honest review.