Rating: 4/5

A surprisingly depressing tome which illustrates the fact that it is not our allegedly over sized brains that has caused all our millenia of misery, but the bits between our legs. Which is a fitting paradox. Pleasure is always a precursor to pain, though many people (especially women) seem to have missed out on the pleasure part and gone directly to pain (and death) via disgust and boredom. The only people who seem to have developed any kind of system of knowledge designed to make sex pleasurable for women were the Chinese, and this they did not for the purpose of making their cloistered herds of women happy, but to maximize the theft of their life essences. Indeed it was thought that if a man had sex with enough different women he could attain immortality. This knowledge was suppressed completely in China by the 17th century but it did leak through to Japan along with the rest of Chinese civilization. She doesn't say much more about this, but it would be an interesting field to research. It also probably inspired the Kama Sutra, but from what I have read of that it is quite crude and treats women no better than beasts. Both options of course are preferable to the sex as sin approach pursued in the west. That makes somewhat hair raising reading to say the least.

Certainly this overview does support the idea that the vast majority of the human race thinks with their sex organs, if you can call the hormonal imperative thinking. Even more depressing when reading history is how bad intentions quite often have unintended good results, and how "good" intentions are most often driven by moral and religious delusions, and so of course end in disaster. The real truth of the war between the sexes, as portrayed here is that women themselves have had a starring role in their own oppression and that they consistently outstrip men in their narrow minded conservatism. Men of course are only interested in planting their semen in as many receptacles as possible, being even more hormonally ruled than women. It is quite astonishing the lengths they will go to to achieve this end. In fact I tend to believe that this is the only reason they are motivated to do anything at all. Women too of course will go to amazing extremes of behavior to be the object of this desire.

It is pure luck really that women have ended up being "allowed to join the human race" at least on paper (and of course only in affluent countries). This honour itself is a highly mixed blessing. I really do sympathize with Sadawos' character in PACO and The Magical Book, whose "insanity" was that he didn't want to be a human being. He preferred to wear a snail costume and hide in the pond. After reading this book I am feeling like doing the same thing.