Rating: 1/5

I read this entire series recently because I missed it as a child, and while as an adult I hated it, I still feel pretty safe thinking I'd have hated it as a kid, too.

The problems are too many for me to go into (crappy character development for these irritating goody-goodies without any flaws, abrupt endings, repetitive moral garbage), but I suppose the main problem is... they're just boring. Every book in this series, boring boring, so utterly boring. So dull. So sad and dull.

Things happen, I guess you could say. In a way, things occur. Like, plot. But more accurately you could say that each book is a stupid boring lesson of some kind, history or politics or science, loosely stuck in the framework of pretending something is happening.

In a previous book, a kid's on a quest with a unicorn. That's a story right! Oh except the entire thing is him just going into different bodies in the past (doing what in them is unclear), and we learn a whole bunch of bullshit about some massive confusing family tree, and Indians, and history, and it is dull dull dull. What was it about? Choices, I guess? Your parentage deciding your level of evil because there is no free will? Brown-eyed people are bad? 

Who knows. 

Oh but the family's so interesting, so the story must be interesting, right? One son is like psychic or whatever, the mother is like a scientist, and she cooks on her Bunsen burner. So that's like an interesting story, right? Because the family's so kooky and unique? All the kids talk and act like boring adults (so saccharin too, oh gee whiz mom shucks we sure can't wait to set the table golly we're all so swell and super, shall I make you sandwiches and cocoa sister, yes brother please do), so that's story and character, right? 

No. Things have to actually happen. Characters have to make decisions beyond just going to a rock where they like to sit, and things have to happen beyond just having shit happen AT them while they stand around growing freaking vegetables. 

(Love the relationship in the first book, by the way, between Meg and Calvin. They meet, Calvin says some nice stuff, then they're just married and having kids. DEVELOP RELATIONSHIPS WHAT IS WRONG WITH YOU.)

It's like someone's trying to teach you math, but you don't want to learn math, and so they say "Well then let me tell you a story of a dragon-slayer and his epic true love!" And you say oooh alright, and the story is this:

"Once a man set out to slay a dragon, and on the way he learned that two plus two equals four, and Pi is 3.14, and (insert 3 hours of really boring math), and then he slayed the dragon the end! Oh also he met a girl and it was epic."

It's just awful. They're all awful. I feel so sad about how awful these books are, how soulless and without whimsy. How can you have UNICORNS and your book is completely devoid of whimsy? It's all just sound and fury signifying nothing.

Why.