Rating: 5/5

Psychologically Addicted to Hyde

Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde has like Bram Stoker’s Dracula and Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein created a monster. This monster has escaped the confines of the page and transformed itself from genre to genre moving further from the text with each evolution. Like Dracula and Frankenstein, Mr Hyde has appeared on stage and screen. The monster of these horror productions has grown in the telling until it becomes part of the public psyche. Many more people know of the monster from Jekyll and Hyde than have read the book. However, this gothic novel is not about a monster. It is a psychological story about the different aspects of personality that combine to make up a person. There is a bit of Henry Jekyll and Edward Hyde in all of us. Jekyll writes in his full statement of the case: 
“Strange as my circumstances were, the terms of this debate are as old and commonplace as man; much the same inducements and alarms cast the die for any tempted and trembling sinner; and it fell out with me, as it falls with so vast a majority of my fellows, that I chose the better part and was found wanting in the strength to keep to it.”
The universal nature of this theme has allowed the tale to transcend time and be as relevant today as it was in the Victorian era of its publication. The complex psychology of the story shows an awareness of the mental struggles that we all deal with in a lifetime and that those with multiple personality disorders go through everyday.
Stevenson also deals with the psychology of drug addiction. It is through drinking a potion of undisclosed psychoactive drugs that Jekyll is transformed into his degraded form of self, Hyde. In Victorian society opium, cocaine and alcohol were the popular drugs of the day to abuse but whatever the substance the trials of addiction are the same. Jekyll goes through a typical cycle of pre-occupation, ritualisation, addiction, remission, relapse and despair that addicts to anything endure. 
“For two months, however, I was true to my determination; for two months I led a life of such severity as I had never before attained to, and enjoyed the compensations of an approving conscience…I began to be tortured with throes and longings, as of Hyde struggling after freedom; and at last, in an hour of moral weakness, I once again compounded and swallowed the transforming draught.”
Soon Jekyll is taking the drug more frequently. As his exposure to the drug increases his control over the transformation into Hyde wanes. He unintentionally changes out on the streets of London and has to take the drug just to remain normal. 
	The setting, London in the late nineteenth century, adds to the gothic horror atmosphere with thick fog in the streets. Yet despite this fog the crimes of Edward Hyde are clearly illuminated. Sir Danvers Carew is murdered in a lane “brilliantly lit by the full moon.”
In telling the story Stevenson gives the reader three distinct narrators. First we see the strange case from the viewpoint of the lawyer Utterson. This sets up the mysteries of what is happening to Jekyll and who is Hyde. Hyde’s identity is revealed in a letter from Dr Lanyon, an old friend of both Utterson and Jekyll, who provides the second point of view. Finally all is laid bare by the epistolary hand of Dr Jekyll in his full statement of the case. Stevenson has a talent for creating characters that leave the page and last in the memory of his readers. Who can forget Long John Silver who came alive in daydreams of childhood adventures?
The idea for this novel came to Stevenson in a dream. He wrote the first draft in three days, completing the book in six weeks. Although from conception to completion The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde took only a short period of Stevenson’s life it stayed with him until his death. According to his wife Fanny, his last words, as he fell dying to the floor after the onset of a sudden headache, were:
 “What’s the matter with me, what is this strangeness, has my face changed?”
This is a fantastic book that exposes to scrutiny the duality of the mind and dangers of addiction. It transcends the gothic horror genre its film adaptations have revelled in. If you haven’t read it do so, and if you have, but a long time ago along with Treasure Island, read it again.