Rating: 5/5

I love John Muir for his brilliant mind, his deep respect and awe of God's creations, and his beautiful words. What a truly special and talented and spiritual man. I would have loved to hang out with him in Yosemite back in the day. I loved this book, loved getting to know him. I'm a superfan and will stand in line to meet him in heaven. 

PS I don't necessarily recommend this book. You have to want to read this. The descriptions are lengthy and if you aren't swept up in it, you would probably want to poke your eyes out. (Even I, a fan and tree-hugger, did not read the last section because I was done with all the description without much story by then.)

Favorite parts:

The first section reminds me so much of the Little House books. I love his wild tendencies and passion for the natural world from the beginning. It's inspiring! 

I wandered away on a glorious botanical and geological excursion, which has lasted nearly fifty years and is not yet completed, always happy and free, poor and rich, without thought of a diploma or of making a name, urged on and on through endless, inspiring, Godful beauty. p72

I was compelled to sleep with the trees in the one great bedroom of the open night. p82

Not a breath of air moved the gray moss, and the great black arms of the trees met overhead and covered the avenue. But the canopy was fissured by many a netted seam and leafy-edged opening, through which the moonlight sifted its auroral rays, broidering the blackness in silvery light. p91

His descriptions are so beautiful, every one. This one (above) stood out especially. I love John Muir!

Often I thought I would like to explore the city if, like a lot of wild hills and valleys, it was clear of inhabitants. I can make my exhilarated way over an unknown ice-field or sure-footedly up a titanic gorge, but in these terrible canyons of New York, I am a pitiful, unrelated atom that loses itself at once. p96

The great yellow days circled by uncounted . . . p105

How deep our sleep last night in the mountain's heart, beneath the trees and stars, hushed by solemn-sounding waterfalls and many small soothing voices in sweet accord whispering peace! And our first pure mountain day, warm, calm, cloudless-how immeasurable it seems, how serenely wild! I can scarcely remember its beginning. Along the river, over the hills, in the ground, in the sky, spring work is going on with joyful enthusiasm, new life, new beauty, unfolding, unrolling in glorious exuberant extravagance-new birds in their nests, new winged creatures in the air, and new leaves, new flowers, spreading, shining, rejoicing everywhere. p109 

Beautiful passages like this (above) are a dime a dozen in John Muir's writings. I will stop quoting them here and just read. He is inspiring with every word.

I can't help it -

. . . above the water, beneath the leaves and stars-everything still more impressive than by day, the fall seen dimly white, singing Nature's old love song with solemn enthusiasm, while the stars peering through the leaf-roof seemed to join in the white water's song. Precious night, precious day to abide in me forever. Thanks be to God for this immortal gift. p114

I therefore concluded not to venture farther, but did nevertheless. p127 (I love him!)

(Half Dome) A large and imposing pulpit for so small a preacher. (A grasshopper) p133

The story of sensing his friend in Yosemite starting on p134 is a testament to God, and Muir's tender and sensitive spirit.

(Describing a hermit he met among the Sequoias)
 . . . life's noon the meanwhile passing unnoticed into late afternoon shadows. Then, health and gold gone, the game played and lost, like a wounded deer creeping into this forest solitude, he awaits the sundown call. p210

Climb the mountains and get their good tidings. Nature's peace will flow into you as sunshine flows into trees. The winds will blow their own freshness into you, and storms their energy, while cares will drop off like autumn leaves. p311 (One of my already favorite John Muir quotes.)