Rating: 5/5

Absolutely loved this. It was recommended to me last January by a friend who knew I was looking for more Christmas books, so I put off reading it until now, and I'm both sad and glad. Sad that I'm just discovering it, and glad that I'm reading it at the start of the Christmas season. 

The book covers a whole year in the lives of orphaned sisters Nancy and Plum, but it starts and ends with Christmas and has a sort of Christmassy spirit throughout. It's based on the stories about two plucky sisters that MacDonald used to tell her own sister when they were growing up, and was originally published in 1952. This edition has wonderful illustrations by Mary GrandPre which really made it special. 

But it's still a very old-fashioned book, and that's a good thing. 

I kept thinking about how this book couldn't be written today. I mean, the beginning, where you find out how two little girls came to live at the almost cartoonishly awful Mrs. Monday's Boarding House, that would work. But from there things would probably get more and more hyperbolically awful until the day was saved by the girls discovering magic powers or that everyone is a robot or that they are the heiresses to some Roald Dahl-esque candy factory. All the adults would be awful, and the kids would save themselves. But this book is very real. Sometimes the kids are hungry or dirty or have had to do awful chores all day. Sometimes grownups are mean, sometimes kind, sometimes ambiguous. You know, like real people. The girls are able to come up with some schemes and adventures on their own, and other times they are helped by adults. There's no magical elements, and yet the adventures the girls have are still exciting or funny or scary, and there is a magical quality to some of it. When you are hungry and lonely, being fed a delicious hot meal (described in glorious detail!) by a kindly farmwife does feel like magic, even if the farmwife doesn't turn out to be a good witch. 

When I talk at schools, I talk about how I didn't really enjoy reading until I was in fifth grade, because there were no good books to read, but that's not 100% true. (It sure holds the kids' attention, though!) I think really the problem was that I didn't like the books that were being written for kids at the time. I have very fond memories of books like A LITTLE PRINCESS and THE SECRET GARDEN, THE ALL-OF-A-KIND FAMILY, and the works of Noel Streatfeild. I loved books that talked about Life. I liked descriptions of old-fashioned clothes, and how to build a fire, scrub a potato, and cook it in the coals. That was all very interesting to me, and still is. NANCY AND PLUM is that kind of book, the kind of book I would have been obsessed with as a child. So while I'm sad I'm just finding out about it now, the good news is: now I've read it, I've loved it, and I own a copy!

Read aloud 2019: The kids really got into this. At first they thought it was too sad, but they were fully invested anyway, and they loved the ending. My daughter (age 10) wanted to know if there was a sequel so that we could read it immediately.