Rating: 3/5

3.5 ☆

Published in 1955, Bath Tangle was aptly named as it included not just one romantic triangle but multiple interwoven triangles. The Earl of Spenborough has died leaving behind his daughter Lady Serena Carlow, age 25, and his second wife Fanny Carlow, who is about 22. His two ladies possess very different temperaments. While Lady Serena can easily manage their family's affairs, the younger Fanny as the widow has the social stature that could protect both ladies. Serena chooses to live with Fanny in the dower house. 

  
    It was natural to [Serena] to command; she had reigned over her father's household to admiration, triumphantly confuting the older ladies who had considered her too young to succeed in such a charge. 
  

The reality of Regency England (and now) is that it's a man's world. And the late Earl couldn't resist an effort to direct from the grave. His will placed Ivo Barrasford the Marquis of Rotherham as trustee to Serena's fortune and gave him the authority to reject her suitors. The sucker punch is that Ivo, the late Earl's close friend, had been betrothed to Serena until their wedding had been canceled. 

  
    "The very thought of Ivo's holding my purse strings to the day of his death, or mine, is enough to send me into strong convulsions!"
  

Lady Serena is no shrinking violet. She had cried off her wedding to Ivo because they are too similar. Despite the public embarrassment, Serena and Ivo remain on friendly terms as they share a love of politics. 

  
    “Live where you choose! It’s all one to me. Have you anything more to say?’
‘No, I have not, and I should be very happy to think I need never say another word to you for as long as I live – and of all things in the world there is nothing – nothing – so abominable, and contemptible, and cowardly, and ungentlemanly as persons who walk out of the room when one is addressing them!”
[Ivo] had opened the door, but at that, he burst out laughing and shut it again. "Very well! But I warn you I shall give as good as I get!"
  

Gentle Fanny is thrown into verbal confusion by her fear of the Marquis. This is a common reaction to Ivo, who tolerates no fools.

  
    "You frighten many people, my lord. It has sometimes seemed to me that when your black mood is on you it is your wish to frighten people. But I am sure I don't know why, for you can never tolerate anyone who fears you."
Rotherham looked up quickly, a reluctant laugh escaping him. "True! ... Wilton, I have a considerable regard for you, but you have not the power to make me change my mind."
"I know that, my lord," Wilton said. "There was only one person who ever had that power."
  

Think shades of Katherine and Petruchio from The Taming of the Shrew for their interactions. All of their fiery exchanges hide deep feelings, but are they platonic or romantic feelings? I have no doubt that I would find Serena and Ivo exhausting to live with, but I have no objections to them as characters. Bath Tangle has an emotional muddle, and it would be better to avoid reading the Goodreads summary as it gives away to much of the plot.