Rating: 4/5

Here's why Nana should never be made into a movie... (Too late. It already has been. Four times.) Emile Zola has created a character so preposterous that casting agents in every corner of the globe would be hard-pressed to locate an actress capable of making her believable. Now I am not claiming that a woman like Nana could not exist—because our world is certainly chock-full of the preposterous—but she would necessarily be so exceptional—such an astounding confluence of so many unlikely variables—that her successful imitators must surely be just as rare. The part of Nana would require not only acting wherewithal, but also a physical allure (not a traditional beauty perhaps, but a certain... je ne sais quoi) so commanding that men (and women too) of every station in life, every class, and every moral conviction consider themselves powerless to resist her. What could such a woman possibly look like? She couldn't be adequately described, I don't think, because there would be something ineffable or even transcendent about her looks which would resist the banality of all the adjectives at our disposal. Oh, and did I mention—she has to be trashy too? There has to be the well-trafficked cooter stench (if only subliminal) of a Kardashian about her. In other words, I'm not seeing Katherine Heigl or Keira Knightley in the role. 

One of the advantages of reading over film-viewing is that I can imagine Nana any way that I want. Zola provides a few descriptors along the way—plump, tall, blonde, large-thighed—but these are fairly neutral construction materials which can be fashioned into an architecture of my choosing. My imagination, safely tucked away in the cellars of my mind, also isn't subject to the disapproval of others ('You think that's attractive?'). The spectral Nana of my conjuring becomes the authoritative Nana. Because she seduces me, she seduces everyone.

Let's talk more about this Nana. There's really no getting around it: she's a cruel, calculating, ridiculous woman. She allows men into her life only to suck every last sou out of them and to send them, spitefully, on their way. She manipulates their affections—drawing them in to a sexual complacency and then, when she's taken everything she wants or gets bored, she belittles and abuses them and, finally, throws them out. A primary victim of her allure—although there are many—is Count Muffat, an older, distinguished, and erstwhile religiously devout man who ruins himself completely in his futile attempts to possess Nana. Nana cheats on him so often and so flagrantly that she seems like a sexual vending machine. Anyone with the cash on hand is entitled to a bag of Funyuns.

Based on what I've told you, you probably won't be surprised that Nana has been attacked as a misogynistic work. If you approach the book prepared to understand Nana as symbolic, in whatever sense, of all women and to infer that many of the male characters' attitudes toward women are the author's own, then you will likely find Nana a repellent novel written by a repellent man. I, on the other hand, view Nana not as the Woman, but merely a woman. The misogyny of the male characters in the book, meanwhile, doesn't strike me as Zola's, given what I know about him: his avowed goal in his twenty-volume Rougon-Macquart series was to shine a 'scientific' light on the central role of social environment and heredity in the psychological determination of the individual. Nana's parents were poor, alcoholic, and abusive. Should we wonder that Nana ends up being this woman in this particular society? Is Zola blaming it on her gender? I don't think so. Of course, many of Zola's views on heredity seem ridiculous today, but no sane person doubts the tremendous effect of environment on the formation of an individual's character. 

I don't think anybody, male or female, comes off very well in this novel. We sometimes say that realists provide us with a 'warts-and-all' depiction of reality, but I think Zola prefers to dwell on the warts in Nana—and he certainly doesn't restrict himself to the title character's. Zola, on the one hand, clearly had a somewhat pessimistic view of the ills of society, but I think—and this is pure speculation here—he found some kind of hope in being able to illuminate these ills so that they could be remedied or guarded against. 

Lastly, a few practical notes: I read the creaky, dusty, and very British public domain translation published by Barnes and Noble. It was written in 1922, I believe. I'm taking it as a article of faith that there is a better translation out there—maybe more than one. If you decide to read Nana, seek out more opinions on translations because I'm guessing this one isn't the best bet. Also, this novel takes a while to really sink into. At the beginning, it's a little confusing—particularly at Countess Sabine's party—because there are a LOT of characters. But if you soldier on, I think you'll find yourself starting to like it at about the one-hundred page mark.