Rating: 2/5

This is a historical novel with elements of fantasy set around 6,000BC, around the time horses were first domesticated. I do find the pre-historical period fascinating. So much of what we think of as human originates in that period and I've found few novels set in that era other than Auel's series that starts with Clan of the Cave Bear. Tarr's story involves the ancestors of the Celts on the Eurasian steppes. In her story, it was a young woman who first tamed a horse in her tribe, but her discovery was usurped by her brother and only males can be riders. That first rider tells the true tale as she's dying to her great, great granddaughter, Sparrow. Sparrow is soon drawn to ride a mare, even though the penalty for a woman who rides a horse is to be buried alive. 

I didn't care for the book much. The prose style isn't stellar--there are point of view slips and Tarr has this disconcerting habit of calling the male member a "rod" (when she isn't calling it a "manly organ" or "manly parts.") Indeed, I could wish this was a young adult book. It would have fit, this being a coming of age tale, and teen girls might relish more the girl power message. Moreover it would have meant no sex scenes. I'm no prude, and I can relish them well-written, but these were frequent and graceless. But I think I was most irked by this being one of those stories that thinks creating a strong female character means making almost every male character a jerk. Well, at least in the first part among the patriarchal tribe. Then we meet another tribe with a female chief and we're over the rainbow in what I thought was a rather pat way. When the two groups meet again, I thought it rather puzzling how easily Sparrow's tribesmen got over the shock of women on horses when this was supposed to be sacrilege. 

The story and characters just never clicked with me. I think I would have given up early in if this book hadn't been on my shelf unread for years, giving me an investment in getting through it. It's not the kind of book I imagine I'll ever read again, and thus won't be keeping its place on my bookshelf much longer.