Rating: 3/5

The heroine and her father, once wealthy and prosperous, have now fallen on hard times because their main source of income, her father's mine, is failing. Things have gotten so stressful that her father has had two heart attacks in the past three years, and seems destined for another, possibly fatal one.

Father and daughter try one last valiant gamble by insinuating themselves into the company of a big shot tycoon mine owner (hero of the piece) who is spending some down time at a fancy resort. Hero seems instantly smitten by the heroine though he makes highly cynical, cryptic remarks about her and her father being gold-digging hall of famers. Heroine is very offended by his insinuations and slaps him for it. However, the hero was not so far off the mark. No sooner has he turned down her father’s loan request that heroine deliberately tries to seduce him to get him to change his mind.

The hero refuses to rise to the bait. He bluntly tells heroine that he would love to jump her bones, but he simply cannot afford to rescue her financially: Much like the Emperor who had no clothes, seems this tycoon hero has no cash flow LOOOL.

All hope is lost. However, contrary to heroine's greatest fears, this last blow does not kill her father. 
 In fact, he miraculously recovers from his health problems. Apparently, it was the heavy responsibility of running a mine that was giving him heart attacks. Now that he has finally declared bankruptcy, not only have all his debts disappeared but all his worries too. Free at last, he decides to pursue his lifelong dream of being a… dollhouse maker. He doesn’t even flinch when he finds out his trampy daughter was willing to sell herself to rescue his mine. On the contrary, he feels proud of his little darling that she tried to leverage her body just to secure a loan for him. I think the hero pegged these two gold-diggers right! :)))

The Deus Ex Machina moment that occurs at the conclusion involves… the OM. He gets trapped inside the mine and the heroine agonizes over his fate, leading the hero to believe she is in love with the man. The noble hero rescues the OM for the sake of the heroine and the OM, knowing the heroine has friend-zoned him and is in love with the hero, magnanimously brings the two lovers together.