Rating: 5/5

Wow. All I can say to preface this mini review is that this is a masterpiece to end all masterpieces. 

I first read this masterpiece of systemic racism and its hideous legacy in high school English. It was my introduction to black authors that would define my reading and teaching life, a book that would change my life. 

Every English teacher out there from high school to graduate school level out there should recommend this text for anyone who loves a good story, a reading challenge, a puzzlement of sorts, and finally, a true novel that was relevant then, and relevant now especially in the light of Black Lives Matter, the death of George Floyd, and the sentencing of his murderer. 

As Ellison writes, "perhaps only the unbelievable could be believed. Perhaps the truth was always a lie" (Ellison 498). 

I think out of all the modern African American texts out there, Invisible Man should be required reading that serves as one of today's essential important books. I would say Invisible Man should lead the pack of novels about how to find an antiracist self, and how that systemic racism is still a hideous legacy that needs to be discussed in all educational forums. 

For me, it's part of this list: The Autobiography of Malcolm X, Native Son, The Bluest Eye, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Their Eyes Were Watching God, Passing, and The Fire Next Time.

Ellison's protagonist is bleak, bold and defiant. His anger and his experiences of constant racial aggressions beginning from the infamous Battle Royale, and his search for an identity up in Harlem will stay with you. 

The language of the novel is paced slowly then bites you when you least expect it, pouncing like an angry cat lying in wait, "I moved with the crowd, the sweat pouring off me, listening to the grinding roar of traffic, the growing sound of a record shop loudspeaker blaring a languid blues" (Ellison 443). This is an example of where Ellison writes of a setting that is loaded, hot and humid filled with jazz and rage. 

The narrator writes the truth of what its like to be a black man in America, "it was a normal mistake of which many are guilty, he thought he was a man, and that men were not meant to be pushed around. But it was hot downtown, and he forgot his history" (Ellison 457). 

The narrator's story is a series of bizarre circumstantial events that begin in the South, to the North- and is often victimized with a series of aggressions that were meant to keep him down because of his race. 

From the fateful Battle Royale, where he participates in a fight to receive money; his fateful encounter with Mr. Norton, his expulsion by Dr. Bledsoe and his joining of a brotherhood similar to that of the Black Panthers in real life, the Narrator witnesses one traumatic event too many. 

An example is his witnessing of Brother Clifton being shot by a police officer in the subway and no one wants to do anything about it- is extremely reminiscent of what continues to happen today to our black men. 

The novel is timeless in its insistence to be a catalyst for change, though the work is always going to be a struggle, "an unarmed man was killed, a brother, a leading member shot down by a policeman" (Ellison 466). 

That haunting final question, "I speak for you?" is one of the most brilliant summing up of the events of the novel, symbolic of the vicious cycle of harm that continues to pervade the black community by their racist counterparts.