Rating: 2/5

Due to the fact that I have been writing more than reading this summer, I have to admit that I made a poor choice when I picked this book for my summer read. This was due to the size and slow pace of this historical fiction novel about John &amp; Abigail Adams. 
 First published in 1965, it is quickly evident that the book and its subject matter were thoroughly researched by the author, Irving Stone. My main complaint is where the author chose to focus his attention. This book is quite long...nearly 650 pages. It is not a quick or easy read. While I give credit to Stone for staying as true to the style of the language of the day, I could have done with less description. By the end of the story, I was almost glad John Adams didn't win his second term as I did not wish to devote any more time to Stone's story.
 I've read quite a bit on John and Abigail Adams through the years. They were, indeed, very much in love and very much a part of the making of their country's history during their lives. But, for me, the real John and Abigail Adams were missing from this book. I found Stone's characterization to be too one dimensional. I didn't read about the controlling, irritating side of John Adams. Stone's John Adams, I imagine, is more likeable than the historical one. I also didn't read about the fiercely outspoken, almost possessively protective Abigail. Stone's Abigail was much more soft spoken than her surviving letters to her husband and Thomas Jefferson suggest of the historical figure I've always imagined her to be.
 One of the biggest disappointments in the book was, what I perceived as the glossing over of the two greatest occurrences of John Adams' Presidential administration...The XYZ Affair and especially The Alien And Sedition Acts -- the latter of which still serves as a stain on Adams' otherwise impeccable political character and most certainly led to him not gaining a second term. I felt Stone spent more time explaining the styles of furnishings and types of clothes the Adamses favored instead of matters of greater import.
 To gain a more thorough and readable understanding of these otherwise fascinating historical figures, I'd suggest reading David McCullough's magnificent "John Adams" or Cokie Roberts, "Founding Mothers". It's a shame that this book, in my opinion, was a waste of time. I would have been better served reading Joseph Ellis' telling of the Adams' story in his book, "First Family"...a book I planned to have read, but will now need to be put on hold. "Those Who Love" has effectively led me to need a break from John &amp; Abigail Adams as well as from the time period in which they lived. This is an unfortunate consequence of having read Irving Stone's book, because from what I've read previously about John &amp; Abigail Adams, they deserved a book to be more worthy of who they really were. FINISHED 8-25-12