Rating: 5/5

This is the second book in the Hawkenlye Mysteries series. It is just as entertaining as the first book in the series. I love that the books are set in England during he reign of King Richard. This series has been compared to the Brother Cafael series. I understand both feature religious main characters as slueths, but I am not sure how much more they offer the same. The time frame is different, and so it the location. does not really matter because both series are w9rth ready if you like cozy mysteries with a historical setting thrown in for some more flavor,

Joss has not really seen Abbess Helewise for almost two years. it is taking forever for his new home in Britain to be rebuilt. So he has stayed at his home in France, but honestly, he is not a farmer. His brothers are more attached to the land while he was trained to be a knight and fight for his King. so when Joss goes back to New Winnowland to live, he makes sure he calls at the abbey to visit his friends. He finds the Abbess troubled by two of the young ladies residing at the abbey and a man recently murdered. Soon, Joss is in the forest seeking answers to why a man was murdered. one thing Joss understands is the forest is old and the people who live there are not like the people who live around the outside of the forest. Abbess Helewise is troubled about the young ladies in her care. She needs to understand why one acts like the forest is calling her to come and why the other lady is going I to the first. When another murder happens and the lady is found running from the forest covered on blood, Helewise decides she has to go to the forest herself. she needs answers. Thankfully, Joss will be with her and protect her. They cannot imagine what they come upon in the forest and how much danger they are truly facing. There may be more death to come. Abbess Helewise has her faith that God will help and guide them so she may help those who need it most. 

I enjoyed this second story even more than the first in the series. Now I have to find the 3rd book in the series and I am not sure how easy that will be. I want to see what happens in the lives of this night and the Abbess. I also really enjoy the view of life during this time period. The mysteries to be solved are never straight forward and that makes for some enjoyable reading.