Rating: 2/5

2.75 stars

This started off strong. I thought I was going to discover a new old school HR favorite. Unfortunately, half way in I realized this was more campy medieval romantic comedy rather than dark Beauty and the Beast-inspired medieval romance. Or at least the writing style gave it that feel. Which is fine, and if you are fan of Amanda Quick and Julie Garwood then maybe this will work for you. But for me personally, it wasn't a good combination and very odd at times. When the plot stalls out and characters are doing the same thing over and over again and fumbling about and being hopelessly inept for laughs it's not very exciting or interesting. I needed the plot to move forward and stuff to happen after the 200 page mark. The last 100 pages took forever to get through. I lost count how many clouds of dust "tussles" happened with the hero stepping over grown men fighting in the mud like kids over a lady's favor. I felt the author spent more time trying to make a funny scene rather than focusing on her couple and the overall plot. Having your heroine choke on her own spit while kissing and getting the wind knocked out of her from aggressive back thumping just leaves something to be desired. Things are over exaggerated for a laugh. Her characters oddly started to take on a one-dimensional feel the deeper I got into the book. I've never seen characters regress into comical flat caricatures like they do here. I don't mind comedy in my HR but this felt more slapstick humor with a dark backdrop and it felt weirdly...odd. 

This is my first Lynn Kurland book and I've been meaning to try her for some time. This definitely has dark elements with a blind cantankerous "The Dragon of Blackmour" hero and a shy timid heroine who has been badly abused by her father and pretty much given away to the hero in a marriage pact. I thought the hero Christopher was a sweet cinnamon roll with a snarky sense of humor and big soft spot for the heroine Gillian who is terrified of him for a good half of this story. I enjoyed seeing him try to get a rise out of the heroine and trying to put her at ease. That was probably the part I enjoyed the most. You need patience with how Kurland writes the timid mousy heroine who is so naive and helpless and bursts into tears at the drop of a hat whether she's terrified, upset or happy. I was intrigued at the beginning because I thought we were going to get a scrapy tomboy heroine who loves to fight (she owns a sword and practices with it since childhood) and we'd get to see her learn to stand up for herself and find her independence. We technically get that but 100 pages too late and with a looooooot of hand holding and "magic" potions to help her along the way. Gillian is terrified of her own shadow, doesn't like new-comers and men to the point she hides, believes her new husband is a warlock who is going to beat her and sacrifice her for a good half of this story. She turns to 3 witches for potions to give her beauty and courage. She believes what anyone tells her or overhears and takes it as fact and runs with it so you could well imagine the numerous misunderstandings that take place here. The number of times this girl attempts to run away or go to the witches to help her made things go from serious to just silly and ridiculous. Her inept naivety while at first made for some hilarious moments, the longer it went on the charm wore off for me and my patience was long gone. Gillian is a sweet girl who desperately wants to be loved and she's had a very difficult sheltered life but I would qualify her as TSTL with how Kurland wrote her.

Another thing that I found surprising was there was no sex scenes in this. I wasn't expecting this to be closed door considering all the heavy lifting Kurland does with all the sexual tension. I don't know if no sex is a thing of Ms. Kurland's or she was trying to be clever but it didn't work for me here because all the sexual tension and angst hinged on it. Considering Gillian is terrified of the marriage bed and believes babies are conceived through kissing and all the slow build up to get to the actual act....well let's just say I was expecting more than gasping, kissing and afterglow being shown. It felt like a blanket was being held up and you are trying to make out what's going on through hazy light behind the cloth or just listening through a closed door. 🙄 What was the point of this? The author just teases you and makes you guess what is happening in the scene. Everything is alluded to. "Did you like that?" and "what about this?" a gasp here and gasp there just leaves you wanting and feels so pointless. I didn't understand this writing choice. Was it because the hero is blind? If half the story wasn't built around the sexual tension and the heroine being terrified about sexual intimacy then I wouldn't be this annoyed about it or call it out. You can't build your conflict on marital intimacy and show nothing for it in the end. Like WTF? I don't like being baited. 

So overall, disappointing. I wanted to give this a 3 star because it definitely had it's sweet moments but the last quarter just made that remaining star wither away.