Rating: 3/5

Who reads the Art of War?

OK, sure everybody, or anybody can, but who actually does and why?

If we could somehow take a survey and create a pie chart of who reads this 2500 year old Chinese manual, what would we find, who reads it?

Military professionals, sure; executives, probably – wanna be executives, almost certainly; sports coaches, law enforcement officers, school teachers, teenage gamers, etc etc.

The title will get attract and repel many all by itself. The text, full of philosophical musings and anecdotal asides, will lose and / or gain many more.

What will readers take from these words written so long ago? One thing, unfortunately, is that human nature does not seem to change – if Master Sun was a wise and great general 2500 years ago, people had been fighting long before then and enough for him to be considered a master of the subject. Even a casual observer of history will notice that there have been plenty of students of war ever since.

In history – how many humans have been killed in war, in battle, in organized conflict? Old age and cancer and heart trouble seems to account for a great many deaths, but throughout history there seems to be a virus that gets too many of our young people.

One thing that can be drawn from this tome is that if war is to be fought, if it is inevitable, if a line has been crossed (or a river in Italy) and there is no going back, then it must be fought to win. Military leaders are taught to be prepared and decisive, to act.

But for me, and I think the everlasting philosophy that should be taken from this work, is that war is costly, and brutal, and ugly and should be avoided if at all possible. Hawks in the congress and saber rattlers elsewhere seem to be conspicuously NOT in the military; rather the WE to which they ascribe is most frequently “we” in the collective sense, but in every sense a “we” that does not see them getting dirty or bloody.

What do readers other than military leaders take from this? To go for the jugular? To win at every cost? Not if they’ve actually read it. Preparation and contemplation and the ability to act when necessary are all elements attributed to the Art, and certainly decisiveness when the time is right, but not savage brutality or chaos for the sake of destruction. Ultimately this is about conflict, strategy and leadership – themes that are relevant to more than just the military.

An important work that should be read.

** 2018 addendum - this is at once a great source of quotes but also a work that is likely misquoted frequently. I heard a quote recently that made me wonder if the speaker had it right, misquoted, or was just making up a quote and attributing the statement to Sun Tzu for effect; and that made me think of Kevin Klein's character Otto from A Fish Called Wanda.