Rating: 5/5

Waterloo is of course one of the biggest battles in European history. Cornwell brings history to life in a way you would never get in a class room. Waterloo was originally intended to be the last book of a 11 part Sharpe series but since completion Cornwell has added to Sharpe's career and polished his character a bit.

Sharpe's waterloo well my copy is just called waterloo as the name suggest is more about the battle than Sharpe, As it should be. Probably the most expansive treatment of a battle in the series. The characters do take more of a backseat to the battle. Kind of a shame because character development is such a spotlight in the series as a whole. But Cornwell does a great job of interweaving some familiar plotlines like the prince of orange being the anthesis of the bad commander. A theme which is pervasive in the series. And Cornwell writing in general. Also a superb subplot involving Sharpe estranged wife and her new man a elegant Calvary officer. Gives waterloo a bit of Sharpe's personal touch a reader of the series expects. Sharpe is now Lt. Col. And is summoned from his Normandy farm because, well he could use the colonel's pay. So he brings his wife, dog, and the retired Patrick harper to Belgium and is posted to the young and arrogant prince of orange staff who he calls the young frog! In that capacity he is more of a observer to battle than a participant with a specific job to do. But never fear he does end up commanding the South Essex by battles end. The way he takes control of his former battalion is a bit unbelievable but is classic Sharpe. The relationship between Sharpe and Harper is at its highest point with their dialogue relating a lot of what's going on. The Duke of wellington is also included more in waterloo than other books in the series. One downside is because it's supposed to be the end of the series many recurring characters die with little fan fair which is a shame. Sharpe has come a long way from a private in India to a colonel living in Normandy. From butting head with sergeants to now a spoiled prince. It has all lead up to this point! the battle of waterloo! I have loved the journey.

There's another book in the series written in this manner where the battle is the focal point. Can't remember which at the moment. But because there is not much plot or character development I can understand many dropping their rating for those reasons. You need the series as context this is not a stand alone read by any means. But it has the since of epic conclusion. A favorite of mine!