Rating: 5/5

This book is extremely well researched and stunning in its conclusions. That this event could happen as described should shake to the core every American's faith in governments and their law enforcement institutions. There is just too much information that is odd about this case to accept the version that the government claims is true. For instance, if Tim McVeigh had just set off a massive bomb that was bound to kill many people why would he meekly surrender to a traffic cop 45 minutes later when he was armed? Why balk at killing a cop when you just killed 168 people with truck bomb? Likewise, Terry Nichols walks into a police station after seeing his face on the news and surrenders. The FBI then finds all this bomb making equipment and other evidence at his farm. Why didn't he try to destroy or hide this damning evidence before he just walks in and hands himself over for the crime of the century?During the trials why would the government refuse to allow any testimony or evidence contrary to that which pointed the finger solely at McVeigh and Nichols? Why was the hunt for John Doe 2 dropped? No explanation for this was offered by the government and no testimony was allowed at the trial from the people who had seen JD2 with McVeigh on the day of the bombing. Why not show the security camera tape that was taken from a nearby building? Why has no one outside of the government seen these tapes? The only portion of the tape shown in the trail was a still frame showing the truck exploding. Why not show the whole thing? Could it be that the tape shows McVeigh and JD2 together? Could it be that the tape shows TWO explosions: one from inside the building and one from the truck? What is the government hiding? Why was McVeighs'defense team being shackled? This book asks these kinds of questions and offers evidence to support the claims. Most of it is just eye witness testimony since all of the hard evidence was destroyed and buried in a secret location by the government before the McVeigh trial was even over; the defense wasn't permitted to examine the evidence independently. The government did that at Waco, too. Hmmm... An important book for every American to read.