Rating: 2/5

For all the positive reviews I was expecting this book to be the end-all in coming to terms with divorce. Instead, it's an outdated, glib, simplistic overview of the stages you go through after divorce with very little actual practical advice. Not well written and at times frustrating to read, it's more like an outline instead of an actual developed book. Using it with the workbook may help (I didn't have the workbook) but reading it as is gives a person very little to work with.

The two main things I got out of the book was that you have to work on your own self esteem to love yourself before you can get back into relationships. And part of that work involves figuring out how you originally adapted to your upbringing so you can make corrections based on mistakes you made in marrying the first spouse. 

But those are simple observations and this book doesn't take you step-by-step through how to resolve self esteem or upbringing issues. The longest chapter is about anger and while it's good to address the issue I came away feeling like I learned nothing from it because there was so little practical advice on how to change. The "exercises" or "how to" parts of the book are pretty much worthless. The authors tackle a topic, write a couple paragraphs on it (not anywhere near enough), then claim to give you suggestions but instead often just relate a story of how someone else improved. If you are looking for practical, hands-on tips to work through these issues they aren't in this book.

The book is really old (originally written in 1981), the main author died years ago, much of the material was taken from seminars he gave, and the oddest part is that the book is unsure whether it wants to address the spiritual aspects of marriage. Since so many churches use this book for divorce recovery groups the issue of religion is addressed briefly but is barely alluded to. If you are a conservative Christian you'll find the book to be liberal in its view of sexuality and disappointing in its unwillingness to address the spiritual aspects of marriage and family. I'd even say I don't understand why churches would use this book--it is too shallow to have much practical use.