Rating: 4/5

So....I give the Sunflower, Wiesenthal's autobiographical account of his interaction with Karl during WWII and with Karl's mother after the war, a five star rating. Wiesenthal manages to come across as sympathetic and gracious; he writes of horrors but makes them readable and his own willingness to question his actions in spite of the impossibility of the position in which he was put give him (and not the SS man) a superhuman air. 

However, the 54..yeah, 54!...essays in response were tortuous to read and I would give a one star to the second half of the book. I felt like I was once again a TA suffering through undergraduate papers; some were better than others, some had unique perspectives, but the vast majority of them were so similar as to make me want to allow my eyes to roll up in my head and take a nap.

That said, there were some overarching themes that make sense and deserve to be mentioned in a review (although to be fair, I feel like I am also now adding to the pile of papers to be graded). 

There seems to be a difference between Jewish and Christian understanding of forgiveness: Christians believe that we can forgive others for atrocious actions if they express repentance and that as children of God we are all able to soothe each other, Jews believe that only the person who has been wronged can forgive the person who committed the atrocity. And so...murder cannot ever be forgiven. Even by God.

There is also a huge distinction between the individual and the collective. When Karl requests "a Jew" (any Jew, just a Jew) the request is offensive and diminutive. Despite his professed desire to repent, he is still viewing Jews as interchangeable members of some collective, rather than individual people who deserve to be seen. This lead me to ruminate more on bigotry and racism in America as well as the psychological biases that allow us to see and experience and recognize individual differences among members of our group (whatever group with which we identify), while simultaneously rejecting those outside of our group as all of a piece. When we "single story" or "stereotype" others, when we allow our implicit biases to reign we are reducing individuals to representative cutouts of their group and no longer seeing them in their own rights.

Mostly my mind wandered to the current racial and political problems in America. Several of these essays were about other genocides in other places, but rarely did they explicitly address the American problem of historical oppression and racism coming out of colonization and slavery. More and more I wondered about white complicity and how akin we are to Germans looking the other way during the reign of the Nazis: "Sins of complicity are killing the planet and laying waste the souls of many young people as we live in denial of the prisons we are building to house young persons whose violence stems from despair and joblessness and as we lay waste forests and waters and soil and the air itself by our lifestyles of consumption." and "Those who might appear uninvolved in the actual crimes, but who tolerate acts of torture, humiliation, and murder, are certainly also guilty. Looking away may be a comfortable but ultimately disastrous path, the effects of which are incalculable." seem equally applicable to German as modern day America.

It is easy for me to say I have not caused historical harm; it is less easy for me to acknowledge that I have benefited from past inequalities; it is most difficult for me to sacrifice in the quest for change when by necessity the zero-sum world of capitalism requires that people like me (or even worse, people who I love) will receive less when all others receive their fair share. It is easiest to ignore the problems and allow the white supremacy to continue; not only does this give the the luxury to do nothing (no effort involved), but also ensure that those who are like me will continue to receive an undue share of the resources. I should be just as engaged in creating a more equitable future as any other American, and yet no matter what I do, it will not actually be enough: "As a white, they tell me that I must always feel guilty and grovel over what whites in the American past did when they killed Indians and enslaved blacks. And, to a measure, I do. But I have sufficient guilt for my own faults in relations to the heirs of the Indians and blacks, and to many other people. Is there not a limit to the good that can be achieved by my groveling, my self-hate, my loss of pride in the positive features of my heritages?"

There were several essays that seemed to be applicable to these themes, but did not explicitly address the American problem: "In order not to have their lives fatally imperiled, the victims or their descendants subject themselves to their wrongdoers and admit that their lies and excuses are true. Whence the at least temporary success of the totalitarian oppressor and tyrant. In both cases a purposeful 'disactualization' takes place, in order to free the present and more especially the future from the heavy burden of the past." rang true from the color-blind perspective of the 1990s. It is more comfortable to ignore the past and pretend racism is over, but by doing this we perpetuate the inequalities that are residing within the systems.

The Sunflower is a great moral tale and worthwhile to read and discuss and think about; I think the book itself should have been edited down however to a few (maybe 10) representative essays..54 were just too many and too repetitive.