Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars rounded up because of the narration.

I've noticed a lot of people hate Emma. 

 

She's spoiled by her circumstances and self-absorbed in a way that only someone who hasn't really known any sort of hardships can be. And I get why she isn't the heroine that anyone is really rooting for in a serious way. Because if the book had ended with Emma alone with her father, it wouldn't have really broken my heart. 

 

But here's the thing I found as I listened to this one: It wasn't really Emma that I hated, it was the whole stick-to-your-social-level thinking that was so...accepted.
I guess I forgot that society's structure was such an ingrained part of everyone's lives during this time period that the fact that Emma dared to think her friend worthy of a certain man made her into a villainess. I think we tend to focus on Robert Martin, who, for all intents and purposes was a nice dude, and Emma discouraging Harriet to accept him because she thought he was socially above him. But in reality, it wasn't just Emma who needed to be chastised for sticking her nose into Harriet's love life. Although, yes, she should have been! &lt;--because stop being a nosey bitch, Emma!
It was the whole if you marry a farmer, we can't be seen together anymore thing.
How was this a thing?! How was this ever a thing?!

Ok, ok. Take away my disappointment in the casual way humans treated other humans who hadn't been born into the right family and weren't gentlemanly enough. Or the way Emma was SO GRATEFUL that Knightly had taken the time to correct her when she didn't behave properly.

And take away the part where Knightly blushingly confessed that he had probably been in love with her since she was 13. &lt;--with their 16 year age gap, that puts him at 29.
OHMYFUCKINGGOD!
I get it. Times...they were a bit different.
I still made The Face when I heard that one, though.

Anyway. Take all of that away, and I honestly liked this story. Emma wasn't a bad person, she was just somewhat Clueless as to what the real world was like and oblivious to not only what other people needed but to what she needed, as well. 

Speaking of what she needed - she needed someone to grab her father by the shoulders, give him a good shake, and tell him to stop acting like such a pussy. Mr. Woodhouse was so fucking annoying. I mean, he's portrayed as a lovable, harmless old man, but...not really! She almost didn't marry because of him. And everyone just bowed and scraped and let him get away with his nonsense. Except Knightly's brother. &lt;--loved that guy! Probably the only normal person in the entire fucking book.

It was good luck that they had a chicken thief in the area that scared her father into wanting a man around the house. Ha! I really did think that was a cute way to end the story.
And Knightly really was a super nice guy who deserved a happy ending of his own.

My point is, that while it has its problems, I wasn't bored to tears with this classic story. And I like that Austen wrote about people and the things that made them tick, and not the weather or the scenery. The issues I had with the book are the same things that make the book a classic. 
In other words, it's old. And they did shit differently when this was written. Not really sure what you can do about that other than be super fucking happy you weren't born back then.

 
Nadia May was a wonderful narrator and really made listening to the audiobook a very pleasant experience. And, as always, I suggest audiobooks for those of you who aren't fans of trying to read some of these older books. Getting someone to spoon-feed you this old stuff can make all the difference in the world.