Rating: 4/5

Reading through the author, DJ MacHale's introduction (do you do that? read introductions? try it out if you don't do it already. they're a wealth of information), he pointed out that "[we're] halfway home", and I realized that yes, what I had in my hands was the Fifth book out of the Ten intended for the series. And immediately, I had mixed feelings. 

First, excitement because I was halfway through a long series of books. Which is no small feat, regardless of what book series it is.

Second is, of course, the dread for the end of a series I legitimately enjoyed. 

Pendragon: Black Water came at me with some pleasant surprises, like the kind of characters, enemies, and points of view! The merging of POV's in one (or more chapters) is a breath of fresh air, as the switch between the Pendragon Journal POV and the Mark+Courtney POV can get a bit...routinary, especially on its fifth book. And how the POVs merged wasn't just the author suddenly changing styles; it was done fluidly, in my opinion. And although I expect the original format of POV for the next books, I hope the author finds more ways to combine them again. Especially since I wasn't that big a fan of the Journal POV to begin with.

The Journal POV isn't a bad style, mind you. But sometimes, Bobby seems like he's talking to the reader, (who doesn't know much about Bobby's pre-book life) more than he's talking to his best friend and girlfriend (who know more about him than the reader does). And that disrupts the immersion a bit.

The ending was quite intense, and reminiscent of the first significant death, which I found very effective in making me want to grab the next book and jump right back into the world.

But there are, unfortunately, other books that demand my attention. And I have to admit that my return to Pendragon's universe is much more enjoyable if I've had a book or two before then.

This book gets: 💀💀💀💀 Dorian Skulls, a mark of recommendation, especially for people who enjoy YA, and are looking for other good ones, or people who want to get into YA and don't know where to start.