Rating: 3/5

Grace Dilworth's family has always made their mark on the community of Wingate, Connecticut. Her father, the wealthiest man in town, had had fingers in nearly all the pies and when he died, part of his legacy was the Dilworth Arts and Crafts Center. It's a place for community artists of all sorts to ply their craft and exhibit their work. It's known beyond the town's borders for the beautiful rose garden. It's a place the town is proud of. Now Grace, his heir, is making her own mark...but it's not nearly as well received.

Grace returns home after a long cruise with the handsome Davin Lowry on her arm and starts dropping bombshells. The smallest is that they're engaged. And the biggest? Well--first of all, the beautiful rose garden is history. Davin is supposedly an art expert and he's had the brilliant idea to dig up the roses and replace it all with an avant-garde sculpture garden. The board of directors are dismayed--but Grace has the controlling interest and what she says goes. And Mario, the gardener who has cared for those roses like their his own children, is incensed.

The first of the sculptures arrive--among them a ten-foot steel piece with sharp, sword-like prongs sticking out of it titled of all things "Touch Therapy." Well...somebody uses it as therapy all right to get Davin Lowry out of their system for good. The young man's body is discovered impaled on one of the protruding prongs.

Lucy Ramsdale, the sixtyish amateur snoo---er, sleuth, and Inspector James McDougal are off on another hunt for a murderer in this second of the four-part series. Lucy can't believe that one of her neighbors could be responsible. McDougal is sure that Alec, the assistant director for the center, was afraid Gavin planned to see him thrown out of the place just as effectively as the roses (Lucy thinks McDougal is letting his prejudices run away with him). But the evidence points to Mario, the gardener. And Sergeant Terrizi, who is engaged to Mario's niece, is under family pressure to prove Uncle Mario's innocence. Terrizi actually thinks that there was trouble in paradise and that Grace did away with her betrothed herself. Are any of them right? 

At the end of the first book, I had high hopes for McDougal--he'd become a more interesting and likeable character by the end and I thought that would continue. Nah. He's back to grousing over his failed marriage and feeling sorry for himself that he isn't really connected to the police any more. It's amazing how he keeps getting to lead investigations when he's officially retired... Why doesn't the man apply to the local force for a job? And Lucy is also a bit more annoying. She keeps getting her feathers ruffled over how McDougal is investigating and not reacting exactly as she wants him to. Yes, she's a rather egocentric person, but I don't remember it being quite such a thing last time.

The mystery is okay--I mean, there aren't many suspects to begin with and when the killer starts knocking off others who may have been witnesses of one sort or another then the number shrinks even more. It would have also been nice if a little more foundation had been laid for the killer's extreme response to a certain piece of information. It felt like it came out of the blue. I do have one more in the series (the third)--I hope it is stronger than this one. ★★ and 1/2 (rounded up here)

First posted on my blog My Reader's Block.