Rating: 4/5

set in November 1139, midst a civil war sweeping thru Southern England... those seeking refuge from it arrive in Shrewsbury. 

and a search for two children who were in Benedictine care in Worcester, who got lost on the way to Shrewsbury. 

🌳🐴⚔👨🏼‍🦳👨🏻⚔🐴🌳 

🙂 there's lots of to-ing and fro-ing amongst the cast of characters in securing the whereabouts of all! be it the children, injured monks, each other... and the occasional sheep 😉

🙂 there was alot of complexity to the different attacks on person and property, and the solving of these. 

🧡 young Yves' boyhood-hero crush on Olivier was sweet! it seemed Olivier was the object of affection, and commanded obedience from, both brother and sister 🙂

💚 not so much focus in this novel on the herb garden, and brews and decorations and more... but brother Cadfael usually had a plant potion or three about his person, for eventualities 😉😁

🤎 the scene with the reuniting of horses with their humans was sweet 😁

❤ and some serious suggestions that some of Cadfael's past might be briefly present with them before parting! 😃♥ 

then all the children away to the west, Cadfael and Hugh ride back contentedly to Shrewsbury 🙂

loved the closing pages 😁 ♥ ♥ ♥ 

🌳🐴⚔👨🏼‍🦳👨🏻⚔🐴🌳 

amongst the many good lines, and turns of phrase, and bits of dialogue, I was moved to note down:

"we can't restore them their dead, only their cattle" 

"windows on a great contained grief for which there was no cure" 

"even the cows in Ludlow would have plenty to say about where they belonged" 

tho perhaps not quite so good out of context 🙃🤔🙃

🌳🐴⚔👨🏼‍🦳👨🏻⚔🐴🌳

the Brother Cadfael novels, and their author, have definitely grown on me. I think in part the characters become more whole/full, and faceted, as the series progresses, bringing in new details, and/or simply acting consistently across novels. and the story-smithery and word-smithery of the author have become increasingly clear. I've noticed I've developed an affectionate regard for both Cadfael and the author! 🙂

🌳🐴⚔👨🏼‍🦳👨🏻⚔🐴🌳 

I've always considered these novels adult novels, but have noticed a trend of them often including plucky young people in peril... and of course they often come into/under the care of the calm and compassionate Cadfael. this one made me wonder if the series might have a young adult following too 🤔🙂

🌟 🌟 🌟 🌟 

accessed as an RNIB talking book, nicely read by Rosemary Davis 🙂