This is one of those titles that have been familiar to me since childhood, its three words tripping off the tongue so easily, making them impossible to forget, puzzling and all as they surely were. If there existed a photo of the family bookshelf of my childhood home, I'm certain the thick spine of this book would stand out in the pattern of greeny-grey and red-brown cloth-covered books that filled the shelves, old books acquired by my grandmother long before I or even my father came into the world. Old musty books full of dense print and no pictures, and therefore very daunting for a child no matter how keen a reader they might be. I did eventually tackle some of those daunting books, E M Forster, for example, Rafael Sabattini and Thomas Hardy, Baroness Orczy and John Buchan, and a few more I've forgotten. But I never prised Somerset Maugham from his position on the bookshelf, and the meaning of the title Of Human Bondage retained its mystery down through the years. Even now, after finishing the book, I'm not sure I fully understand the meaning of the title, but it doesn't matter. The main character, Philip Carey, has taken his place amongst the ranks of memorable characters in the bookshelves of my mind.

…………………………………………………………………

There were no books by Henry James on my grandmother's bookshelves as far as I recall but I was reminded of one of his stories while reading Somerset Maugham. The Figure in the Carpet was written in 1896, twenty years before Of Human Bondage, so Maugham may have read it. The reason I mention it is because in Maugham's novel, the young and idealistic Philip Carey is given a scrap of Persian carpet by a writer he reveres. The writer tells him that the answers to the big questions he has about life lie among its faded patterns and he must figure them out for himself. In the Henry James story, another young and idealistic main character is told that the meaning of the enigmatic oeuvre of a writer he reveres is also like the pattern of a Persian carpet: if you look at it long enough, you will be able to figure it out. 
You may not be surprised to find out that neither of these young and idealistic men manage to guess the figure in the carpet, but in the case of Maugham's Philip Carey it ceases to matter. Someone else, a character who might easily fade into the background of any colorful pattern they found themselves in, figures it out for him. Is Philip made free or enslaved by this knowledge? It's very difficult to say.
It seemed to Philip that life lived itself.

……………………………………….....……………….....

There are some fine meditations on literature, art, and philosophy in this book and I enjoyed those sections a lot. 
On being asked why he reads, for instance, Philip says: Partly for pleasure, because it's a habit and I'm just as uncomfortable if I don't read as if I don't smoke, and partly to know myself. When I read a book I seem to read it with my eyes only, but now and then I come across a passage, perhaps only a phrase, which has a meaning for me, and it becomes part of me.

He has a similar experience when viewing the work of certain artists. It's as if the paintings become part of him. Here he is talking about the emaciated figures in El Greco's paintings : 
El Greco was the painter of the soul; and these gentlemen, wan and wasted, not by exhaustion but by restraint, with their tortured minds, seem to walk unaware of the beauty of the world; for their eyes look only in their hearts, and they are dazzled by the glory of the unseen. No painter has shown more pitilessly that the world is but a place of passage. The souls of the men he painted speak their strange longings through their eyes; their senses are miraculously acute, not for sounds and odours and colour, but for the very subtle sensations of the soul.

I wondered if Somerset Maugham had modeled Philip on one of El Greco's ethereal figures. He often appears wan and wasted, and he suffers tortures of the mind over the fact that life seems nothing but a brief and painful passage. And he's acutely aware of the subtle sensations of the human soul. 

Portrait of a Nobleman, El Greco, 1586, Museo del Prado