Rating: 2/5

Patricia MacLachlan seems to specialise in stories about mothers who abandon their children, either via death or simply going. The home environment the children remain behind in is warm but the ones left there must come to terms with their loss. Journey is no exception to this rule. I suppose one shouldn't complain, as each book is different enough to escape the horrors of formula fiction so popular today. 

Liddie leaves her two children, Cat and Journey (Seventies hippy names, anyone?)with her parents and simply goes away. No one knows where or why, but her parents know she will not return. She sends cash in envelopes for the kids periodically with no more than a paperclip--and one assumes she used padded envelopes, or none of it would have made it to destination. 

Grandma and Grandpa assume responsibility for the kids--easier to set this story in summer vacation than during the school year, when the superintendent and co. might have a few questions. Grandma and Cat deal with their pain by gardening, while Grandpa tries to get Journey interested in his hobby of photography. We are never told how old the kids are, and it's hard to tell. Sometimes Journey acts like a seven-year-old, sometimes like a little old man as he tries to analyse his situation, his memories of the past, and his future. Cat seems to be like her mother in more than appearance, as she abandons her flute and the practice of eating meat at the beginning of the story (though not another word is said about her choice of vegetarianism, and it seems to be forgotten.

The writing is good, the situation all too common--the young child who feels he must be at fault for his mother to leave him like that. But there are so many gaps. We later learn that their father left Liddie long before (a common scenario in the "free-love" Seventies, and even today) but nothing more is known about him, or shared with the kids by the adults. The grandmother's personality skips and changes from one moment to the next, while Granddad seems to hold the whole family together.

Well written but somehow disappointing. Perhaps it was too short for satisfactory development, or perhaps the author simply published an unpolished effort.