This is a short story collection a found courtesy somebody on GR, it really has expanded my reading world and this seems to become one of those treasures in a bookish sense I am really very glad to read.

Nightmare Town - Steve Threefull awakes after a crazy bet in a little town where about everything seems to be off. It kind of tickles his curiosity and when he finds out what is going on he can only be surprised.

House Dick - Why are there three dead people inside an hotel room?- Continental Op does find out and the solution leaves you shaking your head with pure disbelieve and total surprise. Grand ending.

Ruffian's wife - She is threatened in her own house and when her man comes home she finds out more than she cared to know. A story about a woman and her perspective. Well written

The man who killed Dan Odams - locked up because he shot a man in a fair fight, he takes his chance to escape jail. The man who killed Dan Odams finds a place to hide in safety with a widow. Another brilliant little gem that does give a great kick in the last paragraph. 

Bight shots The Continental op gets send to a house where somebody took a shot at the sick and old patriarch of the family and nobody saw anything. When the next night the same happens again and somebody else gets hurt the Op ahs an idea and it is an uneasy one. 
 
Zigzags of treachery
In which the continental Op gets asked to investigate the suicide/murder of a Docter by his wife, especially when his first wife comes forward with her claims after she visited the Doctor when he was alive. The detective will have to find out what really happened with the good Doctor and his first wife. Another surprising little tale of human drama.

The assistent murderer
Private detective Alec Rush is not the typical PI in that there is nothing reaaly attractive about him, in fact he's quite ugly, and women aren't falling all over him. But as as a former policeman he does know his stuff. He paid to check out a woman who gets followed and discovers murder and mayhem. a well written story sometimes a wee bit confusing.

His brother's keeper 
A boxer and his brother and a major fight on Saturday evening. At the end one boxer wins and somebody dies. Well told but perhaps somewhat shortish.

Two sharp knives
A man comes to town by train and gets picked up by the chief of police as there is a warrant out on him. Give the man a nice locked room and then the man kills himself. What really happened? - well written but somewhat predictable too soon.

more will follow...........