Rating: 4/5

This is a dual review comparing my two most recently completed novels -- The Murder Room "police procedural" and Spy Line, the fifth "Bernard Sampson" by Len Deighton spy novel. I seem to have thought them both worth four Goodreads stars, said to mean "really liked it." But I'm going to be more likely to continue reading the P.D. James "Adam Dalgliesh" series than the Deighton series. So why do I think that?

P.D. James is a more elegant fiction writer than Deighton, at least judging by this book, which apparently is the only book I've read by James. I have read six Deighton books, four novels and two nonfiction, and I've found his nonfiction superior. 

Is it writing style? Characters? Plot? Not sure. But some of it might be that I find the story set in London more enjoyable than the stories set in Berlin . . . and the main reason for that may be that I am familiar with London neighborhoods and infrastructure, etc., but only know Berlin from what I've read. 

The Murder Room concerns a police investigation of deaths at a small privately owned museum in the Hampstead Heath area of Greater London. The museum is a character in itself, which plays an important role in the novel. Other characters are established individually in early chapters, which is an interesting technique. I wonder if it is the author's regular method -- I guess I'll find out if I read more in the Dalgliesh series. The twists and turns in the plot are logical but not obvious, which I always appreciate. There's a good deal of information on Dalgliesh's private life . . . this is novel #12, after all . . . but I am comfortable with where I came in, thanks to James's handling of the situation.

Spy Line is perhaps the more complicated of the two, since in the spy world one can't trust anyone and one never knows who, if anyone, is what he or she seems. The story takes place at a point in the protagonist Sampson's career when neither Sampson himself or the reader can be sure of the future direction. Clearly by starting with the fifth novel I have wandered into the middle of Sampson's career story, but Deighton, like James, does a good job of helping the reader understand what came before without a lot of dreary exposition, thus helping earn four Goodreads stars. 

Bottom line, as they say: I enjoyed both novels and am comfortable awarding four stars, which I don't part with easily, but I haven't found Spy Line particularly memorable and so it's doubtful that I'll take up the story of Bernard Sampson again. P.D. James, on the other hand, I wouldn't mind sampling again -- probably with the first in the Dalgliesh series unless another in the series falls in my lap.