Rating: 3/5

I keep a list of series I read. I write info on them detailing what I like and if/why I drop them. I did this to Ms. Reichs after reading Book #1, but then heard such a compelling review of book #2 I bought it. However...

I still don't know about this book, or this series. It's interesting, highly descriptive, with some fairly good characters which I instantly liked. (I like her MC, Temperance Brennan.) But there is SO MUCH DETAIL. Plus, the MC does so many things, is always doing this, that, and ten other things and it's constant, and unending. In this book she digs up a woman (a nun) in an old church who is a candidate for sainthood. This leads to...

A mystery involving (maybe) a cult, and human sacrifice or murder or something (maybe) which Temperance, or Tempe, a physical anthropologist who assists with police investigations gets involved in. But she also teaches, juggles a complex personal life with an ex-husband, daughter and crazy sister, and does at least a dozen or more things EVERY DAY. Correcting papers; giving exams; teaching forensic science; working on skeletal remains - several at a time - and that's just the tip of the TempBrennan iceberg. She's like a wunderfem, if that's a word. It's constant, constant, constant and you wonder when she can take a breath. Every day she has a mental list of a dozen things she MUST do and MUST do NOW.

She flies to North Carolina; she flies back to Montreal. She's in 70+degree weather - no wait, it's like minus-40. (Fahrenheit in the US; up in Canada it's Celsius.) It's a busy, mind-boggling, you had better pay attention read. This is NOT a book you set down on Monday and pick up again on Friday. So I read it straight through, putting aside a Stephen King book (OMG) for Ms. Reichs.

As for the forensics? Complex. The explanation of how to remove a body - or bodies - in varying degrees of putrefaction is almost textbook-detail. And near the end of the book, endless pages of explaining what happened and why. Think infodump-to-the-max. That many readers like this kind of book is obvious. A TV series resulted from the series and multiple best-selling books to follow.

I found it a bit dizzying, though. So many characters. Multiple bodies being dug up. Multiple crimes. Lots of creepy sorts who might be responsible. A daughter to take care of. A crazy sister. A guy who she kind of sort likes. The weather. The environment - from ice storms to alligators, and a lovely cat named Birdie. How does the author keep it all straight?

So three stars for confusion, but even so, I probably will read the next book.