Rating: 5/5

Great book...one of the best history books I've ever read. It took me a long time to read this, but not because it was dull or slow reading. On the contrary, it was very informative and exciting. Part of the reason it took me a bit to read this book is that I left it and came back to it a couple of times. There is a lot to absorb here...this book takes the reader from the discovery of the Americas by Columbus, through the American Revolution and First Constitutional Congress. The book is fascinating and absorbing. Also, I did not just read this book...as I often do with histories, I really want to learn the material, so I took copious notes to help me learn and be able to review the subject matter (and this, of course, is quite time consuming). I, like many, like to read for leisure, and when you read a book to study and take notes, it's not very leisurely. Still, I learned and retained a lot, which was my ultimate goal with this book. I highly recommend this book...it provides so much insight and direction into where our Country is headed.
I often discuss politics with people, and being a Christian, I always try and approach this topic from a biblical standpoint. I have found it very common for people in political discussions to claim that the Founding Fathers are on their side. I have often felt the beliefs of the Founding Fathers are contemporaneous with my beliefs...but how do you effectively or reasonably argue this when you don't really know what exactly the Founding Fathers believed? It has been claimed that George Washington was a Deist (he wasn't). Thomas Jefferson was said to be a Rationalist and a fan of the "Enlightenment" (he was). This book provided so many insights into these issues, giving thoroughly researched details, as well as eye-witness accounts and journal entries from the respective time-periods. This book covered a lot about the various missionaries to the Native Americans, and some of these stories were heart-wrenching in their description of man's struggle against the elements, and torture and killing at the hands of some of these tribes. The re-telling of the journey of the Pilgrims, and the first harsh winters in the Americas were also fascinating, and gave me such a deep appreciation of what our ancestors went through to give future generations a better life. The authors painted such a stark picture of the struggles of the first colonists to American shores, that it was apparent these were people of great faith, and their faith in God alone and God's intervention on behalf of the faithful were the only things that sustained them through some of the devastating times of starvation, sickness, and the brutal New England winters. Also, the authors devoted a chapter to the Salem Witch Trials, and the broader witch trials in New England, and this information was very powerful, disturbing, and insightful (as there is no implication that the witch trials were merely superstition and fanaticism, but that in some cases, there truly was a dark, spiritual element to what was happening).
Of course this book is written from a Christian perspective, and some have accused the authors of trying to make Christian links in America's history that are not there. I disagree. I think the evidence of God's hand in the formation of this Country is quite evident, and one does not have to look far at all, or research too deeply, to see this truth. Still, that is for the individual to decide, but the in-depth research done in this book, to include numerous quotes and journal entries from the first explorers and colonists, to many, many of the founding fathers...it is very apparent that men and women of faith had a great deal to do with the foundations of America. Similarities are drawn between Israel and America, in that when the Israelites of the Bible were faithful to God and obeyed His commands, then they were prosperous, but when they strayed and were disobedient, then they sometimes incurred God's judgement and just punishment. The authors pointed out many times in American history when such obedience or waywardness had similar results for the first explorers, colonists, missionaries, and patriots. 
After having read this book, I felt my knowledge of American history had increased by leaps and bounds, and I gained insights that will help me to have much deeper dialogues with others about America and where we came from and where we are going.