Rating: 5/5

I have chosen this book because it looks so exciting to me that I want to read it. I like to read a books about magic, magical stuff will surprise the readers of how they did, where they learnt etc. The static image of the book cover were OUTSTANDING to me because they used a magical stuff in it. I just attention to it and I just wanted to start reading it!

This book will fit in the category of fantasy book because it creating our imagination of how the snow spider glow their white snow light in the dark. This kind of fancy magic to me and unbelievable. 

My favourite character is Gynn because he is so funny. His parents always asking him where have you been? Why you covered in the snow? All he is saying that he gone out to see his grandma, or fall into the snow etc. They told that he is a magician person. This become magician after saw the snow spider for the first time in years. He takes them inside the houses to his bedroom without letting his parents see what it is happening. When he put the spider in his room, the spider glow the snow light and it nearly brighten up his bedroom! This is so magical that he thinks he is a magician. He is very keen to found out what his grandmother do as she is a magician person. Sometimes, His dad was angry at him sometimes because he wants to rid of something he wants to get rid of stuff he got. 

My favourite quote in the book is "just shrank, sort of faded away, and so did the bars of ice until there was nothing there except.." This quote makes me think that he got away with the idea he got. He just got it blocked when Gynn was talking to him about how to get the magic from his grandma, maybe secretly ask her what the magic is, I don't know!!! Also, this quotes described him as he is shy as a cow to talk and he missed all the ideas he got right here.

I learned from this book is to tell the truth to the people to make sure it believe him, later in the story, when he came home to go to his bedroom, his mum asked "Where have you been Gynn" He told her mother that he was at the Grandmother house but actually, the real thing he has gone is to the mountain to look for the snow spider as he is interested in magical stuff. This is also one of our MAGS school rules, be trustworthy to each other, he isn't trustworthy to his family. DO NOT LEARNT FROM HIM!!! 

Overall, I think that book I thought in the book review is excellent because it talks about magical things and it makes people more entertained and sense of humour while reading the book. I would recommended this book to someone else who interested in this book.
At the end of the story, the girl called Eyera has disappeared from Gynn's house as she was being recovered from her injury two days ago after Gynn's Dad found her cover in a thick brown mud. 

One of the thing you didn't know during my book review is about gifts for his birthday. The story was set in the past. Gynn has received 5 gifts for his birthday. They are to do with magical things. He got is black watch with moon in there (He needs this watch because he looks at the moon every night!! She thinks it would be funny)..... More information about the gifts if you read this book.