Rating: 4/5

An important collection of poems, if a little on the slim side, from one of the greats to emerge from the Soviet Union (whom I didn't realise had died only last year). Two poems in particular are highly political, the long memoir, 'Zima Station' which connects his daily life and trip back home to sub-zero Siberia, and 'Babiy Yar' which deals with Russian anti-Semitism and the 1941 massacres in Kiev, which resulted in a nobel prize nomination.

Yevtushenko was much respected by others at the time both for his poetry and his political stance toward the Soviet Machine. He challenged the state, not in a political way but culturally through words. And as a recognized writer, he was banned from leaving his homeland for some time. But over his life was actually still well traveled and this only helped to strengthen his popularity in the West.

Not everything here struck me as great, a couple of poems didn't seem to fit in with the rest, but overall, considering I hadn't read Yevtushenko before and didn't know what sort of direction he wrote in, the vast majority impressed me. Some brief highlights - 'Waking' opens with,
 
Waking then was like a lonely dream
in this cottage in this settlement,
thinking: time to go and pick mushrooms,
and ruffling your hair to wake you,
and kissing your eyes open,
all this each day a new discovery...

An extract from 'Lies' 

Who never knew
the price of happiness
will not be happy.
Forgive no error
you recognize, 
it will repeat itself, 
a hundredfold
and afterward
our pupils
will not forgive in us
what we forgave. 

And 'The Companion' 

Masculine pride was muttering in my mind: 
I scraped together strength and I held out
for fear of what she’d say. I even whistled.
Grass was sticking out from my tattered boots.
So on and on we walked
without thinking of rest
passing craters, passing fire, 
under the rocking sky of ‘41
tottering crazy on its smoking columns. 

Finally some powerful lines from the mighty ' Babi Yar'
 
Wild grasses rustle over Babi Yar,
The trees look sternly, as if passing judgement.
Here, silently, all screams, and, hat in hand,
I feel my hair changing shade to gray.

And I myself, like one long soundless scream
Above the thousands of thousands interred,
I’m every old man executed here,
As I am every child murdered here.

No fiber of my body will forget this.
May 'Internationale' thunder and ring 
When, for all time, is buried and forgotten
The last of antisemites on this earth.

There is no Jewish blood that’s blood of mine,
But, hated with a passion that’s corrosive
Am I by antisemites like a Jew.
And that is why I call myself a Russian!