Rating: 1/5

It’s 1906 and in New Rochelle, NY, there’s a family referred to as Father, Mother, Mother’s Younger Brother, Grandfather and a child known only as “the little boy.” Father is about to travel with Admiral Peary to reach the North Pole. Harry Houdini crashes his car outside their home. Mother takes in a young black woman and her baby, and the woman’s boyfriend Coalhouse Walker Jr. comes courting. And America is captivated by the saga of Harry Thaw murdering his wife Evelyn Nesbit’s lover, Stanford White, at Madison Square Garden, which is being called the “Crime of the Century” (though as one character wisely noted, “it was only 1906 and there were ninety-four years to go”).

Ragtime regularly appears on lists of the top 100 novels. Apparently, its greatness lays in the way it blurs the lines between fantasy and historical fact, weaving real-life characters in and around each other and the fictional ones. Well that’s objectively true. Real-life characters appear throughout Ragtime. A few, such as Houdini, Sigmund Freud, Henry Ford, and J.P. Morgan, are still remembered today, while the majority of them are not. But it’s not particularly clear why any of those real characters are in this story. Freud appears in one chapter, doesn’t like America, and leaves, so what exactly was the point? We learn a bit about the others—Houdini doubted himself, J.P. Morgan was really into pyramids—but the relevance to any larger story was just lost on me. 

Instead, I thought Ragtime was a waste of time, and actively terrible in some places. There’s one interesting story, the one involving Coalhouse Walker Jr., his car, and his vengeance. But it seemed to be an anachronism, a 1975 novel imputing a lot of 1960s counterculture and society upheaval into 1906. I thought about giving the novel two stars for that portion, but I just couldn’t get past this subplot: Real-life anarchist Emma Goldman is giving Evelyn Nesbit a massage that seems to be progressing from sexual to actual sex, that is until:
At this moment a hoarse unearthly cry issued from the walls, the closet door flew open and Mother’s Younger Brother fell into the room, his face twisted in a paroxysm of saintly mortification. He was clutching in his hands, as if trying to choke it, a rampant penis which, scornful of his intentions, whipped him about the floor, launching to his cries of ecstasy or despair, great filamented spurts of jism that traced the air like bullets and then settled slowly over Evelyn in her bed like falling ticker tape.
First of all, gross. Second of all, I guess I could accept that scene as the precursor to the two women killing him, kicking his ass, or at least calling the cops and getting him thrown in jail. But no. In 1975, that scene was considered a valid setup for Nesbit to begin having a love affair with Mother’s Younger Brother. It would be funny if it wasn’t so emblematic of the ridiculous way men wrote about women and sex in that era. Read that description again and tell me if there’s ever been a woman in human history who was sexually assaulted like that and then decided “I think I’ll start hooking up with that guy.” I had a hard time taking anything in this book seriously after that insane scene.

I read Ragtime as part of my attempt to read all of the Pop Chart 100 Essential Novels. A couple of years ago, five books were dropped from that list in order to add five more recent novels. Two of the five novels dropped were from the 1970s,  Dog Soldiers and  Falconer. Both of those books were pretty flawed, but I have to say both were better than this novel. I honestly can’t believe Ragtime survived that cut. Not recommended.