Rating: 4/5

Since I love to comb the shelves at used bookstores and pick up older romances, I always love it when we have Old School month at TBR Challenge. This time around, I chose a 1992 Harlequin Historical that turned out to be something of a gem. The author got her rights back for the book, so the novel I know as Sweet Suspicions by Julie Tetel is available nowadays under the title Suspicious Hearts by Julie Tetel Andresen. Considering what goes on in this unusual story, I think that latter title may fit better.

The novel is a Georgian historical mystery/romance, and unlike most other Georgians I have read, this one is set in the very early days of King George I’s reign. The story takes place among the polished ranks of the aristocracy, but the leads are both outsiders of a sort and that lends the story a subtle edge I found attractive.

We meet our hero first. Colonel Richard Worth has sold his commission and being both gently born and in possession of a fortune, he intends to spend his days in society. We learn early on that re-entering society will not necessarily be easy for Richard. Even his status as a war hero who fought alongside Marlborough will not entirely smooth over the fact that he initially left England under a cloud as a young man. To help his cause, Richard appeals to his military friend Jonathan Wyndham, now Duke of Desford. He hopes that Jonathan can help him, among other things, find a bride who might help him become established. His strategy is to find a respectable, aristocratic woman in dire financial straits whose need for funds may help her overlook the gossip about his past.

This series of inquiries leads to Richard’s introduction to Caroline Hutton, an orphaned young woman of good family whose father’s gambling habit has now left her destitute upon his death. To Caroline’s surprise her aunt Esther has invited to visit and offered to take her out into society. Caroline isn’t terribly fond of Esther, but she’s a little short on options, so she agrees – and there the reader meets her at the London Assembly.

This is a partial review. You can find the complete text at All About Romance: https://allaboutromance.com/april-tbr...