Rating: 3/5

It begins in Manhattan, sometime between the end of the Great Depression and the beginning of WWII. Disgusted with the crass brutality around him, a comic book writer/artist formulates an appealing hypothesis about what’s wrong with the world: the masculine principle – force – is in ascendance, while the feminine principle – persuasion – has all but waned. To allay these ills, the artist creates his ultimate character, Princess Paragon, an avatar of goodness and enlightenment. “She stepped out of his soul and into his pen, and when he moved his drawing hand, he released her.” Her creator fervently believes in all she represents. 

“She was his feminine principle – all humanity’s feminine principle – corporealized as a beautiful figure of power and benevolent authority. She was a perfect woman; she was a perfect human being.” 

Spanning decades and social spheres, Robert Rodi’s novel provides a deceptively farcical peek into the frenzied microcosm of the comics industry, while it delineates the denominational conflict between the two major publishers. At Bang Comics, the angst-ridden and cynical characters pulsate with vitality; whereas at Electric Comics, decades older, the square-jawed and noble heroes (and heroines) seem always to have been out of step with the times. Yet, for all their complexity, the Bang characters lack the iconic resonance of the Electric crowd, all of whom qualify as authentic pieces of Americana. Acme Man, able to leap tall buildings in a single whatever, remains as familiar to the average citizen as Uncle Sam, and Moonman with his young sidekick Comet have become an integral part of the nation’s folklore. Nevertheless, Electric has fallen on hard times. Unable to keep abreast of evolving popular tastes, its most venerated titles are in danger of being canceled. In an attempt to rescue the company, a new publisher imports (steals, really) some hot new talent from the competition. 

A veritable palace rebellion ensues, during which a gay artist – gifted with the sort of naked ambition usually restricted to movies about conniving starlets – manages to seize control of the Princess. Readers of FAG HAG and CLOSET CASE will hardly be surprised that Rodi can evoke a claustrophobic demimonde with its own highly idiosyncratic rituals and jargon. Here he presents Brian Parrish, a charming egomaniac who couldn’t care less about iconic resonance. Parrish has big plans – thoughts of merchandizing deals give him an erection – but obstacles abound. Already one of the new breed of British radicals has been brought over to write the coveted Moonman series and – in his first issue – has Comet murdered by child pornographers while Moonman arranges an abortion for a nun. 

That's stiff competition. If Parrish and the Princess are to survive, he must reinvent the old girl and come up with an angle that will salvage her plunging sales. 

Thus is born the world’s first lesbian superhero, and the irreverent wunderkind feels no awe for the folklore he’s tampering with. (When urged to make the Princess’ paramour “a woman of color,” he promptly decides on green.) He’s prepared both for the Christian Right backlash and for parents’ groups who want to have his comic banned. He even relishes the prospect of all the publicity. But he hasn’t reckoned on another force, one before which even the Paragon herself must quail. The true believers: fans whose passion, though a source of ridicule within the profession, remains its lifeblood. 

Those fans are incarnated in the unlikely body of Jerome T. Kornacker. An obese recluse, terrified of change, Kornacker finds his fantasy world crumbling “and with it the only workable self-image he’d ever been able to construct – the only belief system that allowed him to survive.” 

He's like a depressed bomb. 

In situations fraught with hilarious dangers, absurd complications and deft one-liners, the plots shifts from backstage back stabbings in New York to a comic book convention on the outskirts of Chicago, where Kornacker – the ultimate Princess Paragon fan – confronts the heretical writer who threatens to destroy her. 

Don’t be too sure you can guess what happens next. Rodi’s plots are anything but schematic. A colorful gang of characters who confront their own moral failings as they struggle toward personal salvation might seem an awful lot to expect from a satirical novel about a comic book, but Rodi delivers without sacrificing a single laugh. Quips fly in all directions, and Rodi crowds the boundaries of this narrow world with memorably raucous moments… while providing some shrewd observations about the appeal of escapism.