Rating: 2/5

Re Jungle Island - KT is known for her extremely chauvinistic H's (think John Wayne on steroids,) and slightly feminist, much younger h's who seem to have angry defiance down to an art but still have no power to say no the lurve club.

 JI isn't any different, the H is a freight boat captain in the South Seas and a complete Man's Man who tells people to jump and they ask how high. 

The h is a 20 year old orphan who is low on personal funds and has to get to Brunei to give her never-met step mother a final message from her now deceased father and lump sum of cash. 

Her dad was an anthropologist studying Brunei tribal culture and wound up taking a local wife for the duration. They had a child together and the h's father made her promise to deliver his final words and the money and then he moved to another realm. 

The h was fond of her father, even though she hardly ever saw him, (an aunt raised her while the dad anthropologized in various locales and her mother died many years earlier.) So the book opens with the h stowing away on the cargo boat that the H is the captain of. She is disguised as a boy, but the H soon figures out she is female and after a few verbal battles, the H tells her she can stay until they dock. 

She winds up taking over the cooking on the boat and falling in love with the distantly manly H. Then the other crew member tries to rape her, she saves herself pretty handily and when the H comes in to see what is going on, she winds up riding his Tower of Power. The H isn't too pleased to be shagging it up with an infatuated girl ten or eleven years his junior, but any port in an emission relief storm will do to his mind. 

They get to Brunei and after much travelogue and scenic descriptions, the H helps her find the father's wife. She turns out to be a tribal lady of 23 or so, and the H's dad was 48 so that about says it all right there. 

 The h tells the woman about her dad, gives her the money and figures her promise is kept. She is hoping to stay with the H as his lover or cook/tension reliever but the H bluntly tells her it is all over. 

The next part of the book is five years later, the h brought a souvenir home from her jungle adventure and he is doing his best to convince his mum that gerbil would make a marvelous pet. The h is now back in England and working for a travel agency and contemplating marriage to very nice, middle class guy and doing her best to be a single parent. Guess who stops by the travel agency to book his flight back to the South Seas?

The H has returned for his father's funeral and takes the h to lunch. The h is pretty much over the heartbreak, but she has no desire for a pillar to post life style and no desire to be another convenience, so she turns the H's offer of a lurve club desert down.

 She tells him she is engaged, (she isn't she is just thinking about it,) and they part when she has to go back to work. The H then follows her home and finds out about his son. He starts to get fussy about the situation when the h reminds him that he wanted nothing more to do with her and it wasn't like she had tons of cash to track him down while he was wandering the South Seas. 

Of course the kid bonds with the H right away and the H tells her they are marrying. He chases the h's long term guy off . The h agrees after she assumes that the H will stay in England but soon finds out the H has no intention of staying. 

 His family is really wealthy and the H refuses to live what he terms a mediocre trapped lifestyle, so of course the h and her son will just bum around on his now bigger cargo ship in lieu of having a real home. The h is not at all keen on that life style but is still attracted to the H so after the inevitable lurve-up, she decides not to marry the H. He can visit when he gets into port.

The H doesn't like that solution, he wants his son and he needs the h to go too cause someone has to teach and look after the kid while they are all on ship - at least until the boy gets old enough to watch out for himself. 

 He kidnaps the son and they go back to the South Seas, the h has to follow and winds up getting shanghaied when the H send his ship out to sea. (How the H got the kid out of England without a passport and why the h did not have the consulate and police go get her son is never explained.) The H tells the h that he will keep them at sea until she agrees to stay, as he needs his son, and the h says okay and HEA. 

This book should have outraged me more than it did, but in actuality it was just sort of meh. The h had valid points about the H's lifestyle and he certainly won't be faithful and since they never made it to the English registry office, there is no wedding plans either. 

The H also never tells the h he loves her and I wasn't really feeling the love from the H's actions either. I think the H wanted his son as some sort of possession and the h was needed for child care. I don't see a long term relationship out of this. It will probably end as soon as the lust wears off the h and she will probably wind up losing her son as well. 

Still any h that is foolish enough to stay with such a diffident man probably deserves what she gets, but at least she does have the gumption to dump him when she fully exorcises that need for the lurve club. 

 I think KT meant the whole kidnapping thing to be a Grand Gesture, and she does usually write the drama well, but that whole kidnap ploy just did not work - there wasn't enough tension on the H's part to climb the hill of disbelief that he really wanted the h herself and the h doesn't seem too concerned about it all in the end.

 The book read more like the h was the son's mum and female so she would temporarily do until the kid either succumbed to some tropical fever or the h did, or something better came along. 

 Overall this one isn't a winner, but it really isn't a wall-banger either, cause the h just went along with everything eventually - not without a lot of snarly snark - but she did not take any overt actions to leave either.