This biography is more detailed, but less readable than Lepape's work on Gide. It gives an enormous amount of information, but one might wonder whether the author had a similar purpose in mind as Lepape: creating an image of the person André Gide.

The emerging picture at the end is rather that of an active homosexual who also wrote books, most of the time reluctantly, almost out of a sense of duty. It is striking how many pages are spent on Gide's homosexual/pederastic escapades, as if the author cannot hide his surprise at this. Sometimes it gets a bit bizarre e.g. where he says of a certain trip of Gide (p.203/4), almost excusing himself, that this time "we have very little idea of Gide's sexual activities".

Probably Sheridan had a different reading audience in mind than Lepape, Lepape supposing the reader to be familiar with the work of Gide. Sheridan gives as subtitle: 'A life in the century', which he explains as meaning that he intended to look at Gide here and now, and not as a historical figure. 

From Sheridan's biography Gide also emerges as a very special person, socially speaking. During some 600 pages we follow Gide on all his numerous trips and encounters outside and inside France; but this gets somewhat boring. It also involves the risk that nothing stands out: e.g. a characterizing (at least in my view of Gide) citation (p.538) almost gets lost in the ocean of less significant facts and citations. It is where Gide writes on the eve of the second World War that he feels that future generations will no longer be able to feel what he has felt, and will not even be able to regret it, since they will no longer be in contact with the admirable culture he and his friends have lived in.

Since this biography is not written in French, the distance to Gide increases. But the author himself also has his distances to anything French (e.g. "Gide's cult of sincerity was untypically French" p.633). And although distance as such is not a bad thing, it nevertheless gives one the impression that Sheridan is less 'in touch' with his subject than Lepape. (I am aware that this is a subjective appreciation.)

The book contains a very fine bibliography of all editions of Gide's published works.