Rating: 2/5

Jeffrey Eugeniges in his fanboy introduction says that when he first read this 

I was suddenly pulled into a never-before-experienced realm : the sunken world of a strange and marvelous book. Elect Mr Robinson for a Better World is that very rare thing : a book without antecedents.

O Jeffrey Eugenides, you may be very sweet
But I feel your education has been somewhat incomplete

Kafka (1915) 
 K. was informed by telephone that there would be a small hearing concerning his case the following Sunday. He was made aware that these cross examinations would follow one another regularly, perhaps not every week but quite frequently. 

Donald Barthelme (1976) 
Some of us had been threatening our friend Colby for a long time, because of the way he had been behaving. And now he’d gone too far, so we decided to hang him.

Donald Antrim (1993)
Today I’m not sure I’d favour drawing and quartering an ex-mayor and Chamber of Commerce volunteer. That’s what we did to Jim Kunkel after the Stinger incident.

Yes, strange, violent and random things are being described in a voice of ironic normality. And this has been going on for years.

So anyway, in this thankfully brief novel, we’re in American suburbia, there’s a low-level war going on between two suburbs, people are throwing up fortifications round their houses, areas are mined, schools have been closed (because of withdrawn funding, not because of this guerrilla war), and Pete Robinson is thinking of running for mayor. First he has to bury the various parts of the dismembered ex-mayor (currently in his freezer) in various sacred places throughout town, intoning passages from the Egyptian Book of the Dead over them. Oh, and Pete's wife has become a coelacanth. (Not literally, spiritually.) You get the picture? Yes, this is bizarro fiction, of which there is now quite a lot.
 
I took a chance on the notoriously bizarro Blueprints of the Afterlife by Ryan Boudinot after some serious raving by one of my Goodreads friends. Here we have giant heads that appear in the sky; there is the world's greatest dishwasher who is a person; there are over 600 clones of an ancient pop singer's backup dancer; there is a person who keeps getting murdered; indeed there is a lot of fun going on. However, I found that some of the odder science fiction writers had got to this level of wackiness already. But I did like it, because Mr Boudinot has impressively weird ideas and he doesn’t waste them writing mild comedy sketches strung together by room-temperature standup riffing.

Franz Kafka, you rock. Donald Barthelme and Ryan Boudinot, you also rock. Donald Antrim, you are John Denver.