Rating: 5/5

Something unusual occurred to me as I was turning the pages of this novel: I was basking in the simple, unflowery storytelling, relishing the tenderness that the oddly arranged mosaic of characters arose in me, and devouring page after page in spite of having figured out exactly where and when the pieces of the disarranged puzzle of facts, timelines and crisscrossed stories would inevitably converge. Solving the key aspects of the plot didn’t diminish the glee of savoring a book that couldn’t have been improved in any way. Every word counted, every brief digression polished the rough edges of a rather austere prose, every sketchy scene added layers of meaning that didn’t need to be fully articulated because there were vast universes to be found in Luydmila’s tribute to life, death and love.

Everything in this book happens between the lines. 
Greenwish village, New York. Alik is an emigrated Russian painter who sees the last days of his life ebbing away due to a degenerative illness that has him prostrated in bed. Surrounded by a weird assortment of acquaintances and close friends, doctors and quacks, wife and lovers, in his scruffy hovel, he cherishes every second he has left, feeling deeply grateful for the little time he’s been granted to reconcile past mistakes that could have changed the lives of those he loves from afar.
The occasion of Alik’s dying becomes a meeting point for exiles, expatriated, rampant eccentrics, a Catholic priest and a rabbi, all of whom find common comfort in their sincere appreciation for the moribund man, transforming quite unexpectedly a funeral into a spontaneous party that celebrates the existence of art, music and life. It also provides the opportunity Alik has unknowingly been waiting for; his last chance to put into words what he’s kept silent for too many years.

What is it that makes a person impossible to resist? 
How can one explain the magnetic pull, the charisma that surrounds certain people? Alik manages to build a family, as unorthodox as it may be, wherever he is. He might seek solitude sometimes, but is never lonely. Women flutter around him like moths to a flame, burning themselves to death, setting the different stages of Alik’s life. 
It’s precisely through Luydmilla’s portrayal of these female characters that the reader gets to know the painter’s boundless capacity to love everything and everybody, to realize that his cup overflows with passion, with vitality, with a captivating zest for life, that his expansive personality is so contagious that he becomes the sun others can’t help but orbit around.
But who is Alik’s most precious star?

As the last vestiges of the Soviet Union crumble down and Alik’s following watch the historical events unfold on his TV, he closes his eyes slowly, hearing the soothing background commotion, and finally allows the wondrous tide of warmth to engulf him into placid oblivion. In his mind, he mutters the name of his true love. In his lips flickers the smile of an innocent child, and this reader closes the book and stares at the wall for a while, seeing everything very clearly.