Rating: 4/5

Prairie Nocturne is a fictional work that spans many years of ranch life in Montana. Susan Duff is a main character who is a singer and singing teacher of children. She is now middle aged and is apparently an older version of the little girl in Doig's most popular work, Dancing At the Rascal Fair. She has brought down the political career of the owner of the huge ranch that borders her family's ranch. She has not seen, Wes, for four years and so she is surprised when one evening he shows up at her home. Wes has come to ask a favor of her that entangles her life with his again and with his ranch hand and chauffeur, Monty.
 Doig is an extremely gifted writer of beautiful prose. I am stretched in my understanding of phrases and this is a book that makes me feel I will have learned a thing or two about fine writing when I finish. This story is adding to a list of two other Western adventures written by men who live in the West. I have loved the kind of slow, easy tone of these writers about a rough and tumble and difficult life. I cannot read these books without feeling the desire of riding across the Western prairies and into the dry gulches and canyons again. Doig is spinning an intricate web of characters whose loneliness will collide in a big way. One is a very priviledged man with everything except what one desires most, one an intellectual,feminist woman, and one a black man who dares to want the same things that all the white people around him want. They have grown up together but have not known each other well. Doig seems intent on reconnecting them more intimately while reminding us of the long struggles for human rights and the changing American landscape. As the story progresses, danger ensues and Wes Williamson begins to "pull out the stops" to accomplish what he wishes against an unseen foe whose capacity for hatred becomes personal.
 This book has action and for some who pick up subtle hints, still some surprises. A discussion group I was in, was lively and could have used more information about Wes Williamson the manipulator of the story. He is a complex man and readers were still discussing his motivations at the end. The group also discussed the rhythm and sequence of the story and there was mixed reaction as to whether or not it contributes to comprehension. Some understanding of the social pressures and the era that acts upon the characters is necessary. It generates lots of discussion for sure!