Rating: 4/5

There are perhaps few books that can be said to represent a life-changing experience but for me African Genesis: A Personal Investigation into the Animal Origins &amp; Nature of Man represents such a work. The best way to consider Ardrey's book is not to regard it as a scholarly work of man's prehistoric roots but as a very personal voyage by a gifted writer who intersected with the men &amp; women who were at the forefront of these discoveries. Robert Ardrey, a former screenwriter &amp; playwright, acts as someone who collates &amp; dramatizes the characters who brought the world to a more complete understanding to our prehistoric origins. 

Much in the way that Charles Darwin, a man without any specific scientific training fashioned his notes &amp; observations from the long journey on the HMS Beagle into a definitive book on evolution, Ardrey took a giant leap, propelled largely by curiosity while living in East Africa but also hearkening back to a famous biology teacher at the University of Chicago, W.C. Allee, someone who served as an inspiration. 

Beyond that, Robert Ardrey was mentored in the craft of writing by Thornton Wilder while at the Univ. of Chicago, someone who encouraged him to write for the stage. Many years after leaving his Chicago home, New York, where several of his plays were produced &amp; Hollywood, where he was a screen writer, nominated for an Academy Award for the film Khartoum, Ardrey found his way to Africa and transformed himself &amp; in so-doing, served as a kind of evangelist for folks like Louis &amp; Mary Leakey in Kenya and Raymond Dart in S. Africa.

African Genesis is so very many things in one but one of the key elements I'd forgotten about is the autobiographical nature of the work, almost playfully inserting footnotes about the author's own life, while at the same time functioning as an imaginative screen writer in creating a tableaux of primate development with very colorful, evocative language. 

For example, the author compares the "genetic lottery" each of us is beset with to a hand of poker. And Ardrey uses the American musical  West Side Story as a method of demonstrating man's territorial nature, going as far back as "Australopithecus Africanus" in the Pleistocene era, 3 million years ago, a continuing human quest for territory with early primate origins. Here are a few samples of Ardrey's commentary: Not in innocence &amp; not in Asia was mankind born. We are a fraction of the animal world &amp; to its subtle ways our hearts are yet pledged. We are children of Cain. And were it not so, then for humanity there would be no hope. We are born of risen apes, not fallen angels, and the apes were armed killers besides. 

And so what should we wonder at? Our murders &amp; massacres &amp; missiles &amp; our irreconcilable regiments? Or our treaties whatever they may be worth; our symphonies however seldom they may be played; our peaceful acres, however frequently they may be converted into battlefields; our dreams however rarely they may be accomplished. The miracle of man is not how far he has sunk but how magnificently he has risen. We are known among the stars by our poems, not by our corpses.Among Robert Ardrey's many captivating assertions are these: the paradox that our predatory animal origin represents for mankind its last best hope; there are parallel lines of evidence that bipedalism leads to tool use, which leads to weaponry &amp; the inevitable "Cain &amp; Abel moment"; human intelligence is no sideshow but the main event, with the mind free &amp; the creature of no single instinct, capable of discovering a truth or creating a lie; that territory is much more a defining element than sexuality in animal life (he establishes a homestead before gaining a mate); that man is neither unique nor central nor necessarily here to stay; there is an amity-enmity code of any animal society: mercy, devotion &amp; sacrifice for the social partner but suspicion, antagonism &amp; unending hostility for the territorial neighbor. 

Beyond these assertions, Ardrey contends that "in the hieroglyph of human emergence certain symbols must stand for all to read: change is the elixir of human circumstance &amp; acceptance of challenge is the way of our kind. We are bad-weather animals, disaster's fairest children. For the soundest of evolutionary reasons, man appears at his best when times are worst." 

Of course in the many years since Robert Ardrey wrote African Genesis further research has changed the way we view our prehistoric development and many later researchers have refined the manner in which we view primate behavior, among them Donald Johanson, also with a Univ. of Chicago background. 

I first read Robert Ardrey's African Genesis in Africa just after it was published &amp; found it a most remarkable book, in part because much of the research into early man's roots had been done in Kenya where I was living but also in South Africa &amp; Ethiopia, a country where I'd also spent time. 

But more than that, the book served as a pathway to so many other important books by authors such as Raymond Dart (with whom Ardrey spent considerable time in S. Africa), Sonia Cole (The Prehistory of East Africa), Eliot Howard (Territory in Bird Life), Konrad Lorenz, Phillip Tobias, &amp; Eugene Marais (Soul of the White Ant &amp; My Friends the Baboons), all works of considerable interest that represented stepping stones to a further understanding about the African sphere of man's evolutionary passage. 

In a curious sort of way, the book has been with me ever since but only recently did I establish time to reread African Genesis. Yes, much has happened in the world of research on the early archeological roots of mankind as well as competing explanations regarding the behavior of early primates. At some point, unable to locate my paperback edition from my time in Africa, I wrote away for a used hardcover edition, which when it arrived bore the inscription of William L. Shirer, the illustrious journalist &amp; author of Rise &amp; Fall of the Third Reich &amp; other well-regarded books. 

Later, based on a comment regarding African Genesis that I'd made at this site, I was contacted by Jonathan Ardrey, the author's grandson who very cordially introduced himself &amp; proceeded to send me copies in a newly bound paperback format of all of Robert Ardrey's books, apparently long out-of-print. My apology for taking so very long to deal with a review of African Genesis Jonathan.

African Genesis is most certainly a book for a limited audience but I recommend it to those with an interest in primate ethology, human prehistory &amp; African paleo-anthropology. More than that, Ardrey's book represents a quest-tale of a sort that is both formidable &amp; quite unusual in its scope. Alas, some of the comments of reviewers at this site betray an almost utter absence of familiarity with the book but I was quite moved by the positive review by Edward Simpon. 

*There are many expressive drawings inserted within African Genesis, done by Berdine Ardrey, the author's wife, at a time when they lived in South Africa, where both are now buried. Given Robert Ardrey's extreme sensitivity to Africa &amp; man's origins there, Ardrey's place on the continent represented a kind of homecoming. **1st Image within review=Robert Ardrey; 2nd=artist's rendering of Australopithecus; 3rd=Thailand postage stamps portraying Australopithecus/primate evolution.