Rating: 5/5

If you have read THE DEVIL IN THE WHITE CITY or DEAD WAKE: THE LAST CROSSING OF THE LUSITANIA by Erik Larson, and can appreciate the amount of research that goes into documenting the stories he writes about, I would encourage you to pick up a copy of THE NAKED CONSUMER: HOW OUR PRIVATE LIVES BECOME PUBLIC COMMODITIES.

First published in 1992, one may think this is a bit outdated, with technology being what it is, always changing and improving. But I say that is all the more reason to read this and educate yourself, for it is all the more relevant in the world you now live in today.

Advertising has grown into a multi-million dollar industry. Some years ago McDonald's changed the advertising agency they did business with and shook up Wall Street as those selling goods to the American people rely on advertisers to bring in customers. As television became popular in America, merchants and advertisers realized its potential for hawking their goods and services. In order to know which TV shows were the most popular, and thereby the best place to run their commercials, the Nielsen company began placing devices in homes that kept track of which shows were tuned in. Of course there were several reasons why this data might be inaccurate, such as when people leave the room, so Nielsen tried to remedy this over the years with fancier devices. Erik covers this in pretty good detail.

It soon became apparent that just knowing which shows were popular left a lot of blanks about what the consumer wanted, so the industry set out to know more about the consumer themselves. Was the consumer a man or a woman? What did they eat? Where did they live? What were their hobbies? What was their income? Were they married? What was their race? In time this quest for knowledge morphed into an espionage service where money could be made.

Much of this information gathered over the years came from the Census Bureau and credit rating companies like Equifax. Another source of information came from being members of shopping clubs where by filling out an application listing personal information you got a card that gave you discounts on purchases. Do you remember the warranty cards for the items you bought that started out asking the item's serial number and ended up asking your age, level of education, and how much money you made? All that information was collected. At times even your garbage was gone through to see if you really bought and used products as claimed.

With the coming of bar codes, every purchase was recorded if you wrote a check, belonged to a buyer's club or used a credit or debit card. Whether you like it or not, you now have a national identification card that tracks you. To some it is known as a Visa.

Since Erik wrote this book you now can have your refrigerator remind you to buy milk. Your GPS not only shows you where to go but where you have been. Your phone tracks you as well. I can just imagine if Erik wrote an updated version of this book what it might say.

In time it has now got to the point where each of us has files made of our likes and dislikes. Nothing is sacred. What is the harm in this one may ask? Let's see. The rounding up of the Japanese Americans was helped by the Census Bureau. Those parents who filled out those Farrell's birthday cards so their kids could get a free ice cream cone on their birthday found reminders for draft registration in their mailboxes. One bank in Boston would not provide mortgages to certain zip codes that had low income black families. Gay organizations bought lists of gays (Yes, they could figure that out by what you bought, read, and places you frequent.) that were used to out people who were not ready or willing to announce that to family or friends. You bought roses, condoms, and paid for that motel room with a credit card. Hum? You are a single woman who purchased a lot of condoms, so was the incident really rape or concentual? The insurance company for the job you applied for might be interested that you buy a large cup of Mountain Dew every morning but have never bought a toothbrush nor been to the dentist since you were a child. Your car insurance company might be concerned that you habitually speed and buy a can of beer every day on the way home from work. Palestinian protesters can buy lists of Jewish Americans to harass and torment. Though racial stereotyping is frowned upon, it is used by advertising agencies, security agencies, and others.

All this information they collect on your private life is considered proprietary information that is sold Yet you receive not a cent. Erik thinks it is time this was changed.