Rating: 4/5

Back in High School, during the lost years we call the Reagan Era, I read a modern-era thriller called The Ninja, which was the start of a series of thrillers by Eric Van Lustbader. Full of sex, violence, femme fatales and abused, broken people, it was decidedly NOT targeted at my 14-year-old self, but I loved it! Over the years, I read the sequels it spawned as well as EVL's continuations of Ludlum's Bourne series.

Ironically, as an avid fantasy reader, I've *meant* to read the novel series that launched Lustbader's career for decades but never have, and remembered it again while watching SILO, as it also deals with an underground outpost that might be the last habitation of humans, a lost history of what the world was really like before, or who the 'Freehold's' founders were, and a ruling cabal who may or may not be hiding a secret about what lies above.

Now, beyond that, these two works couldn't be much more different. The disaster of the Sunset Warrior is ecological: an Ice Age, and the world inside its Freehold has no pretenses of democracy; it is a feudal, caste-based society in a world that is definitely science-fantasy, not science fiction, with a crumbling technology whose use and maintenance is increasingly not understood, the use of scrolls and strange technology (or is it magic?), that suggest the world before the collapse was either not our own, or was ours at some equally distant future. 

A lot of the set-up feels tropish, until one remembers that the story was written almost 50 years ago, and there are some interesting twists, including the discovery of an even older refuge than the Freehold, although this introduces one major continuity glitch: we are given a vocabulary for how an underground society tracks time in the absence of day and night...but somehow there is a clear, day and night in this deeper world...indeed 'sunset' even triggers an important plot point. But what is this sun or where is real sunlight coming from? There's a suggestion that perhaps there are intentional 'sunroofs' in the refuge, but wouldn't that just let the cold in? Whatever the case, it is never addressed.

As the first of a trilogy, the novel ends on a cliffhanger and a twist-ending that prefigures some of the ideas the author would use ten years later in The Ninja. Not a perfect novel but a compelling, short read and I'll definitely finish the series.