Rating: 4/5

One of the most devastating things about American slavery is how newborn babies were considered free gifts of property to slave owners. And there may be no better book than Toni Morrison’s, Beloved, to convey the specific pain of that for a mother. 

This mother’s empathy for her daughters is so deep it burrows through her to the other side, until we find Sethe, the book’s protagonist, become Medea before our eyes. Morrison gives her way more humanity than Euripides did for me, and even more than David Vann ever could in his Bright Air Black. Now I understand Medea. 

Morrison spares us details of direct abuse to children by whitefolks in this story (I love how that’s written as a single word) by showing instead the abuse to and from the mother. And even this Morrison leaves in the past, revealing instead how that kind of suffering scars one for life and crowds the present. Not much actually happens at the time of the main story, but that time is literally haunted by the past. And it is in the past where the drama lies, the pain of being human, that gets trapped in this family’s home. 

“There is a loneliness that can be rocked. Arms crossed, knees drawn up; holding, holding on, this motion, unlike a ship’s, smooths and contains the rocker. It’s an inside kind – wrapped tight like skin. Then there is a loneliness that roams. No rocking can hold it down. It is alive, on its own. A dry and spreading thing that makes the sound of one’s own feet going seem to come from a far-off place.”

Morrison was a prose poet, and this book a bit like an Epic poem. The structure felt like a series of eddies swirling about and knocking into each other, sometimes even on a sentence level. It disoriented me; until I fell into a whirlpool that took me down so deep I almost didn’t make it back. And while she had me submerged I was knocked into a second eddy, this time sliding into the deep end of someone else, until Morrison brought me up for air. Talk about intimacy! The characters felt like amoebas, merging and splitting, merging and splitting, until new beings emerged, the desire between them visceral, symbiotic and engulfing. For all these reasons, this was an artful read. The thing is, I worked hard for it. I became hyper-vigilant of the big picture as I was knocked aside, bounced around, and sometimes kicked out. I held on tight, leaving the rest of me loose enough to trust the ride. 

“She floated near but outside her own body, feeling vague and intense at the same time. Needing nothing. Being what there was.”

“White people believed that whatever the manners, under every dark skin was a jungle. Swift unnavigable waters, swinging screaming baboons, sleeping snakes, red gums ready for their sweet white blood. In a way, he thought, they were right. The more coloredpeople spent their strength trying to convince them how gentle they were…how human… the deeper and more tangled the jungle grew inside. But it wasn’t the jungle blacks brought with them to this place from the other (livable) place. It was the jungle whitefolks planted in them. And it grew. It spread….It spread, until it invaded the whites who had made it. Touched them every one. Changed and altered them. Made them bloody, silly, worse than even they wanted to be, so scared were they of the jungle they had made. The screaming baboon lived under their own white skin; the red gums were their own.”

“Nobody saw them falling.”

“Nobody saw them falling.”

“It was not a story to pass on.”