Rating: 5/5

Who would have thought she could write so detailed and specifically about herself without at any time sounding self-centered, arrogant or in any way much out of the ordinary. But was she!

I have to think about this one for some days. It's the best girlhood and young womanhood cultural and mores eyes of context for the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century in her location that I have ever read. A run on sentence that is incredibly true. And I have read many, most written during or far after hers was. 

If you have not read this book, I strongly recommend it. Particularly difficult in the amount of people, places, houses (those especially)- it is not an easy read. Yet sublime. I believe there was a way of speaking and nuance between the two world wars that will never be surpassed. Those in their prime time then, like Agatha- and especially those who wrote during that era! They hold grace and respect quite beyond any intellectual or economic differences, but could determine their absolute beliefs and realities exactly at the same time. Differing without rebuke and distortions too.

That they could travel for a year or 10 months or 2 years at various intervals to "save money"? And the mindset they (and she specifically) held on work, serendipity of experiences, female obligations or onus in anyway for "freedoms" of choices etc. etc. Agatha, you are the goat- as they say now.

I totally agree with both your short and long views on the female, on work, on play, and also on motherhood, Agatha. Immense territories of experience and degree have been lost for the average girl / woman.

Read her take on her own education. And how despite sea sickness and other negatives, there is always more to see over the hill or across the water if you have the gumption. Or another house to rent or buy or trade or change. (Even if it means a fight with the government councils to take out the 14 bathrooms that they made of your larder during the war.)

She didn't have any wealth until past 40. But she sure did have imagination in the millions of pounds range. She was shy of groups always. But thank God, that wasn't allowed.