Rating: 4/5

Very much enjoyed how this book humanized the legendary Dietrich Bonhoeffer. I was challenged and inspired by his story.

I was amazed, as well, by the numerous parallels between Hitler's Germany and our current political environment. Of course there are significant differences, but with certain passages I had to stop and remind myself that this book was written long before the era of Trump.

"[Bonhoeffer] shakes his head and decides this new tactic will fail, for how will anyone be able to bear the stale jokes and forced humor, the historical inaccuracies, spiritual vapidity, and upside-down logic that characterize Hitler's speech?"

"I believe," Niemoller said, "that Hitler is surrounded by fools and charlatans, and that he receives bad advice. But he's also quite obviously an intelligent man. He wouldn't have got as far as he has otherwise. Who knows, perhaps he's capable of listening to other voices as well. If so, we can do a great deal to alleviate the harsher measures the Nazis have proposed."

Bonhoeffer: "First, we Christians can challenge the state's actions and ask the state to live up to its responsibilities. Second, we must do everything we can to help those who have been victimized by the state. That includes those victims who are not part of the Christian community ... Third, if these first two courses of action do not achieve satisfactory results, we are obligated not just to bandage those who have been broken beneath the wheel of the state, but to jam a spoke in the wheel itself."

Bonhoeffer: "A national church which accepts Nazi policies may be popular, but it will never be Christian."

Bonhoeffer: "But I find now that I am angry, always angry. It's not just the bullying and the threats. It's the way all logic and knowledge and reason are twisted into their exact opposites. So that it is no longer possible to converse with these people. Only to scream at them..."

"Dr Frank Buchman, the great American evangelist, is in Berlin for the Games. At the Adlon Hotel he attends lavish receptions, holds private meetings with Himmler and Goebbels, and even talks briefly with Hitler himself. The Fuhrer assures Dr Buchman his work is appreciated and no roadblocks will be placed in the way as he preaches the Gospel ... [Buchman] suggests the the Nazis, like Franco in Spain, are making the world safe for true Christianity and protecting the West from godless Communism ... "I thank God for a man like Adolf Hitler, who built a front line of defense against the Antichrist of Communism...Of course I don't condone everything the Nazis do. Anti-Semitism? Bad, naturally...But think what it would mean to the world if Hitler surrendered to the control of God...Through such a man God could control a nation overnight and solve every last, bewildering problem."