Rating: 4/5

When I read Theroux in the 1990s the books were two train journeys in different parts of the world. Then I read him on Henry Miller. In all instances he was an above-it-all snot. I heard about this book when it came out, but not liking Theroux and having been bored by Naipaul's Mr. Biswas (read because Gaddis liked Mimic Men, I think) I had no interest in it at the time.

Time passed. The copy I have was purchased used. The two writers deserve each other. What impresses me is how Theroux comes out looking better than Naipaul, but that's through suppression of his raw feelings on him until the last pages. Toady is a word that comes to mind, enabler another, coward a third. It's not smart to be impressed by a writer and his rules to the point you have them in your head, or to think that succumbing to a cult of personality can be forgiven by every reader. There are enough cults around to make one leery of anyone blind enough to join the Naipaul one.

What I mean is, Theroux was impressionable when he was 24 and Naipaul 35 or so, but as the years went on surely he could see better what Naipaul was. Wilful ignorance. The glitter is lifted from Theroux's eyelids when he receives a fax from the second Lady Naipaul that would be considered, by most standards, insulting and high-handed. He has been barred from the presence of the great man. That's what hurts him the most, that a woman with literary pretensions (Theroux's implicit judgment) got in the way of this literary friendship. To me it seemed more like a conman and his mark separated by a hostile third force, but that's only an opinion.

Why 4 stars? For the unadorned anger, for the ugly portrait of himself (as he must be aware), and for the even uglier one of Naipaul, done with liveliness and venting of the spleen that powers certain writers' sentences. (Trolls share that.) It's a welcome change to see Theroux shoot himself and Naipaul in the feet over and over instead of hitting the targets he focused on in those earlier books, the Other.