Rating: 4/5

What Was It All For?

The Battle of Verdun in 1916 is synonymous with the First World War. A huge waste of life for little gain in a pointless war. From reading this book, this has reaffirmed this perception for me. Originally written in the 1960s, when the memories of this conflict were still fresh in the minds of the generations that followed and the veterans were beginning to die off. The Price of Glory: Verdun 1916 is able to offer something that cannot be done today. Interviews with veterans and those who knew the figures of this book. The author, Sir Alistair Horne also visited the battlefield 40 years after its conclusion. Still scared with the sites of the war, with skeletons, helmets and rifles still being regularly uncovered; the landscape much changed again, although one still sees the last vestiges of another world.

Horne tells a great, balanced story. He brushes away the caricatures of those involved, such as Phillippe Pétain or Crown Prince Wilhelm and shows what decisions men made and seeks to answer why they made those decisions. As Horne himself exclaims, this is the more interesting inquiry. The other dominating figure in all of this is of course Eric von Falkenhayn, who as a ‘westerner’ (ie looked to win the war in the west) masterminded attacking at Verdun, famously saying ‘to bleed the French white’. This of course failed, after the initial successes as the battle cost both sides around 700,000 casualties, with the French loading slightly more.

So why did it fail? Some say the war was lost after the First Battle of the Marne in 1914, as once Germany failed to win a quick victory they could never sustain a long war. Verdun was the second chance of a German attempt at a decisive victory, to take away French morale by seizing the important fort structures in the Verdun area. However, they had not yet the technology of tanks or the tactics of a creeping barrage to break through. The heavy bombardments destroyed the land, killed the soldiers, but the machine gun nests were still devastating and the counter bombardments and counter attacks simply took back what was taken. Only in the Spring offensive of 1918 did the Germans bring up duck boards to push the heavy artillery along a battlefield as to shell new positions once their men went in. The Crown Prince was hamstrung by his aid de camp Otto von Knoblesdorff who was believed in the Verdun mission alongside Falkenhayn and was unable to convince his father, the Kaiser of its futile nature. Falkenhayn became more and more obsessed with taking Verdun, before finally loosing interest. His lack of communication with his peers or even the Austrians who knew nothing about the attack was fatal. The other cause of the failure was the allied response. Namely the British attacks on the Somme to relieve the pressure. This engaged the Germans further north where more men had to be sent.

What did the battle achieve? This is also an interesting question posed by Horne. The downfall of Falkenhayn and the raise of Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff. It also paved the way for early feelers of negotiated peace from figures in Germany such as the Crown Prince. More intriguing, the fall of France in 1940. As Horne explains, Verdun broke French hearts and destroyed a generation. Never again would the lives of young Frenchmen be so needlessly sacrificed. It had a huge influence over the leadership in France and of course Pétain. The French lost the war in 1870 through being too defensive and relying on fortifications, they were broken by being too attacking in 1914 and so reverted to a defensive strategy in the inter-war years. The Maginot Line was cut through by the German blitzkrieg by a France unable to find the right balance. 

The battle is one of tragedy and ultimate bleakness. From the air duels where aces burnt to death to the tragedy waste of horses. Men sat in waterlogged trenches, next to piles of bodies, starving to death in the cold. None of it is positive or heroic. A true anti war pamphlet in the ilk of All Quiet on the Western Front. No one can say war is not hell after reading this. Times have moved on from when The Price of Glory: Verdun 1916 was written. We are now starting to see the ‘lions led by donkeys’ narrative changed, which Horne actually doesn’t prescribe too all that much, the book doesn’t feel out of date or a new history is needed. I enjoyed this and recommend to the First World War enthusiast.