Rating: 3/5

The second in a set of three novellas - published as long-short stories or in annuals - Tom Tackles The Chalet School is an amiable, charming read, though it can feel a tad inconsequential when compared to the proper books in Elinor M. Brent-Dyer's longrunning series. 

The undeniable highlight of this slim tome is Tom herself, who proves herself to be one of the most unique, appealing schoolgirls ever created by Brent-Dyer. That's primarily because Tom - a.k.a. Lucinda Muriel Gay - has been effectively raised as a boy. This tomboy (surely her preferred choice of nickname is deliberate) is flummoxed by her classmates when she joins the Chalet School - not because they're soppy, silly girls, as Tom expects. Instead, Tom finds herself having to reevaluate the notions she's always had about girls as she meets new friends well worthy of her time. 

The novella is roughly split into two halves - the first nine chapters were published in one Chalet Book For Girls, the last six in another - and the first half can come across as a tad plodding. The main incident, which causes Tom to form a woeful impression of prefect Daisy Venables, is as well-observed as ever, but doesn't really stand out amidst all the schoolgirl hijinks that Brent-Dyer has crafted. It's also tough to care because Brent-Dyer has created such an honourable young gentleman in Tom that the misunderstanding never feels properly dire - of course Tom will realise that all the girls around her, especially Daisy, are jolly good sports. 

Far more amusing is the second half of the book, which brings to the fore the Staff and former pupils of the School in relation to Tom. The latter's attempt to catch some burglars yields a very funny chapter of misunderstandings, paired with the cheerful insults and banter that fly back and forth between arguable series heroine Joey Maynard and the current Head (Miss Wilson) and games mistress (Hilary Burn) of the school. The tradition of Tom's soon-to-be legendary dollhouses also begins here, nestled within a truly epic sale crafted around an Alice In Wonderland theme. 

A quick, easy and quite lovely read, though a hardly weighty one, Tom Tackles is the best of the three novellas set in the Armishire era. 3.5	/5