Rating: 2/5

I was feeling homesick, so I downloaded this novel because of its references to the Outer Hebrides, and its rather evocative front cover. As a mystery, it's not bad. Who is the dead man on the train, and what does the mysterious verse mean? Inspector Alan Grant, on holiday in Scotland, determines to find out in an investigation that takes him out west, to an island based on Barra, where the plane flies in and lands on the sand. Though not the singing sand.

And then – oh my fucking God! Fair enough, the description of the islands in March is pretty spot on – the howling wind, the 3-days gales,the relentless rain, the biting cold – but the excruciatingly stereotypical view of the Gael was jaw dropping. Take this, for example: 'After the circumlocutions of a people so devious minded that they had no word for No, it was pleasant to be asked a straight question in simple English' (p.125, Kindle version). The Gaels are portrayed as lazy, gullible and uncultured, and it only gets worse.

This is a novel that suffers deeply from the cringe. Grant, and through him, Tey, despises Scotland and the Scots. 'The typical Scots insularity in 'those English rivers' made him hope Laura would not wait too long before sending Pat away to his English school. The quality of Scotchness was a highly concentrated essence, and should always be diluted. As an ingredient it was admirable; neat, it was as abominable as ammonia' (p.224). The Scots are seen as careless, smug and dangerous, an unpleasant nation that needs to be Anglified to make it palatable. I'm fairly sure the only reason Grant himself is a Scot is to show the rest of us the errors of our ways. In this book you can either be an Anglified Grant (BritNat Good!) or a Scottified Wee Archie (ScotNat Bad!) By this point, who cares who the dead man is? One can only presume he died as a means of escape from the God-forsaken region that is Scotland.

A disappointing read, but one that should be studied by all students of post-colonialism, because if Tey ever mastered anything, it was the art of superiority painfully perfected by the British colonial.