Rating: 4/5

PRIVATE AFFAIRS – by Judith Michael
I have had this book on my “to be read” list for quite some time. I delayed reading it because I wasn’t sure I would like it…. mainly because of the reviews I have read. I was wrong… I enjoyed every page. My having been a business manager for a small town newspaper for a few years, this story brought back memories of those days. Some parts of the story could be a little boring to some, but not to me.
The only thing that kept me from giving it a 5 star, was how it ended. A sudden HEA for Matt and Elizabeth. I thought Elizabeth went to Matt’s arms too quickly. He should have had to beg, walk on hot coals and suffer before she took him back. Much more groveling needed from Matt!

This is a story about the life of a married couple, two newspaper journalists, who are caught up in the corrupt world of the power of the press. The story takes place within the span of 2 years.

Hero-Matt Lovell (43)—Co-owner of The Chieftan, Journalist, Publisher, VP of Rourke Enterprises – wants to live the dream of power and wealth, has 8 month affair with Nicole because she was available and supported his views and decisions

Heroine-Elizabeth Lovell (43)—Co-owner of The Chieftan, Journalist, writer of the syndicated column “Private Affairs” – thinks Matt is making a mistake by accepting a job with Rourke Enterprises, has a brief affair with Tony because she is feeling alone and rejected by Matt (after finding out that Matt is having an affair with Nicole)

OW-Nicole Renard (27 or 28)—Wealthy socialite, arm candy for influential business men, interior decorator, friend &amp; lover of Keegan Rourke, 8 month lover of Matt

OM-Tony Rourke (48) – a little shot trying to be a big shot, son of Keegan Rourke, a spineless jerk, a charmer to the ladies, talk show host, married &amp; divorced 5 times, loves Elizabeth and had brief affair with her, seduces Holly (Matt &amp; Elizabeth’s 17 year old daughter) when Elizabeth dumps him

Keegan Rourke (70) – Owner of Rourke Enterprises, wealthy news media mogul, master manipulator, conniving and devious