Rating: 4/5

The second installment of the Kovacs series varies dramatically from the first, losing its neo-noir vibe and delving into a gritty war zone and ancient alien artifacts. The plotting, however, outshines the first volume in its complexity. Kovacs starts off working as a mercenary for the Protectorate, e.g., the UN ruling body of humanity. The current war (and there seems to always be some war among the 30+ human colonized worlds) at Sanction IV involves a rebel force led by Kemp with the corporate cartels backing the Protectorate (of course). The main industry on Sanction IV concerns Martian artifacts, which seem to litter the planet. We still have no idea what happened to the Martians, but their interstellar civilization collapse some 100,000 years or so ago. Humanity basically pirated some of their tech and used it to colonize the same stars the ancient Martians did.

While recovering from the latest battle, Kovacs meets a guy, Jan Schneider, a Kempest rebel, who tells Kovacs that an intact Martian space ship has been discovered, along with a 'gate' on the planet that takes you their. How would he like to organize a mission to claim it? Just for the money. After some convincing, Kovacs bites. First they need a sleazy corporate backer and the 'scratchers' who originally found the gate/ship...

While the Martian story still remains a mystery, Morgan gives us much more details about how human society runs. The push to the stars was led by corporate backing, only slightly reined in by the Protectorate. Due to the ability to digitize consciousness, some humans have achieved immortality of a sort; this 'option', however, takes money, and most people do not have the cash for even a new 'sleeve' when their body wears out. Live is still cheap for most. Political leaders, along with corporate VIPs, however, have the cash and essentially a plutocracy has emerged. Rebels like Kemp want a better system, but the Protectorate has been putting down revolutions for ages. 

Much of the story here involves the prep work for finding the gate and Martian ship; no one has even found an intact Martian ship before. Kovacs, along with a renegade archeologist, a band of revived/resleeved special ops soldiers and a corporate VIP team up to find and 'mark' the ship as their salvage...

I love the grittiness of the tale and the intricate plotting that keeps you guessing until the last page. While this installment lost some of the novelty regarding the tech, it makes up for it in political intrigue. I can see why this got mixed reviews from fans of Altered Carbon, but I dug it just the same. 4.5 violent stars!!