Rating: 4/5

Sprig Muslin draws on a lot of familiar Georgette Heyer character types, but arranges them in a story structure that is elegantly conceived and executed. It is not one of my favorite Heyer novels, but it is a very enjoyable book to read.

Sir Gareth Ludlow suffered a tragic loss in his youth, when his fiancée borrowed his carriage and crashed it. Since then he has shown no interest in romance or marriage. He is charming, gentlemanly, but elusive. The story opens with him declaring to his sister his intention of marrying a longtime acquaintance or friend, Lady Hester Theale, a woman essentially on the shelf, the unappreciated daughter of an impoverished peer. 

Sir Gareth travels into Cambridgeshire to make his proposals, but gets sidetracked along the way. He meets a very young and very beautiful girl, Amanda, who has run away from home. He wants to restore her to her family, but she refuses and will not give her name or direction. She wants to marry a young military man and is trying to scare her grandfather into agreeing to the match. Unable to work out how to dispose of her appropriately, Sir Gareth takes her along to his intended’s home. Awkward!

Lady Hester doesn’t know what to make of Amanda. She believes her to be an innocent (though her family doesn’t share her view) but also fears that she is sufficiently reminiscent of Sir Gareth’s lost love that he may be on the way to falling in love with her. Therefore, Lady Hester rejects his suit. Meanwhile, Lady Hester’s ne’er-do-well uncle makes off with Amanda, with all the evil intentions you might imagine, and Sir Gareth goes off in pursuit. Amanda leads Sir Gareth a merry dance, which ends up in some serious trouble. There are some callow boys who complicate the story, along with a number of comically obtuse relatives and interested parties.

The twists and turns of Amanda’s adventures lend the story suspense, as do the symmetries between her character and that of Sir Gareth’s lost love. Will he be drawn back into an old form of attraction or look for a new kind of love as a mature man? Will Amanda find her way safely to her military love or take a permanent detour? Will Lady Hester succeed in escaping her life of family drudgery and neglect? A few coincidences that feel a bit of a stretch come to the rescue to sort everything out appropriately in the end.

The final scene is one of those comic delights when Heyer brings together a large number of the characters to act, well, characteristically. It’s not as funny as some of her climaxes (I love the one in Devil’s Cub and the one in Sylvester more), but it makes a nice, tidy bow to tie the story up in.

Sir Gareth himself is an interesting hybrid character. He has all the grace and charm of one of Heyer’s “beta” heroes, while physically he fits more into the “alpha” mold. I like his kindness and patience with others and hoped he would get his happy ending. I tend to like the Heyer novels that are told more from the hero’s perspective than the heroine’s, but it’s important in those situations to make sure that the heroine is someone the reader can root for as well. This is true in Sprig Muslin, and it makes for a well-balanced story.