Rating: 4/5

“The Rack” is a long and involving novel, covering much of the same territory as “The Magic Mountain.” Both are set in an Alpine TB sanitorium and follow the story of a hapless young man whose stay lengthens from weeks to months to years. But “The Rack” is based on the author’s own personal experience as a TB patient and focusses much more on the main character’s illness and treatment.

The story is set after the Second World War, and in those days, the treatment for TB was brutal and barbaric. The reader will find themselves immersed in the sounds, smells and pain of the operating theatre in all its excruciating goriness. Certainly not an enjoyable experience, but a compelling one.

The main character, Paul Davenant, is one of a group of British students sent to the sanitorium on an international student scheme. Paul is the oldest (27) and most sickly of the group. The last few years of his life, due to circumstance, he’s been living in reverse. From the responsibility of being an army officer in the war, return to study at Cambridge and then the loss of agency as he becomes institutionalised in the sanitorium, at the mercy of a gaggle of grotesque doctors.

The first part of the novel focuses on the Boy’s Own cameraderie of the British students - high jinks and gallows humour. In the second part, Paul falls in love with a Belgian girl, a private patient, which gives him something to live for:

“... his life had entered upon its optimum phase. This was both the meridian and the point of eclipse.”

The novel’s final part revolves around the politics of the sanitorium and doctors, as Paul’s mental and physical condition deteriorates. He clings onto the hope of a final reprieve, as does the reader.

This all sounds depressing, and it is. But the novel also contains a good dose of dark humour about the patients’ absurd predicament, their antics, as well as the bizarre collection of doctors, nurses and other staff with their questionable motives. It’s a grown-up novel, beautifully written with some startling descriptions and metaphors. 

Well worth reading and made me feel grateful for my health.