Rating: 1/5

Having read reviews of this book, and always interested in a tale of Camelot told from Guinevere's perspective, I looked forward to reading this. I am quite disappointed in the result. First, although I love Mary Stewart's Arthurian cycle, McKenzie's reliance on Stewart went well beyond inspiration. Not only does she track most of Stewart's plot developments, but, at particular moments, she either closely paraphrases or plagiarizes Stewart's description of certain events.

Second, McKenzie's Guinevere is a Mary Sue. Everyone who is virtuous, noble, good-hearted, and kind worships her. Men fall in love with her at first sight and never feel disappointed/disenchanted/less interested upon greater acquaintance. Only the villains dislike her, and they are always motivated by jealousy, either of her beauty or her influence with the King or the respect she receives from everyone who isn't a villain. People who aren't villains but not initially impressed with her are always won over by her intelligence, good sense, wisdom, generosity, etc., etc. Her "flaws" are that (1) she can't understand why Arthur loves her so when she cannot bear him children, (2) she has a hard time reconciling herself to her childlessness (although, ultimately, McKenzie makes that a virtue because it means Arthur doesn't have to share his glory with a child), and (3) she sometimes briefly struggles with jealousy with regard to Lancelot's relationship with Elaine. The first two "flaws" just emphasize how hard she is on herself when she's so generous with others, and the last failing is supposed to make the reader feel sympathetic to her, and then immediately admire her when she (always quickly) realizes that she's being unfair. She is also the most visionary character in the book, seeing a nation where Saxons become British citizens, when everyone else can't imagine such a thing.

Third, the love triangle is very hard to believe in this book. Lancelot and Guinevere love each other passionately and devotedly at first sight, and the intensity of that relationship never changes. They don't feel an attraction that grows into love; it's just there, from the start, entire and complete. And, even though it is all-consuming, Guinevere goes through with a marriage that she does not want, and which both acknowledge she could escape from. Her decision ends up feeling selfish and foolish (a deliberate martyrdom that sacrifices the happiness of four people), rather than forced by circumstance. Then, of course, she ends up falling in love with Arthur, who is passionately devoted to her. But he's okay with her not only loving Lancelot, too, but actually engaging in public displays of affection (I lost count of the number of times she and Lancelot hold hands or kiss before others, or she tells people that she loves Lancelot but it's okay because they won't betray the king). This is 5th C Britain, not 21st C New York City. It's simply incredible to believe that such behavior would not cause a scandal that would force Arthur to put her aside.

In The Once and Future King, T.H. White says that its hard to describe Guinevere because she is a "real person." And White's Guinevere has real flaws; flaws that make her at times unlikeable. But she also has real strengths--courage, determination, humor. McKenzie's Guinevere isn't a real person, and that flaw is fatal for this novel.