Rating: 1/5

DO NOT BUY THIS KINDLE EDITION OF THE GHOST FROM THE GRAND BANKS. Calling this an abridgment is too kind. I read this novel when it was first published, just before the wreck of the Titanic was found by Ballard. I chose to pay the overpriced $10.99 for this digital book because I knew it would be a good reading experience, but the original book and this Kindle edition are not the same. I had no idea the Kindle edition was an abridgment. The original book had much, much more story to it and as a result, was a much more satisfying, better novel. I'll try not to include any spoilers here: there was much more about "Colleen," who is only mentioned twice in this abridgment, and the ending to the story of actually raising the Titanic was completely cut from this Kindle edition. The Kindle edition skips right to the epilogue, occurring eons in the future. I know more story about many of the characters was cut, but this is what I remember most from the original novel that isn't in this bad edition.

I'm not going to read Deep Range, the second novel included in this Kindle edition. Goodness knows how it has been butchered.

Nowhere does Amazon tell its customers that this is an abridgment. Whose fault is this? The publishers? If a Kindle edition is not the same as the print version, customers must be told before making a purchase. Why else should a reader overpay for a digital edition? (I don't think any digital book is worth more than a few dollars - with less production and freight costs, authors can and should make even more than from the print version, if only the greedy publishers and retailers would let them.) It is irrelevant who sets the prices for Kindle editions and what that price may be - customers must be told when they are purchasing a digital book that contains less text/info/prose/whatever than the print version.

The publisher is The Hachette Book Group (quite aptly named, so it seems), one of the big six publishers. Is this what we can expect now, publishers abridging books and not telling readers?

Not only are readers cheated out of a good literary experience, but also the author is made to look as if he produced an inferior novel. I hold Amazon just as responsible as the publisher for this, because Amazon is big enough to force publishers to be honest about what they are selling.