Rating: 2/5

Think Scanners meets Apocalypse Now.

David Mingolla is an artilleryman in a near-future dirty war being fought by America and Cuba in Central America. A war where the mind is as much a battlefield as the jungle. Where both sides employ psychically gifted individuals to influence and destroy their opponents. Mingolla, though gifted, has no interest in that. His only concern is abiding by the routine he and his squadmates follow every R&amp;R. A routine he's convinced has acted as a protective talisman till now. That is, until he meets Debora, an enigmatic woman with similar gifts who wanted Mingolla to desert the army and come to Panama with her. Soon, Mingolla finds himself a pawn in a larger shadow war that's responsible for countless conflicts throughout the ages.

Life During Wartime began life as a Nebula-winning novella called R&amp;R which serves as the best and first part of this novel. R&amp;R is a helluva read. Disturbing, evocative, and even a bit haunting. Shepard manages to really put across a sense of a twisted skein of unease draping an entire world. A fever dream filled with scifi drugs, jungle heat, and electronic visor readouts. By the end of it you're left with a sense of Mingolla's life shifting into a new stage.

Unfortunately, I didn't find the rest of the book lived up to R&amp;R's initial promise.

To cut to the chase, Life During Wartime is a bit of a slog. An all-over-the-place slog that can't seem to make up its mind whether it wants to be an essay on the violence of imperalism, a conspiracy theorist wet-dream, or a male power-fantasy about finding true love, one's true self, and rejecting authority. And while I'm all for over-ambitious works that occasionally fumble on finding a main throughline (I did enjoy Smith's Norstrilia), this work really tested my patience.

Still, it isn't a write-off or anything that harsh. Shepard's prose often received high praise for its vividness and beautiful imagery, and in LDW he delivers that prose in spades. And in the realm of Military SF it certainly manages to stand on its own as maybe the SF book about the Nicaraguan conflict. At least I got the vibe the story may have been inspired by outrage against America's involvement with the Contras. It's also hard not to think of Shepard taking a possible page from Haldeman's Forever War in the story's tone. Though, that might just be my brain making connections based on the similarity of Mingolla to Mandella.

Ultimately, if you're big into Military SF, you may want to check this out. If you're looking for something that's more hawkish or "rah-rah!" about the prospect of future warfare, LDW may irk your sensibilities. But if you like your SF with unreliable narrators and strong anti-war sentiment, then this might just be the literary drug cocktail for you. I just wish it were 150 pages or so shorter!