Rating: 5/5

"Reader, may these plain but honest words I write
brighten the long hours of your own dark night."

The Song of Kieu is often said to be the greatest literary achievement in the Vietnamese language. I confess, I have not read any other Vietnamese books (only American and British books set during, of course, the Vietnam war, as that is apparently the only way English speaking countries can even think of Vietnam), but even with my extremely limited knowledge of the country’s writing, I would not be surprised if this was correct. This is a beautiful book. It is melancholy, thoughtful and a work of art that surpasses many European and American classics. This epic poem focuses on Vuong Thuy Kieu, who agrees to a marriage in order to pay off her father’s debts. Instead of the life of a bride, she finds that her husband only intended to sell her at the brothel he owns. 

This is an epic poem about suffering. Through the course of fifteen years in her life, she will deal with slavery, bandits, war and religion. The author Nguyễn Du thoughtfully considers how women deal with adversity and the limited means they had to escape such dilemmas. He points out repeatedly that several of the men who enter her life could have had the power to prevent these events, but through inaction, or worse, outright taking advantage of her, Kieu's life becomes worse. While there is far more to it than this, I found it fascinating to see this tackled in a book written in 1820, where the author’s sympathies are obviously with our lead. While it definitely goes to some melodramatic territory, and could be viewed as at times condescending by modern standards, I think it is a case where the author never went to far and his goal was noble.

There is some absolutely stunning language in this book, with a translation that creates wonderful imagery (something that many poem translations fail at, for me at least). The translator of this new Penguin edition is Timothy Allen, who is a poet in his own right and it shows. This is a stunning book that took me a few days to read, not because of length or complexity, but because I became immersed in the language; reading, then re-reading passages. It’s a stunning work, with clever wording throughout. I cannot say to how accurate the translation is (though based on the footnotes explaining some lines, I would say at least fairly accurate) but it certainly captures the spirit and feelings the original intended. 

There’s a very Chinese feel to the writing, which makes sense given the history of Vietnam during this time. It was also apparently based on a Chinese story which Nguyễn Du reworked (a fairly common practice I’ve noticed during the time). I also discovered that the story rather interestingly can be compared to the author’s own life. Vietnam at that time was ruled by the Lê dynasty, but real power rested in the Trịnh lords in the north and the Nguyễn lords in the south. Nguyễn Du was loyal to the Lê Dynasty, but in 1802 the Nguyễn conquered all of Vietnam forming the new Nguyễn dynasty. The new emperor apparently, summoned Nguyễn Du to join the new government and, preferring to continue being alive under the Nguyễn dynasty, than remaining a loyal, but dead, follower of the Lês, he accepted. Du's situation in terms of conflicting loyalties between the previous Lê king and the then current Nguyễn emperor part fits with Kiều herself who is forced to submit to circumstances but continually longed for her first love.

All in all, this is a fascinating little classic. One I truly enjoyed on all levels. The prose is beautiful, the story interesting and the parallels to the author’s own life fascinating. I cannot recommend this enough to anyone with any interest in Asian literature or fans of classic poetry. A full 5/5 stars

And let me close on a humorous note, with my favorite line from the work.

"As the proverb puts it: in difficult times,
there might be thirty-six possible plans, 
but the best is always run like hell."