Rating: 2/5

Disappointing to me

This is a re-issue of a book originally published in 1961 which was then called ‘The Courting of Joanna’. 

This is not an easy book to get into. The writing style is detached (all knowing POV and switches between the various characters third person POV) and the introduction to the characters is done through chapters focusing on the different sets (family, law, spies). After a while the stories of the sets of characters start to mingle which makes the reading easier and allows a common plot to arise. So after the first five or six chapters I discovered I rather liked the story, the main characters and even the spy subplot that added some fun facts. But then…

Let me first say that endings to me are very important. I love reading romances and, well, since we all know that the hero is going to end up with the heroine at the end; the ending to me is not about just having them end up together, but about how they end up together and having it fit the rest of the story in a somehow believable way. At some point during the story I had a feeling I knew what the real identity of the hero was going to be, but when I expected that particular ball to drop, it didn’t. So I decided it must be something else and I wondered what his real name would be right till the very end and then… well, I was disappointed and couldn’t believe it could have ever worked out that way. And that ending, right on the very last page of the book, managed to destroy the fun I had while reading this story. If I hadn’t been reading this on my e-reader (and I LOVE my e-reader) I would have thrown this book out of the window (I live on the seventh floor). 

Now, after I have calmed down (I read one of my comfort reads ‘The Secret Diary of Miss Miranda Cleever’ by Julia Quinn before writing this review) I can see that my expectations where the cause for my disappointment. And maybe, if I would read this book again, I would be able to find little clues all along the text shouting out what I apparently decided to ignore. But even though I can see that and even though part of me is curious if those bits are indeed around. I’m probably not going to reread this. 

*** Received an ARC from the publisher in exchange for an honest review.***