Rating: 4/5

Jan 29, 5pm ~~ Review asap.

Jan 31, 120pm ~~ Quoting from the inside flap of the cover of this 1958 book ~~
This is an angry novel, telling of the fifty-year battle between two titans trying to dominate Alaska's future. And this is the story of their lovely young granddaughter Christine Storm, who had to choose between two younger titans ~~ a choice that stood, in a way, for Alaska's future. 

Alaska is still a territory, and the two men mentioned are Czar Kennedy and Thor Storm. One loves and respects the land, wants to see it used without being abused. The other is there for as much profit as he and his cronies can get, full speed ahead and damn the torpedoes. 

One's son married the other's daughter, and Christine was the result. But her parents died so the two grandfathers raised her. Six months with one, six months with the other. It is a wonder young Chris did not go crazy from the stress of living such a split life, especially in her childhood. But she learned to think for herself, sometimes to the point of being obnoxious, but always honest and curious about her world. 

I usually absolutely adore everything about Ferber's work, but I could never really connect with our Miss Chris. She was too much of a symbol, I guess. I think that was my problem with the entire book. It was interesting, it was dramatic, and yes, it was angry, but it was so very clearly Nature versus Industry with the Future ready to step in and go either way or perhaps work out some blend of the two. Having all of that spelled out for you in the first few chapters is different from realizing it yourself in the course of your reading.

The first few chapters took place mainly in Christine's present day, while she and the other Symbols went to meet a delegation from Outside. But then we switch to her own life history, which is of course vital to the story, but the entire time I was wondering when we would land again in the present. And I was not ready for the jolt of the switch back when it came. By then I had almost forgotten what had been going on way back at the beginning of the book. At that point it seemed like Ferber just wanted out of Alaska, because the last couple of chapters are fast and furious and present the reader with a bit of a Lady Or Tiger type of ending for Christine, leaving the reader to decide not only her fate but Alaska's also.

And it still is not completely decided, is it. There are still those who believe that only in destroying Nature can we have the modern life we all think we need, and others who still believe in respecting the planet, living gently in partnership with the Earth, whether it is in Alaska or Mexico or any other place on the planet.

I will quote Grandpa Thor (Nature) before I go ~~

"What a lovely world. The loveliest. We've had it, a gift, for a million million years, and now we're throwing it away. A pity."