Rating: 4/5

Rollo May (1909-1994) was an American psychologist who, alongside Carl Rogers and Viktor Frankl helped create and popularize humanistic and existential psychotherapy.

May was also an artist and particularly focused on the psychology and phenomenology of creativity and the creative process.

May describes the creative process as laboring at the edge of knowing, and then pausing in mindfull receptivity to the insights and epiphany that emerge from the embodied unconscious. 

I’m assuming that everyone has had the experience of working on something and feeling stuck or uncertain, only to be surprised by a sudden insight later on, when doing the dishes, or walking the dog, or in the shower.

This is exactly what May is talking about. 

May sees this process of conscious working, in an unknown or uncharted territory, in collaboration with the unconscious as the important difference between creativity and other kinds working and learning. 

May recognized that the artist (or the creative in any capacity) risks serious ridicule and failure at every juncture.

May argued that creativity of every kind is ultimately about making the world a better place.

May named the fact that attempting to create something new, for the sake of the betterment of mankind was a truly courageous act. 

May saw creativity as more than a type of cultural production, and viewed courage as more than simply risking danger and scorn. 

May viewed the courage to create as a fully embodied and wide awake way of being in the world, knowing ones self and being in relationship with others. 

May argued for a new type of “physical courage” that entails abiding in the here and now, with an ongoing undefended awareness of the emotional body, for the sake of cultivating attuned sensitivity. 

May states: “it will be, as Nietzsche remarked, a learning to think with the body. It will be a valuing of the body as the means of empathy with others, in expression of self as a thing of beauty and as a rich source of pleasure."

I am myself a psychotherapist, and I take great joy in May’s articulations of the creative heart of our work. 

One of the things I really appreciate about May, is his fearless commitment to psychology as a humanistic pursuit. 

He’s an erudite scholar of art, literature, religion and philosophy. 

His psychological writing has an inspirational, soaring quality when it’s at its very best. 

Unfortunately, he was somewhat hostile to science, and failed to fully integrate a systematic, skeptical methodology and critique into his thinking. 

And when his writing is at it’s very worst, it comes off as self indulgent, pompous, and nearsighted. 

That being said. 

I’m absolutely enamored with the interstitial zone between the humanities and the hard sciences.

And popularizations of psychology are at their very best when they are born from that place. 

Large swaths of May’s work hit the bullseye and deserve to be remembered.

Other aspects of May’s work hit like a rock on an old tin pot. 

The discerning reader will be aware of this, and proceed with the stance of the garage sale shopper, looking for a treasure buried in the junk pile.