Rating: 3/5

At first, I had a really difficult time with the book, because she writes (at times - more about that later) in the stereotypical "Wicca is KewL!" teenage blog post writing style. It is overly conversational and filled with pop references. I assume that many Wiccan authors these days feel like they must emulate Silver Ravenwolf, because their readers are assumed to be younger and new to the craft. She also is extremely negative and highly opinionated; however, after reading her personal accounts of some of the things she has experienced in Wicca, I can see why. Her MO for writing this book seems to be to burst the bubble of all fresh faced new pagans with a dose of reality. 

Even with these caveats, this book is worth a read. 

The book is a hodge podge guide to McLelland's opinions and experiences with modern Wicca. From the title, I was expecting it to be more about the history of Wicca and all the inaccuracies that are commonly spewed. There is some historical information, but this book is more a practical, common sense guide to surviving as a Wiccan in the modern world. I think her views are skewed to the negative because she lives in Salem, Mass., which has become a ridiculous "Wiccan Mecca". (Ridiculous because the Salem witch trials had more to do with puritanism and the madness of crowds than anything regarding ancient witchcraft.) I can see why the crowds of wanna-be witches that are into the costumes and make-believe parts of the witch image would make your head explode after awhile. The stories she tells in the book of "Witches Behaving Badly" are just sad examples of immaturity. For example, she makes the claim that "All witches are drama queens." Yes, most PEOPLE are drama queens, but then, I know quite a few (even witches!) who aren't. 

The highlight of the book for me was when she was talking about Wiccan civil liberty cases and successful Wiccan activism. She writes very well about these topics, and obviously is very experienced and well-educated about them. She goes out of her way to describe what you have to do to avoid looking like an idiot in front of the public, and she gives pointers about how to be taken seriously. Her advice about dealing with witch wars, conflicts in the Wiccan community, abusive covens, and discrimination is very well described and valid. The sad part is that any of those things have to be mentioned at all.

The distilled advice for being a Wiccan from this book is simply:
Act like an adult
Read a lot of books
Volunteer to help in your community

These are things that we can all get behind, as Wiccans, and as generally decent human beings.

Edited to add: OK, there wasn't a good place for this in my review. There really wasn't a great place in the context of the book for it either. She has a chapter on deities, and why you should be careful about choosing which deities to work with, and to take it seriously. OK, I'm with her there. 

However, then she goes on to say that no one but the Asatru should work with Norse Gods. Whaa? really? She goes on to explain that they are very intense, serious, often violent deities. How is that different than Set, Hades, Zeus, the Morrigan and dozens of other gods of other cultures - some of which she promotes the worship of in the same chapter? I just don't understand. 

Wicca is a modern religion, and we aren't going to be worshipping ANY deities in their original ways, so as long as you take it seriously, do your homework, and pay homage to the deity, I think it's up to you who you want to work with. She does point out that, if you are working with a death Goddess like Kali, then yes, you had better be prepared for some serious life change. Don't take the Gods lightly, no matter what pantheon they are from.