Rating: 3/5

~Oh, I really wanted to give this light romantic farce more than 3 stars but I just can't.~

Before starting this story, set aside any criticisms of proper behavior during Regency times. You will need to believe in the unbelievable and sacrifice realism for the sake of enjoyment. If you do, this is a funny, light adventure of two very likable adults whose lives inadvertently twisted together. And twisted, they did. 

Charles Hastings was a gambler at heart. He loved nothing better than to place a wager on an item, an event or a person. And he always bet to win. His widowed mother wanted the best for her only child and thought it was high time he found a wife. Charles loved her dearly but was committed to bachelorhood. It was too much fun to be tied down to one woman. 

Miranda Troy was the youngest, and only unmarried, daughter of two loving if not well-intentioned parents, Sir Bascomb and Lady Troy. Happily on-the-shelf, she had her share of proposals but she was simply not interested in marriage. She was an heiress; she wanted to work on her parents' property and design their gardens. 

The H and h had a heartwarming relationship with their mothers. So, just to appease the women for the time being, Charles and Miranda agreed to meet. It didn't take long for Charles to say the wrong thing and Miranda, exasperated at this odious man, to return to her guestroom for the night. 

But that was only the beginning to their new and very unusual relationship....

"It struck him that the deception she was maintaining for his sake was taking a very great toll on her. Though she was courageous, she did not lie easily or well and as that constituted one of her most admirable qualities, he could not help wishing to ease her mind. He was ready to put her welfare before his own. He was not accustomed to liking ladies that did not like him in return. If he did not take care, the wound on his head would fester in his heart."

GAMESTER'S LADY played on utter goofiness. The hero was dressed as a woman for a portion of the story and Miranda's family actually believed he was a lady! Let's not even talk about him getting dressed every day without the assistance of a maid. And what about him using the bathroom/privy/chamber pot?!? For some reason, that kept popping into my head. Especially when Charles was first hurt. 

I shouldn't have enjoyed this story but I did. I really, really liked Charles and Miranda. Their romance-in-bloom drew me in instead of turning me off as I would have anticipated. It was a nonsensical story with some charming characters. It was also an eye-rolling, shaking-my-head, my-mouth-was-open, piece of fluff not to be taken seriously. 

*On a side-note, Miranda's gardening enthusiasm had her finally meet her idol. The author cleverly infiltrated the story with the real-life character Humphry (no e, as is in the romance) Repton. He was the first to coin the term 'landscape gardener'. And as Ms. Sherrod mentioned, Repton was in a carriage accident in 1811 that left him disabled. He did in fact, for the remainder of his life, require a wheelchair.*