Rating: 4/5

“Eye” before “E,” except after “Cat.”

(That sounded a lot wittier before I typed it out. And even then, it was still pretty bad.)

Roger Zelazny is my favorite author, and I’m pretty sure he listed Eye of Cat as one of his five favorite books he wrote. Thus, you’d think I’d really like it.

Unfortunately, I didn’t share Roger’s enthusiasm on the subject.

The book was . . . okay. I had pretty high expectations going in, especially since it’d been over a month since I’d read anything by Zelazny (blasphemy!) and was really excited to return to the words of my hero.

The premise of the book is interesting enough, and is as awesomely unique as you’d expect from a Zelazny story: Billy Blackhorse Singer, the last Navajo left on Earth in the 22nd century, is an expert animal tracker who pretty much single-handedly populated Earth’s galactic zoo by chasing down strange creatures on alien worlds. He gets hired to help deal with a potentially disastrous interplanetary political problem that he’s uniquely suited to handle, and the next thing you know he’s running from a terrifying beast on some crazy spiritual journey.

Emphasis on “crazy.”

Eye of Cat is just weird, as far as form goes. Every now and then we get random poems, sentence fragments, and garbled paragraphs with no punctuation or capitalization that would make a modern-day word processor combust from spell-check overload. And yet, it sorta works. In a way, the unusual form makes it like Creatures of Light and Darkness; in fact, I seem to recall reading that Zelazny said he couldn’t have written Cat without having done Creatures first.

That being said, the book is a little slow to start and can kind of drag in parts, but overall, it was pretty good. I’d say 3.5 stars, and I’ll decide by the time I’m done writing this whether that means it should be rounded up or down (although I have a feeling that the Z-factor alone will bump it up to 4).

There’s a lot of good Navajo mythology and cultural stuff in here, which is pretty interesting if you’re into that sort of thing. Perhaps my favorite part of the book, however, was the visuals—I really felt like I could see the lightning split the sky, feel the snowflakes falling into the canyon. There were a few stretches where it felt like not a lot happened, but they were saved by great imagery that really dropped me into the middle of every scene.

Of course, part of this could be that the climate seemed generally stormy (be it rain, snow or lightning), and that’s pretty much my favorite type of weather. So I definitely felt like I was in a little piece of paradise made just for me, a lot of the time.

All in all, I think this is a book that will be even better the second time I read it (whenever that may be). The weird format will flow better now that I’ve been through the story once.

Not my favorite by Zelazny, but still great.