Rating: 5/5

1. I'm completely obsessed with Make Lemonade and True Believer. I can't wait to read the third one. On the back of this book Kirkus Reviews said, "When Wolff writes a book, it's an event." No truer words have ever been spoken.
2. I feel like every teenager has had to figure out life the way LaVaughn had to. It's so difficult to navigate your belief system, while crushing on a boy, while trying to maintain grades, while trying to keep friendships afloat, while trying to welcome new people into your family. Isn't this the story of every teenage girl? I know that I was right there with LaVaughn. 
3. I'm an English teacher and I loved the way LaVaughn's grammar teacher explained this: "Nouns name the world. Adjectives qualify it. Verbs are the meager attempt to record the vast motion of all life, prepositions connote the relationships among phenomena." 
4. Most inspiring teacher award goes to: Dr Rose.
"Some of you will invent excuses not to come to this after-school elective class. You will find other endeavors that are more immediately gratifying. The rest of you will struggle and be exalted in your learning. And, by the way, you will become taller, should you choose to remain. In this room are fewer than one percent of the students in this school. Be aware that you are the one percent. Good day."

"Ours is a dangerous world, it goes without saying. What we need to believe in-to believe in thoroughly-is that you and you and you can stand up tall, shatter those statistics about students in the 'poorer schools,' as they call us, and make a difference in the vast and terrifying and magnificent world."

"We will rise to the occasion, which is life."

5. Maybe if all of us had this mindset, the world would be a better place, "I fold the laundry and stack it and distribute it where is had to go. And there is always the thought of those little children laying on those sheets so I fold them very nice, very, very nice. And I feel like I am doing some good. Folding sheets is not the biggest good in the world. But it is some."
6. Doesn't everyone have this thought even if you are a devout Christian? "But I don't get it. If God's will gets done anyway because it is God's will, what's to pray for? And is all the horribleness of the world God's will? How come?"
7. When Lester turns out to be an idiot the mom goes into a cleaning frenzy. 
"Mom, what are you doing?"
"I am ironing," she said.

Hahahah. Love her.

8. Heart.break.ing.
"On the bus home I thought how there had to be nurses in Emergency when my father died of a gunshot. Those nurses saw him last of all. To them he was a patient that died. One more heart that stopped. 

Did they even know he had a little girl?"

9. Can Patrick get any more romantic by writing the botany names on the flowers that he got LaVaughn for her birthday?? I mean come on!!
10. The handprint gift that Ricky and Jolly made from Jolly and Jeremy's handprints. (Heartstrings pulled) 
11. It is truly possible to love a sequel as much as the first book but for different reasons. I feel like Virginia Euwer Wolff understands humanity to its core. 
12. Didn't see the Jody plot coming at all.
13. New favorite author. Hands down.