Rating: 4/5

The jig is up, the news is out
They finally found me
The renegade who had it made
Retrieved for a bounty...
—From "Renegade", on the 1978 album Pieces of Eight by Styx
If you have been reading my reviews with the close attention that I hope and pray you have, then you saw me mention upon rereading Quicksilver, the first volume of Neal Stephenson's Baroque Cycle, that the most fun was to be had during the swashbuckling and adventurous sections involving Half-Cocked Jack Shaftoe, King of the Vagabonds (in French, L'Emmerdeur), that most romantic renegade (who had become, if you'll recall, a galley slave by the end of that book), and Eliza, the love of Jack's life, whom we left as the Countess de la Zeur, with a child—not Jack's, though—on the way.

(Those are, by the way, the last explicit spoiler warnings I'm going to issue in this review—if you have not already read Quicksilver then quick, hie thee to the previous installment, lest your eyeballs be assaulted by that which you do not wish to see.)

But if you are of the same mind as I am about Jack and Eliza's value as entertainment, I have exceedingly good news. The Confusion, the second volume of The Baroque Cycle, interleaves two distinct narratives, both of them quite romantic and swashbuckling, and both focused primarily (though not solely) on our favorite star-crossed couple: to wit, the globe-spanning "Bonanza" of our friend Jack, and the more strictly European "Juncto" involving our increasingly influential inamorata Eliza.

In short, The Confusion is faster-paced, and more action-oriented, than Quicksilver.

Bonanza is, it turns out, not just a TV show or a concept—Bonanza is a place, an historic Spanish port serving the Andalusian city of Sanlúcar de Barrameda. Columbus and Magellan both sailed from there. But, more importantly for The Confusion, the Bonanza is where shiploads of gold from the New World flowed in to Spain.

The title of that Styx album now seems even more apropos.

Jack Shaftoe, that Renegade among renegades, and a colorful cabal of his fellow galley slaves have hatched a complicated scheme to divert a particular shipful of that Mexican gold—enough to buy their freedom, to pay off their masters for letting them conspire in the first place, and even to set themselves up in business afterwards. The surprising consequences of that scheme take them as far away as Japan (where I was myself surprised by a connection with the setting of David Mitchell's The Thousand Autumns of Jacob de Zoet) before wandering back to Europe.

Their journey is... eventful.

The Juncto sections are, in contrast, somewhat less colorful, at least in terms of exotic locations and stirring battles (though Eliza does take one memorable sleigh ride early in the book), but they're no less full of twists, turns and intrigue, and are certainly no less important to the story.

These chapters are also where Stephenson can fully indulge his penchant for witty observations:
If Daniel had hopes of weaseling out, he had to do it now. To Roger Comstock, silence implied not merely consent, but a blood oath.
—p.489And to include arch references to future events, as when Stephenson says of Sir Richard Apthorp's country dwelling,
This bland countryside seemed oddly well suited for the hiding of secrets in plain sight.
—p.495The rural estate in question is called Bletchley.

Throughout The Confusion, the narratives of the Juncto and the Bonanza—of Eliza and Jack—weave around each other, approaching ever closer but never quite touching. Meanwhile, the con-fusion proceeds apace, with the disposition of that ship's worth of gold in doubt more than once.

Of course, a lot more than one star-crossed romance is going on... various royal figures die and are replaced by others; the Royal Society continues replacing alchemy with science, while Sir Isaac Newton is placed in charge of the Mint; and so on... Stephenson continues to portray the grand sweep of history through the personal anecdotes and asides that make the Baroque Cycle such a lively read.

And then... another cliffhanger ending—and it's no spoiler to tell you that The Confusion's conclusion is every bit as dark as that of, say, The Empire Strikes Back. But never fear; there is a third volume in the series, and The System of the World promises to pull together all the tangled threads that, for now, Neal Stephenson has had to leave hanging...