Rating: 4/5

3.75 

Ted Williams was one of the greatest hitters baseball has ever known and this memoir includes enough interesting anecdotes, analysis, and criticism to be worth reading. The style can be a bit off-putting as there are four parts (chapters) and no breaks within those parts. The organization is mostly chronological, but Williams does skip around a bit and the book sometimes seems like stream-of-consciousness. At its best, it is conversational. 

The original edition was copyrighted in 1969, but this 1988 edition is clearly an update. It includes references to some players from the 1980s (Boggs and Mattingly, for example) and even notes the HR explosion of 1987. However, it basically ends with his years managing the expansion Washington Senators after the original team departed for Minnesota. Williams managed for one year (1972) after the team moved to Texas. He talks mostly about the first year (1969) and his efforts to help Frank Howard hit (and draw walks), but does not mention that the team's winning percentage declined every year under his leadership. He does note that he disagreed with some management trades. 

I mention the copyright because the memoir includes some material that Jim Bouton was criticized for when he wrote Ball Four -- unfavorable comments about teammates and opponents, very negative stories about sports writers, etc. Williams had a reputation for not getting along with the press in Boston and there is very little here to disparage that thought. 

Williams began play in 1939 when Gehrig and DiMaggio were teammates (Gehrig was very near the end) and he played until 1960, when integration had changed the game. Williams doesn't discuss integration directly, but he has all sorts of favorable things to say about Willie Mays and some other black stars and he used his Hall of Fame induction speech to call for the inclusion of Negro Leagues stars. It seems like Williams was interested in competing against the best players and he admired talent regardless of skin color. 

As is well-known, Williams missed much of 1943 to 1945 because he was trained as a pilot in World War II and he was called to serve in Korea in 1952 and 1953. He flew combat missions in the latter war and there is a harrowing story about an incident when his plane was struck by enemy fire, caught fire, and was essentially destroyed by the time he landed (p. 180). 

I read a DiMaggio biography a couple of years ago, who was the main star American League rival for Williams, and that book had many more cultural references than this one. DiMaggio played in NY, owned a restaurant, and married Marilyn Monroe, so that difference was perhaps inevitable. Here we learn that Williams read Hemingway's Old Man and the Sea (p. 94) and he quotes John Updike's famous New Yorker essay about Williams's last game (when he hit a HR in his final at bat). Williams claims that he liked to see movies when he was not playing (p. 75) but there is almost no discussion of them. He liked John Wayne westerns.

There is not much here about politics either, though Williams said he agreed with the Korean and Vietnam wars -- though he opposed the way the draft was selectively taking some Americans and not others.

Williams demonstrates a reasonable level of humility and generosity though he does recognize and approve of his status among the game's great hitters. He was not jealous, or says he was not, when other players won MVP awards despite his own tremendous performance. He even exhibits a measure of self-deprecation, especially when talking about his defense, running speed, and social skills. He preferred hunting and fishing to the banquet circuit. 

On the personal side, there is a little bit about his multiple marriages and children, but not enough to learn anything, really. We read that he cried after losing the World Series in 1946 (p. 118) and after former manager Joe McCarthy died (p. 153). Williams talks frankly about his salary (very high for the era) and notes his eventual interest in stocks and reading the Wall Street Journal. Williams definitely builds an image of a pragmatic man who knew his own strengths and weaknesses. 

The book was produced "with" John Underwood and I don't know why the latter didn't ask Williams to clarify some points. On multiple occasions Williams says he was typically among the last to leave the clubhouse after a game (pp. 8, 153), but on p. 111 Williams said he would typically shower and leave quickly -- that behavior resulted in him missing a locker room celebration in 1946. Williams does say that the last 5-6 years of his career he left early, but that would not have been 1946.