Rating: 2/5

This book had the potential to be so good. The writing style was on the cusp of being amazing and the present-tense narrative was just shy of being utterly captivating. However, I have several big qualms with this book. One is the fact that it was written by a man. Many of my favourite authors are men but this book is about a tween/teenage girl (Saskia) and her friendship with another teenage girl, as well as the relationships between Saskia and her parents. There is so much intimacy in these relationships and it made me feel like Brian Hall was stepping into a zone that he didn't have the right to be in. The subject matter is so female-centred (which also includes descriptions of female puberty, female anatomy, and just general experiences of girlhood) and a lot of it felt really weird to read knowing that a man wrote it. 
Apart from that, there were a lot of choices made and issues dealt with by Saskia that didn't seem quite real, and I think this also pertains to the authorship. I'm not saying that there are elements of the story that would never happen in real life, but again, it felt weird and almost creepy that a man was in charge of this. These elements include pedophilia AND incestuous pedophilia, and it seemed like they weren't portrayed as actual problems for the most part. Fortunately we do see at the end that the main perpetrator (there are more than one) is actually revealed to be a terrible person and all the characters acknowledge this. The incestuous pedophilic bit was brushed off though, and I think it was totally unnecessary to begin with. Again, I don't think Brian Hall knows what it's like to be a teenage girl, and the choices he made on behalf of Saskia sometimes aren't very believable and are mostly just really bothersome. There's also a scene near the beginning featuring borderline sexual assualt and I think the author was trying to make it look like an innocent educational experience but it was so messed up.
Another problem I have is with aspects of the writing. As I said before, it was on the verge of being so good, but things were quite vague a lot of the time, and sometimes it was hard to tell what was actually happening and what was just part of Saskia's imagination. (This also pertains to the pedophilia because I couldn't tell as first if it was just a weird fantasy or if it was reality.) There was also some confusion with some of the characters and who was who. This could have been a me problem but I do think some of them were not properly introduced.
Furthermore, I had some issues with the ending and resolutions. It felt kind of rushed and it was hard to tell how exactly Saskia was processing everything. My biggest issue with the ending though was how the main friendship was treated. Again, there was some confusion and vagueness around what was actually happening along the way, but in the end it felt like this specific character was just tossed away. We are given a brief explanation of what happened but it was very unsatisfying to me because of how much effort was put into this character and friendship earlier on in the book.
Anyway, there were several charming elements to this book and its characters, especially in the first half. But it ended up being just way too weird in a negative way for me that even two stars feels generous. I wish I could ask Brian Hall what exactly was going through his mind when he was writing this and what his intentions were, because they sure as heck did not feel very wholesome. Why on earth is a man focusing so much on the sexual experiences of a girl who's barely even 13? Kind of horrifying if you think about it too much.
Oh yeah, and one more thing: I found this in the middle grade section of a bookstore and it is NOT a middle grade book. There is a fair amount of language, drug usage, and sexual content aside from the pedophilia (nothing crazy graphic but there was a lot of innuendo and multiple references to/descriptions of sex, masturbation, etc.).