Rating: 1/5

This is from a religious propaganda book series. My cousin gave me this book, I did not purchase it but gave it a chance. . In the Forward, titled, "Seeds of Darkness", the author indeed states that the French helped America gain freedom in the American Revolution, but "the French would launch their own revolution, boasting that, unlike America, their Republic would achieve the Brotherhood of Man, without the Fatherhood of God as a prerequisite. Their version of republicanism, a heady brew, flattered man into believing that his own intellect reigned supreme." The French helped America gain independence from England, NEVER attempted to take anything from America, and became and remain one of our closest allies. They 'gifted' us the Statue of Liberty as a symbol of their belief in our country, standing beside us, even today in NATO. 
 The next paragraph begins thusly.....
"An anti-spiritual invasion rolled over our land." As if the French did that. Seriously? This book is ridiculous, based on this ridiculous premise that only this one group of poor pilgrims and puritans held the religious key to the salvation of America and France invaded us and took it away, when they helped America gain independence from England. I've never read anything so full of feigned religious persecution. The French did nothing but help us. 
This book is full of religious propaganda meant to separate and divide Christians from people of other religions or no religion. We know this country had non Christians here before any Puritan or Pilgrim arrived and the Puritans and Pilgrims were not the ONLY people to arrive on this land, claiming MANIFEST DESTINY. That the land is theirs because they say it is theirs and because God told them it is theirs. That one little band of pilgrims/puritans did not have ownership of America. We all do. Christians, Amish, Quaker, non-Christian, Buddhist, Hindu, Islam, EVERYONE on this land . This book is complete HOGWASH. This one will not be passed along to anyone, recycled, sold, shared, traded, given away or exchanged. It is going in the fire pit