Rating: 4/5

The Law and the Lady was my fifth venture into the world of Victorian sensation fiction, following Collins’s Basil and The Dead Secret, Mary Elizabeth Braddon’s Lady Audley's Secret, and Thomas Hardy’s Desperate Remedies. It is proving a richly rewarding inquiry, in all kinds of ways, even though the literary quality of these works has been mixed. 

The Law and the Lady is one of the less inspiring of these works, from a stylistic point of view, along with Lady Audley’s Secret. It is distinctly less finished than Collins’s earlier Basil and The Dead Secret, or Hardy’s Desperate Remedies, which is quite lovely at points. 

What The Law and the Lady lacks in terms of the quality of its prose, however, I think it compensates for quite splendidly in terms of narrative invention. The plot is as twisty and turny as you would expect in a sensation novel, as long as you’re willing to swallow the usual dose of coincidences and implausibilities; and the characterization is startlingly bold and original, especially in terms of the characters’ gender identities and roles.

The plot, briefly, is this. The protagonist, a young married woman, Valeria Woodville, discovers a scandal about the past life of her new husband. The discovery parts them; and Valeria devotes herself to revindicating her husband’s name, turning proto-detective in the process, and engaging with all kinds of more and less salubrious characters along the way.

Already, with the valorous Valeria and her shrinking husband Eustace, we find ourselves on the wrong side of normal Victorian gender values. Valeria and her doughty mother-in-law Catherine Macallan drive forward the action, while Eustace variously expostulates and repines, in a stereotypically "feminine" manner. (There is a very funny conversation between Valeria and Catherine over whether Eustace is actually weak—his mother’s preferred position—or rather “of delicate sensibility,” as his wife charitably suggests.) 

Valeria is flanked by various well-meaning men who tell her how outrageous she is to persist in her quest: her uncle Starkweather, a vicar; her father’s faithful clerk, Benjamin; her husband’s ex-lawyer, Playmore; the ludicrous aged Don Juan, Major Fitz-David. All are quite right in their assessment, by Valeria’s own acknowledgment. She represents herself quite cheerfully as in the wrong through the whole quest, while continuing to do exactly as she pleases.

All this is refreshing enough, without the scene-stealing minor character of Miserrimus Dexter, who is surely one of the most splendidly-named characters in Victorian fiction, as well as one of the most memorable in absolute. I was blown away by this figure, as soon as he appeared: legless as a result of a birth defect; rattling manically down corridors in his wheelchair (“the modern Centaur: half man, half chair;”); part Byronic hero; part tranvestite, in his rose silk jacket; unsettling in his overt, but ambiguous, sexuality; master of the feminine arts of embroidery and cookery; ever primed for a mournful ditty on his harp. 

I have recently begun to investigate the field of historical disability studies, for my own academic work—though looking at a much earlier period—and I was immediately intrigued to see how much Miserrimus D. had impacted on the field. I was pleased to see that a Cambridge scholar, Clare Walker Gore, had written an excellent recent blog post on this character in the context of disability studies, which says pretty much exactly what I would might have wanted to say in this review:

https://victorianist.wordpress.com/20...