Rating: 2/5

I believe this was one of the books that my 8th grade teacher, Mr. Bailey, recommended to me back in the 50s. For some reason I remembered the names of the books he recommended but never read any until I was in my 70s. 

I can still remember taking them off the book shelf at the Paso Robles Library and placing them back on the shelf. I remember the exact shelf. You walked into the library, made a right turn into another room, and it was on the first end shelf along with "Kon-Tiki" and "The Raft"--both other recommendations by him.

Mr. Bailey's one other recommendation was "Silent Spring" by Rachel Carson. I have not read "Silent Spring." I tried.

Mr. Bailey was also my favorite teacher, and I was always going around saying, "Mr. Bailey said..." And now I wish I had kept in contact with him. 

But this was a boring read with little action and emotion involved. If you like history and information on ships and life aboard one, you may like it. If you like adventure, well, I didn’t think there was much in this book. I would think that many would like the Hornblower series, or “Treasure Island” over this, and for true adventures, “Kon Tiki,” "The Raft, "Paddle to the Amazon” and “Mutiny of the Bounty.” But if a person wanted to know what daily life as a sailor was like on board a ship in the 1800s, well, this book could be for you. 

I questioned how he could write a diary on ship and not get caught. He wrote about the cruelty of the captain towards the men. He also wrote about a man on board, who he knew had jumped ship and had hid out on the coast line of California until the ship left, and on his return trip his learning that the man got on another ship would arrive to take him home. If his diary was found it would have been the end of him, but maybe he just took notes and remembered to fill in the blanks later.

Here is a gem from this book:
 
The author came upon a few of the Kanaka tribe of Hawaii while in San Diego, and wrote: “Whatever one has they all have, money, food, clothes, they share with one another, even to the last piece of tobacco to put in their pipes.” One of them said, “Kanaka all ‘e same a’ one!” I liked the sharing and wondered what this world would be like if we all took care of each others needs.

I had to pass up the cock fighting and the killing of coyotes, but the fact that California is replete with rattlesnakes interested me. He was in the woods chopping down a tree when he heard a rattlesnake. He just kept chopping because at least he knew where it was, sort of, and he felt as long as he could hear the rattle he was safe. When the rattling stopped he became unnerved, so he threw a rock in the area where the sound came from, and it began rattling again.

California hasn’t changed much over the years. One person, who lived along the coast in an RV park on Camp Pendleton, told me he would walk outside in the morning and there would be several rattlesnakes on his patio. Since he was on a nature preserve he could not kill them. A Buddhist monk, who is a friend of mine, once told me that he walked out of his room just to run into one, and since they didn’t believe in killing, he had to walk around it.

I had seen several in California over the years as I grew up there. Once I was gathering fire wood and came to the bottom of the pile. There was a rattlesnake curled up asleep. I got my shotgun and called a friend to ask if the shot would ricochet off the tin shed or go through it. I didn't know how powerful buckshot was. I pulled the trigger, picked up the snake with a shovel, and buried it. Later, I heard my dog barking, so I went outside, and the snake was half out of the ground, twisting in the air. That is when I cut off its head and buried it separately from the body. If the snake and kept squirming I was afraid that it could accidently bite the dog. 

In this part of California where I lived, in Creston, farmers threw the dead ones over their fence that runs along the road so people can see them. Maybe that is like notches on a gun butt. And these stories ran through my head as I read the book because I was trying to humor myself since I was so bored.

And then the book continued to move at a slow pace, and I was counting the time on my kindle like a person watching their watch when bored. I wanted to finish it reading because I had owned the book for many years.

As a note: I admire that the author became a lawyer and fought for the rights of sailors and slaves. He also wrote the book, “The Seaman's Friend: A Treatise on Practical Seamanship” which was a reference book for legal enquiries on the legal rights and responsivities of sailors. It may be good to read this first if you need to understand sea terms, which, if you did not know them, it may also make “Two Years before the Mast” an even harder read.