Rating: 5/5

She raised her brows. She had put on her cap of Phrygian leather lined with bronze. The scarlet flaps fell on her neck and cheeks, bright as a pheasant, but left her face clear to see. I said to her, 'This is all - I love you. You are my life's love. I came here for you, to win you or to die. Do as you must, as your law commands you; I will not have you disgraced for me. If I die it was my fate, and I ran to meet it. Be free of my blood. May sorrow never come near you. My shade will love you, even in the house of Hades under the earth.'
She stood with gleaming arms under the fading sky and the little moon, straight, slight and strong; and I saw in the eyes of the king and warrior a startled maiden, who since childhood had not spoken with a man. She looked at me dumbly. Then grasping at the thing she knew, she cried, 'I must kill you! You saw the Mystery!'
'Yes, you must try. Come to me with your honor, for in yours is mine now. Come, begin.'

Mary Renault continues the tale of Theseus with his meeting of his most trusted friend, Pirithoos, their roving adventures and with Theseus' romance with the Queen of the Amazons, Hippolyta. And although Theseus' intentions in the original myth are dubious at best (he typically captures the Queen), in the hands of Mary Renault, their story is one for the ages. They meet as equals, Theseus wins Hippolyta's hand and never attempts to tame her. Her glory and honor as a strategist, warrior and ruler are as dear to him as his own. Their relationship was the highlight of the book for me.

Of course, those who know the myth know it does not end well. Hippolyta gives Theseus a son, and the machinations of his Cretan wife will result in tragedy for the household. Theseus loses the favor of the gods and would have fallen into obscurity, if not for everything he had built, and the Athenians continue honoring him. As Plutarch says : His tomb is a sanctuary and refuge for fleeing slaves, and all men of low estate who fear the mighty; in memory that Theseus while he lived defended the oppressed and heard the suppliant's prayer with kindness.