Rating: 1/5

I am shocked that this book is considered a young adult book. If I had children, I wouldn't want them to read this book, even if they were in high school. The synopsis on the back said it was about a sixteen year old girl who receives strange notes and phone calls. She feels she is always being watched. I thought this would be a normal young adult mystery where the characters get scared and try to solve the mystery. In the end, they catch the person, and everyone is saved. However, this book is much different. First of all, they talk a lot about Gail, the main character, having sex with her boyfriend Steve. Then the notes and phone calls that Gail receives are very vulgar. The stalker tells her what he plans to do with her. Half-way through the book, Gail is beaten and raped by Phil Lawver, her best friend's boyfriend and the son of the most powerful family in town. His family is so powerful that they have complete control of the police, the school board, etc. No one wants to persecute him because all authority figures are where they are today because of the Lawver family. The police try to make Gail seem like a slut and Phil seem like the victim. Gail decides not to go for an arrest because if the case even makes it to trial, which is highly unlikely, she will have to relive the event and undergo harsh questioning on the witness stand. Even after that, Phil will probably not be persecuted. The rest of the book is about her trying to cope with this tragedy, which is even harder when Phil roams the streets. Phil even sent her flowers. Gail tries to warn her best friend, Allison, but Allison just gets furious and refuses to believe it. Gail eventually goes back to school, but Phil harasses her on her walk home. Before the end of the book, Phil attacks again. He almost kills a girl who was wearing the same coat as Gail. Phil is finally taken away somewhere, but no one knows where. Then the book ends with everyone in an uproar. Gail can't stand men, Steve is mad at Gail for not taking action against Phil, Allison is depressed because her boyfriend is mentally sick, the other girl is almost dead, everyone in town is scared, etc. 
This book might be a good book for a rape victim to read because it might help the victim cope everything. However, it is a really intense book. The rape scene is especially intense. Therefore, I do not think children should read this book. It should be an adult book. It definitely should not be placed in school libraries.