Rating: 4/5

This was overall a cute story even though it felt at times like one long, drawn-out bickerfest. I really liked how the author wrote so plausibly of the rodeo cowboy circuit setting without delving into hokey cliches. And the job she gave to the heroine as a trick rider specializing in roman riding (when you ride two horses by putting a foot on each) was a breath of fresh air after reading about so many secretaries, babysitters, or nurses in the romance genre. Not that there's anything wrong with those professions, it just gets repetitive so this was really interesting to me. 

The premise of the story is that the heroine travels the circuit with her grandfather while suffering of unrequited love for one of the rodeo cowboys, the married hero from Land Of Enchantment: New Mexico. The heroine is not an OW at all, she never had a romantic relationship with the OM, only wishful thinking, she is certainly not trying to break up their marriage, and she is nice and polite to his wife, even if she feels agony on the inside.

There is a cowboy on the circuit who teases her mercilessly about her obvious feelings of unrequited love. This is apparently the only way the big doofus has found to get her attention. Any attention is better than none, and even though his remarks always put her on the defensive and they end up arguing, he is happy that he finally gets her to focus on him for those brief moments instead of pining for the OM. He just keeps inserting himself into her life, at times protective, other times cruel, tender, or in full seduction mode. Somehow it always ends up with them fighting! Poor guy is trying everything to win her over lol. 

The heroine initially only sees him as annoying, rude and overbearing. She gives as good as she gets which is why she is a good match for him. All the other women swoon over him and would be easy conquests (not that he gives any of them the time of day), no wonder he was attracted to the only one who talked back and even slapped him a couple of times lol. The key giveaway is that when he manipulates her into meeting his parents, it is evident that he has been talking about her to them for quite some time and they are elated to meet her.

Over time, some traumatic events (don't worry no horses have been harmed in the making of this story) makes them grow closer together. Heroine realizes she has fallen in love and has long ceased to think about the OM. But Great Big Terrible Misunderstandings and Miscommunications keep them apart until the hero is so scared that she is going to hurt herself trying to ride a "buck horse" that he hauls her off and tells her angrily that he is going to have to marry her to keep an eye on her, to which, to his great shock and inconceivable pleasure, she responds delightedly, taking the wind right out of him. I have no doubt they will have a wonderful longstanding HEA where they continue to bicker for all eternity but as a form of foreplay instead of actual arguments :)))