Rating: 3/5

I'm not sure if Rusch is getting tired of the series or if she was in a hurry to get this one out or what, but it 'technically' wasn't as good as the earlier Fey books. Lots of typos, including referring to one character by another character's name a few times (granted only 1 letter differentiates the names, but she named them after all).

Also at one point a character says "With great power.." and another says "...comes great responsibility. I know." Now in an urban fantasy novel this would have fit, but these books take place in a made-up world completely different from ours, so using a common phrase like that (whether you know it as something Voltaire said, or something Uncle Ben from Spiderman said) was really jarring and I would think an editor would've asked her to change it.

This is also the first of the Fey books that picks up immediately after than last one ended, which made it all feel a little slow. None of these books span much time, but when they were separated by years that felt ok. Like we were peering at significant moments in a culture's history. But somehow making one come right after the other, and having the events of an entire book take place over a few days, makes it feel kind of slow to me. Because while not a lot happens in any of these books, you do learn a lot of back story in the earlier ones.

This is also one of those books where a plotline just ends with no kind of closure so it can be picked up in the next book. 

Another bit that felt odd is that Gift (that's a character's name) suddenly starts referring to another character as what he is rather than by name. In dialog he refers to him by name, but during his internal dialog he de-humanizes him (de-Feyizes him?) by referring to him as 'the Cap' over and over. Cap is short for Red Cap, a class of Fey who is looked down upon. Having Gift suddenly pick up the prejudices of the Fey was kind of disappointing and made me dislike him a lot.

Actually by the end of the book there are few characters that I actually like. 

I'm going to try one more (and it again picks up right after the last one ended). but I may be about done with the series, which is a shame because I really enjoyed the earlier books.