Rating: 5/5

For as much as I pointed out the rare lack of anything religious in the plot of the last book, 'The Merry Devils', in this late sixteenth century set Nicholas Bracewell series, where even ’whodunit’ style murders were relatively thin on the ground, let alone having any dastardly Catholic plots and skullduggery lurking in the background, as their motivation, well needless to say, this third book in the series, 'The Trip to Jerusalem', more than made up for it! 
It had religiously motivated, regicidal plots and God guided intrigue coming out of its ears. There were Catholics, secret priests and bigoted, vengeful Protestants aplenty, in fact, there was even the delightful, if very, very rare for the sixteenth century, appearance of an atheist! ‘Woohoo! Go yon non-believers!’ **fist bump** 
The story was also crawling with spies and sycraft, both working FOR Sir Francis Walsingham, and AGAINST Sir Francis Walsingham, and on top of this bountiful supply of sixteenth century tropes, we had Lord Westfield's men, camping it up across the country, unwittingly engaged with all the key players from those treacherous machinations! And it was fantastic!

London is ravaged by plague, so Westfield's men have to upsticks and head North, for pastures new and fresh plague free audiences. Their ultimate destination being York, alternatively known as Jerusalem. Unfortunately for Nicholas Bracewell, Lawrence Firethorn and the rest of Lord Westfield's men however, so do their arch rivals, Giles Randolph and Lord Banbury's men. Whom visit upon the Westfield players, their very own plague of misfortune. Starting off by stealing their plays and performing them in towns and villages, a few days before the arrival of the Westfield troupe, and as well as being an act of utter sacrilege within the acting fraternity, it also ensures that the townsfolk are less than receptive to any new performances, guaranteeing Firethorn's ire, and playwright, Edmund Hoode's melancholy at having his work plagiarized. Woe betide Randolph if Firethorn ever gets his hands on him, such is his rage, at Banbury’s misbegotten, underhand deeds! They also eventually kidnap the Westfield apprentice, Richard Honeydew, whom, because of his fresh faced youth, plays most of Westfield’s ‘leading ladies’. This was done just before the itinerant actors reached Nottingham, with Honeydew set to play Maid Marion, in a geographically appropriate performance of ’Robin Hood’, it did indeed seem like an insurmountable setback.
However, there was one thing, that Lord Banbury's men hadn't accounted for, Nicholas Bracewell! 

So, our Nick is sent off to track down the young performer. In the meantime, as the rest of the troupe are in rehearsals, another disastrous event is uncovered, Banbury's agents have stolen their costumes, sending Lawrence Firethorn apoplectic with rage, and precipitating a torrent of top notch medieval swearing and the violent abuse of a bush!
Eventually however, on the book holder, Nicholas Bracewell's return, he has not only retrieved a thankful Richard Honeydew, he's also uncovered and returned the costumes, the stolen plays, AND an extra horse, belonging to a fellow passenger, that the actors had picked up along the way and had allowed to ride with them, along with his story of previously being robbed on the highway. Nicholas also proceeds to hilariously get his boss, Lawrence Firethorn, out of a hole (he’d dug himself!) with TWO would be mistresses, when his wife, Marjory unexpectedly turns up, by pairing them off with other partners! Is there nothing the hero of the day, Nicholas Bracewell, can't do, haha?! Marvelous! Great British farce at its very best! 

Author Edward Marston's delightfully frothy sense of humour permeates the book throughout, for example, when dogsbody, George Dart has to disturb Lawrence Firethorn, with the terrible news of Honeydew's disappearance, while Lawrence had been in his chamber carousing with the buxom inkeeper, Susan Becket,

'Plucked untimely from the womb, he flung open the door and breathed such crackling flames of anger that the little gatekeeper was charred for life. Facing his employer was a daunting task at any time but to be at the mercy of Firethorn when he was naked, roused and deprived of consummation was like taking a stroll in the seventh circle of Hell. George Dart was sacked three times before he was even allowed to open his mouth. It was a lifetime before the message was actually delivered.'

And when eventually told the message,

'Simultaneously robbed of his orgasm and his Maid Marion, the actor-manager was in a mood of vengeful urgency.'

Haha! Absolutely hilarious writing, but Lawrence Firethorn did indeed have his vengeance on the nefarious tactics of his worst enemy, the highly egregious Giles Randolph and the rest of Banbury's roving, low grade thespians, when denied Westfield’s stolen plays, and after Nicholas had also bathed Banbury’s own play books in manure, their inept performances were laughed and booed out of town! 
Oh! And there was all the other stuff too, involving religion, sectarianism, perfidious nobility, spies and executions, haha! There was just so much going on, I couldn't possibly cover everything. 

These books and stories are getting better and better, going on to prove however, never judge a series by its first novel, haha! Superb stuff!