Rating: 5/5

It's official - the Nicolas Roeg film version of this novel is garbage. ~ esp. compared with the book, of which the film uses... I don't know... 2%?

I'd seen the movie on its initial release, when about 20 minutes of Roeg's (ahem) 'vision' had been cut by the film's insensitive distributors. At the time, I hadn't of course read the Tevis source but, thinking back, it didn't seem to matter much; the film was essentially incomprehensible. 

In recent years, I then saw the Criterion blu-ray which restores the excised footage. And lo and behold... it still didn't matter. It was still largely incomprehensible. 

Roeg (a former DP, and an excellent one; he should have remained one) once said that, as a director he didn't really concern himself all that much with that 'pesky' thing called 'text'. And clearly he didn't. More's the pity.

Full disclosure: I'm not a Roeg fan. He fancied himself an... auteur. I also particularly detest how he butchered Daphne du Maurier's 'Don't Look Now'... but don't get me started.

Anywho.....

I'd read and enjoyed Tevis' Mockingbird' and 'The Queen's Gambit', but (good as they are) neither book quite prepared me for the game-changing wonder of 'The Man...'. It's a startling reading experience - as it takes science fiction to a unique and deeply personal level. If Thomas Jerome Newton isn't the most tragic alien protagonist ever, he's certainly near the top of that list of such. 

Though I was bolstered by his drive and determination, I was also moved by his... well, alienation and loneliness: a stranger in an inferior land:
  ... he felt disgusted, weary of this cheap and alien place, this loud, throaty, rootless, and sensual culture, this aggregate of clever, itchy, self-absorbed apes--vulgar, uncaring, while their flimsy civilization was, like London Bridge and all bridges, falling down, falling down.
That said, he did also seem imbued with the considerably calm resignation of the confident entrepreneur, keeping his focus on his mission as he battled self-doubt and a nagging fatigue. Considering what he was laboring under, I found his overall spirit admirable.:
  He felt momentarily like Henry Thoreau, and smiled at himself for the feeling. 'Most men lead lives of quiet desperation.'
Newton's congenial contretemps with a trusted ally reveals just how much Earth-folk would need him... if they actually cared to stretch their perception and notice. 

To make the novel less gloomy than it could have been, Tevis injects welcome humor:
  "... I am carrying a weapon. I always carry it." 
"An Anthean weapon?"
"Yes. A very effective one. You would never have made it across the floor to my bed." 
Bryce inhaled rapidly. "How does it work?"
Newton grinned. "Does Macy's tell Gimbel's?"
I've read that this work was seemingly 'intended' as a metaphor for the experience of alcoholism. Even though there's a fair amount of drinking in these pages (esp. of gin), I don't really see that as the point. I think the book has a much, much larger concern - one that manifests itself in the (remarkably poignant) final chapter.