Rating: 4/5

This is an older romance reminiscent of Linda Howard, a particular favorite of mine. It has all the elements of a Linda Howard book, romance, suspense, intriguing characters, and an interesting plot that captures and holds your attention throughout. Mandy owns a bookstore in a small town. She hires a handyman, Reilly, and the two of them fall in love. Simple, right? But what happens if the handyman is really an undercover cop whose real name isn't Reilly but Ryan? And what if this undercover cop was responsible for putting a powerful militia leader behind bars and is now in hiding due to his testimony? Sounds intriguing, yes? But it gets even better. What if the militia leader will stop at nothing to get revenge and by getting involved with Mandy, Reilly has put her in danger? What if he feels his only course of action is to fake his own death, thereby eliminating the threat against Mandy, then after a suitable time he can return for her? He even goes so far as to change the way he looks with plastic surgery. Which is why Mandy has a hard time believing it's really him when he does finally return. She watched his truck blow up, saw the flames, watched him die. She wanted to die herself after losing him. So how is it possible he's standing in her house trying to convince her he's back? It doesn't take long for the truth to sink in when Mandy' s house is fire bombed and she and Reilly have to run for their lives. This was an excellent story, wrought with misunderstandings and lies, heartache and happiness. This couple once meant the world to one another. Now it appears they never really knew one another at all. Both have secrets, things they aren't saying, but even so, there is still a powerful attraction between them and the love they once felt is tugging at their heartstrings yet again. As they work through their issues, Reilly is trying to figure out a way to keep them alive and hopefully build a future with Mandy. I first became aware of the author when I read Cody Walker' s Woman. I discovered that he'd been a character in a previous book written by Ms. Austin. Of course I had to go back and read it too. I wasn't disappointed and you won't be either. This was everything a good romance should be and more. Definitely recommend.