Rating: 5/5

I’ll open no gates for you, my girl! you’ll take any fence I take, and we’ll clear it, neck and neck. 

Wonderful story with marvelous dialog and Heyer's trademark witticism. The book is not as popular or as universally loved as some of her other titles. And, actually, if you’re never read the author, I wouldn’t recommend it as your first encounter but, please come back to it later. 

The plot is a clever mix of romantic entanglements, comedy of manners, and vivid portrayal of everyday life of genteel society. I found myself reading the book at a slower pace, savoring nuances, marveling at the turn of phrases. This was a real treat! 

The slow-building romance between the main protagonists, who constantly clashed with each other, is fun to watch. They are both strong-willed and impatient, and have been indulged for most of their lives. As such, it's only natural that they should behave like an irresistible force meeting an immovable object. The characters are the main reason why some people don’t find this novel as appealing as some other author’s work. But as flawed and imperfect as they are, I couldn’t help but loved them! And even though, this was one of these stories where the main characters didn’t spend much time together, the strength of their relationship is a domineering force of the narrative. I think Heyer is at her best during their quarrels and banters.

The story begins shortly after death of Lady Serena’s father. It’s during a reading of her father’s Will that Serena receives a shock of her life. Her father designated Ivo Barrasford, Marquis of Rotherham to be a sole trustee of her wealth. Moreover, Rotterdam would have a power to give or withhold his consent to any marriage Serena might contemplate. For a beautiful, sharp-tempered, independent, domineering Serena the situation is simply intolerable and made it so due to their past. She has known Rotterdam all her life, and has great affection for him, they were even engaged once but she jilted him a month prior to their wedding because two of them "just wouldn't suit”. It seems every time they are in the same room, sparks fly and they get into some kind of argument. This is partly due to the fact that Rotherham does not let Serena boss him around, as she is wont to do everyone else. Soon, however, even the indignity of having to cope with Rotherham is nothing compared to having to watch her cousin assume her dead father's place. Hoping to revive her flagging spirit Serena and her lovely young stepmother Fanny decide to move to Bath, a place more appropriate than London for they are still in mourning. And that is where the main story takes place including reappearance of Hector, Major Kirkby, Serena’s old admirer. His reappearance is just a beginning of a tangled web that the author so masterfully weaves in this novel. The title sure suits the book! Numerous secondary characters who contribute to the tangle are unique, interesting , wonderfully characterized and nicely compliment the story. I especially like the secondary romance involving Fanny. The poignant quiet nature of that particular romance provides a nice balance to a spirited and spark-inducing relationship of Serena and Rotherham.

I also loved the setting. On our visit to England couple of years ago, I dragged my husband to Bath -location of many of my favorite romances. By the way, the walking tour of Bath organized by the Mayor of Bath's Corps of Honorary Guides is a must do activity there in addition, of cause, to visiting the Pump Room, the Abby, the Roman Baths, etc. Reading this book was like visiting these lovely places again.