Rating: 3/5

Mr Majeika On the internet written by Humphrey Carpenter is an extremely witty book. This book is about class three and their crazy teacher Mr Majeika. It is important to note that Mr Majeika had been a wizard before he became a teacher and he still likes to perform some odd and magical displays in the classroom. When the class receive the gift of an old computer from a local business, Mr Majeika hasn’t the slightest idea how to work it as this technology wouldn’t be his expert field.

The kids have to create their own websites for the school website competition and the worst behaved boy in the class is the last to use it before the day ends. The following morning, when the children arrived into class the old computer had vanished and in its place was a brand new one, twice as big with a huge screen. Of course the last person to use the computer the day before is their number one suspect to this mystery, even though he claims he doesn’t know where the computer came from! 

When Mr Majeika asks the children questions during a geometry lesson, the computer randomly displays sarcastic comments. Mr Majeika finally decides to do some magic on the computer to stop it being a nuisance but his magic backfires and the whole class end up being magically trapped inside the computer. 

On their travels through the computer, they become friend’s wit the computers mouse Gulliver. The children associate his name with the book Gulliver’s travels which is about a man who travels to strange islands and meets peculiar people. They class decide to go on an adventure to places named in Gulliver’s travel book where they meet quiet a few of bizarre characters. The class soon realise that being stuck inside the computer was a big opportunity to explore the net and look for a way out of the computer. Eventually Mr Majeika realises who was playing the trick on the class, with the help from one of the students in the class. Will class three ever find an escape route out of the computer? 

I really enjoyed this book. I enjoyed the way that the children explored the web, being faced with place names, characters and story elements from Gulliver’s Travels. I enjoyed the use of Computer jargon in this book. The book is full of lots of computer words like World Wide Web, modem, yahoo, keyboard etc. Throughout the magical story, great explanations of how some parts of a computer work are introduced very creatively. I would definitely recommend this book for children who have a huge imagination and a great interest in computers.