Rating: 4/5

I am waiting for a book to become available at my local library and was looking for a quick read. I read somewhere that Louis L'Amour described himself as a storyteller. Many years ago I read pretty much every L'Amour book I could get my hands on. Some of my favorites were his Sackett novels. This is the third Sackett novel published but in the Sackett series it is the eighth. The protagonist is William Tell Sackett and the time frame is 1874 - 1875. Tell fought for the Union Army during the Civil War. Since then he has been a wanderer and takes on many jobs from cowhand to miner.

The story opens with Tell having shot Wes Bigelow during a card game. Being a wanderer Tell decides it is time to hit the trail again. Working on a cattle drive he learns that Bigelow's brothers are looking for him. He also receives his very first letter. Sent by one of his brothers. Feeling homesick he decides to pay a visit. On the trail home and in the Sangre de Cristos mountains he finds gold. He also finds a beautiful woman, Ange Kerry. 

Tell decides maybe it is time to settle down. And possibly get married. The gold can be the means to buy some land and start a new life. But when someone discovers gold trouble cannot be far behind. The Bigelow brothers are already seeking to avenge their brother and when Tell brings in gold and tries to stake a claim he has even more enemies who want to jump his claim. He lives in a violent time and place. As mentioned in the book when people live in a society where there is a sheriff, court and judge they can leave the enforcement of laws to others. Here you cannot depend on others to enforce the laws of society. 

Tell is a strong moral character and carries a copy of a legal book that he tries to read and learn from but he is quick to fight when pushed. There was a movie based on this book and The Daybreakers starring Sam Elliott as Tell Sacket.

Louis L'Amour novels may never win a Pulitzer but they are a fun read and for me nostalgic. L'Amour is after all a storyteller.