Rating: 3/5

There is a wonderful wealth of information here about the evolution and rationale of table manners throughout history. For that I definitely recommend it. One particularly neat aspect being the frequent tidbits about the parallel evolution of linguistics, and idioms in particular. Though it offers a bit less on contemporary table manners and current differences around the world than one might expect. 

But the book has some notable problems. I found the constant use of first person pronouns to make vast generalizations ("we choose", "our disgust", etc.) quite alienating and kept wondering who she was talking to/about, as it was never clarified. Is this "we" representative of all humans? That's fairly easily contradicted, especially within a book focusing on the different ways in which cultures approach food. If the "we" refers solely to Western audiences, it seems rather condescending ("we" versus "them"). And even that would make no sense when, again, even in the "Western world" differences abound between countries and regions and social groups.

The other issue with her writing is a penchant for repetition that makes the first and last few chapters particularly tedious. In those she introduces and concludes the themes of the book but without really synthesizing and could have really used the help of an editor to cut out at least 50 pages. 

Finally, there is an attempt to make it seem as if this is an exhaustive look at global rituals around food but more than once subjects are introduced and then dropped with no explanation, with paragraphs like these serving as placeholders: "Toothpicks, fairly successfully banished in England and America, have never been entirely rejected from the European Continent; it would be interesting to know just who uses them today, when, and what the strictures are." Well, yes, now that you bring it up, it WOULD be interesting! But immediately after that sentence she segues into other subjects leaving that ridiculous "wouldn't it be great if someone actually looked into this" dangling there with no further follow-up. No book can cover every detail and this one goes into interesting depth on a lot of topics but this kind of writing makes it feel incomplete despite the huge amount of information it DOES contain.

It is still worth reading despite the stylistic flaws. It's just not as enjoyable as it could have been. My final impression was that if a better author had taken this exact information and done a better job of actually writing it, I could have given this book an enthusiastic five stars.