Rating: 4/5

Dec 21, 245am ~~ Review sometime after the sun comes up.

10pm ~~ In November I read an article about Michael J. Fox and his new book. I have long admired Fox for his courage and determination in coping with his Early Onset Parkinson's Disease diagnosis. Reading the article reminded me of the years (a long time ago) when the sitcom Family Ties was one of THE shows to watch. The character Fox played was someone I sort of loved to hate, but I never learned much about Fox himself at that time. 

So the Guardian article renewed my curiosity and I decided to order the new book. But of course me being me, I thought I would order a couple of Fox's earlier titles as well. So one visit to Amazon and another to Thriftbooks and I sat back to wait for Michael J. Fox to come back into my life. 

Lucky Man was the 2002 book in which Fox talked about his early life and the eventual discovery that he had an incurable disease. We get to meet him as a very confident toddler and watch over his boyhood years. I had to laugh at one point because he talked about hitting a hockey ball against the wall of a house they had just moved into. I thouhgt wait, hockey ball?! Hockey is played with a puck, dude! Of course I had to investigate and of course Fox wasn't kidding, he played with a hockey ball. Turns out there is a sport known as Ball Hockey, played on an indoor court with sticks and a ball and no skates. Moral of the story is never doubt a Canadian when he talks about hockey. lol

Anyway, as we grow up with Michael, he finds his passion for acting and is certain that he will be a success. And of course he was. He went through his phase of brattiness afterwards, and had some rough years with drinking and not truly being a responsible adult. All of this is shared in a matter of fact, nobody's fault but my own kind of way which earned Fox even more of my respect. 

Of course he had plenty to deal with when he learned about the Parkinson's Disease. He hid it for years, wouldn't really accept the diagnosis, thought he could force his body into working properly again. And he hit rock bottom at a certain point: without the help of his wife and a very good therapist, who knows where he would be now. But he got the help he needed and fought for the acceptance he also needed. And since then he has become a spokesman, bringing Early Onset Parkinson's to the public's attention. Not in a sappy, poor little me way, but with the same dignity and strength that he now faces his life. And of course, with huge doses of humor. The saving grace for all of us who face battles with our bodies each moment of each day.

The message here is the same from Fox and his Parkinson's as from me and my Ehlers-Danlos:
You are not your condition. You are still you. Face each day with courage and humor, even the rough ones. Don't despair. Just do the best you can each day. Be gentle with yourself when you need to be and tough on your condition when it deserves it. Above all, be happy. Your life will be different, but YOU CAN DO IT.