Rating: 5/5

5+++++++++ stars Ariana! I promise i can never run out of those +++++

Warning! Gushing! Gushing! and more Guuuuushing!

Henry is Batman! And is officially my Number 1. 

  “Crimes against persons and crimes against property are both on the rise, especially against Jews, blacks and gays, with Latinos running a close fourth. Where’s the public outcry? The Times will bury this report on the inside pages of the Metro section. The broadcast media can’t be bothered.” She slouched in her chair. “We’re becoming habituated to hate. Maybe we’re even becoming addicted to it. There’s nothing like it for that adrenaline rush.”

Damn! History repeating right there! 👆👆👆 

This book is!!

So, a month ago, i was in a cycle of slumps, then My lovely Moony gifted me the chance to experience: Lay Your Sleeping Head: A Henry Rios Novel, GAAAH! from the moment i read that book, i knew, i knew this series will leave a permanent mark. Thank you so much Moony for getting me to read Lay Your Sleeping Head: A Henry Rios Novel and in turn i went back started at the beginning. What i am trying to say is! I am in book heaven. 

 

Book 6 in the Henry Rios series, and boy did we get a treat. It is the longest in the series, and a serious page turner. 

Henry takes on Hollywood! And Lawd, Gawd! it is a wild ride. The characters in this book are shady, despicable, evil and every evil name you can think of. Henry finds himself on both side of the law, the accused and the defender. He is manipulated, lied to, abducted. He couldn't catch a break. His private life is in shambles, professional life is not any better. He is barely surviving. Let's just say the drama that unfolds in this book is worth Emmys.

I have said this and will say it again, Michael Nava gives Dick Wolf a run for his money. The mystery here is exceptional. GAAAAAH! 300+ pages of twists and turns and i was never bored at all. The mystery it self is daring and heartbreaking. 

The writing is bold, in your face, Nava doesn't hold anything back. I don't think i will be able to reread this series. The story stays with you. No need to relive it again.
 

  “Homosexuality is evil,” he said. “It’s an abomination condemned by God. He sent the plague of AIDS as a judgment on your lifestyle.”
In my appointment book was a plane ticket to San Francisco where, on Sunday, I would be attending a memorial service for Grant Hancock.
“Someday, when you realize what you’ve just said, you won’t be able to forgive yourself.”
“I meant it.”
“You can’t run away from yourself forever,” I said. “You can’t hide in someone’s Bible for the rest of your life.”

Richie, Henry's sort of friend, i hope he stays. His one liners are the best. 

  Richie emerged from the bedroom, dressed entirely in black except for a necklace of large, fake pearls. “What do you think?” he asked, preening. “I call this Jack Kerouac meets Barbara Bush.”
“No hat?” He whipped a black beret out of his coat pocket. “I’m way ahead of you, Daddy-o."

GAAAHH! I LOVE THIS SERIES!.

The End of Gushing.