Rating: 3/5

A maritime classic as the last book of the day! The once relatively unknown son of William Buckley, Christopher Buckley, published an account of sailing as an observer on a US flagged tramp steamer in the late 70’s. When the book finally appeared, Buckley was a full-time speech writer for Vice President George Bush. Far from the lofty yet disreputable oval office of the Reagan White House, Buckley, a few years prior, sailed with more common everyday derelicts in the Seafarers International Union (SIU, an acronym playfully bastardized as Scumbags, Indigents and Undesirables by those who rose from its rank and file or who still deal with its scowling members). 
Well before the era of random drug screens, breathalyzers and monolithic, generic container ports, tramp steamers used to roam the oceans looking for cargo in faraway, outlandish places like the fictional Bamboola. Boisterous crewmembers were begging for a fight every port and GPS didn’t even exist. Nevertheless, the characters and scenarios are utterly archetypal to anyone who has ever done time in the merchant marine. The Captain and Chief Engineer detest one another. The steward ignores basic hygiene and manages to carry three cups of coffee to the bridge by keeping the contents of one cup in his mouth while climbing the ladderwell so he doesn’t spill any. Most memorably, illicit, repeated use of an inflatable fuck doll leads to transmission of STD’s amongst the crew. Buckley, nonplussed, chronicles it all. One is loath to even suggest that he exaggerates. From talking to old timers, I’m apt to believe he reported faithfully.

I often give “Steaming to Bamboola” as a gift to maritime friends who somehow haven’t read it, so I am always looking for an extra copy.

“Steaming to Bamboola” is among the best accounts of a voyage in the merchant marine. Unlike John McPhee, whose “Looking for a Ship” is mediocre and suffers from mate worship and an incredulous author believing flagrant sea stories, Buckley immersed himself in unlicensed crew and reports with trenchant sociological accuracy. The result is a superior book. The back jacket has a blurb by James Dickey, comparing Buckley’s first novel to Conrad’s “Youth” and Malcolm Lowry’s “Ultramarine.".