Rating: 5/5

This book was an inspirational read!

You’ll wonder how a book like ‘Where’s Spot’, which is a toddler or early PYP book, can ever be inspirational for an adult like me. 

Well, it is inspirational for me because it happened to be the very first lift the flap book that initiated the avalanche of more lift the flap books right throughout the roaring 1980s and 1990s. Even today, lift the flap books are a big deal in early PYP or Primary Years Programme board or story books and so I salute the pioneering author and creator Eric Hill of the ‘Spot the Dog’ series for creating this wonderful world of educational flap books for us. 

His innovation in the year 1980 for his own toddler son became the reason why reading books became so much fun throughout the 1980s and 1990s. I thank Eric Hill who through his creativity, innovativeness and ingenuity created this wonderful lift the flap world for younger readers and creating in the youngest of the young a love for reading for ages to come. 

Eric Hill passed away in the year 2014 but his legacy as a promoter of child literacy lives on in the golden period of early PYP literature of the 21st century. Sadly, many children today in this post-Truth Era do not continue with their fascination for the printed word or books into their pre-teen years and then land up becoming teenagers or young adults who just don’t read and just don’t give a fish about the same. We hope that in due time the contributions of such stalwart book creators and authors can further induce Gen-Alpha and Gen-Beta children to continue their reading habits into their junior school life and then beyond. This should be done not merely for academic purposes, but to make this cruel world a better place to live in.

When you see some of the leaders or powers that be ruling our world today, you can easily notice that they were certainly not brought up on the ‘Spot the Dog’ series like most of us 1980s and 1990s and early Gen-Z kids – because there is no empathy, compassion or remorse in their brutality and sheer immorality, which they have the audacity to cover up with the gloss of conservativeness in religion and term as maintaining ‘the so called natural law of social order’. The next time you visit them for a photoshoot, gift them Eric Hill’s ‘Where’s Spot’ and if you can afford it, a local library membership card for 4 or 5 years for free; that will certainly solve our global problems better than all the protests in the rain, cold and hot weather that we can ever do even for a million years to come! 

Eric Hill was also in his lifetime appointed as the Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2008 New Year Honour List and I am not surprised about that. It is not surprising because anyone who revolutionizes children’s literature for the better the way he has, deserves more praises than generations can ever afford. Let us not forget that in creating this classic board book ‘Where’s Spot’ he has managed to affect the lives of toddlers everywhere in the world, including someone like me and my students here in Mumbai, India. I’ve known people in India who keep the ‘Spot the Dog’ series as a staple diet for their toddlers, and it is a compulsory book for a toddler in all the kindergarten schools of South-India since the year the board book first came to India. 

This is a better and more positive contribution to society than nuclear weapons, nuclear arsenal, guns galore, bombs, communalistic notions, AI, etc. This is because a child who reads will become an adult who thinks. Not just an adult who thinks up the stock market or economic policies or diplomacy, etc., but an adult who thinks about the consequences of their actions both short term but especially long term. 

Eric Hill gets 5 stars from this 1990s kid and his old-time fan. 

Thank you, Sir, for giving me and others around the world the best introduction to the world of books. Most of us owe our early toddler years to you, Sir. We are grateful. 

So, therefore, this book was truly an inspirational read!