Rating: 5/5

Re-reading for our discussion on Friday, May 27th! https://www.goodreads.com/topic/show/...

Anne fans, I INSIST that you try Emily at some point.

[image error]

-----------------------------------

I love the Emily books so much. Her passion and her dreams, along with her dignity, were expressed in a way that really appealed to me when I read them as an impressionable teenager. The formative years of every girl's life are filled with wild hopes and worries and exhilaration, and as an adult, I re-read this series with a great deal of fondness.

I also love Teddy Kent. Such a romantic character, and how lovely to have your childhood friend be the love of your life! 

Some of the anecdotes, like many of L.M. Montgomery's, do cross over into exaggerated predicaments and a wee bit of melodrama...but honestly, that's part of the fun of indulging in books like these.

  It had always seemed to Emily, ever since she could remember, that she was very, very near to a world of wonderful beauty. Between it and herself hung only a thin curtain; she could never draw the curtain aside-- but sometimes, just for a moment, a wind fluttered it and then it was as if she caught a glimpse of the enchanting realm beyond-- only a glimpse-- and heard a note of unearthly music.

ETA/content warning: (for the series as a whole) Adult readers will certainly recognize severely problematic behaviors from Dean Priest, one of Emily's mentors when she's a little older. When I read the books as a child, I thought his later romantic attentions towards her were a little creepy, but mostly because OBVIOUSLY SHE IS MEANT TO BE WITH TEDDY. I was more bothered by his infuriating betrayal of her trust as far as her writing was concerned, and recognized that the age difference and time period play into his pursuit of her. Still, he exhibits controlling, possessive, manipulative behavior, and the power dynamics are terrible, even as mature and independent as Emily is. It's not brutally or aggressively controlling, but manipulation—and grooming—are there all the same.