Rating: 4/5

Ten years ago I participated in the life-transforming SoulStream contemplative spiritual experience of  Living From the Heart  and learned the surprising truth that desire rather than duty was the most reliable guide for discerning the will of God and determining my life calling. I chose this book for one of the assigned book reviews. As I move into year two of my retirement and seek to discern next steps for living into my true calling, I decided a few weeks ago to re-read this book. Its essence is captured in the following quote, a commentary on the exploration of . . . 

 “who we most truly are at the heart of ourselves, where the Godseed is planted (where) God’s dream for us is unfolding. Our lives (Glen’s retirement) are the space in which that dream takes shape, and our gift to our God is his dream fulfilled” (p 246). 

This expresses well my vision for this next chapter in my life. Yet along with my eager anticipation of its unfolding, I am aware of my own fear and apprehension as I wrestle with doubt that I could ever discern with my clouded vision God’s dream for me. A dream reflected in my deepest desire. A desire which can so easily be concealed beneath many legitimate yet lesser desires.

There is so much for me to appreciate about this book but I will add one more precious gem of discovery. For so long I thought that the only effective way to gain freedom from unhealthy attachments was to rely on willpower to force the suppression of the "unholy" desires that fueled these attachments. This was obviously the path of asceticism, or fasting. 

Silf makes the distinction between the the stick way (the ascetic way) of the carrot way (the way of deepest desire) to find the path to detachment. 

 I am becoming aware that I have these particular dependencies, attachments, compulsions, crutches, idols (or whatever you want to call them) . . . I will spend all my energy in trying to destroy them. 

I am becoming aware that I have these particular dependencies, attachments, compulsions, crutches, idols, etc. . . . I will not try to get rid of them by my own efforts. Instead, I will use the limited energy I have to attend to those things in my experience where I feel right with God, or on solid ground, or living true. This will become the music in my heart . . . In this way God will lead me to freedom without my even realizing that it is happening. 

I love this! It shifts my image of God from a stern and scolding spoilsport who frowns on desire and chooses punishment and pain to motivate . . . to the host of the feast who turns water into wine and not only legitimizes desire but implements it as his primary strategy to lead me into his heart of love! What can get any better than that?!