Rating: 3/5

Raising Dragons by Bryan Davis is the first book in the Dragons in Our Midst series. 

Like I said in one of my many status updates for this book, this isn't normally the type of book I'd read. However, I ordered my friend to read the first Love Comes Softly book, and that isn't normally the kind of book she reads. So I felt obligated to read it when she told me it was good. So there's a little backstory for you. ANYWAY. 

In this book, a teenager, Billy, learns a secret his parents have been keeping from him for years. He's half-dragon. Then he learns that another girl in his school, Bonnie, is also half-dragon. The principal of the school is out to kill him, his father (the dragon), Bonnie, Billy's mother, and whoever else happens to be remotely related to anyone who has anything to do with dragons. Can they defeat him? 

This book was certainly interesting, I'll give you that. It dragged on at times, and I feel like it was a little too long for what it was. But it was an interesting take on dragons and fantasy. I just feel like it could have been executed better overall. 

The plot got a little confusing at times. First it was Billy's father is a dragon, okay, cool, Merlin, yeah, nice. Mystery solved. Then it's like "MODERN KNIGHTS OF THE ROUND TABLE" and I'm like "wait wut I thought you sai -" then NOPE "BILLY IS A DESCENDANT OF MERLIN" and then it's back to Billy's POV and dragons and you are wondering "Which is right?" It was a little unclear at times until later in the book. 

This is also the case with the good vs. evil. At times I was wondering who was good and who was evil. It IS all cleared up in about the middle of the book, and by the end there is not a shadow of doubt who is good and who is bad, but I just thought I'd mention it because I know this is very important to some people. 

Finally, this is a modern Christian fantasy book. What I didn't like about this was that there was a lot of magic and the book does focus around dragons, and it is said that dragons really existed and God made them into humans. Now, I KNOW this is just fiction, and I KNOW there are visions/allegories of dragons in the Bible. But when God and magic are put together it just makes me feel a little uncomfortable. I can't quite put my finger on why, it just does. 

Now let's talk about the characters. I didn't feel particularly attached to any of them except Bonnie and that one awesome British teacher (#teachergoals). He was probably my favorite character in the entire book, to be honest. But I did like all the good people. I thought they were funny with their own distinct personalities. Sir Devin and his dark knights didn't really seem to have a motive for wanting to kill all dragons and their uncles. That kind of bothered me, as well as all the fighting and blood. The descriptions made me wince a little at times. Agatha Christie books have less blood, and they are murder mysteries! 

All-in-all, the book had a unique spin on fantasy, but it took me a long time to get through it, it dragged on, there wasn't a solid motive as to why Devin wanted all dragons dead, and some things in the book made me feel a little uncomfortable. 

Therefor, I give it three stars out of five. I probably will not be reading the next book in the series.