Rating: 3/5

A very early Masterton, his second book right after Manitou. Plague is more of a thriller from before Masterton developed his style. It is actually kind of weird how bad this book is because he immediately comes back a year later with Djinn which I think is pretty good. But then there is Sphinx in the same year, one whose reputation is not great and I started once and passed.

So what makes it bad? First, It's sexist, but like a weird sort of not-your-everyday sexist. It's written with a kind of woman-hating fetish that seems almost like a mean joke. Is the reader supposed to laugh? The way this book treats Adelaide is incredible. Sexy Harry Erskine wannabe doctor Petrie (like Dick Van-Dyke I guess) practices in Miami where he fleeces old ladies with his charm and good looks. Of course, every single woman is a cartoonish, sex-crazed pin-up model. And he has to brave their ridiculous woman-brained whims to escape a Miami collapsing into Anarchy as a plague that kills people in hours causes chaos. The daughter is a feeble-minded toddler that Petrie hopes "will be pretty one day".

The premise starts strong, but about halfway through the thing just collapses into misogyny and violence. Tons of rats show up. There's gang violence and rape. A guy accidentally shoots a child and has a breakdown. There's a super depressing sequence in which an older gay man and his young lover have a conversation that is so insane and homophobic that it has to be seen to be believed. In a lot of ways the basic ideas are good, there's a decent amount of action, rat attacks are pretty cool. It's sensational and tasteless but generally pretty entertaining.

But it just falls apart in the second half. It completely loses focus. It's too long by about fifty pages. It's confusing. There's almost like a Harrison's Make Room! Make Room! kind of thing where it's about environmental collapse and the situation isn't particularly resolved. But this one just couldn't pull off the wit and resort to some pretty mean-spirited writing. There's a stinger at the end I kind of like, it has a kind of "we did this to ourselves and now we're f*cked" mentality. There are shades of the ecoresponsibility present in The Manitou series where America gets what it deserves for crimes against the native people. But this time it's a tidal wave of diseased shit that kills half of Florida. Masterton just wasn't there yet and too much of this amounts to something like fetish writing, but there's a certain level of quality.