Rating: 3/5

Not usual for the author, but this one takes place in a narrow time frame from April 1941 to June 1941 with all kinds of bizarre events for us to follow. There are two improbable characters: Wolfgang Stahl, a spy for the Americans, who we briefly met in Nazi uniform in Second Violin; and Calvin Cormack, a naive American Army Captain, working for US Intelligence in Zurich. Stahl is the more intriguing character and linchpin for the action, but regrettably his appearances are few and far between. He is a valuable asset for American and British intelligence due to his eidetic memory enabling him to visualize complex military strategies which include Hitler’s planned takeover of Russia and the enslavement of its people.

Cormack, who is Stahl’s handler was sent to London to work with a British agent to search for the now missing spy. The agent, however, was reassigned to interrogate Rudolph Hesse who had mysteriously landed in Scotland with peace overtures. As a result Cormack finds himself working with Special Branch officer, Walter Stilton to find Stahl before he falls victim to a Nazi assassin. They are a comedic pair in their struggle to understand each other with their language and cultural differences. Stilton’s constant use of “wot larx” confuses Cormack as it did me. It seems to be The only clue for Troy after several murders have been committed while searching for the spy. Troy knows that it is a comment used by a character in Dickens’ Great Expectations- an English metaphor that I fail to understand or how Troy was able to use this information to further the investigation.

There is a secondary thread here with Stilton’s daughter, Kitty and her simultaneous affairs with Cormack and Troy. Cormack is convinced that he is in love with her, while Troy shows his usual reticence to commit to a relationship. Kitty feels she is caught in a Riptide (British title for the book) with her two lovers.
It is significant that Troy’s father, Alex, wrote a prophetic editorial in his newspaper which warned that Germany would attack Russia in spite of a non-aggression treaty. He suggested that Russia should be a new ally for England which was most likely on Churchill’s as well as Roosevelt’s wish list.