Rating: 5/5

“If you want logic, you have to go someplace else.”

This is a fascinating companion to more autobiographical works such as Natan Sharansky’s Fear No Evil. Potok tells the story of the Slepaks, especially Volodya Slepak, starting with his father, an Old Bolshevik who never lost faith in the Soviet Union, even when it started persecuting Jews and inciting violence against Jews.

This was not a unique viewpoint; Potok writes of the death of Stalin (which follows the recent comedy-drama movie fairly closely) that

	Even in the labor camps, many cried. 

Solomon loved books, but had no problem defacing or destroying them in the service of the state.

	One day Volodya saw his father remove some books from a shelf and toss them into the garage; the authors had been arrested. Another time his father took down a history of the Russian Civil War and proceeded to ink out the photographs of Trotsky and others. In school Volodya’s teachers told the students to tear out the pictures of this or that person who had just been discovered to be an imperialist spy. At home one day his father expunged with India ink faces of friends and relatives in their family album—all had been arrested.

It wasn’t a matter of erasing history overnight, as in 1984. Students were forced to take part in the cancellation of history, acknowledging that 2 and 2 must make 5.

When the Soviet Union canceled his son, Solomon reacted pretty much the same way, refusing even to look at him when forced to be in the same room. As he did with the illogically mandated book edits, he acknowledged his grandsons, but not his son.

What little we see of Solomon Slepak’s story is a fascinating one, but most of the records of his relationship with the Soviet leadership—and he clearly had outsized influence—have either been destroyed or even under Russia in the nineties were access denied to both Volodya and his sons.

This would probably have been a much longer book if those records were available, because it seems clear that part of Volodya’s and Masha’s troubles were caused either by their father or by his reputation.

Natan Sharansky appears several times as Anatoly Shcharansky.

Volodya Slepak’s role in the refusenik movement appears to have started somewhat randomly. The movements was primed by rising official anti-semitism and official encouragement of more violent antisemitism. The communist bureaucracy refused to recognize Jews as Russian. But it was the six day war that got Soviet Jews thinking they could fight back, and Soviet reaction to the war, and Israel’s victory, that resulted in a Jewish nationalism growing among Russian Jews.

If they couldn’t be Russians, if remaining in Russia was dangerous, it Russia didn’t want them, why not emigrate to Israel, who already considered them Israeli, who seemed able to defend themselves against violence, and who outspokenly did want them?

Like the Germans, the Soviets apparently had something in mind for the Jews, because they refused to let them leave. And while the numbers who did receive permission to leave varied depending on how much the Soviets wanted from the West, the leaders of the movement were not among them. Except when the “wild American cowboy” administration tied international relations to specific individuals.

They were their own doctors; Masha Slepak, as a radiologist, had medical training, and would nurse not just her husband back to health but also other refuseniks.

	Keeping one another alive was another weapon in that war. 

The past described here is a very different country. The refusenik movement in Russia was helped by members of the press, for example. But it is also eerily familiar. KGB agents didn’t just infiltrate the movement; they orchestrated fake gatherings. They attempted to organize the schools to pressure the Slepaks’ children against their parents.

One of the advantages of being exiled to Siberia (Tsokto-Khangil, in the Aginskoye District, Chitinskaya Province) rather than, say, imprisoned in the nation’s capital, was that they received postcards from supporters abroad.

	For some reason the authorities had neglected to inform the local post office to hold their mail, and no one in the post office seemed to care enough to do that on his own.

One of the odder character names comes in the beginning, Solomon Slepak’s story during the revolution, about Admiral Alexander Kolchak,

	Kolchak was a taciturn man, given to dark moods and politically naïve.

Which could of course apply just as well to my favorite fictional reporter, Carl Kolchak.

	…who would think that once they had been among the leaders of a movement that had hurled itself against, and helped bring down, the Soviet colossus?