Rating: 5/5

From time immemorial the gift of creativity has been venerated almost as if it were divine. 

If there is such a thing as creativity as thus defined, then it is clear that civilization must owe much, if not everything, to the individuals so gifted.

It is with the the work of children in our schools that we really ought to begin. How can we best detect the individuals who are endowed by nature with creative ability of this or that specific type?

comic simile &lt;---&gt; hidden analogy &lt;---&gt; poetic image
witticism &lt;---&gt; epigram &lt;---&gt; trouvaille
satire &lt;---&gt; social analysis &lt;---&gt; allegory
impersonation &lt;---&gt; empathy &lt;---&gt; illusion
caricature &lt;---&gt; schematisation &lt;---&gt; stylisation
pun &lt;---&gt; word puzzle &lt;---&gt; rhyme
riddle &lt;---&gt; problem &lt;---&gt; allusion
debunking &lt;---&gt; discovering &lt;---&gt; revealing
coincidence &lt;---&gt; trigger &lt;---&gt; fate
bathos &lt;---&gt; shortcut &lt;---&gt; pathos

The Jester

The Logic of Laughter
The Triptych

Humor, Discovery and Art
Laughter is a reflex
Humor is the only domain of creative activity where a stimulus on a high level of complexity produces a massive and sharply defined response on the level of physiological reflexes.

Across the first page of the Christmas issue of the Catholic Universe Bulletin, Cleveland’s official Catholic diocesan newspaper ran this eight-column banner head:

“It’s a boy in Bethlehem.
Congratulations God - congratulations Mary - congratulations Joseph”

the riposte which appeared in the New Yorker:

“We wanted a girl.”

Hidden Persuaders

The controls of a skilled activity generally function below the level of consciousness on which that activity takes place. The code is a hidden persuader.

Visual constancies enable us to recognize the size, brightness, shape of objects

Habit and Originality

Two ways of escaping our more or less automatized routines of thinking and behaving: plunge into dreaming or dream-like states when the codes of rational thinking are suspended. Or escape from boredom, stagnation, intellectual predicaments and emotional frustration - by the spontaneous flash of insight. It makes us ‘understand what it is to be awake, to be living on several planes at one” TS Eliot

Henri Bergson: the main sources of the comic are the mechanical attributes of inertia, rigidity and repetitiveness impinging on life (Jack-in-the-Box)

homme-automate - the focal or bi-focal concept of all sciences of life. man-automaton

Relief from stress is always pleasurable regardless of whether it was caused by hunger, sex, anger or anxiety.

Laughter rings the bell of man’s departure from the rails of instinct.
“Infinity is where things happen which don’t.” - anonymous schoolboy to his mathematics master

Coincidence, Nonsense, Tickling

… And what could be moister
Than tears from an oyster?

The ever-so-slight feeling of uncertainty and apprehension ~ tickling: let me be just a little frightened so that I can enjoy the relief.

Originality, Emphasis Economy

Words have suggestive, evocative powers; but at the same time they are merely stepping stones for thought. Economy means spacing them at intervals just wide enough to require a significant effort from the receiver of the message; the artist rules his subjects by turning them into accomplices.

A clever joke: the pleasant after-glow of admiration and intellectual satisfaction

‘Statistics are like a bikini. What they reveal is suggestive. What they conceal is vital.’

In 1960, an anecdote in the form of an imaginary dialogue circulated in the satellite countries of the East:

Tell me, Comrade, what is capitalism?
The exploitation of man by man.
And what is Communism?
The reverse.

it has the same power of sudden illumination as an epigram by Voltaire.

(An epigram is a brief, interesting, memorable, and sometimes surprising or satirical statement)

The less suggestive and the more implicit the joke, the more will the consumer’s reactions approximate the producer’s -- whose mental effort he is compelled to re-create.

Si Natura negat, facit indignatio versum - Juvenal
If Nature says no, anger was turned
Though nature say me nay, indignation will prompt my verse

The emotions in question are those of the self-assertive, aggressive-defensive type, which are based on the sympathico-adrenal system and tend to beget bodily activity. Their counterparts are the participatory or self-transcending emotions -- compassion, identification, raptness --- which are mediated by physiological processes of a different type and tend to discharge not in laughter but in tears. 

Laughter is a luxury reflex which could arise only in a creature whose reason has gained a degree of autonomy from the urges of emotion, and enables him to perceive his own emotions as redundant -- to realize that he has been fooled.

Matrices vary from fully automatized skills to those with a high degree of plasticity; but even the latter are controlled by rules of the game which function below the level of awareness. Habits are the indispensable core of stability and ordered behavior; they also have a tendency to become mechanized and to reduce man to the status of a conditioned automaton. The creative act, by connecting previously unrelated dimensions of experience, enables him to attain to a higher level of mental evolution. It is an act of liberation -- the defeat of habit by originality.

That animals can display originality and inventiveness has been asserted since Aesop

One should not underestimate ripeness as a factor facilitating discoveries, which as the saying goes, are ‘in the air.’

The Latin verb cogito for ‘to think’ etymologically means ‘to shake together.’

Alchemist’s Rosarium - for finding the Philosopher’s Stone:

“The Stone can only be found when the search lies heavily on the searcher. -- Thou seekest hard and findest not. Seek not and thou wilst find.

Souriau: to invent you must think aside

Fleming: One sometimes finds what one is not looking for.

The history of discovery is full of such arrivals at unexpected destinations, and arrivals at the right destination by the wrong boat.

Thinking in pictures dominates the manifestations of the unconscious -- the dream, the half-dream, the psychotic’s hallucinations, the artist’s vision

Separations and reintegrations

After the Macedonian conquest of Greece there followed a period of consolidation, orthodoxy, and decline. Aristotle’s categories became the grammar of existence, his animal spirits ruled the world of physics, everything worth knowing was already known and everything inventable already invented. The Heroic Age was guided by the example of Prometheus stealing the fire of the gods; the philosophers of the Hellenistic period dwelt in Plato’s cave, drawing epicycles on the wall, their backs turned to the daylight of reality.

p 227 After that there came a period of hibernation lasting for 15 centuries. During that time the march of science was not only halted, but its direction reversed.

there were hopeful stirrings.. the budding universities at Oxford and Cambridge, Salerno, Bologna and Paris...

The recurrent cycle of periods of crisis and creative anarchy precede new synthesis.

When the ritualized worship of the Olympian gods and demi-gods could no longer provide answers to the ultimate questions after the meaning of existence. Mythology had become a ‘blocked matrix’ 

Burnet: No sooner did an Ionian philosopher learn half a dozen geometrical propositions and hear that the phenomena of the heavens recur in cycles than he set to work to look for law everywhere in nature and with an audacity amounting to hubris to construct a system of the universe.

Science and Emotion

The Artist, the Jester, the Sage

Benevolent Magician and Mad Professor

Art is a form of communication which aims at eliciting a re-creative echo. Education should be regarded as an art, and use the appropriate techniques of art to call forth that echo. Man cannot inherit the past; he has to re-create it.

The logic of the moist eye

Laughter and Weeping

Excepting saints and maniacs, our emotions nearly always consist of mixed feelings, where both tendencies participate in the mixture. extraordinary cocktail of emotions

Walter de la Mare: 
It’s a very odd thing --
As odd as can be --
That whatever Miss T eats
Turns into Miss T.

Verbal creation

The Power of Illusion

Rhythm and Rhyme

Pulsation

Cold blows the wind on my true love
And a few small drops of rain --

Infolding

Originality and Emphasis

To name the thing means forsaking three quarters of a poem’s enjoyment -- which is derived from unravelling it gradually by happy guesswork: to suggest the thing creates the dream. Symbols are formed when this secret is used to perfection; to evoke little by little, the image of an object in order to demonstrate a mood.

Make the message more luminous by compelling the recipient to work it out by himself -- to re-create it. Hence the message must be handed to him in implied form -- and implied means ‘folded in.’ To make it unfold, he must fill in the gaps, complete the hint, see through the symbolic disguise. But the audience tends to become more sophisticated with time; so the message must be made more implicit, more tightly folded. It is the antidote to the law of diminishing returns in the domain of the emotions.

The history of art could be written in terms of the artist’s struggle against the deadening cumulative effect of saturation. The way out of the cul-de-sac is either revolutionary departure towards new horizons or the re-discovery of past techniques, or a combination of both.

Leave out everything that is irrelevant, and everything that is obvious.
Hemingway advised a young writer: The more bloody good stuff you cut out the more bloody good your novel will be.

Trains of thought run faster than a century ago, on tracks beaten smooth by mass media and torrents of print.

Milton: Nymphs and shepherds, dance no more --

puppets and strings

The mental equivalent for the less spectacular routine regeneration of tissues designed to compensate for wear and tear is the nocturnal regressions to the primitive levels of the dream.

‘It is wonderful to see how analogies can blossom when they are given a little affection.”

Multidimensional aspects of thinking:
1) Degrees of consciousness
2) Degrees of verbalization
3) Degrees of abstraction
4) Degrees of flexibility
5) Type and intensity of motivation
6) Realistic versus autistic thought
7) Dominance of outer or inner environment
8) Learning and performing
9) Routine and originality.

Habit						Originality
Dynamic equilibrium				Activation of regenerative potentials
Rigid to flexible variations on a theme	Super-flexibility (reculer pour mieux sauter)
Repetitiveness				 Novelty
Conservative					Destructive-Constructive.