Rating: 1/5

Memphis is the second in a trilogy about the O'Brien brothers from Ireland and their...ummm...romantic adventures in America. Book #1 took place prior to the Civil War, and this book begins in 1862. Caleb O’Brien is a major in the Confederate Army (never did figure out why he was so hot to serve since he's against slavery and I don't recall the boys gaining citizenship yet). Caleb comes across Sophia Merrick ("spirited" per the book description) when his troops are under fire from the boys in blue. Sophia took over the family newspaper after her father's death (her brothers are off fighting), and she dresses up in blue to infiltrate the Union army and get news and secrets and stuff. 

Got all that? Good. Caleb and another fellow soldier (Will) are badly wounded, and only Sophia is around to get them home to Memphis and to Will's family doctor. Will's home is too full of other wounded soldiers so there's no room for Caleb, and Sophia brings him to her home to nurse. She's only seventeen and only has two servants in the house, and she takes in two other wounded soldiers and nurses them back to health. That includes lots of late nights wiping Caleb's fevered brow and naked chest. 

OK, so Caleb gets better and then there's all kinds of ups and downs and the Yankees taking over Memphis and underground dealings and stealing weapons and payroll and of course - an ebil, mean-as-mean can be Union Officer lusting after Sophia. 

*yawn*

I usually like Civil War romances, but this one was a definite dog - at least for me. I prefer a bit more realism in a story, and for things to make sense and there just wasn't a lot of anything that made sense in this book.

1) How did Amity (perhaps around 15/16 in this book), the younger sister of Caleb's sister-in-law and Caleb's very young brother manage to travel from New Orleans to Memphis with a fortune in gold all by themselves? Did they come by train or carriage? Trains were mentioned, but still - there's a war on, and later in the book Caleb and Sophia had to ride horse because all the trains were disrupted by the conflict. Which was it? And why in the hell were they not accompanied by adults, or better yet why didn't the adults go in their place?

2) Sophia is seventeen, and all the town thinks of her as a plain spinster, yet all the new-to-town men think she's the hottest thing evar. And boy, does Sophia learn all the positions with Caleb lickety split.

3) About 2/3 of the way through, the whole Union army is hot to catch our pair, yet they have time to make whoopee in the woods, check into a hotel and do it, and even on public streets in a carriage. Oh hell, it was after dark, so no one looking for them would notice them in the carriage making whoopee.

*head desk*

I know a lot of readers don't mind a sexed up book (there's a lot of sex in this book) in a wallpaper historical setting, but I'm just not one of those readers.