Rating: 4/5

Two books into Monette's lineup of fiction, I'm sensing such a strong pattern that it really feels like I know him. 

I'm almost never one to treat artworks - least of all /stories/ - as pieces of The Greater Work Of Art That Is This Particular Guy's Life, because whenever I see people do that, it always seems so arbitrary to care about THAT guy so much that anything they make is automatically imbued with meaning. Like, to the point that they even seem to refuse to see ANYTHING as a flaw; no, it all indicates something about the creator, and by virtue of that alone, it's valuable. That being said... the first thing I read from Monette was Becoming A Man, and I connected with it so deeply that I guess I've become somewhat guilty of what I just laid out. Of course, it's NOT arbitrary here, and it's NOT an unwillingness to call something a flaw nearly as much as I really, truly feel motivated to examine any less-than-positive feelings I have. It's just so undeniable how talented Monette is from his other works, I'm inclined to think that *I'm* the one who's not getting it.

One other undeniable thing here is that Monette's prose is THICK. And progressively moreso as the book goes on. No matter how literate you are, if you have even the tiniest dash of OCD, you are going to re-read passages almost constantly. But like... as much as that will be out of a need to make sure you understand what's going on, it'll also be because you do, in fact, NEED to experience that sentence again. And it'll often be for both reasons. You got so lost in the beauty of the prose, in the perfect flow of words, that you forgot to take in what it actually means. Monette has a way with language that skips past the front of your brain and goes all the way to the back to play out the events like a movie, just, where you can't quite actually see it.

Speaking of movies, that's the pattern I was talking about. Or stories, more generally. MAYBE it's just this and Mrs. Carroll, and my opinion will change the more of him I read, but so far I see how much of his protagonists simply must just be /him/. A talent for language and for stories, and his connection with all the abstractions of life, is so inherent to Monette than he can't fathom not putting that same sensibility into his leading men - or really, ALL his characters. And it creates for an ironically VERY unrealistic world - where all communication is satisfying, where everyone has a certain degree of self-awareness even for the fact that they ARE in a narrative - but one which I, personally, fucking love. As it's literally set in Hollywood, anyway, it doesn't feel for a moment contrived. It just feels like Monette is making his desire for life to BE a story palpable, and I sympathize deeply, and I welcome every bit of that desire that he's trying to feed. 

It's a bit further ironic, then, that The Long Shot has the bare bones of a real story. I suppose there comes a point where you're SO bent on life being a narrative that you forgot to put real events in it - which may, then, be the difference between life being a story vs life being a BOOK. The way it's all wrapped up in Walden kind of foreshadows this fact in a way - that it's going to be heavily self-reflective and incredibly internal, more like a memoir than a real chronological series of events. There ARE events, but you have to pay so much attention to pull them out of the slurry of prose. Many of them are even "offscreen" as you might put it (with the actual plot and dialogue feeling more cinematic than literary) and then only revealed as retrospective. One /could/ say that it's all a matter of showing off his ability to write purpler and purpler for a solid 150K words... OR you could say that this novel is, frankly, kind of exclusive. It's just not meant for most people. It's meant for people just like him, who can find the tail-end(s) of the story in there and pull it out. Also - I said it was a slurry of prose, but that's also just one side of it. More accurately, imo, it's that Monette needs everything to smooth together. Everything that happens feels like it has precedence. It's how you might live life when you're like our protagonists Greg or Vivien: a dream, where it's all hollistically connected. Where it's all like a film. 

Thinking of The Long Shot this way, then, is admittedly where I come into some genuine complaints. Those very complaints are why I felt the need to say all I've said so far, because I've worked them over and tried to decide exactly how justified they are, based on why I think they're in there... and all that ruminating kind of did just bring me back to them, because I can't help but feel like Monette slipped a little. 

(SPOILERS AHEAD)

1: For all that most things felt connected, the truth about the murder seemed... kind of random? Locked up in prose, even moreso. If you let the story feel like a movie (and lean into the sort of meta-ness of how it's a /badly-written/ movie), then yes, it works. But even with Monette there's some things I'll hesitate to do when I'm regarding a piece of media. I won't /completely/ accept it even if I get it. Like... it not only feels lame, but really unbelievable? Maybe I missed something (despite my efforts), but I couldn't see a reason for Max to have waited this long if he was going to PLAN out a murder like this. It would have made so much more sense if it was evidently a crime a passion or something. 

2: Along that vein... Harry Dawes. With how cinematic this whole story is clearly supposed to be, and how core he is to the very premise of the plot, a resolution for him seems strangely missing. The explanation of the pure coincidence that led him to get murdered alongside Jasper just does not feel like enough. Greg himself also just seems no longer affected by it by then? It makes Harry feel honestly like a cheap hook to get Greg's intrigue in the plot, and lacking in follow-through. I was predicting for about the whole second half, up until the last few pages, that the entire murder investigation would be for naught, and that all those clues would be red herrings. I thought that what would be discovered was that /Greg/ was flawed in how he viewed this whole thing, that he was affected by a sort of self-centered grief that had him not consider that he just really didn't know Harry. Hell, I was even figuring "this is really predictable lol" but thinking, at the same time, that it was the perfect ending: that Harry had some fixation on Jasper, and he killed him and then himself. Or something like that. 

3: Finally, part of what I owe the above prediction to: The cover of the book. That art of two men on a beach. I was waiting for so long to see which two characters that would actually BE. Mostly, of course, I assumed one of them would be Greg. But a good ways in, there were no love interests for him in sight. I was thinking there might be a flashback of some kind, but no. THEN I was thinking... oh, maybe Harry is the secret core of all this? Maybe that's HIM and Jasper. Maybe they had more of a relationship than anyone else realized. Maybe this painting is one of their last moments together..... Alas, I still don't know who those men are supposed to be. And that's really frustrating to me.

Final words:

Despite those complaints, I sincerely wish Monette was alive so that I had a chance of telling him that I understood this. I see the bits of self-criticism (of this very story) in both Greg and Vivien's internal monologues and also personally relate enough to add an extra layer of meta that feels a waste not to share. At least I can say so here and potentially add more layers. 

Also, seriously, he's got such a talent for ending scenes in particular. And the very end brought it home hard. It didn't matter how unsatisfied I was about the resolution to the murder because of how visceral the final and /first/ confrontation of Jasper Cokes was, and how I felt it was undeniable what the story was really about. 

It's insane to me that Monette's own relationship with the film industry was so tangential when the desires that poured out in his writing were so wrapped up in it. But then again, like Greg, it may be that he never would have felt the way he did if he weren't only ever on the fringes.