Rating: 4/5

8/2023: still entertaining, 3.5-4 stars, great narration, great secondary characters. Serena and Ivo are humorous but I think would be exhausting to be around, such tempers, overwhelming personalities!

2/2019: second read, this time with the Heyer Fan Group on GR; this was one of the first Heyer’s I read years ago, and have since read several more of her books. My review below still holds, this is still 3.5-4 star read, but not among my very favorite Heyer romances - since I have read more of her books, I’ve seen her handle these types of characters and situations more deftly. But it is still a witty, charming, fun story - I have yet to read a Heyer novel that I didn’t enjoy!

Here, Heyer gives us a beautiful, strong-willed heroine (Serena), matched with one of her gruff alpha male heroes (Ivo, Marquis of Rotherham). They spar constantly, and in fact had been betrothed previously, but Serena broke off the engagement shortly before the wedding. 

Serena’s father, an earl, has suddenly died at the start of this story, and has named Ivo, his old friend, as trustee of Serena’s inheritance. Grieving the loss of her father, who had been more companion than parent, and had given his daughter a great deal of freedom, Serena is enraged at this handling of her affairs - she and Ivo spark off each other as much as ever. Our group was torn whether the constant sparring helps or hurts the story. I guess I understood it - they were clearly very attracted to each other - but I think I personally would find it exhausting to always be at loggerheads with my husband!

Anyway, for this read I listed to the Audiobook read by Sian Phillips, which was excellent and so much fun! She did an awesome job with all the characters- I particularly enjoyed Mrs. Floore and the brittle, phoney Lady Laleham! As always, Heyer fleshes out the story with wonderful secondary characters, farcical plot twists, a few romances in the offing, and sparkling humor.

2008: I really love Georgette Heyer's Regency romances/comedies - they are as much fun (or more!) to read than Jane Austen, full of great characters, hilarious situations and clever dialogue. I gave this one 4 stars only because it took me a little longer to REALLY get into it, mainly because the two lead characters, Serena and Ivo, while obviously meant for each other, were SO pig-headed, strong-willed and temperamental! There were definite shades of "Pride and Prejudice" as they both learned to come around, but they were still quite proud even in the end - but the situation was resolved so satisfactorily, and all of the secondary characters' romantic entanglements resolved so perfectly, that by the end you don't want it to end! Very satisfying, fun read.

 I got the VERY ancient edition from our library (1955!) but I try and buy up the more recent beautiful trade paperbacks I've seen of her books coming out lately - they are definitely worth re-reading.