Rating: 5/5

4.75 stars rounded up

Nathaniel Bowditch was from a long line of ship captains but when Nat's father lost his ship, he lost his "tuck." Young Nat has a plan to turn his family fortunes around. He shares this plan with his beloved sister Lizza and then with a new friend who will help Nat make his fortune. When plans go awry, Nat keeps carrying on. His mathematically inclined brain moves at high speed and proves to be the making of him after all. 
https://photos.app.goo.gl/UDBVeTga75g...
https://photos.app.goo.gl/ieYZKVgrPzB...

This book is incredible! The story is rich in historical detail. The author learned so much just to write this book. The story is full of action and I simply couldn't put it down. The author is a champion of show don't tell. I can't believe she crammed all that fact into one novel without resorting to reciting basic facts. There is a tiny bit of casual racism "swarthy" Spaniard, "brown" men but Nathaniel himself judges men on their abilities and not who they are. There's also a great section on the freedom of the press after the Revolutionary War leading up to the War of 1812. The

Nathaniel's life was full of tragedy and setbacks yet he never ever gave up. He taught himself Latin, figured out the principles of navigation AND discovered errors in the leading textbook of the day. He taught common men navigation that was considered beyond their scope of understanding, rewrote the book and undertook several sea voyages around the world. If the novel is to be believed, he was also kind, compassionate and loving. I really connected to Nat because I have a quick brain too and feel like kicking a chair when someone can't keep up but unlike Nat I can't understand math. I can't even imagine beginning to understand 1/10th of what Nathaniel Bowditch understood! I especially liked his gentle sister Lizza, sweet Liza and laughing Polly. The women in this story are very strong despite the lack of opportunities for girls in those days. 

I really liked the illustrations despite them being black and white line drawings. I could easily picture 18th century Salem since I was just there a year ago. I walked the same streets Nathaniel did and learned about the history of Salem. Unfortunately many of the maritime museum exhibits were closed so I must return to learn more about the background of this story. For those readers who have not been to Salem, the illustrations perfectly capture the spirit of the town before the kitschy witchy craze took over in the late 19th-century. 

More background on the Derby family
https://photos.app.goo.gl/phxEjoAaCk1...
https://photos.app.goo.gl/PmHDo9DCGap...

Pepper trade
https://photos.app.goo.gl/fLTfdEjkxGk...
https://photos.app.goo.gl/CZzCLK3Fq1N...

What is a Kris? (knife briefly mentioned in the story)
https://photos.app.goo.gl/P7dKvb3gEaG...

fuzzy map of Salem harbor
https://photos.app.goo.gl/HoCDs6HsRKS...

Salem ships
https://photos.app.goo.gl/QeR45dPsrhZ...