Rating: 5/5

If you want to read a SF collection set mostly in the Galactic Empire, this is a pretty good choice. I picked up this book from the library thinking it was a collection of stories by Brian W. Aldiss but it as it turns out he is the editor, not the writer for this one. There are quite a few stories in this edition and I enjoyed most of them immensely. Some of them weren't top of the notch, but on overall I do like the Aldiss' selection. Moreover, I enjoy reading Aldiss' introduction and commentary. 

Been a Long Time (Lafferty) 3/5
I can't say that I enjoyed this story that much. It is about a group of monkeys who need to retype complete works of Shakespeare. Who sets them to this tasks? These characters are named, but I can't say that I got them- or the point of this story. However, the writing is entertaining so the story was fun to read. I just don't see the point. Maybe there isn't one. Maybe it is just meant to be- entertaining. 

The Possessed (Clarke) 5/5
Very imaginative SF story about an alien vessel (entity) that sets itself to an important task of developing higher life of Earth. This highly intelligent entity supposedly put all of its force into pushing evolution in the right direction, but with time it starts to loose its original memories. The writing of the story is quite poetic and I liked how the story developed. The ending isn't entirely plausible because it features a myth ( mass animal suicide is a myth) but it is a poetical one nevertheless. 

 Protected Psecies (Fyfe) 5/5
A fantastic story with a great ending. An official arrives to a newly founded planet and asks for a protection of its indigenous population. The only way to do is to ask for them to be protected as endangered animals, to make them be seen as a species of moneys. However, it turns out they are not really monkeys- and they are listening. 

All the Way Back (Shaara) 5/5
Another story with a fantastic ending. Humans exploring the unknown planet discover something that will amaze them and make them see the human race in another light. They find aliens that tell them of a great conflict and war. The Antha people once almost destroyed all the known life in their imperialist expansion. They were so brilliant that it took the rest all of the others united together to keep them back. What I liked about this one is that it makes us question our human history. How much do we really know about it? Where did we sprung from? 

The Star Plunderer (Anderson), 5/5
Possibly my favourite story in this collection, The Star Plunderer speaks of bleak future. The future human society has become decadent and as such vulnerable to attack. The opening to the story is quite depressing. Indeed, the humans seems to be loosing a war with an alien race regularly enslaving people and taking over its planets. However, there is still hope as one ship carries inside a brilliant man who plants a slave rebellion.

Foundation (Asimov), 5/5
It is a lovely story, but hard to understand without the context. A group of scientists has been working for 50 years on a project that is even more important than it seemed at first but they only learn of it when the time is ripe for it.

 We're Civilized! (Clifton and Apostolides) 4/5
 This story is quite satirical and straight to the point. It doesn't focuses much on characters, they are mere symbols but it does delivers a strong message. Perhaps it is best described as another great commentary on the shortcomings of humans and our inability to preserve civilizations that are unlike our own. It is indeed possible that some alien race will return us the favour and see us as not being civilized at all.

 The Crime and Glory of Commander Suzdal (Smith) 3/5
Great ideas, but this story just doesn't work. First of all, it put me off by its preface that pleads for us not to read it because it didn't really happen (What was that about?). Secondly, the plot doesn't make much sense. The part about all the females of all species being wiped up by some kind of cancer didn't seem that crazy and I imagine that it would leave the society on that planet traumatized. So, I can understand how the society made entirely of men could end up hating the human race but the third part was just crazy. The commander Suzdal sending cats into past? The cats evolving to save his neck? If he can travel in time why didn't he just go back in time to resist the siren call? I don't get it. I feel like the story needed more details to work. 

 The Rebel of Valkyr (Coppel) 4/5
There is something fascinating about Vikings travelling around in space ships, isn't it? It doesn't seem plausible, but then again, anything is possible. There was some poetry in this one and I imagine those who like Scandinavian mythology might enjoy it. The bad and the good gusy are obvious from the start. It could be said that The Rebel Of Valkyr is a bit predictable story in a number of ways, but nevertheless I found it quite interesting to read. It reminded me a lot of Barsoom series, there are definitely pulp fiction elements in it. There is a beautiful topless princess that the hero must save and even her nemesis is a beautiful topless usurper Ivane. There are definitely some dated elements to this one. However, I quite enjoyed it. The ending even managed to be touching. 

Brightness Falls from the Air (Seabright), 5/5
What a beautiful and touching tale! Humans in their expansion take over a planet where one of species are bird people. Having their home taken, the bird people fight themselves because that entertains people and keeps them fed. However, they become so desperate to fight and die they are slowly dying off as a species. A young man strikes a friendship with a bird girl that will teach him just how wonderful these bird people can be. Another tale that takes a depressive view of human nature. 

 Immigrant (Simak), 5/5 
Only the smartest people can selected to go and live on a mysterious planet. Everyone is anxious to go, but those few that go never return, preferring to send letters. The human kind is very much aware of the fact that this alien species is more advanced then them and they want to learn more about them. In this story, we follow the journey of one young man that arrives to this planet. 

 Resident Physician (James White), 4/5
Well written and entertaining, this medical story reads like a crime story. A doctor needs to treat an alien patient that is a supposed cannibal. The problems are many. The patients seems to unconscious, he doesn't react to treatment and he belongs to a powerful alien race that is deemed immortal. 

Age of Retirement (Lynch),4/5
This one reminded me of Heinlein's juveniles. It shows a society where the very young are 'the police', a patrol of some kind, that is retired at age of 16 and then continues their education. 

 Planting Time (Adams and Nightengale) 2/5
I found it gross and only slightly entertaining, but maybe that is because I'm a female.