Rating: 4/5

[9/10]

 She was a slender thing, timid as a fawn, and fawn-like, too, in her young uncertain grace. She had a tiny head, delicate for even that thin body, and the tilt of it along with the bright shyness of her slightly oblique dark eyes further contributed to the sense that Bambi - or Bambi's doe - had escaped from the forest and galloped up the eighteen flights to this apartment. 

Laura Hunt had the face of an angel, the kind that makes men weak at the knees and turn them into ad-hoc poets. And yet somebody was driven not to poetry but to murder, blasting that pretty face with a shotgun as she opened the door to her expensive Fifth Avenue apartment one sultry summer evening. Reluctant detective Mark MacPherson, a rising star in the police department of the metropolis is tasked with finding the murderer, a job he feels is beneath his previous successes dealing with government corruption and organised crime. McPherson must start not only with the careful investigation of the crime scene, but also with interviewing Laura's closest associates : fashionable writer, critic and socialite Waldo Lydecker and marketing executive Shelby Carpenter, the victim's fiancee.

Most of us are familiar with the story from the Otto Premminger classic movie of the same name. It's extremely difficult, after seeing the movie several times, to put any other face on the main character than Gene Tierney, yet the experience of the novel was enhanced and not diminished by the familiarity. Tierney was unforgettable in the titular role, yet I feel the book Laura has more depth and more style than the movie one. I was able to pay better attention to the style of the presentation and to the psychological study / social commentary that makes the book much more than a simple crime story. The quality of the writing, the subtlety of the changes in narrative style and the surprisingly biting critique of the 'American Dream' - all these made me wonder why Vera Caspary is not better known, more widely read? A quick look at her biographical notes online offer a few suggestions and furthermore point to several autobiographical notes in her most famous novel.

 To solve the puzzle of her death, you must first resolve the mystery of Laura's life. This is no simple task. She had no secret fortune, no hidden rubies. But, I warn you. McPherson, the activities of crooks and racketeers will seem simple in comparison with the motives of a modern woman. A complicated, cultivated modern woman. Concealment, like a worm i' the bud, fed on her damask cheek. 

The story is narrated successively by each of the main characters, offering us clues in the manner they describe the victim and their relationship with her  later Laura Hunt herself takes up the narrative giving us her own take on the drama and on her motivations  . The first one is Waldo Lydecker - a snobbish, self-centred intellectual who sees himself as the Pygmalion who guided Laura through success in the glitzy New York society. He is a collector of fine china and glassware and quite clearly a phony, but what is he really hiding behind the polished public persona?

 I should have been an actor. Had I been physically better suited to the narcissistic profession, I should probably have been among the greatest of my time. 

Lydecker likes o pontificate on a number of subjects (his own magnificence, culture, food, manners, etc), but relevant to the story might be his opinion on crime literature:

 I still consider the conventional mystery story an excess of sound and fury, signifying far worse than nothing, a barbaric need for violence and revenge in that timid horde known as the reading public. The literature of murder investigation bores me as profoundly as its practice irritated McPherson. Yet I am bound to tell this story, just as he was obliged to continue his searches, out of a deep emotional involvement in the case of Laura Hunt. I offer the narrative, not so much as a detective yarn, as a love story.
I wish I were its hero. I fancy myself a pensive figure drawn, without conscious will, into a love that was borne of violence and destined for tragedy. I am given to thinking of myself in the third person. 

Opposite Waldo Lydecker is a practical, pragmatic man who makes a job out of finding other people secrets. Detective Mark McPherson sees a lot and keeps his own council, most of the time, but even he gets rattled by the airs Lydecker assumes:

 You're smooth all right, but you've got nothing to say. 

McPherson is a self-made man who pulled himself out of the gutter without any outside help and who doesn't take kindly to the patronising style of the literary critic. Yet, maybe because of his humble origins, Mark falls under the spell of the glamorous Laura. More than the mystery of her death, he is captivated by her portrait hanging over the fireplace at the murder scene, by her books and her wardrobe, by the reasons that made her postpone marriage to a very presentable suitor and drove her instead to seek a solitary retreat in the country, a couple of days before the wedding. Can the dour Scotsman maintain the distance between his professional and his emotional life?

 In such inconsistent trifles as an ancient baseball, a worn 'Gulliver', a treasured snapshot, he sought clues, not to the passing riddle of a murder, but to the eternally enigmatic nature of woman. This was a search no man could make with his eyes alone; the heart must also be engaged. 

We hear next from Shelby Carpenter, the Southern gentleman with the chiselled profile and perfect manners who was supposed to marry Laura in the week after her murder. His chapters take the form of an official police interview, in the presence of his attorney - from which we can deduce he is one of the suspects in the crime. Without getting into details about the alibis and the damaging evidence against Shelby, his role turns on the question of the definition of a modern man, the other side of the coin where Laura is the personification of the modern woman. Shelby has good looks, good breeding and a lot of success with women, but he is lost in the jungle of New York, a habitat where he is closer to the role of gigolo than to that of bread-winner.

 Auntie Sue once told me I'd grow tired of a six-foot child. Auntie Sue said that when a woman feels the need for a man that way, she ought to have a baby. [...] Ten years in and out of precarious jobs hadn't taught him that gestures and phrases were of less importance in our world than aggresiveness and self-interest; and that the gentlemanly arts were not nearly as useful as proficiency in double-dealing, bootlicking, and pushing yourself ahead of the other fellow. 

Ultimately, Shelby is little better than the cynical Lydecker, another selfish jerk who tries to fake his way through life by acting like a gentleman:

 I picked up a cigarette. He hurried to light it.
'Don't do that,' I said.
'Why not?'
'You can't call me a murderer and light my cigarette.'  

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

I find it a bit difficult to continue without giving a hint at the big reveal that comes halfway through the story, so consider this a mild warning (it happens about the same time in the movie also)

SPOILERS

Laura Hunt is not dead. Somebody else was murdered in her apartment

SPOILERS

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

What has Laura has to say for herself? As far as the crime is concerned, she acts highly suspicious, giving little reason for her fickle behaviour before her planned wedding and lacking an alibi. Yet, Laura alive is even more fascinating than her portrait to detective McPherson, who is seduced by their similar histories of humble origins and becoming a self-made professional in a hostile city. Mark is equally repelled by Laura's obvious lies. Vera Caspary walks here on a high wire, well balanced between a budding romance and feminist empowerment, probably the best part of the whole story. Caspary is equally adept in avoiding the clyches of detective fiction, making Laura more than a femme fatale and Mark something other than a classic gumshoe. Here are a few snapshots from the two main actors:

 - I see nothing wrong with your face, Miss Hunt.
- Skip it. I've never tried to get by on my beauty. 

- - - - 

 - In detective stories there are two kinds, the hard-boiled ones who are always drunk and talk out of the corners of their mouths and do it all by instinct; and the cold, dry, scientific kind who split hairs under a microscope.
- Which do you prefer? 

- - - - 

 Freedom meant something quite different to me, Mark. Maybe you'll understand. It meant owning myself, possessing all my silly and useless routines, being the sole mistress of my habits. Do I make sense? [...] Freedom meant my privacy. It's not that I want to lead any sort of double life, it's simply that I resent intrusion. Perhaps because Mama always used to ask where I was going and what time I'd be home and always made me feel guilty if I changed my mind. I love doing things impulsively, and I resent it to a point where my spine stiffens and I get gooseflesh if people ask where and what and why. 

It's easy to see in Laura a poster girl of feminism, trying to make her own way through life, deciding who to go out with , when to marry and how to live her life, even irrationally if that's what her mood is. It's less easy to understand how this strong woman got to be so closely linked to Waldo Lydecker and Shelby Carpenter, yet Caspary makes the attempt to explain even these faux steps:

 I had been wickedly amused and proud that my charms had roused passion in this curiously unimpassioned creature. What a siren I had thought myself, Laura Hunt, to have won the love of a man born without the capacity for loving! 

Mark McPherson has a similar revelation as he investigates the life of the girl who died instead of Laura:

 ... Shelby was a dream walking. He was God's gift to women. I hated him for it and I hated the women for falling for the romance racket. I didn't stop to think that men aren't much different, that I had wasted a lot of adult time on the strictly twelve-year-old dream of getting back to the old neighborhood with the world's championship and Hedy Lamarr beside me on the seat of a five-grand roadster. 

By going after the 'dream factory' Caspary makes the transition from the personal drama of one woman to the social implications of a whole generation raised on unattainable promises of wealth, beauty and happiness in the pages of glossy magazines or on big silver screens. Thousands of young men and women leave their small towns to come to Hollywood or Manhattan to become stars. Caspary knows all about it, because she was one of them, struggling to make a career as an advertising writer, living in rundown boarding-houses,trying to make ends meet, dreaming of one day finding true love among the skyscrapers.

 I knew the smells.
Sleep, dried soap, and shoe leather. After I left home I'd lived in several of these houses. I felt sorry for the kid, being young and expecting something of her beauty, and coming home to this suicide staircase. And I thought of Laura, offering her apartment because she had probably lived in these dumps, too, and remembered the smells on a summer night. [...] All day while she worked, she lived in their expensive settings. And at night she came home to this cell. She must have been hurt by the contrast between those sleek studio interiors and the second hand furniture of the boarding-house; between the silky models who posed with her and the poor slobs she met on the mouldy staircase.

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

I will close my review with an observation by Mark McPherson, made as he watches the crowd of onlookers gathered around the murdered girl's apartment, hungry for any tidbit of gossip :   Murder is the city's best free entertainment.   .
Nothing much seems to have changed in the decades since Vera Caspary published her novel - tabloids and TV's are still filled with gory murders and unfounded speculations, offered to us as newsworthy. It takes a master's touch to makes us see the real people and the real problems behind this avalanche of gossip and glossy publicity shots, and here I think is the one reason why the present novel will remain relevant for a few decades more.

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

disclaimer : I only read the book one time, but Goodreads, as usual, implemented a new feature (re-reading) full of bugs. thanks for nothing...