Rating: 4/5

Club Read: On the Southern Literary Trail 

Comments: 

Had no idea what to expect from KAP, having read before not so much as one word from this acclaimed writer. It seems to me the closing pieces -- especially 'Flowering Judas', 'The Cracked Looking Glass' and 'Hacienda' -- reflect a marked change in her style and craft from the earlier tales. 

Of her domestic stories, 'Cracked' moves beyond the orderly development of the single premise you find in 'Rope' or 'That Tree' to an approach that's more open to ideas that are somewhat off-center, if not off-beat. With Rosaleen, we get a lot of Irish blarney from a woman trying to reconcile the hopes of the past with her current, drab life tending to the aging Dennis. She'll never find contentment by looking at herself in the cracked mirror because, despite its appearances, the mirror will always reflect back the faultlines in her life. Near the end, though, Porter inserts an account of the neighbor boy and the dark spectre he meets on the road. For Rosaleen, it's the Evil presence she first encountered back in the old country and that now roams the countryside in Connecticut, spreading 'bitter lies' and tarnishing her good name. You can dismiss this as superstitious folklore but I think the author's coloring here is a tad sinister. At the end, as Rosaleen voices her fears of her husband passing, what are we to make of her final words to Dennis: "For I could cry if you crooked a finger at me"? 

In 'Flowering Judas', Porter dispenses altogether with development and relies entirely on detail and attribution for the story conceit. Nothing really changes much in this piece and it doesn't have to: Etched in bold colors, 'Judas' is a brilliant portrait of a monster, Braggioni, and of the abject creatures in his orbit. Though he is controlling and cruel, his most salient feature is a self-love so powerful it throws off a bright glow admired by his followers. As we first meet him, KAP pulls out all the stops, describing Braggioni less as a stern tyrant than a grotesque, tone-deaf balladier left too long at the dinner table: 

Balancing his paunch between his knees...His mouth opens round and yearns sideways, his balloon cheeks grow oily with the labor of song. He bulges marvelously in his expensive garments. Over his lavender collar, crushed upon a purple necktie, held by a diamond hoop: over his ammunition belt of tooled leather worked in silver, buckled cruelly around his gasping middle: over the tops of his glossy yellow shoes Braggioni swells with ominous ripeness....When he stretches his eyelids at Laura she notes again his eyes are the true tawny yellow cat's eyes

For Laura, under the thumb of a man who thinks 'one woman is as good as another', the divided psyche is one that succumbs to evil. Her idea of being 'betrayed irreparably by the disunion between her way of living and her feeling of what life should be' does not begin to convey the condition of her compromised spirit. At the end, Porter makes us feel the true nature of Laura's accommodation with her brute benefactor: First, by giving us the monster in the comfort of his home where the obsequious and clueless Mrs. Braggioni, in a mocking burlesk of Christ and Mary Magdalene, washes his feet and begs his forgiveness; Second, by showing us that Laura's spiritual pain that cannot be quieted. There's no more of the framing word 'disunion'; instead Laura's sub-conscious creates a nightmare from the living hell of her wakeful life, invoking another Christian element -- the betrayal of Christ by Judas Iscariot. We see her in the dream 'greedily' eating the flowers of the Judas tree and as the ghost of Eugenio leads her off to the netherworld, her concept of betrayal -- to herself and to her departed friend -- now resonates with the harsher judgment of 'Murderer...Cannibal'. 

As good as these stories are, my favorite in the bunch is 'Hacienda'. In this story of a movie shoot on location in Mexico, there are elements that can be likened to a thirties screwball comedy (w/o the romance), even to gonzo journalism (w/o the drugs). But the real draw is the cool detachment of the narrator, a female writer whose character sketches of the production ensemble and the Mexican natives are models of brevity and droll wit. The first sentence is something Dorothy Parker might well have penned, at the top of her form: 'It was worth the price of a ticket to see Kennerly take possession of the railway train among a dark inferior people'. Much of the comedy springs from the clash of nationalities -- odd Russians mixing with the Americans, the Mexican peasants and the aristocracy -- and from the eccentricities of those with inflated egos (which is just everyone in this story). But KAP's insightful language does not always serve the interest of broad humor. There's occasionally something darker, reminding you that underneath the daffy proceedings at the hacienda can be found the silent suffering of the indigent: 

In the Indian, the love of death had become a habit of the spirit. It had smoothed out and polished the faces to a repose so absolute it seemed studied, though studied for so long it was not held without effort; and in them all was a common memory of defeat. The pride of their bodily posture was the mere outward shade of passive, profound resistance; the lifted arrogant features were a mockery of the servants who lived within. 

Not sure this collection reflects a sensibility I would call 'Southern' but it's well worth the read.