Rating: 5/5

(4.0 - 4.5 rounded up)

After a few months I’m back at it with an Aaron Allston X-Wing book after reading and loving his Wraith Squadron entries in the X-Wing series earlier this year. “Starfighters of Adumar” is a stand-alone entry that follows Wedge and 3 of his co-pilots being dispatched to the world of Adumar that adores starfighter pilots to try and beat out the Imperials and win the world to the New Republic. After a string of Star Wars Legends novels I just found to be just okay, good but very frustrating, or just bad, getting back into a quality Allston’s SW book was a nice return to form in my Legends reading.

Admittedly I don’t think Starfighters of Adumar is as great as Allston’s Wraith Squadron books. This mostly is just a number of nitpicks like how we don’t get any Star Wars aliens with this one (the people of Adumar are all human as are Wedge’s co-pilots) and Allston needing to join the bandwagon of rewriting/downplaying the events of Jedi Academy Trilogy (I wasn’t the biggest fan of JAT myself but still). And truthfully I did think after a good start, the book’s second act did drag at points with all the explanations of Adumar cultural values and differences. 

But otherwise I found Allston’s writing to be vastly superior to that in recent books I read by K.W. Jeter, Kevin J. Anderson and yes even Michael Stackpole. The characters felt more believable and grounded while still being part of a sometimes pulpy Star Wars adventure where the New Republic chose combat pilots to be diplomats to a world that has celebrity worship for such pilots. Adumar is an interesting world because of this pilot worship and other space opera/pulp adventure story tropes like honor duels with swords that double as laserguns. It leads to very fun action set pieces between the (not)Rogues and the more antatonigstic members of the host world and visiting Imperials, like a mad dash through a hostile city to an airbase once the heroes have a kill order placed on them. Some of these set pieces are also funny like Wes Janson using the gun swords to make shapes that insult his opponent before devolving into a fist fight instead of sword fighting. Janson’s prominence and Allston’s return meant Starfighters of Adumar was a return of the X-Wing series’ more humorous elements. Not as funny as Wraith Squadron books but it's perhaps a more realistic and believable type of humor (apologies to anyone that was hoping to see the return of “Yub Yub Commander” jokes) that was still greatly appreciated. 

Perhaps one of my favorite parts of the book was that it was solely told from the perspective of Wedge Antilles. Unlike my recent reading of “I, Jedi” whose writing style and protagonist started to irk me after a while, I’ve long been a fan of Wedge and Allston does a great job writing him. I loved that we got such an intimate look at Wedge’s character and story after almost 2 decades of war and heroics. Him being the sole focus of the book instead of just being part of the ensemble like other X-Wing stories makes the book really feel like a showcase of why Wedge is a Star Wars icon, a hero just as worthy as Luke and Han to have his own stories about. There’s plenty of air battles that showcases of Wedge as the legendary pilot and commander he has been for years. But him becoming a diplomat for the story and trying to win his hosts to both his style of combat and debates encouraging them to have an re-examination of what “honor” is showed a nice dimension to the character. Plus Wedge gets his very own Independence Day/Captain Kirk style speech in the climax which is awesome, as well as finally finding true love (since his JAT girlfriend didn’t work out) after every other X-Wing pilot and Star Wars hero found one.

“Starfighters of Adumar” is very much a standalone “bottle episode” within the X-Wing series and it is as of yet unclear if it’ll have broader implications on the Star Wars Legends timeline moving forward (besides Wedge scoring). But after a streak of not as great Star Wars books in my 2026 reading challenge, the book felt like a nice return to form and reminder of why I like Wedge Antilles and Aaron Allston Star Wars books. So well worth the read ultimately.