Rating: 5/5

A DETAILED ACCOUNT OF SUGE KNIGHT, DEATH ROW, AND MUCH MORE

Music journalist and author Ronin Ro wrote in this 1998 book of Suge Knight’s youth, “At home, Suge’s assertive mother spoiled him. She would cook his favorite meals, clean his room, iron his clothes, and shower him with affection. If his grades were bad or if he misbehaved or picked on his sisters, she turned the other way. In [her] eyes he could do no wrong… His mild-mannered father… instilled in Suge a love for music and football. Suge’s home like, though characterized by struggle, was a stable one. Unlike many of his neighbors, he had two parents present in the household.” (Pg. 13)

He notes, “Suge found work doing security for Bobby Brown… At the time Brown was a bachelor who liked to make the scene at nightclubs… With Suge in tow, well-dressed Brown made the rounds almost every evening. Suge kept seeing the DOC (Tracy L. Curry) everywhere he went and struck up a friendship with the successful rapper… Suge would ask the DOC about his producer, Dr. Dre… A flamboyant man who … kept his head clean-shaven, and wore earrings on both ears along with the baggy clothes favored by local gang members… Dre was the most successful rap producer in the industry… Though Dre played the role of gang member (firing shotguns in bank-robbery scenes in violent N.W.A. music videos) the DOC revealed that that was just an image. Dre was the nicest guy you’d ever meet. As a bodyguard, Suge had seen the large sums of money earned by popular musicians… Suge began to formulate a plan… what he needed was for the DOC to introduce him to Dr. Dre. If Suge could somehow convince Dre to break his contract with Ruthless Records and join him at a new record label, they would both become very rich.” (Pg. 20-21)

After Death Row Records was founded, “Soon Suge began to hire ex-convicts … to keep watch over the office… The Death Row office was soon overrun with Bloods… These gang members sat on schools, chain-smoking… People who tried to chat with them were attacked… People who came to the office uninformed met these ex-convict gang members under less than ideal circumstances. Messengers and business associates had their pockets patted down and money taken… Suge wasn’t the type to take someone to court… Why pay an arm and a leg in legal costs when situations would be handled directly in minutes? If Suge felt someone was trying to cheat him, the offender would be dragged into a storeroom by his goons and pounded to a bloody pulp. Death Row employees went about their filing and faxing as blood-curdling shrieks filled the office.” (Pg. 102-103)

He notes, “At first Suge wasn’t a Tupac fan. He looked like any other wanna-be gangsta rapper glutting the market. But Tupac started getting into brawls, shooting off-duty cops, and facing accusations that he was a rapist. Sensing the potential for sales of albums built around Tupacls new outlaw image, Suge’s opinion changed. Tupac’s legal troubles would make him more appealing to Death Records’ core audience, the suburban white kids who went from listening to heavy metal acts … to buying millions of copies of gangsta rap albums. Suge…wanted to sign Tupac as soon as possible.” (Pg. 136)

He recounts, “Tupac’s friends warned him about the consequences of posing as a gang member onstage. Real gangsters would confront him, especially if he kept wearing those bandanas tied around his head… The summer Tupac was cast as a postal worker opposite Janet Jackson in director John Singleton’s ‘Poetic Justice.’ Singleton hoped the role would calm Tupac down. Before they filmed any kissing scenes, however, Janet Jackson insisted that Tupac be tested for HIV.” (Pg. 145)

He observes, “According to a number of young black males … Interscope Records [the distributor for Death Row] decided to turn a blind eye to the violence. [Interscope co-founder Jimmy] Iovine, they felt, knew Suge and his men had dragged Fade Duvernay out of the meeting and choked him in an adjacent office… Many people connected to Interscope felt, since Death Row was earning the label millions of dollars, Interscope could not afford to risk damaging the relationship because a few black employees were being threatened or slapped around… one Interscope employee explained, ‘But I never heard of no white boys getting whupped on.’” (Pg. 190)

After Tupac was imprisoned for sexual abuse, “Snoop Doggy Dogg pitied his old friend Tupac’s plight… Snoop said… ‘I told Suge, “We need ‘Pac on Death Row.” Suge agreed. Tupac was having trouble with Puffy. Now would be a good time to offer Tupac a contract. Suge made his offer. Behind bars, Tupac accepted. His friends urged him not to sign, but Tupac desperately wanted to be free… ‘I know I’m selling my soul to the devil,’ he said. ‘At that point,’ his mother, Afeni Shakur, claimed, ‘I don’t think he had any choice but to sign that contract.’ This was not entirely true. Tupac could have decided to refuse Suge’s offer and serve his time in prison—just like any other inmate.” (Pg. 249-250)

Ro explains, “When he signed to Death Row, thirty-two-year-old Hammer hoped his career would receive a much-needed boost. Suge hoped Hammer could recapture the hearts of the immense white audience that loved his single ‘You Can’t Touch This.’ Dr. Dre was disgusted by Hammer’s presence on what was supposed to be a gangsta rap label… He represented everything Dre spent a career insulting… As the relationship with Death Row soured, Dre saw Suge use subtle manipulation to sway artists to his side. Most artists were upset when they heard Suge’s version of why Dre did n appear at the courtroom during Snoop’s trial… ‘[Dre] would have saved Snoop’s whole case,’ said Tupac Shakur. ‘Dre never showed up. He was too busy. When they told me that, I was like, no matter how dope he is, and Dre is one of my heroes in the music business, if he’s not down for his homeboy Snoop---who brought him back when he was a relic---then I don’t wanna be around him.’” (Pg. 266-267)

On the night of the Mike Tyson fight, “Tray told Suge and Tupac … this guy was one of the Crips involved in that robbery in the summer… Tupac approached the guy… the Death Row entourage piled onto him, giving another of their trademark beatings… By participating, Tupac had crossed the line between rapping and gangbanging. After the assault, Suge and Tupac led the entourage through the casino like an occupying army. Hotel security approached the victim and urged him to file a report, but the guy refused and quietly left.” (Pg. 292) Suge and Tupac were both shot (Tupac fatally), as they were heading to the afterparty.

This book will be “must reading” for those interested in “gangsta rap,” Death Row Records, Suge Knight, Tupac Shakur, and similar topics.