Rating: 5/5

"Rattling the Cage" was released in 2001, unlike "Unlocking the Cage" which is a documentary about the same topic created years later. The topic? The "personhood" of nonhuman animals--specifically apes: chimpanzees, bonobos mostly.
The author is a lawyer who has practiced animal law and protection for over three decades and is also the president of the "Nonanimal Rights Projects" --a group of over 400 (and climbing) number of lawyers working pro bono with more and more animal rights classes for up incoming lawyers, all working pro bono for the sake of these animals. The ones languishing in medical research facilities being injected with Hepatitis and AIDs and insecticides, and having their brains "cracked open" all the while they are living alone within a small concrete cell with no windows or sunlight or enrichment toys. The ones who, even as infants, may never have seen sunlight or felt grass beneath their feet, or climbed a tree. These are some of the most important cases that the Project is trying to rescue. 
And that is where Steven M. Wise, the author, steps in. While he agrees that not all non-human animals should be given personhood because they are not human and do not show the "counter-stones" required for such a momentous task, he shows that chimpanzees and bonobos certainly do. However, at the same time, judges have awarded personhood to rivers, religious idols and other inanimate objects for whatever bizarre reason, yet resist offering the same to apes. 
 The beginning of the book is a bit difficult to get through because, even though he simplifies it as easily as possible it was still about the laws and the court systems, as well as common law and the difference between civil liberty and common liberty, fundamental rights and legal rights, as well as human dignity, equality and ethics. He talked about what it means to have legal personhood (note the objects that have been given personhood above) and how nonhuman animals--specifically chimpanzees and bonobos currently in biomedical research labs, alone, in small concrete cages with no contact with their own kind and very little--mostly indifferent--interaction from humans have no rights. If it was a child, there would be an uproar, but because it is a chimpanzee (a non-person), it has no rights and is "a thing" in the eyes of the law. 
 For the remaining 2/3 of the book, Wise discusses the taxonomy of chimps and bonobos to humans (nearly less than 1% difference genetically) and their consciousness and beliefs--the things that judges are having difficulty understanding. The very same type of disbelief that, years ago, judges had difficulty believing that blacks, women, children or the mentally handicapped were still worthy of liberty against bodily harm. But finally they were forced to and they were finally treated as people. But not chimpanzees or bonobos, or any other non-human animal. 
 The main difficulty here is that, even though hand-raised chimps/bonobos can learn ASL (American Sign Language) from a very early age or learn to use a lexigram (a board with hundreds of symbols that when pressed, the symbols create spoken "words",many believe it is because of "training, like parlor tricks", even when chimps like Kanzi signs"Kanzi banana want" and other much longer sentences. They can also follow direct, sometimes complex, instructions: "Sherman, go get the ball in the bedroom" (even tho there is a ball in the same room.) They have even been seen "talking" to themselves the way a toddler might, but also use their lexigram to have conversations with other lexigram-using chimps/bonobos. And there have been cases of mothers teaching their young to use ASL without human intervention. 
 Within two different "laboratories" Wise discusses the work being done with chimps and/or bonobos who are being raised --not like "stupid, non-thinking animals" but as animals quite capable, and even eager to learn. The facilities are not concrete bunkers, but are full of windows and enrichment toys and have human contact most of the time, and, in one, even take walks through the hundreds of wooded acres of forest along with their "handlers" where the signing animals constantly learn new words by asking what something in the woods is called--and retains the information! 
 Without going into the entire book, the list of items required for something to be considered a person can be checked off on the list by nearly all the chimps and bonobos discussed in this book. However, just because they can display this list of behaviors, does not mean that the judge will, or even has to, give them personhood. And that is the problem that many are facing in this new century. Judges who are using old rulings from past centuries to make their decisions, many afraid to "rock the boat" or of setting a precedent that will cause a flood of cases being brought to court in order to have every type and sort of animal be deemed a person, rather than a thing. But even Wise argues that not all nonhuman animals should be given personhood. But certain chimpanzees and bonobos most certainly should. 
 This book was written in 2001 and a great deal of laws have changed since the writing of this book. To my knowledge, although certain animals across the world have reached "personhood", not a single one in the U.S. has. I hope that will soon be rectified.