Rating: 4/5

Bertram "Bertie" Wooster is part of the English idle rich, don't you wish you were too ? Set during the bleak Great Depression of the 1930's, these dark aspects are unseen by the clueless gentleman; that strangely gives it charm... Most of his friends are members of the notorious Drones Club in London and hardly notice the bad economic conditions either, such a bunch of nincompoops the world would be hard to find anymore. He has a valet Jeeves, much smarter than his boss and for that matter his friends. This comes in handy, as Jeeves is always getting them out of trouble, with small assistance from his employer. The big mystery is why such an obvious genius remains, I know times are tough yet with the constant harassment and never ending turmoil; but maybe this will change... The often engaged but never married Bertie, finally drives poor Jeeves out, by Wooster's incessant banjo playing; excruciating caterwauling which would raise the dead... even butlers have limits. Leaving the noisy city and going to live in a quiet country cottage by the sea, where there are no neighbors to complain about, shall we say Bertie's not a very expert performer, being kind . The silly Lord "Chuffy" Chuffnell the landlord and one of Wooster's numerous Oxford friends, needs help, plenty of it. Miss Pauline Stoker , Bertie's ex-fiancee (for two days) and new love of Chuffy's , the lord doesn't know about their past peccadilloes and Bertie can keep a secret, is visiting here, yes trouble will commence shortly... Her wealthy American father has brought his little yacht, to keep an eye on the pretty but fickle athletic daughter , Jeeves new employer is you guessed it Lord Chuffnell. The fun begins with the eccentric Bertie (the poor are called crazy) and his new mysterious valet Brinkley, cause the local police the two of them , many headaches migraines if truth be told. The forever calm Jeeves will have to use all his wisdom to eliminate the misunderstandings , for a hopeful, proper and acceptable ending . This is England....after all.....A delightful amusing romp into the mythical lives of the very well- to- do, there adventures, problems and mishaps admittedly not serious, compared to us, still quite entertaining as written by the incomparable Mr.... excuse me, Sir P.G. ( Pelham Grenville) Wodehouse even his name brings a smile to the reader.