Rating: 2/5

1.5 stars. When I was 16 I visited Scotland, where our tour bus stopped at Loch Ness (naturally). Inside a tourist-trap souvenir shop I spotted on the bookrack two novels by Walter Scott: Ivanhoe and Rob Roy. I decided to pick them up, only knowing Rob Roy from a recently released cheesy Liam Neeson movie. After I got back to the States, I devoured these two hefty books in about two weeks, fascinated by the archaic language and feeling transported to these almost-fantasy worlds of the past. Since then, I had always wanted to explore more of Scott's Waverley novels, but I just hadn't gotten around to it. I decided this summer--17 years after my high school trip to Scotland--was the time to revisit Scott. Kenilworth seemed like a fun place to start, since it involved Queen Elizabeth, Walter Raleigh, and an alchemist. Pretty cool, right?

Well....what a let-down! 

Could this novel possibly be from the same writer who penned Ivanhoe? Was my memory of reading Scott as a teenager overly-nostalgic? Did I have shitty taste back then, or was Kenilworth just a crummy novel from an otherwise good writer? Unfortunately, I lost my copies of Ivanhoe and Rob Roy in a hurricane, so I couldn't go back to compare. I can only try to figure out why I disliked this novel.

Where do I even begin? The Elizabethan language was embarrassing and distracting. Characters were quoting Shakespearean works that they couldn't possibly have known. The plot (which, according to the introduction, was lauded at the time as being Scott's best) was a mish-mash of painfully protracted scenes followed by brief spurts of interesting material followed by pages of purple prose and cringe-inducing dialogue. There were slight moments of interest (the court scene, the final few chapters) but these were spaced between long-winded and dull passages that were tough to get through. Even so, it wasn't bad enough for me to give up. It felt like driving a car on the interstate that sputtered and coughed for miles, but eventually was able to lurch into the closest service station before dying completely.

Unfortunately, I bought three more Scott novels along with this one (Waverley, Guy Mannering, and The Bride of Lammermoor). I'm not sure I want to read them after this experience! At least they're all shorter than Kenilworth. Maybe I'll read the shortest next (Lammermoor) and hope that it's better, even if it doesn't approach my memory of reading Scott in my teens.