Rating: 4/5

I read this book two decades ago, it meant something to me then (my review below) this time it provided answers and context, for a passage more visceral than my first passing. I feel more now than I think; thankfully! The journey continues

This is a truly fascinating book. For someone who has gone through what these people are labelling a spiritual emergency, and found the mental health system totally wanting in its capacity to offer any insight into what was happening or why the perspective offered here is cause for some consideration. My own understanding of the process as a fluid movement within that has a life of its own and seemingly no definite form but a sensed and definite purpose of revelation or transcendence is consistent with many of the ideas put forward here.

I have over many years in Se4 Asia also had some contact with other "more primitive" cultures and seen much that belies the rationality of the western view of the mind as mechanism.The culture that has developed in the west from its beginnings in the European age of enlightenment ha shifted from a wider context of connectedness in society, in tribe, in family prevalent in these "primitives" to the narrow consideration of everything through the prism of the individual, the the looking glass darkly that is selfish self interest, the driving force of a globalised consumerism. Get get get! Use use use! More more more!

In that headlong rush we are all getting sicker because there is that fundamental disconnect between our experience of our lives and the natural flow of the human spirit. The idea of spiritual emergency is not new however in the context of the world as it currently evolves it has gained importance since by our very nature the human need for transcendence will exert ever more strongly against the bonds that simply seek to com modify us all into consuming units. If the so called mental health professions are to offer anything but the deadening impact of ever more effective and expensive pharmaceuticals those who see themselves as professionals in that context must undertake a sea change in their thinking even if they are just to simply cope.