Rating: 3/5

This is not actually a novel; it's three novellas, connected by setting (sort of -- in the same universe, and same version of humanity's future, but with no characters in common) and by the conceit that the stories are all a sort of well-researched historical fiction that alien students of the future can read to get a sense of the "ambiance" of human history.

-----

The first story, "The Only Neat Thing To Do," was my favorite. It's about a girl whose parents buy her a space coupe for her sixteenth birthday. She immediately spends all her saved allowance fitting it for deep-space travel, heads out for the "Starry Rift" in search of adventure, comes upon the track of two adult scouts reported missing, and in an attempt to find them herself comes subject to the same problem... It's also a story about the friendship between this human girl and a young creature of another star system.

I thought the characterization of Coati Cass (this story's protagonist) was lovely. Yes, Coati's not exactly sensible in breaking away from her approved flight plan, and that is why she gets in trouble. But she's also clever, confident, and extremely well-prepared, just like one of Heinlein's Boy Scouts.

Most of my favorite of Tiptree's stories are a lot darker and sadder and especially angrier than this one. I kept waiting for the other shoe to drop, for something really horrible to happen to Coati. And of course, something does happen; but it's not, somehow, terrible. In fact, this is very much like a retelling of "With Delicate Mad Hands" in which the protagonist starts out with rich, adoring parents in a society in which sexism doesn't seem to exist anymore (there are even gender-neutral honorary prefixes!). Same irrepressible wanderlust and creativity in obeying it; same intense, costly female friendship with an alien creature; but Coati is taken seriously and until she heads out into the Rift, she's safe.

That was good to read. "With Delicate Mad Hands" is one of my favorite Tiptree stories, but it makes me happy that she had "The Only Neat Thing To Do" in her too.

(The only real problem with this story, I think, is that unless I was missing something -- and I definitely wouldn't mind doing a re-read to check! -- the time-settings of the Base Coati starts from, Coati awake on her little ship, and Coati at her destinations all seem to match up, when they shouldn't.)

-----

The middle story, "Good Night, Sweethearts," was far less interesting to me. It's all about how a lone spacer rescues a luxury space-yacht, encounters some pirates, is reminded of a past he's left behind him, and has to choose between human affections and the lonely freedom of his space adventures. I find Tiptree's male protagonists much less interesting than the female ones, especially when they're thinking about women as sexual and romantic objects -- she's good at doing the Male Gaze and I don't really want any more of that -- and so this story, for me, was too much navel-gazing by this character. I liked the exciting rescue and escape bits, but otherwise could have done without.

-----

The last and longest story, "Collision," is a very good First Contact story. It's told partly in a sort of future-epistolary form, as the humans on a Base bordering the Rift receive recorded messages from an expedition that set out twenty years ago. The first message states that after crossing a certain point in space, the explorers are all experiencing "subjective phenomena" -- species dysphoria, in fact, in which they feel as though they ought to have structurally-important tails, an upper set of arms, and in some cases, socially-significant spots! But although they feel clumsy and fear that Base might question their sanity, they see no compelling reason not to carry on...

The human messages are alternated with scenes (in some cases, other recorded messages) among people who, it so happens, have structurally-important tails, an upper set of arms, etc. Interesting alien-design is very important to me in science fiction, and I highly approve of Tiptree's creativity in designing the parts of this alien society she chooses to describe. Unfortunately, although these aliens (the Zieltan) are just as interested in peace and friendly contact with others as the humans (which is very much, in this universe), at the same time the human explorers are making their way across the Rift, the Zieltan are becoming predisposed to hate and fear them...

"Collision" is not as tightly written as "The Only Neat Thing To Do," although it tries a lot harder to have the timelines make sense; but it's fun and exciting, and is one of those first contact stories in which one gets the aliens' side of things and sympathizes with and cheers for them just as much as for the humans.