Rating: 4/5

Many moons ago, when I became absolutely obsessed with hiking and mountaineering, I went to the second-hand book store and picked up old copies of Into Thin Air, High Adventure, and this book, Alive: The Story of the Andes Survivors. There is nothing quite like the persistence of human achievement, and these stories speak to my adventurous soul. I’m not quite sure why this book sat and collected dust for so long. Maybe it’s because I knew Sir Edmund and Jon had the supplies necessary to aid them in their frigid endeavors, whereas the unfortunate souls traveling on the Fairchild for Chile were terribly unprepared for their fate, which made it much more difficult to begin. Either way, this was a grim book filled with dismay, fear, and anguish, but I was not ready for the impact it would leave once the final page was turned.

** I like to be extremely vague when writing these reviews, but I feel particularly strongly about this story so I think I will add quite a bit of detail concerning the content. Please skip if you: 1.) Intend to go into this harrowing story knowing nothing; or 2.) Are squeamish. This book contains some grisly content. ** 

If you are not familiar with the story, it’s a non-fiction book about a Uruguayan rugby team that chartered a plane from Montevideo to Santiago. The Fairchild F-227 aircraft with the 40 passengers aboard crashed in the Andes mountains, leaving very few alive to try to survive in the frigid temperatures. For the reader, it places you in the minds of those left to survive, and you can only begin to guess the horror of how it affected them both mentally and physically.

With the help of numerous interviews, the author was able to provide a detailed account of the events that took place over the course of those few weeks along the icy mountainside. It became apparent very quickly that if the survivors were to be located, they would need to attempt to signal for assistance. Using fabric from the plane, those who were not severely hurt in the crash built a cross in the snow, while others tore up cushions to fashion crude snowshoes and gathered up clothes from those who had passed on so they could survive the fridged temperatures. Most of the passengers were farmers and athletes, but there were a few who had some basic medical training. The injuries some of the crew sustained from the crash were just heartbreaking to read about. Boils formed, organs protruded through the body, and some had frostbitten appendages. This crew suffered a lot, but they also summoned the courage to survive by telling stories about food, leading a daily prayer service, and messaging each other’s legs as they slept to keep the blood flowing. It is so incredibly hard to imagine the mindset it would take to persevere under these conditions. But just like in our world today, as long as we, as a collective, put our minds to something, anything and everything can be accomplished and overcome—even when all hope is lost.

One of the most heartbreaking aspects transpires as the group starts to run out of food. They ration a bit of chocolate after a few days, but once that dwindles, they look to their fellow passengers as sustenance. Most are completely against the idea because of their religious morals, but as time goes on, they come to the collective decision that the soul has left the body, and if Jesus gave up his body and blood for the people so that they all may live, these frozen bodies would help give them a chance for survival. The details are ultimately soul-crushing, but their fellow passengers who passed on helped a few of them survive in the end.

  || "You can make it tough God, but do not make it impossible."

Once the food is sorted, the survivors attempt to create a sort of work hierarchy. This is the point where you get more insight into their families, politics, opposing views, and backgrounds. A few write letters to be found if they do not make it, while others stare into the stars at night, knowing that a loved one is doing the same. It helps make them feel more attached and boosts their mental state. A game plan is formed, and from here on out, expeditions are planned to see if they can summit the mountain and look for a path for rescue.

A tale of two: What’s interesting is that you get quite a bit of story involving those looking for their loved ones on the other side of the mountains. The families turn to anything to help gain reprieve. They pray, concoct ideas about a plane hi-jack, and even hire clairvoyant mediums who give them locations on a map. There were desperate to come up with anything to help find them.

Eventually, an airplane and helicopter are sent out to try and locate them one last time, and that’s where I’ll leave it.

  || "I’m going to chew up the Andes. Search foot by foot until I find the boys.”

I do have a few nitpicks towards the end. The last 50 pages seemed a bit rushed and had a few too many jumbled sequences, which made it sort of hard to process. The media aftermath touched on because it had some important moments and messages, but I would have liked it to be more structured like the rest of the book, but this is just a personal preference.

The writing is done with sensitivity and compassion, even though the subject matter is quite disheartening. However, if you do plan to read it, I would suggest taking breaks. I feel like I only touched on the misfortune and struggles the crew had, but it is heartening to know that some of the brave ones returned home to be with their loved ones.

  🎵| Soundtrack |🎵

❖ James Newton Howard – Finding the Tail
❖ James Newton Howard – Home
❖ James Newton Howard – The Final Climb

  ⭐ | Rating | ⭐

❖ 4 out of 5 ❖