Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars (because I felt uneasy about Sam getting a falcon the way he did, but it’s just my opinion; plus wondering about how good Sam’s diet really was, how lax his parents were about leaving him wandering on the family plot, and did his schooling end here). There are some illustrations in the book, of places, plants and such; the texts in some of them are in cursive, not always easy to read. One of those books, too, where ‘gay’ still means just ‘happy’ :)

Spoilers include spoilers also for the follow-up book.

Sam Gibley, about 12 of age, is unhappy living in a crowded family home in New York (and as he mentions Third Avenue, probably living in Bronx) with his parents and 8 siblings; he packs a few things and heads for the Gibley family plot on the side of a mountain in Catskills, near the town of Delhi. His survival there depends on his wits and things he’s learned, and he makes surprising friends, both animal and human kind. Some of the story is told in diary entries, written on tree bark pieces.

The story is based a little on author's own childhood experiences, including her brothers’ falcon training. We learn a lot about how Sam found himself food (and not just meat and water-fauna), how he made himself a home, clothes, and entertainment, how he kept himself clean, and how he managed to stay away from being found so long. The time he spends in nature is from May to June of next year, and he certainly wouldn’t have lasted so long if he hadn’t had the knowledge, worked so hard, and had Frightful the falcon as his companion and hunter buddy. Some other animals also appear as neighbors for him: Baron the spicy weasel, the cuddly raccoon Jesse, and some birds and such things. Many details were interesting; the ice storm’s effect on the forest comes to mind right now.

How would Sam do if his adventure happened, say, in 2019? Would all the people he met be as friendly as in the book? Would the one giving him a ride to the Catskills, hunters, poachers, fire wardens, hikers, town people, and the press be as nice? Would the same variety (and number of) animals exist? Would his parents be more worried, and come check on him sooner? I think the 40 minute run-away things mentioned in the preface would not be so easily allowed today, since the America of today is less safer.

And thinking of what could have happened after this books (spoilers for the second book in this series): What happens on the land he lives – does he stay, does his sister Alice stay, is the land given to him eventually – who owns the land now? Did the family come to visit sometimes, even though they couldn’t make themselves stay on the land for more than the three weeks after the end of the first book? Did Frightful stay in touch with Sam until the end, even after being free from his ownership? What happened with Sam and Alice’s education (if they ever wanted it, or were made to have some)? And did any Gibley child become a sailor (and did any of them serve in Vietnam)?
Who is still alive, if they were real people, today (if we choose 1959 as the year for the book’s story, so 62 years on from that)? Not Mrs Fielder the strawberry lady – she was already in late 90s when we first meet her, nor Bill who teaches him how to make a good fire, and I think most of the adults of that time are gone too. All the animals we meet are gone, including Frightful (even if she lived to a record age of past-19 years; peregrine falcon population in general suffered from pesticides until the early 1980s, and in eastern United States even vanished) and that owl (great horned owls can live up to 29 years in the wild). Who in the Gibley family has children, grandchildren?

Yes, the book raised some questions about that time, and about the future after. I have read books about children and teens living in the wild before, including the author's “Julie Of The Wolves” book. This one was charming and an easy read, though I felt nervous about Sam being found living there soon. I have read that the rest of the series’ quality is not quite the same as this one’s so merely glancing at the plot description of those can be enough… but this one works well as a stand-alone. No real danger of violence from people wandering though Sam’s land, though the hunters might have brought some serious trouble into it.
I can see it’s status as a classic is worth it; not really essential, but works well as a ‘living in wild nature as a young person’ kind of a book.