Rating: 5/5

Too easily overlooked and very underrated, T.H. White's The Book of Merlyn is the keystone and fitting conclusion to the Once and Future King collection. Published posthumously, The Book of Merlyn serves as the resounding epilogue to first four books: the Round Table is no more, the kingdom is well-nigh collapsed, and the once innocent and naive young Wart is now an aged, broken, decrepid King Arthur, waiting alone in his tent, fully expecting to die in the next morning's battle. To this defeated figure appears the wizard Merlyn, with the news that there are still one or two points in the education of the king that need to be reviewed.

As is suitable for an epilogue, the Book of Merlyn changes tone considerably from the rest of the series. Most of the book is spent in philosophical ramblings, with Merlyn and his troupe of intellectual animal friends (yes, you read that right) discussing the human condition, the merits of mankind, and the relationship between Might and Right (which has been the guiding theme of the series). Those readers who find themselves bored by all this chatter completely miss the point of the book: now that the epic story of Arthur is nearly finished, it is time to review and reconsider the epic struggle to which he (and all of humankind) has devoted his life.

The Book of Merlyn sums up the grand lessons of the series. Arthur, feeling utterly defeated in his quest to bring peace to humanity, is brought face to face with the best and worst within human capabilities. He must bring himself to find some form of meaning to his life, and readers who have read the first four books of the series cannot help but do the same.

This book is about us: humans. Are we wicked things? Are we no better than the animals? Are we worse? If even the best among us can make horrifying mistakes, should anyone try to do good at all?

All of these questions are addressed in this simple, fictional setting dreamed up by T.H. White, and mystically hidden within what seems like a fictional situation: Has all of Arthur's grand history been a waste?

If Arthur can find an answer to his question, then we can find an answer to ours.
In this book, he succeeds... and so do we.