Rating: 3/5

Mary Wollstonecraft is renowned for her contribution to promoting the rights of women, but not as well known for her works of fiction, and for good reason. 

For two good reasons, in fact. Firstly both of the works in this collection were left unfinished. Mary has a beginning, middle and end, but seems short, and ends abruptly. The Wrongs of Women was left unfinished at the time of Wollstonecraft’s death.

The second reason is that Wollstonecraft was not an especially great writer. Both books are only of note because the writer was an interesting person, and the views expressed were ahead of their time.

One criticism often levelled at works with pretentions to art is that they are style over substance. Certainly a book can be just a box of tricks and quirks with no real intention beyond impressing a panel who gives out literary awards, as can be seen with most Booker Prize winners.

However style is ultimately more important than content in the world of art, and a book that is all content and no style is usually worthy, but dull. Ideally the two elements should marry but with style as the dominant partner.

Mary is the weaker work here. Both books are clearly autobiographical, as betrayed by the name of the heroines – Mary or Maria. The theme of both books is the plight of women in 18th century Britain. 

In this first book, Mary is neglected by her family and dedicates herself to charitable work. After her brother’s death, Mary becomes heir to the money, and is forced to marry a man she has never met. He spends most of the book abroad and away from her, suggesting he has not much enthusiasm for the marriage either.

What Mary does have enthusiasm for is her friend, Ann, a consumptive woman living in poverty. Ill health is a motif in the book, and characters are always dying after a long period of sickness. After Ann’s death, Mary falls in love with another man, Henry, but he too is ailing, and after Mary’s husband returns and she is forced to live with him, Mary suggests she will die soon too.

As can be seen, the book is a dreary one in which Wollstonecraft piles the misery high. Wollstonecraft is also something of a cross hanger, and there are long tiresome passages praising the god who has done nothing to make Mary’s life any better.

Still Mary does provide an insight into the position of women. It is Mary’s fate to adopt male traits – intelligence, reading, strength of character, and attraction to women. However she can only ever be stifled by her life because her fate is decided by men.

That is the theme too of The Wrongs of Women. This is an improvement on Mary. Wollstonecraft seems to have shed her cloying piety, and this allows a more straightforward narrative. Nonetheless it is still a depressing affair in which the brief moments of light in Maria’s life hardly compensate for all the suffering.

In a metaphor for the plight of women, we open in an insane asylum where Maria is imprisoned so that her husband can get his hands on her money. Still isn’t this the fate of all women? In marriage, the husband has the upper hand. His infidelities and dissipation are allowed. He keeps possession of the house and goods if she walks out. He can abuse her. He can pursue her using the law if she runs away from him. He can have her committed.

Maria seeks to win the trust of her attendant, Jemima, a woman who has also been mistreated by men. After being raped, Jemima was turned out of a job as a maid, and forced to become a prostitute. This brought her more freedom but at the cost of morality and respectability. Working in the asylum gives her a first chance at getting on her feet again.

However Jemima is compassionate for the fate of Maria, who tells the attendant her story. This is in the form of a narrative that will be passed on to her baby daughter. By the time the narrative begins, we have learned that the daughter has died, which will probably spare her the suffering that the other two women experienced.

Maria was at the mercy of a despotic father and brother, and then married a selfish and feckless husband. However the marriage laws are stacked in her husband’s favour. Wollstonecraft often stops the story in its tracks to provide a polemic against the state of affairs that reduces women to the status of prisoners and slaves. These are the best passages in the book.

Eventually Maria’s husband has her committed after she runs away. While in the asylum, a romance develops between her and another inmate, Darnford, a late addition to the story drafts. With his and Jemima’s help, Maria escapes, but the book ends with them being pursued in the courts.

A draft for the remaining part of the book was drawn up suggesting that plenty more misfortunes were coming Maria’s way, and the story would either end in suicide, or with Maria agreeing to live for another child that she has had in the meantime.

It is refreshing to see a book by a woman in this period that is not an absurd romance. The action of The Wrongs of Women is grounded in real issues. It makes important points about a system dominated by men and the upper classes, and the plight of women who wish to follow their own feelings, rather than adhere to a duty imposed on them for no purpose but to secure their obedience. 

As with Mary, however, the book is more interesting for its ideas and for the light it sheds on its fascinating author. The cloying sentimental style and constant attempts to tug at the heartstrings tend to make The Wrongs of Women hard-going at times. It is a brave attempt at establishing a true work of ‘women’s literature’ though, and well worth a look.