Rating: 3/5

I found the story to be very compelling and unfortunately a somewhat realistic portrayal of what can happen to a woman that doesn't get the help and counseling needed after a brutal assault.

Our heroine was a 17 year old girl, gang raped walking home from work on a rainy night. Innocently, she accepts a ride home from two teenage boys she knows from school. (What do they say in the statistics? The chance of getting raped by someone you know is 100 times more likely than the bogey man jumping out of the bushes) She is forced to stand trial in a small town. She is emotionally wrecked by not only the physical attack, but the public shame she must endure in the trial. Given it's a small town, there is no hiding, behind blanked out faces on a TV set. Everyone knows what happened. To add insult to injury, her family really doesn't help her. They more or less turn a blind eye to the whole thing. She receives no counseling and the young girl moves away to start a new life.

Fast forward a few years later and she has become a successful business woman who rents a shop from a large corporation. Hero owns the corporation and wants to buy her out of her lease so that he can develop the territory. 

There were a couple of things that I didn't really like in the story, which is why I dropped two stars. 

First, the author writes a very credible portrayal of a woman who was raped. There are all the classic signs, fear of being enclosed in small spaces, fear of men, a reserved shyness, the inability to be intimate, the clenching at his touch, etc. As a reader, I didn't have to get to the "big reveal" to realize she had been raped. So I found it somewhat astounding that a man "about town" such as our hero, missed all the signs. Instead he just assumed she was a nervous virgin. Really? 

Second issue, she decides to marry him without telling him of her ordeal. It seems in the past when she shared this with other men, they seemed to walk away from her. Since she loved the hero, she couldn't bring herself to tell him. So instead, she thinks they are going to play "monopoly" on their honeymoon. To me, that just didn't seem plausible or gel with the smart woman that she was. Consequently, the author takes us on a horrific journey on their honeymoon and short marriage that I actually found uncomfortable to read.

The ending was well done, though I thought it ended a little quickly. I kept turning the page, thinking that's it?

This is definitely a book that had I read 30 years ago, I would have loved. It still is a pretty compelling read. However, now that I am a little older, wiser or perhaps jaded, it didn't totally work for me.