Rating: 5/5

I added this book to my shelf in 2014 when I joined Goodreads but did not post a review until today (09/14/22)

REREAD

Hewey Calloway is one of the good old boys whose only ambition is to be a cowboy forever, and, in the year 1906, that makes him a living anachronism, for the life he desires to live forever has had its place in the sun, but that sun has set.
 
As Elmer Kelton writes in the introduction to my copy of the book:

[Hewey] tries to remain a horseback man while the world relentlessly moves into a machine age…. He lives in an impossible dream, trying to remain changeless in a world where the only constant is change.

The story opens with Hewey riding toward the homestead that his younger brother is farming in west Texas, but he approaches with trepidation. He expects a warm welcome from his brother and his nephews, but he knows that his appearance will not be welcomed by Eve, his sister-in-law, who seemed to always like him more when he was going than when he was coming.

Before Walter married Eve he was a footloose good old boy, just like his brother, and beginning at an early age they had ridden many a trail together. After their marriage Eve insisted that Walter take a job as a ranch foreman rather than jumping from one job to another as he once did, and as Hewey still did.

She grew dissatisfied with their situation on the ranch and she talked Walter into filing a homestead claim so that they could raise their two sons on land that they owned. Walter, cowboy, became Walter, farmer.

Eve fears the effect that Hewey might have on Walter and their two sons. She is afraid that Walter may be influenced by Hewey and long for the days in which he too had the freedom to roam at will. She knows that Hewey loves her sons and they love him in return, but she is fearful that they might grow up to emulate their uncle.

Eve was always lecturing him about settling down, about responsibility, respectability, always trying to change him. The way Hewey saw it, the Lord had purposely made every person different. He could not understand why so many people were determined to thwart the Lord’s work by making everyone the same.

Fourteen-year old Tommy has grown a good deal in the two years since Hewey last saw him, but he is young enough that he still worships his Uncle Hewey. Cotton, age sixteen, is a different story. He has not only grown, he has changed, and he has grown distant from both Hewey and his parents.

Cotton talked of the future as a time of automobiles and great machines and fantastic inventions waiting to burst forth upon the world. Hewey shuddered. He tried, but could picture no place in such a world for him. The wonders that made the future look golden to Cotton made it bleak and terrifying to Hewey.

Hewey is thirty-seven, never married, and possesses no desire to change that situation, at least not until he meets the boys’ teacher, Miss Spring Renfro. This causes him to examine and re-examine the life he has chosen to pursue.

Kelton writes in the introduction: 

To fulfill a wish we often give up something of equal or nearly equal value. Hewey feels drawn to the life his brother Walter has found: a home, a family, a piece of land that is his own. But to have it he knows he must give up his freedom to go where he pleases, when he pleases, to travel his own road without considering the needs of someone else….

He cannot have it all; nobody can. 

Which road will he choose? Will it be the open road or a settled life with Miss Renfro?
******

The Good Old Boys is not taken as seriously as Kelton’s other critically-acclaimed novels, primarily because it is a comic novel. All of Kelton’s books have some humor in them, but The Good Old Boys features it throughout the book. 

I give you Hewey Calloway, philosopher:

If a bath always felt this good, I would take one every week or two.

He had never seen harm in an occasional small liberty with the facts, provided the motive was honorable. The motive in this case would be to keep Eve from raising hell and later regretting her lapse from grace. It had always been his policy to protect her from herself.

I was ducked for a Baptist. But the water didn’t soak very deep. I taken up my old and willful ways again pretty soon.

I always liked God better when I found Him outdoors. He always seemed too big to fit into a little-bitty cramped-up church.

If it cost a hundred dollars to go to heaven I maybe make it to Fort Worth.

And Hewey Calloway, citizen:

I’m a free-born American. I even went to war. I’d be a taxpayer, and proud to say it, if I owned anything to pay taxes on.

And finally:

Folks have got to take me like I am or leave me alone. (But does that apply to Miss Renfro? I ain't tellin'.)

.