Rating: 5/5

This was just wonderful.

We’re first introduced to Zack Banning, a half-white, half-Comanche boy who is severely abused by his white stepfather. His white mother informs him that she had been kidnapped by Comanche and had once been the wife of a chief, but was returned to white society, unaware that she was already pregnant. He had given her a necklace meant to protect her - any Comanche who saw it would know she belonged to him, and if she “ever needed him” she could show it to someone and they would take her to him. Realizing that her husband will eventually kill Zack, she gives him the necklace and encourages him to run and try to find his real father.

Over a decade later, Deborah is getting married to a wealthy Mexican man whose family has owned a large amount of land in Texas for over a century - but they need American citizenship to keep it. The wedding party is raided by Comanche, Deborah’s new husband is killed, and she and her cousin Judith are kidnapped.

Zack now goes by Hawk and alternates between living with the Comanche and living in white society, but struggles to belong to either. He resolves to stay with his Comanche family as he is sick of the things he has to do when he tries to live with whites. He is captivated by Deborah and buys her from the Comanche who kidnapped her.

Deborah gradually becomes friends with Hawk’s younger half-sister, Sunflower. She learns a little Comanche. She is treated relatively well, but Judith is severely abused. Hawk attempts to slowly woo her so that she will come to him willingly, but when she and Judith escape he decides he’s done being patient. A sort of spirit talker in the tribe predicts that Deborah will destroy the tribe, so many of the Comanche want her gone. Hawk succeeds in seducing her - the first time is dubious consent as he coerces her into saying yes by promising to release her and Judith, but the second time is consensual - and then he takes Deborah and Judith to a military fort so they can return to their people. He gives Deborah his father’s necklace, telling her to use it if she ever needs him, and promises to remember her forever.

Back in white society, Deborah and Judith are more or less held captive again by Deborah’s dead husband’s family. A wealthy rancher who has been buying out other ranches starts trying to woo her so he can get his hands on her dead husband’s lands. Judith has an intense hatred for the Comanche, including Hawk, but denies having been raped.

Zack works for the man trying to marry Deborah. They have a few secret trysts, and Zack ultimately attempts to help Deborah and Judith escape to safety when he realizes the fight for the land is going to get ugly - but Judith betrays them. Zack is severely beaten, dragged to the death, shot multiple times and left for dead. Deborah is held prisoner and told that Zack is dead.

Zack miraculously survives and is nursed back to health and strength by a widow named Sally. He eventually returns to town, where he witnesses Deborah’s marriage to the other rancher. Neither of them will admit their feelings, and Zack leaves town believing that Deborah never even mourned for him.

He gets his revenge on the men who tried to kill him. He eventually shoots one of the rancher’s new gunmen in a saloon and is thrown in jail while they wait to see if he lives or dies. Deborah has realized she’s pregnant with Zack’s child, and her new husband begins abusing her. Sally secretly sends her a letter telling her Zack is in love with her, and she sends one of the gentler ranch hands to the jail with Zack’s necklace as a message.

Zack busts out of jail and shows up to help Deborah escape her husband. Judith actually helps this time. They’re still caught. Deborah stands in the way so that Zack can’t be shot and reveals she’s pregnant. Her husband begins beating her and Zack shoots him. None of his men defend him because he abused a pregnant woman. Judith rushes to his aid because she loves him for some reason.

Zack and Deborah are allowed to get away. Zack is taking them to see his mother. He tells Deborah he didn’t shoot to kill her husband because he believed her husband was the father of her baby, but Deborah tells him the truth.

In the epilogue, Judith has married Deborah’s ex-husband. Deborah and Zack have a son. Zack plans to buy Sally’s ranch and introduce her to his maternal half-brother. HEA.

Overall, very lovely.