Rating: 4/5

I think it was back in 2012 that I took a long trip to England and stocked up on readily available, dirt cheap secondhand paperbacks in the process. I'm pretty sure that's how I acquired most of my Daniel Woodrell novels, judging by the pencil price marked on the first page of The Ones You Do anyway. Only this copy came with a little added extra not intended by Woodrell when he wrote the story, thanks to a customer of Baggins Book Bazaar I imagine, I was the recipient of an "insightful" series of underlinings with black pen and ruler. 

They started with enthusiasm and rapidly ran out of steam, only remembering their task in fits and starts as the book progresses. I like to think that the story was so engrossing that they completely forgot that they were reading it for homework and just steamed through it as I did. I shall now share a sample of the words chosen by our mystery user of black pen as it's a good example of what Woodrell does best I feel.

"last-call Lotharios from along the Redneck Riviera"

"Europe loves ballads of amore and shitty luck and am I ever he thrush for them!"

"like a precociously forlorn honky-tonker."

"the stark moral to a cautionary homily he'd chosen to ignore."

"a tangle of Appalachian underbrush in it...about five and a half feet of condensed malevolence."

But by the time my favourite piece of description came around the pen had been lost and for those of us grown accustomed to having the good bits pointed out to us it could quite easily have been missed.

"John Smith had the complete barnyard of personal characteristics: ox-sized, goose-necked, cow-eyed, a hog gut, probably mule-headed, and clearly goaty of appetite. His hair worn in the style of an early Beatle."

This early example of the man's work is slighter than the remarkably dark, deep and far reaching literature of Winter's Bone, in fact it is much closer to a disposable piece of genre fiction than I expected the mind behind Woe To Live On capable of, but as the above quotes hopefully demonstrate it's still a work of a man capable of evoking sense of place and people with a flair for entertaining sentence construction. 

There's a sense of inevitability about the whole thing which underpins the reconnection of an estranged family, giving it all a bittersweet feeling, but that's not to suggest there's anything obvious about the last few weeks in the life of John X. Shade; simply that when A happens in the first couple of pages, Z is the clear outcome in the final pages. Everything in between is a nice surprise, and in the case of Lunch Pumphrey's encounter with a motel prostitute a quite horrible surprise, but in a good way. In the end it's the inventiveness and the way Woodrell chooses to balance the light with the dark that marks this as not just another entertaining genre read for me, that elevates his every work in to must read territory, a writer with great skill who isn't afraid to use it.