Rating: 4/5

My 17th PKD novel.

When I decided to explore the work of PKD with some real concentration, my intent was to focus on his sci-fi titles. But we all know that 'little voice' inside that speaks up from time to time - and mine was saying, 'Hey - you - try one of his mainstream novels for a change.' 

So I did. It occurred to me that it might make for an interesting change-of-pace - and, for the most part, it was. 

'Confessions...' is the only non-sci-fi Dick book that was published in his lifetime (a number of others finally saw the light of pub. date posthumously). Going into it, expectations were probably on the low side; well, when the word 'crap' is in the title...

But, lo and behold, this joint is funny! I wasn't expecting this much of a flat-out satire. ~ something along the somewhat anarchic lines of novelist / screenwriter Terry Southern (a major collaborator on 'Dr. Strangelove', 'The Loved One', 'Barbarella', 'The Magic Christian', etc.). This particular black comedy vein can have an uncomfortable flow inside it - mainly because, no matter where you look, you're not likely to find a likable character. 

~ well, maybe one. Sort of. ~ compared to the others. With some of the others, if you're uncertain, it's best to keep a distance. 

Four people, by turns, tell this story: Jack - our hapless, seriously goofball hero; his take-no-prisoners-sister Fay ("Are you sure your sperm doesn't have some sort of sulfuric acid in it?"); her brutish husband Charley; and Fay's easily assimilated lover Nat. There's no plot; it's just these four bouncing off each other - or scratching or cutting, and sparks fly. 

The only other character of real significance - which is still minor - is Claudia, the provocative, eccentric leader of the local UFO-enthusiasts group. She's... well, she's about what you would expect, from what I've just said. She's... exotic.

Since the chapters are on the short side, the read is a rather 'breezy' one. ~ until... near the end, things turn tragic, and disturbingly so. So much so that the 'story' is more or less over - and all PKD seems able to do at that point is take care of clean-up detail; squaring away the basics of how the main characters will continue with their suddenly re-arranged lives.

Possessing the feel of a beach book, this is hardly literature. The tone is haphazard; relentlessly zany. I would have preferred it if the progression of things hadn't been summarily curtailed. But... these are all rather desperate characters; designed to make the reader nervous. ~ designed for laughter, but nervous laughter.