Rating: 4/5

Paul O. Williams, The Breaking of Northwall (University of Nebraska Press, 1980)

Ever since I heard that the University of Nebraska was going to be reprinting an obscure seven-book paperback-original science fiction saga from the eighties (originally published by Ballantine), I've been intrigued by the concept. This is especially true give that it's University of Nebraska press, who normally do history books and Native American studies. What is it about the Pelbar Cycle that drove them to re-release it? (It's not even like the author's from Nebraska; Williams was from Illinois.) After reading the first book in the series, I still don't quite know the answer to this question. Which is not in any way to say the book is bad.

Jestak is one of the Pelbar, a peaceable, matriarchal tribe who live along the Heart River. As the book opens, he comes back to town after a long, long time away. The leaders of the Pelbar had sent him east to learn with the coastal cities for a year, but he'd been gone for three. Obviously, the leaders want an accounting of his whereabouts, and after he refuses to give it to them, they banish him to Northwall, the large fortress that guards the northern edge of Pelbar territory. Once he gets there, the leader of Northwall, a more levelheaded woman indeed, asks to actually hear the story. This takes up roughly the first quarter of the book, setting up a good deal of what is to come; thanks to his captivity (he'd been kidnapped by another tribe while walking east), he'd come to gain allies and friends among some of the rival tribes. The alliances Jestak formed help the warring tribes along the river to see that perhaps they can work together. Just in time, for there are two major threats facing them. One is to the east, where a new, savage tribe has sprung up (the one that kidnapped Jestak). The other, to the west, have run out of slaves in their area and are now pressing east to find more, edging into land controlled by Jestak's new allies.

Even the book's most gushing reviews often point out that this is a hard book to get into. I didn't think it was that bad; I had a much harder time getting into Snow Crash, for example (that one took me almost seventy-five pages to latch onto, where I had this one inside thirty). Once I was there, I saw what Williams was trying to do, but I couldn't tell whether he just wasn't successful at it or whether my bias against work that consciously tries to impress a message upon the reader was acting up. That said, I was astounded by Williams' claim in the introduction to the U of N edition that much of the message-flinging in the book was unconscious. I still don't fully believe that claim. Still, it's not as painfully message-based as, say, The Girl Who Owned a City, and there is a good deal of action to go along with the philosophizing, so I'll keep going with this series and see where it leads me. *** ½