Rating: 5/5

Please, consider me down on my knees in small shards of glass, hair shirt on my bare back, pounding my exposed chest, over and over again, with this small novel. May this be the proper supplication offered, like a prayer, in the direction of the dead Virginia Woolf and the living Michael Cunningham. 

For the love of all that is Holy! Why did I make the same mistake, over and over again, wasting my time trying to read Virginia Woolf's TO THE LIGHTHOUSE, instead of discovering this novel of hers instead? Why on earth didn't I read this before now? How could I have ignored an author like Virginia Woolf who was badass enough to put rocks in her pockets, head out into the water, and call it a day? How could I have ignored the enthusiasm of an author as hot and talented as Michael Cunningham? The brilliant Meryl Streep as the modern day Clarissa Dalloway?!!

 

I am penitent! I am penitent! Forgive me! Forgive me! How could I have been such a fool??

Of course this book. . . about unhappiness, about the act of being unhappy would go on to inspire Cunningham's Pulitzer Prize winning novel, The Hours, an Oscar winning movie and a soul-crushing soundtrack by Philip Glass (I'm listening to it, right now, as I write this).

From the famous first line of the book (Mrs. Dalloway said she would buy the flowers herself), you know you are in it. You are in it; you're in the water with Ms. Woolf, stuffing your own pockets with heavy stones (Human nature is remorseless), then you're in London with Clarissa Dalloway and the jet set crew that surrounds her, post WWI (the streets whose growl came up to her lying on the sofa), and then you're in the middle of your own quest for existence, somewhere between sanity and madness (She was about to split asunder, she felt. The agony was so terrific).

This exquisite, terrifying novel was published almost exactly 100 years ago, as the citizens of England blinked back up at the sun, looking around at their broken, post-war world, and yet here we are again, 100 years later, remembering how awful, how wonderful, it has always been to be human. How devastatingly lonely, cruel and unfair life can be, and yet no one in the whole world would know how she had loved it all; how, every instant. . . 

(I can not express enough gratitude to my dear friend, Musa, who gifted me a copy of MRS. DALLOWAY for Christmas, in the hopes that I would review it. Thank you for seeing the Clarissa in me).