Rating: 5/5

Whether I've chosen it or not, this book has formed the basis for the mapping of the occult in terms I can understand. It is a touchstone for me when it comes to quotes, understanding magic as a Christian, and speaking of that: my appreciation for everything from the Eucharist to Iconography to the organization of Orthodox religion in general has become transcendentally enjoyable. Whatever you think of Crowley, just remember that most of the "High Popes" of real change and fathers in the Bible itself were far from perfect and that the Divine can certainly use anybody who is willing to be a vessel. Crowley is not ashamed to approach the Divine, even if his tone about it seems completely irreverent and purposefully blasphemous. This of course inspired people like Anton LaVey and the Satanism movement, but it also secretly stayed a secret language of code, neither good nor evil. There is nothing in Book 4 that asks you to worship a god or an idol, there is nothing that tells you to recite some spooky spell to get what you want, although some of that is explained and it is a book that will enrich anything else you read from the Western, perhaps the whole World, much like Jung's Symbols or Freud's Analysis of Dreams, this book will have the power to affect your worldview and never go away. I was quite surprised when I first heard that Ritual Magic(k) was "based on the system of the Kabbalah" as it's most commonly spelled. I hadn't heard much about that belief system except for red thread bracelets that seemed to be a Hollywood fad and that Madonna and a few other celebrities were practicing it. Now, a year later, I'm finding the entire Italian Renaissance branches out from the alchemical template part Neo-Platonic, part Jewish mysticism and ends up corresponding to basically anything you can think of. Once getting into the Sefiroth, and understanding the Monad and its emanations through the tetraktys, you'll never look at "virtue" the same. Words like glory, wisdom, understanding and beauty come alive with the diagram and concept of the Kabbalistic tree of life. My appreciation for all things Orthodox has increased by a great margin after reading Crowley's theory on Magic(k), Book 4.