That man over there . . . is a lover who fell madly in love with you at first sight. He has never been afflicted like this before, by anyone else, he is suffering terribly, burning up. It is quite possible that he will even die of this today.

On reflection, it appears that all of human life is permeated by sexuality . . . That is why the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad says, ‘Man is sexual.’ Sexuality is the semen of the mind. —Devadatta Shastri, Jaya Commentary
__________
Richard Schmidt, the German translator, would wax lyrical: 'The burning heat of the Indian sun, the fabulous luxuriance of the vegetation, the enchanted poetry of moonlit nights permeated by the perfume of lotus flowers and, not least, the distinctive role the Indian people have always played, the role of unworldly dreamers, philosophers, impractical romantics—all combine to make the Indian a real virtuoso in love.'

The real Kamasutra by contrast, is not the sort of book to read in bed while drinking heavily, let alone holding the book with one hand in order to keep the other free. —Introduction
__________
This is not a book about sex positions, but it's also likely not as "interesting" as you think it is: even the second book for which this work is famous for. It all gets a bit repetitive.

Best read if you've got a historical interest in Ancient India and related customs.

This translation is very readable and can be recommended purely for the inclusion of the extensive included Jayamangala Sanskrit commentary.

['Y' and 'S' below indicate extracts taken from commentaries, not the main text]
__________
In recommending that the man not touch the woman sexually for the first three nights after marriage, using this time to understand her feelings, win her trust, and arouse her love, Vatsayana takes a momentous step in the history of Indian sexuality by introducing the notion of love in sex. He even goes so far as to advance the radical notion thatthe ultimate goal of marriage is to develop love between the couple and thus considers the love-marriage (which the religious texts regarded as ritually ‘low’ and disapproved of, and which is still a rarity in contemporary Indian society) to be the pre-eminent form of marriage.

Y: A man should not be congratulated
If he happens to succeed tag something without knowing its science,
For it is pure chance, like a bookworm eating a hole
In the shape of a letter of the alphabet.

Childhood is the time to acquire knowledge and other kinds of power, the prime of youth is for pleasure, and old age is for religion and release.

Y: There is a saying:
Until the age of sixteen a man is a child,
As long as he eats rice cooked in milk;
He is middle-aged until he is seventy; and after that he is said to be old.

S: Until the age of sixteen, a woman is called a girl, from sixteen to thirty a young woman. After the first age, when they re equal, the men are much older than the women with whom they are matched; a woman is old at fifty, a man at seventy.

Power, in the form of wealth, consists in acquiring knowledge . . .

Pleasure, in general, consists in engaging the ear, skin, eye, tongue, and nose each in its own appropriate sensation, all under the control of the mind and heart driven by the conscious self. 

People should not indulge in pleasures . . . they make a man associate with worthless people and undertake bad projects; they make him impure, a man with no future, as well as careless, lightweight, untrustworthy, and unacceptable. And it is said that many men in the thrall of desire were destroyed, even when accompanied by their troops.

Undertake any project that might achieve
The three aims of life, or two, or even just one,
But not one that achieves one
At the cost of the other two.

When a man has become educated, he enters the householder stage of life and begins the lifestyle of a man-about-town, using the money that he has inherited, on the one hand, or obtained from gifts, conquest, trade, or wages, on the other, or from both. He settles down in a. City, a capital city, a market town, or some large gathering where there are good people, or wherever he has to stay to make a living.

But nothing rash should be done merely because of passion.

Y: For sometimes when a woman has made love with one man she may make love with other men who happen to be there. And so it is said:
A fire is never sated by logs,
Not the ocean by the rivers that flow into it;
Death cannot be sated by all the creatures in the world,
Nor a fair-eyed woman by men.

Y: Indeed, woman want a climax that takes a long time to produce, because they desire is eight times that of a man.

The man is aroused by the thought, ‘I am taking her’, the young woman by the thought, ‘I am being taken by him.’

When the wheel of sexual ecstasy is in full motion,
There is no textbook at all, and no order.

The emotions and fantasies
Conjured up in a moment
In the midst of sexual chaos
Cannot be imagined even in dreams.

With the flowers from her hair strewn about, her laughter interrupted by her hard breathing . . .

Y: As Vasishtha says:
‘But a man who copulates
In the mouth of his wife
Causes his ancestors to starve
For fifteen years.
[*Note: The passage that Y cites from Vasishtha is at 12.23, where the ancestors of the man who copulates in the mouth of his wife do not starve for fifteen years but, rather, are forced to eat nothing but his semen for a month.]

For the statement that ’There is a text for this’
Does not justify a practice.
. . . Medical science, for example,
Recommends cooking even dog meat,
For juice and virility;
But what intelligent person would eat it?

A room of his house dedicated to sex, a room decorated, full of flowers, and fragrant with perfume and incense . . .

Never court a girl
With a disgusting name
That is a constellation, a river, a tree,
Or ends in a syllable beginning with ‘l’ or ‘r’.

For it is commonly said: ‘Young women desire right from the start a man whom they know well and see all the time, but, even when they desire him, they do not make advances.’

Whenever he gives her anything or receives anything from her, he invests it with erotic feeling.

This suitor is the best
Because his very nature is love.

Now, there are ten stages of desire, and their signs are: love at first sight, the attachment oft he mind and heart, the stimulation of the imagination, broken sleep, weight loss, revulsion against sensual objects, the loss of all sense of shame, madness, loss of consciousness, and death.

He carries on a conversation that seems to be about something else but has a double meaning, about her . . .

He cooks the heart of a mongoose, the fruits of a fenugreek plant and a long gourd, and snake eyes, over a fire that does not smoke. Then he rubs into this the same measure of the collegium used as eye make-up. When he has smeared his eyes with this, he can move about without a shadow or a body.

When the man arrives, she gives him a love-gift, something that will arouse his love or erotic curiosity, saying, “This is for you alone, and no one else, to enjoy.”
__________
Yashodhara’s comment on 7.1.25 (‘Do this in such a way that the woman you want does not realize, “A man with something spread on his penis is making love to me”’) has inspired at least one reader to remark, ‘Any woman who would let you make love to her with all that stuff smeared on you would have to be madly in love with you already.’