I picked this book up because it was referenced a number of times in Dan Barber's The Third Plate which I really loved (despite its elitism). It's important to note before diving into this book that it's 23 years old this year (2020) and much of Safina's research and visits for the book content were conducted before that (25-27 years ago). So my biggest take away from this was, what has changed in the intervening quarter century? Certainly climate change is a much larger, well-known, and well-accepted concept/issue, as well as being further advanced, and he doesn't really mention it. But are things better for salmon, blue fin tuna, and reef fish? Are things worse? Did scientists, conservationists, and business people and lobbyists stop fighting in order to address the real and pressing issues Safina discusses?

Song is by turns incredibly depressing and incredibly awe inspiring. You won't come away from this without being deeply concerned and invested in preserving the oceans and their habitats. The blurb on the front compares it to Silent Spring and while I haven't read Carson's seminal text, I am aware of its impact and legacy and I think this is an apt comparison. Safina visits three areas of the world to discuss three different types of fish and show how over exploitation of natural resources and the fish themselves, as well as poverty, has slaughtered these creatures, their habitats, and the people who rely on them. 

I certainly came away with the impression that capitalism and greed is to blame (as it so often is), but Safina doesn't take a radical stance on changing the economy. And he doesn't condescendingly insist that impoverished communities continue to remain so for the sake of conservation. He presents the evidence of both science and what he goes out and sees with his own eyes and through the eyes of the experts (scientists and local people alike). 

The book was a slower read for me in large part because Safina is a beautifully poetic author. He brings the people, places, and conversations to life. Some passages are so exquisite they needed to be read a second and third time to really take the time to create a mental image that went with the words. You're in for a treat with this book for that alone. And maybe that helps the content of the book feel more important and immediate too. 

If I have one complaint about the book it is his lack of recognition of and contact with Indigenous people here in the U.S. who have for centuries relied on fish populations to feed their people and their culture. He mentions them very briefly in his look at the salmon runs on the West Coast of the United States and he repeats an unsavory quote from one person he visited in the Pacific Northwest about the natives in that area. But he never gets tribally specific, naming which people's land has been destroyed, which people relied on the salmon (and other fish on the East Coast). He completely erases the people in Northern California, except to correctly point out they were hunted for the bounty on Indian scalps, by talking only of the cattle rancher women he interviews and their "long" history on the land. Land that was stolen through bloody genocide. He's marginally better in the South Pacific (Palau and the Philippines) because a lot of their conservation efforts include the native populations so he spends some time with them. I could write it off as of-the-time, but I think it's inexcusable. That being said, if this is what it takes to get people to care about preserving our oceans, I still recommend reading the book.