Rating: 3/5

I read this book because I totally thought it was about something else. This is what happens when you see a book on a list, in this case the 1001 books to read before you die list, and run off at a tangent because it has the word "sand" in the title! Did I pause to read the 1001BTRBYD entry concerning this book? Nope. I bought it in a second hand store, motored home and curled up on the sofa with the vague and woolly notion of getting some sort of desert-based mystery, possibly with an archaeological flavour.

WRONG WRONG WRONG! (stupid shovelmonkey1)

In fact the story is as far from desert as it is possible to get because it is largely set aboard a boat in the Baltic Sea, therefore, in terms of environment it is the exact opposite of what I'd hoped for. Once I'd gotten over the hurdle of that minor, self imposed disappointment it is actually a decent read. One of the early spy novels (written in 1903), it went on to inspire and inform Le Carre, Buchan, Fleming and probably anyone else who ever wrote a tightly scripted spy thriller. This book has Brits spying on the Germans a good ten years before World War I kicked off, proving that the British were always insanely suspicious careful (although some elements of modern history suggests that they had pretty good reason to be).

It largely concerns the oober Britishly named Carruthers and chum Davies as they negotiate treacherous sandbanks while tracking sinister and tricksy European types who are probably, maybe without a shadow of a doubt, up to no good in the murky mists off the German Frisian Islands. As usual it's all about Queen and country and not getting got by the damnable Gerrys. It is difficult to imagine how exciting a spy novel can be when it is predominantly populated only by two men on a boat, bobbing about near some islands which no one has ever heard of (apologies if you live on the Frisian Islands), but it managed to hold my notoriously short attention span and was a pleasant and diverting way to tick another book off the 1001 books list.