Rating: 4/5

One thing I've started to do when friends die is watch a movie or read a book that they loved. A dear friend died in March, a man who lived effectively his whole life with spinal muscular atrophy, a disease reasonably akin to muscular dystrophy. A science-fiction fan from childhood, it's no surprise that the book of his heart was Waldo, perhaps the most successful science fiction story about severe disability ever written. 

Of course, as a lifelong science fiction fan myself, I had read these more than once or twice when I was young, but I don't think I had picked them up in 30 years or more. In this time, I found Waldo to be a somewhat interesting curiosity, but it is poorly written (even for its time) and at least half if not 2/3 of it is a treatise rather than a story. Heinlein got very caught up in writing about magic as if it were science, and he can go on for pages and pages without ever referring to his characters or his plot line. Politically, it's also dated, because although the protagonist is very severely disabled, well, let's just say that they could cast an able-bodied character in the movie and let you determine the spoilers from there.

Magic, Inc., on the other hand, which I remembered as pretty minor, may not be anything special but it is more interesting. It pairs well with Waldo because both are about integrating somewhat different concepts of magic into the existing culture of the 1940s/1950s US. In the interest of foiling the magic user cabal attempting to control all magic use for its own profit, our "regular guy" hero gets caught up in the American legislative system. Heinlein describes that system, how it works and how it doesn't, in clear and reasonably entertaining detail--and it is surprisingly close to how things work now, 70 years later. Heinlein wrote a nonfiction book called Take Back Your Government and, to my surprise, this story felt like the template for that idea. The characters are a little better drawn than in Waldo and there's a better story-to-theory balance. 

In the end, if you haven't read these already, they probably won't give you much, but they are historically interesting--and I feel like I paid a little tribute to my friend's life.