Rating: 5/5

EXCELLENT! I started reading this actually as a management and leadership book. This past spring while standing along Willoughby Run at Gettysburg my friend
Christina was talking about the Iron Brigade, the 1st Brigade of the 1st Division of the 1st Corp...those "damned Black Hats" as the Confederates referred to them. I knew some about the Iron Brigade already, but walking back up from Willoughby Run through Hebst Woods and seeing the monument to the 24th Michigan come into view I wanted to know more. Why were these randomly assembled men from Wisconsin, Michigan and Indiana so much more successful than any other group of soldiers in the Union Army?

I stumbled onto Jeffry Wert's book and it's contrasting coverage of the Iron Brigade with the brigade in the eastern Confederate army with an equal reputation seemed like the perfect study. It's no real mystery why the Stonewall Brigade was so successful. Their flamboyant and hard driving leader, Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson, asked more of men than they thought themselves capable and he brought them success and self confidence. His hard driving marches that made a mockery of Nathaniel Banks' Union army in the Shenandoah Valley in 1862 weeded out all but the most dedicated and hard driving soldiers from his ranks and their continued success brought increased confidence.

The Iron Brigade in contrast had no flamboyant leader. It's no doubt that their second leader, General John Gibbon, made them into an army. His constant drill and instruction made these common farmers and clerks from the middle west into a well oiled fighting machine, but Gibbon wasn't charismatic or even that well liked at the time and it gets more complicated to understand why the men of the Iron Brigade were so feared and so brave. Wert makes no assumptions. He lays out the story and lets the reader decide for themselves. The writing is crisp and clear. There are no villains or heroes, just a balanced and well told story.

The story ends in a sad but not surprising way. These brave and honorable soldiers, the heroes of so many battlefields, end up suffering the same fate. They basically ran themselves to death. Both brigades started in 1861 with nearly 4,000 men and by the summer of 1864 they were each down to just over 150. The Stonewall Brigade was so beaten up that during the summer of 1864 it was disbanded and its members incorporated into other units. The Iron Brigade suffered the same fate just five months later.

Well written and evenly told. A fine contribution to Civil War scholarship and an interesting study in leadership, motivation and management!!