Rating: 2/5

A visit to the museum turns into the craziest, most wonderful day of Danny's life when a little unexplained magic brings him a thrillingly unique playmate. The standard museum pieces are interesting—antique weapons, decorative vases, knight's armor, life-size figures of animals and people—but the dinosaur section is what captures Danny's fancy. He's a dino fanatic, and the only thing better than touring the museum's dinosaur hall would be if one of the behemoths came to life and could play with him. Danny gets his impossible wish when a long-necked dino awakens from its display case and asks him to play, and Danny doesn't waste a moment saying yes. The possibilities for amusement with a dinosaur are endless. 

 The first order of business is to take the ride of a lifetime on the creature's long neck, which lifts Danny high into the sky as the new pair of friends gallop about town. Danny and his dino peek in on a professional baseball game, ferry across a canal, and spend time at the zoo, where a live dinosaur is a cinch to trump any animal exhibit. The zoo animals are unhappy that the crowds favor the prehistoric creature ahead of them, leading the man in charge to ask the dinosaur to move on so "the animals will get looked at," a laugh-out-loud moment. Danny and his titanic mount have great fun playing with Danny's kid friends, teaching the dinosaur tricks and playing hide and seek, though the behemoth's size puts him at a decided disadvantage when he's doing the hiding. Danny's dinosaur has a selfless side, too, lifting people across busy streets and carrying ladies and their shopping parcels so they haven't so far to walk. Yet even the ultimate fantasy of palling around with a dinosaur must end, and this story isn't without its bittersweet moment as the boy and his Jurassic companion part ways. But what a time they had together. Not every boy is so blessed as to spend a day with a real live dinosaur. 

 Stepping smoothly into Danny's life as if nothing could be more natural, the dinosaur's majestic presence is perhaps taken for granted by the boy and his friends. They suggest games they could easily play on their own, or with a dog instead of a gigantic prehistoric reptile, but maybe this nonchalance allows them to fully enjoy the experience without overthinking it, without spending so much energy fretting about its inevitable end that they neglect to appreciate the euphoric ride they're on. How often is one's fondest desire brought to life, especially when it's a desire we thought would never come to pass? This is why the story's ending is wistful, because miracles usually don't last forever and we know that the person who was the improbable answer to our heart-wish may exit our life sooner or later. But as long as we savored the time we had together, we're infinitely better off for the blessing they were to us. Danny would never take back his one beautiful day with his dinosaur. 

 Syd Hoff's New Yorker art is in top form for Danny and the Dinosaur, and his writing is no less impressive. The narrative is fantastical by design, with no explanation attempted for how the dinosaur comes to life or can communicate with humans in English. It's purely a fantasy for kids who want to play with their very own dinosaur vicariously through Danny, and there's nothing wrong with that. I rate Danny and the Dinosaur two and a half stars; it's one of the better easy readers I've come across, a pleasure for all ages. Come prepared to think a little about the nature of spectacular wishes granted and have lots and lots and lots of fun.