Rating: 4/5

There’s something loveable about Isaac Asimov and a sense of endearing pride.

He’s accessible and almost babying at times while also being deeply technical and profound, and what he did in the 1950s at predicting future sociology with unerring accuracy is technologically impressive.

He envisaged that:
&gt; Future worlds would be overpopulated by robots. A robot to carry out every mundane function for all individuals, resulting in thousands of robots for each human.
&gt; A potentially lonely future where we don’t need direct contact with others or have any worries about bringing up children.
&gt; Much more personal time, resulting in selfishness, precociousness and sometimes egomaniacal behavior.

Human beings are gregarious and happier in contact with one another - take that away and life seems rather pointless. What’s it all for?

The Naked Sun is essentially a whodunit crime thriller on another planet with lots of loneliness and robots.

Although brilliant in places, it doesn’t have the same depth as classics like 1984 or Brave New World, but does address the disparities between society, the haves and have nots - a concept where striving for order and perfection doesn’t necessarily mean a better world or more happiness, perhaps even a political book with its sociological standing over capitalism.

As usual there’s a sense of optimism about Asimov’s outlook and a future where mankind should ideologically benefit from technology by reaching the stars instead of worrying about it, to help us understand the needless and endless battles for resources and power on earth.

Unfortunately, R. Daneel Olivaw doesn’t get much of a look in this time around. And the sometimes antiquated 1950s conversation and formalities take a bit of getting used to, but still a wondrous and enlightening read that portrays Isaac Asimov as a really wonderful man with a positive and fertile imagination.

My next Asimov venture will be the first Foundation book as I’m done with the Robot series for now.