Rating: 5/5

I’ll never be accused of having highbrow literary tastes, but that’s okay with me. Before I started writing in earnest myself, I read voraciously, including everything ever written by Ray Bradbury and many other works by authors of action-adventure, crime, fantasy, mystery, sci-fi, and the supernatural. Moreover, like my father and evidently, much of the U.S. prison population, I’ve enjoyed many “frontier” novels written by Louis L’Amour. Admittedly, I’m not drawn to the “classics”. Of course, having Shakespeare and Dickens forced upon me by high school English teachers didn’t help. Anyhow, I couldn’t really pick an all-time favorite book. However, if threatened with dismemberment and other bodily tortures, then I suppose I would pick “Hiero’s Journey” by Sterling E. Lanier.
 
It’s said you can’t judge a book by its cover, and I suppose that’s true for the most part. So, I was naturally drawn this book’s artful illustration of an autumn woodland backdrop, a saddled moose, and a buckskinned outdoorsman and a black bear standing on his haunches in greeting. Though “Hiero’s Journey” has been in print since 1973, this particular cover image is far more interesting and revealing of the story within than the stock art and images adorning many books in recent years.
 
Five millennia after a cataclysmic nuclear holocaust, many of earth’s surviving creatures, including humankind, have undergone dramatic physical and mental mutation. Once purely instinctual, the planet’s flora and fauna have spawned a multitude of sentient beings, some wondrous and some malignant. Telepathic and other paranormal powers have also risen from once dormant psyches. After a radical progression, those who desire to enslave others, and those who wish for peaceful coexistence have chosen sides.

From the northern region of Kanda, formerly Canada, Per Hiero Desteen, a Priest, Rover, and Killman of the Metz Republic, must journey south to the contaminated wastelands of the former United States to recover ancient computer technology. During an arduous and perilous expedition, Hiero befriends unlikely allies and battles all manner of wicked beings.
 
Along the way, Hiero is found by Brother Aldo, a member of an ancient religious order called “The Eleveners”, an offshoot of environmentalists and practitioners of natural sciences that existed before “The Great Death”. Their most revered edict is the Eleventh Commandment: “Thou shalt not destroy the earth, nor the life thereon.” In my opinion, this decree was woefully overlooked in the existing Ten Commandments. Alas, according to the old gospel, mankind has dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over every living thing that moves on the earth. Evidently, we can do as please without regard to the other living creatures sharing our planet. But, I digress…

Pursued and harassed, Hiero hastens to reach his intended destination, lest the Unclean possess a weapon that could destroy the last vestiges of humanity.
 
I know the story sounds kind of hackneyed, but in my very biased opinion, “Hiero’s Journey” is quite possibly one of the finest fantasy, sci-fi novels ever written.

I appreciated the book’s linear storyline, and I didn’t find the reading daunting like “The Lord of the Rings Trilogy”. Mr. Lanier’s descriptions of the flora, fauna, and topography of a post-apocalyptic North America were enthralling and I had no trouble suspending disbelief during the story’s telling. The characters were very interesting, and there was an abundance of suspenseful action. The narrative sustained my interest throughout, and I longed for a sequel, which thankfully arrived in 1983 titled “The Unforesaken Hiero”, another excellent book. Other than the obligatory romantic entanglement and some clichéd dialog, I offer few criticisms. 

“Hiero’s Journey” is an excellent story for aficionados of fantasy and sci-fi.