Rating: 2/5

Blog URL: http://readinggrace.blogspot.com/2012...

I reckon this is probably the type of literature that I instantaneously get bored with it, however gradually grow to like it! Frankly, if you asked me what do I think about this book, I would reckon the title should named The Planet of Buddy Clark or perhaps Tomorrow Billy instead of Junior Brown.
Well, because the stories were mostly revolving around Junior's best friend, Buddy Clark(And I actually enjoy reading Buddy's part than Junior's). Buddy was tough, brave and street smart(a profoundly survival) while Junior was a typical mama's boy, though at time he can be really calm and helpful, especially when his maw(mom) under asthma attack.

I rated this book 2.5 stars out of 5, probably because the 1st half of the book kept me dragging, the pace was rather slow.

Description:

The story is about two black American boys , Buddy Clark a.k.a Tomorrow Billy and Junior Brown. Both the 8ve graders were gifted. Buddy the street boy was a prodigy in Math and Science while Junior the 300kg fat, skittish and awful looking boy was talented in playing piano. Despite their high academic achievement at school, they tend to break the Compulsory Education Law, and played hookies with the school Janitor, Mr Pool(an ex teacher). They hid in the basement room of the school, building their friendship and trusts.

Although Junior came from a well- to- do family, he had very low self-esteem and constantly under depression(to the extend he started to hallucinate the thing...). His mom was a self- centered, sickly woman, who despised his friendship with his best friend Buddy. Whilst his dad was always away and seldom came home for them.

Buddy in the other hand, was a independent homeless boy. A boy who couldn't open up to anyone, not even his friends. He was working at a newsstand, earning meager money and building shelters for other homeless black kids(like Franklin the little thief and Nightman the poor hungry boy). Imagine open a new bottle of water was a ritual that cheer the boys, and owing a pillow is like a dream come true!

Together the boys create their future with believes and dreams...

Note: I received the ARC of this book from Netgalley. I was not required to write a positive review for this book.

This entry was posted on Sunday, February 12, 20