Rating: 5/5

This is such an interesting and eye-opening look at the Bible! Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815-1902), an American social activist, abolitionist, wife, mother, and feminist, wrote in 1895 this disturbingly accurate view of the ongoing misogyny in the Bible. Stanton begins with the obvious: "The bible teaches that woman brought sin and death into the world, that she precipitated the fall of the race . . . Marriage for her was to be a condition of bondage, maternity a period of suffering and anguish, and in silence and subjection, she was to play the role of a dependent on man's bounty for all her materials wants, and for all the information she might desire . . she was commanded to ask her husband at home" (7). Analyzing numerous books of the Old and New Testaments chronologically, Stanton continues with many astute observations about injustices toward women. For example, she says Rebecca should have asked for help watering the camels at the well instead of taking on the task herself as a divine sign of her worth. Stanton also criticizes King David for his shameful treatment of Bathsheba. She also points out the absurity of ancient laws that scorn a woman's natural sexuality and biology--for example, the "purification of women," which meant that menstruating women or new mothers were banned from religious sancuaries and ceremonies because of the perfectly normal and natural presence of blood. Stanton notes that such laws not only degrade motherhood but also discriminate against sex, honoring the birth of a son above that of a daughter (95). In fairness to the original authors of parts of the Bible, Stanton notes that certain passages on women's supposed inferiority were inserted later in an attempt to put women in a submissive place. She also asserts that the Apostel Paul could have had more faith in women's ability to do good works and been less concerned about their apparel. "Could Paul have looked down to the the ninteenth century with clairvoyant vision and beheld the good works of a Lucretia Mott, a Florence Nightengale . . . he might have suspected that sex does not determine the capacity of the individual" (162). 
 Bravo, Mrs. Stanton! Like the determined suffragettes who had to work so hard for their great-great-grandaughters like ourselves to be able to vote, Stanton is worthy of our undying gratitude and veneration for such a courageous work that was remarkable for its time!