Rating: 4/5

Nick Tosches, former writer for Rolling Stone magazine, brings the same in-house, smug disdain for any musician not named Jackson Browne or Bruce Springsteen or The Eagles, let alone a prehistoric nonentity like former cool cat, Rat Packer, Dean Martin. Contempt hangs over this book like the acrid smell of burning meat when your neighbor gets too drunk to turn his burgers over during a cookout. Mix that with a misguided leitmotif (something about a multi-metaphoric breeze that wafts over Dino at key points in his life) and a prose style that mixes hipster jargon, a smattering of Italian words and phrases and some of the more wince-inducing passages I’ve come across in a while and you have this seamy tale of debauched celebrity.

Like most biographies I’ve read, this book takes some time to hit its stride. Except for Dean’s hatred of all things apple, his childhood was pretty much standard stuff. It’s not until he teams up with “the creepy-looking Jewish kid”, Jerry Lewis, does the book take off in a big way. For my Goodreads friends that aren’t taking advantage of their senior discount, Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis were the cat’s pajamas from 1946 to 1956 – they were a comedy team that started out as night club act and took their comedy act to radio, TV and the movies. Despite the dough and the broads, Dino got progressively tired of Jerry’s rampant ego-driven megalomania and the team acrimoniously split up. 

It was in all the papers.

 Kudos to Dean Martin for teaming up for ten years of his life with Jerry Lewis. For me, it’s almost impossible to spend 90 minutes with the guy.

Dean Martin was a guy blessed with looks, a good singing voice and an easy, laid back manner. Nothing phased Dino and this is a concept Tosches runs with – Dean the Indifferent or Dino the Pod Person – someone who withholds his true feelings and nature from others – Dino the Obelisk – keeping the world at bay while reaping the riches by simultaneously embracing family values (It’s a Dino Yuletide!!) and undercutting those values with misogynistic asides and smutty double-entendres (Guess what Dino’s stocking is stuffed with? Try putting a Christmas bow around that?).

There’s also Dean the Philandering Whore-Monger and Dean the Hepped Up, Percodan Popping Drunk too.

Foster Brooks – at the feet of a master.

The drunk routine (his vanity plates read “DRUNKY”) became less of an act and more of a way of life and combined with his general apathy, his Vegas act consisted of thirty minutes of him singing songs he had no interest in singing or finishing – with the ultimate act of scorn having Dino flicking lit cigarettes into an audience.

That’s Amore, pally!!!

Overarching takeaway: Celebrities are pretty much all a bunch of a$$holes. 

Why did I gave it four stars?

Like raindrops on roses and whiskers on kittens, contemptuous storytelling and tales about whoring drunken celebrities are right in my wheel house of “favorite things”.

The Fifties – a time of great subtlety