Rating: 5/5

In the midst of a deluge of knock-off YAs, a good fantasy novel is hard to find. Derived from Norse legend, it still reminded me more of Skyrim and BBC's "Merlin" than anything. 

Jarlsholm was a good setting, its environs sparsely though strikingly developed. As for the rest of the world, its world-building was little but not without charm, imagination, and interest. Ironwood was pure fantasy!

There were several unexplained, and admittedly underdeveloped plots in the story (why do Jessa and Thorkil join with Kari and Brocheal, why is the magic present?) but nonetheless one really settles down and enjoys the ride. Catherine Fisher's writing does take some getting used to, but one the dullness is surpassed by the adventure it certainly is captivating. Catherine Fisher is the author of the Incarceron Trilogy (*blinks* Which I only just learned from Wikipedia), which explains my recognition of the name! Trust me, this is far superior.

Concerning Snow-Walkers.

 The Soul Thieves the last volume is a titch sketchy on the Snow-Walkers and their world, according with the bit-rushed tone of that one! Kari left the reader guessing to his fate to the very end, plus Gudrun was a good villain--threatening, cold, mysterious, and ruthless. Particularly, the phrase on page 225 struck a chord, when Gudrun says distrust  "'Is the sorrow of power, and its delight.'" . Somehow, not meaning to sound like a vying philosophy major, it's unerringly inhuman that Gudrun feasts on distrust. Eek.

Onto the resemblance to "Merlin" Kari reminded me of Mordred's plotline  and I initially -- and to the end -- believed it would end up the same way. And here, it was uncanny.  "'They will never love you,' she said, 'never trust you. Power like ours is a terror to them.'" Exactly the same argument every "Merlin" villain worth their salt, especially Morgana, uses. That of every other villain with supernatural powers, too, but in any case... I was flabbergasted.

A couple discrepancies, though none particularly damaging presented themselves: In Ironwood  "outlaws, kinless men" attack them in the midst of the most inhospitable, anathematized place in their known world?. 

Ahem. If you've managed to storm through my review of nitpicks, commendations and wishes that you benefited from it. 4/5 stars.