Rating: 5/5

The movie tie-in mass market paper back version (the one with Sean Connery's stern face on the cover) came out in 1990, and I remember owning it and reading it before the movie came out, but I am fairly certain that I had read the book---which was originally published in 1984---long before the movie. It was one of the many "grown-up" books I read in middle school, and it started me on a path of reading almost every Tom Clancy novel afterward, at least until "Rainbow Six", which pissed me off for reasons that I wouldn't be able articulate until I was old enough to realize that I was a flaming liberal and that I had outgrown Clancy's right-wing politics.

Still, "The Hunt for Red October" holds a special place in my heart (as does it's sequel, "Patriot Games", which I thought was actually a better novel) as one of those Books and Authors That I Loved But Haven't Read in a While and Need to Revisit.

It's been a long time since I read Clancy, and I certainly can't blame him for the falling out. People change, but books don't. The politics of "THFRO" are the same politics they were in 1984. My politics, however, didn't so much as change (I had no politics in 1984. I was twelve years old, for God's sake.) as cohere and mature as I got older.

Clancy represents a kind of jingoistic pro-military mentality that was popular in the Reagan Era. It was the height of the Cold War, and fears of the Soviet Union and nuclear warfare were common fears. One can't necessarily blame people for an attachment to military strength and hard-line politics. Of course, one can  blame the politicians on both sides for fomenting those fears. One can even arguably blame writers like Clancy for adding to the jingoistic propaganda spreading those fears.

Although that may be unfair. It's been a long time (almost 40 years) since I read "THFRO", but I do remember that Clancy was unlike other military techno-thriller writers of the '80s in that he had a tendency to "humanize" his enemies. His Russians in "THFRO" weren't reduced to evil stereotypes. In fact, I clearly recall one of my favorite scenes in the book: When a US naval vessel captures a Russian sub, the military police officers don't know what to do to keep the captured Russians occupied, so they throw in a VHS movie of "E.T.", which the Russians have never seen. Within an hour of the film, the Russians are sobbing. It's a funny scene, but it's also moving and heart-felt. These soldiers may be our "enemies", but they are also human.