Rating: 4/5

Really a 4.5. Overall, I really got drawn into this book, and kept reading it frantically through the last half, wanting to know how it would turn out despite the incredibly sexist overtones of some of it. 

The tension really ramped up in this book, compared to the previous book that was more lackadaisically paced and broken up into several novella-sized episodes. This book had an overarching plot, followed by a nail-biting siege of the hospital by a fanatical enemy force. It's very obvious that the author had a good handle both on war-time psychology and on the touching determination of medical staff to treat and protect their patients. The science and psychology seems solid, with some rather dated exceptions (no use of anything involving DNA sequencing, for instance, which is understandable given how old this series is, and under-use of wireless communication or personal technology). The pacing is good, and overall it was just SOLID.

Only one thing really kept it from a 5-star rating for me: holy sexism, Batman! What had been hinted at in the first book (lack of female doctors, occasional discussion of pretty nurses) was just...made very explicit here. The worst example revolves around the training tapes. The training tapes are a way that doctors of one race can learn quickly how to treat another race: it's a download of an alien doctor's memories, which lets them use that expertise. It's revealed in this book that females can't take memory tapes. That something sex-based about their "pretty little heads" won't allow it. There's no science behind this, no real reason. This is just the author's decision: there can never be a female physician or Diagnostician because they can't use the major learning method because Female Minds Are Inferior.

Ugh. UGH!

There's other examples. The main character is dating a nurse, and for pretty much the whole book she utterly fails to pass the Lampshade Test: she is a goal and an object to be pursued, protected, and pulled into rough embraces when convenient, with very little care for or discussion of her own feelings on the matter. She is also written very...coyly? Neither the MC nor she are honest about what they feel for much of the book, being cool or harsh with each other to express displeasure at their treatment of each other rather than talking like adults. She comes across as inscrutable, vacillating wildly between coolness and "I was so worried for you" and between "No, now's not the time" and "Oh, i don't want you mad at me, just tell me what to do!" It's all very, very dated. It was no doubt a common view of women for the time period the book was originally published, but it was just incredibly sad to read now, because it seems like such crappy characterization in the middle of an otherwise excellent book.