Rating: 3/5

Austin Fraser is an eighty three year old artist who is looking back on his life and the mistakes he has made. He is a man haunted by the memories of the people he never let into his life. One of them is George, a china painter he grew to know as a young man visiting the town of Davenport in the summer. Another is Sara, the model he painted in the grand landscapes of the Great Lakes on the shores of Silver Islet where his father once owned a silver mine. 

Austin grew up in a home where affection never paid a big role in his solitary life. He travelled to New York City as a young man bent on a career in painting. There, under the tutelage of the famed artist and teacher Robert Henri, his tendency to tread carefully through life was enforced by Henri’s philosophy of painting. Henri encouraged his art students to remain distant from the world and their own feelings. His philosophy was that for an artist, these things belonged only on paper or canvas. 

While in New York City, Fraser met another man who had once been a student of Henri’s but had broken away from his teaching. Rockwell Kent was a man who drank hungrily of life and immersed himself in pain and pleasure, a man who craved the catastrophe of every experience he encountered or created. Austin and Rockwell became friends although Austin remained a voyeur in the relationship, a traveler who accompanied Kent on his quest for experiences but who did not deeply involve himself in any of them. It was Robert Henri who had really won his soul.

Austin learned to paint using a technique which masked the reality he painted. After rendering a realistic scene or figure on canvas, he overpainted it with layers of paint and glazes to hide his initial piece underneath. His greatest fear was that some of the underpainting would later be revealed on the canvas and he hung on to some of his paintings for years to ensure that if some of the original subject matter rose to the surface, that he could paint over it and “correct it”.

Austin loved the hustle and bustle of Greenwich Village and New York City in the twenties and thirties. He had a studio there and painted during the winter months. Although mesmerized by all the activity around him, he remained an observer rather than entering the fray and experiencing it. During the summer Austin would travel from this hectic life to head to Davenport where his friend the sensitive and gentle George Kearns lived and painted china, an art Austin frowned on. This was also where the two as young men had met the heartless Vivian, a beautiful and vivacious singer with whom George became obsessed. 

Later, after his visits with George, Austin would head to Silver Islet where for years he painted and made love to Sara, his longtime model and mistress. Sara opened her heart and home to Austin and gave him everything he wanted or needed, but Austin always remained distant from her, remembering the words of Henri his teacher. He did not find this difficult and actually it was what he preferred. He did not like forming close or lasting attachments as he believed distance and a certain coldness were essential to his art.

Austin recounts the events leading up to the war when George as a Canadian left to fight for the British Empire. When George was injured overseas and in hospital recovering, he met Augusta Moffat, a Canadian nurse who he met up with later when they both returned to Canada. Both were broken by the trauma of war and Augusta spent several months in hospital suffering from shell shock. Over time, the two developed a caring relationship and during one of his visits, Austin was struck by the tenderness with which they treated one another.

When Austin meets Vivian many years later, they spend the night together. The next morning she asks Austin to take her back to Davenport to see George. He quickly agrees to her request without thinking of its implications, a mistake which proves fatal. 

Following the events in Davenport, Austin messages Sara asking her to meet him. Even though he has not spoken to her for several years, he knows she will come. Sara heads out on a difficult and dangerous journey miles across a snowy landscape to meet him, while he waits for her in Port Arthur. He is determined he will try to love her when they meet up again. He watches for her from the window, relentlessly checking every few hours to see a glimpse of her coming across the lake. But as her approach slowly reduces the miles that separate them, Austin becomes fearful, changes his mind and leaves, abandoning the woman who truly loved him. He had spent fifteen years of his life with her, but his fears of intimacy prevented him from ever loving her.

This is a rather sad story of a man who could not learn to engage in life and who now wanders around an isolated, cold and minimally furnished house, nattering with a housekeeper and beginning his final painting. It is of himself, a man who could never accept the love that came to him. He is now left empty and alone, with the memories of his mistakes and the ghosts of his past who insist on accompanying him through his final days. 

Urquhart’s writing is beautiful. She has a way of rendering the Canadian landscape in broad sweeps of texture and color. And I applaud the originality of her story, using the underpainting technique as a metaphor for Austin Fraser’s life. Her account of Augusta’s war time experiences and those of her friend Maggie are also heart rendering. But I could not connect with the lead character. I could not even empathize with him. I grew to almost hate him and I did not want to read any more about him, which is the reason I awarded this Governor General Award winner the score I did. It should have been higher, but emotionally I never felt I could be enveloped in Austin Fraser’s story, the story of a self-centered man who disliked human contact and walked carefully through a life he never really lived. He was a man so blind to life’s subtleties that he did great harm to those who cared for him.