Rating: 5/5

I like oral histories of important periods of the past. I like that they are the assembled verbal recollections of individuals whose experiences reflect a part of the event. Accumulated, they form a comprehensive history. I like that their memories are honestly told and for that reason can be considered a truth, no matter if accounts sometimes differ. I've read some oral histories I thought were excellent records. Christian G. Appy's Patriots is perhaps the finest example I know of this method of history. Most oral histories tell only one side. Appy's approach, as his title indicates, is to tell the story "from all sides" and the result is epic, accomplished. He's interviewed every level of those who served during the Vietnam years, from military leaders and policymakers to people who saw the war as children. Former Viet Cong soldiers, underground operatives, and even porters along the Ho Chi Minh Trail are given as equal say by Appy as American GIs and ARVN soldiers who fought near their homes and families. The Vietnam Era was divisive in both Vietnamese and American societies, but especially for us. Those who think we should have prosecuted the war more aggressively and fought to win at any cost are heard as loudly as those who protested in the streets or went to Canada or Sweden. The testimonies of medical personnel, whether a doctor from the North who operated in Cambodian tunnels or an American nurse, are emotionally wrenching. One of the most poignant memories is that of an airline stewardess who flew the route between America and Saigon taking nervous soldiers from the world into the war and then back. Those who recorded the war, either as combat artists or journalists on the spot or novelists and poets reflecting later, are included. Told "from all sides," American and Vietnamese, what binds them together, as Appy saw from the start, is a common humanity and shared experience.

The accounts are arranged chronologically from the 1940s to the defeat of the South in 1975. Even beyond, actually. A few who were children during the war speak of the legacy of those years growing up in America or Vietnam.

Ultimately, this is a terribly sad book. Individuals holding every possible attitude toward the war are allowed to speak. However, most remember with regret. Appy himself provides the introductory material for each section. His treatment is that Vietnam was a tragedy, and that point of view flows through the book from the words of Ta Quang Thinh, a disabled North Vietnamese soldier who speaks early in the book from Hanoi to William Westmoreland who speaks near the end from Charleston, South Carolina. I've read a lot of books about Vietnam, but this long ribbon of voices taught me a lot I didn't know, taught me new ways to see.