Rating: 1/5

It was so bratty the way he ran away right at the man’s house. He didn’t try to get away before he got there; he ran after his housemother had him get out to open and close the gate and he took off. The old man said he hadn’t even met him first. I hate brats. 

He went hiking up the canyon and the author wrote that he didn’t know he was climbing toward a treasure and turning point. 

Walter has a hard-rock gold mine with no timber in it so it won’t cave in. His wife made him promise not to run it because she thought it was too dangerous.

Cloyd was overworking himself, wanting to finish the entire fence line in order to go to the cliffs. Walter had people illegally hunting on his land and needed a fence to put a stop to it, and Cloyd wanted to earn the trip. Every day it was nothing but work and one morning Walter could see Cloyd was unhappy and suggested he take a break. Cloyd got upset assuming Walter thought he couldn’t do it and he wanted to prove everyone wrong who thought he was lazy. 
Then he told Walter that he got all the holes dug for the posts, and wanted to cut the posts himself from trees. Walter wanted to cut the posts himself and of course touchy, grouchy little brat thought he couldn’t do the job. Walter had to say that it was the chainsaw he was worried about. Then Cloyd said Walter could show him how to use it. He was only pacified when Walter told him he thought he could do anything he set his mind to. 

I was pissed when Walter cooked up a turkey dinner and Cloyd barely ate. Walter asked what the letter from Cloyd’s sister was about and Cloyd was embarrassed at not being able to read. He said “It’s my letter. It’s none of your business.” Walter felt bad and said he didn’t mean to pry. Cloyd shouted that he doesn’t know what’s in the letter and he can’t read and asked if Walter was satisfied. Walter offered to read it to him and teach him to read. Cloyd said he didn’t want his help, accidentally knocked coffee all over his mining newspapers and yelled at him to leave him alone. 

The next day Walter welcomed bear hunters onto his land and the man was mocking and careless to Cloyd. Cloyd thought Walter would be at fault if a bear was killed and he’d have to pay. He thought Walter didn’t care about him and these men were his real friends. He didn’t even help bale hay and left Walter to do all the work himself. I let so bad that Walter did it all himself, to prove what he was made of. He worked through the day and didn’t eat all day or take a break. 

I actually hated Cloyd when he begrudged Walter his nice peach trees because they were better than his grandma’s. He got mad that the hunters killed a bear and thought he’d been eating bear sausage this whole time. He cranked up the chainsaw without using the oil that Walter told him to use or else he’d break the machine. He cut every single one of the peach trees so they’d die slowly and look like his grandma’s. He “hollered with hurt” every time he cut a tree “as if he felt the saw himself.” I wanted to put the book down then. I had to stop reading and take a break because I was so pissed off. Then he went around sawing all the fence posts down—not liking that Walter made someone else do all the work for him. He’s an old man, you little shit. He didn’t see the sense of fencing out hunters when Walter was already letting bear hunters on his land. So all his work, he destroyed. The chainsaw wouldn’t run right and eventually stopped and he’s like “Who cares?” 
Then he felt terrible because he’d never liked anyone like Walter and he knew he’d ruined it. Nope. Too late. Cloyd was done, irrevocably ruined. He was irredeemable to me from that point on.

He came back to the house that night and Walter asked what the hell was wrong with him and said he wanted to get him the hell rid of him. He almost smashed the bear figurine which he’d known Cloyd had the whole time but decided against it. He said Cloyd knew how much those trees meant to him. 
Then he figured out on the way to the home that Utes value bears and that Cloyd was upset after the bear hunters came. 

Walter didn’t care about anything any more. He felt like he’d failed at giving. Cloyd a home and only made him work. It’s not your fault that little jerk went ape-shit and destroyed your property. How could the author spin it around that it was Walter’s fault? Cloyd is the dumbass who decided to overwork himself and wouldn’t even take a break when Walter tried to get him to. 

Walter decided to lease the farm and quit farming and finally work in the mine. Cloyd told him of finding the bear stone and he shared his true name with Walter and said he’s the only person he’ll tell. 

Rusty realized he’d killed a grizzly which is illegal since they’re protected, and that the bear must have been one of two cubs from the mom that was killed long ago. He lied and said the bear charged him and it was self-defense. He knew he couldn’t leave the bear there because someone could see it and report it and the game warden knew they were up there. He didn’t want to lose his business and license so he resolved to tell the game warden. So it turned into Cloyd being a witness to Rusty’s downfall. I didn’t want Rusty to go to jail and be fined for killing the bear—I wanted him to not kill the bear in the first place. 

Cloyd prayed for the bear’s forgiveness. 

He went back and found Walter missing from the tent and when he checked the mines he found Walter lying unconscious facedown, one side of his face like meat. He had overheard the hunters talking about a helicopter and rode back to the kill site and told Rusty what happened to Walter. His eyes actually looked kind and he told Cloyd he did good. He offered to take all of Walter’s belongings back home. 

The warden used the bear’s body as a step stool to get into the helicopter. Was that really necessary? A final F you, bear. 

The Weminuche Utes were from Durango, Colorado but had been forced out by whites when gold was found and moved to Utah. 
I loved to read about the cliff houses in the cantons with handholds carved by the Ancient Ones. They were said to be unreachable without ladders. 
Bears are the most important animal to the Utes. They’re a friend and relative to man, a bringer of strength and luck. If you could make a bear your personal guardian you would be strong and lucky. They didn’t kill bears because that would bring the worst luck. 
A blue turquoise bear was left in a pottery jar at a burial site, to accompany the baby on its journey. 
In the old days people had a secret name that only one other person knew. Now that naming isn’t done. 
The Utes aren’t big talkers. The old ones point with their lips because pointing is rude, and they look away when they talk or are spoken to. 
Blue Mountain is called the sacred one. There’s a mountain in the form of a Sleeping Ute. The Cedar Mesa have a wooded slope with Bear’s Ears. 
The people at White Mesa viewed mining as bad. The uranium made you sick and die. Though many men worked in the mines and at the ore-shipping depot.
Gold made people crazy and dishonest. The whites promised the Utes they could keep their land, before they found gold and made them move onto reservations and grow corn. 

Things were going good and then Walter ruined it this time. He became so obsessed with gold that he forgot that Cloyd wanted to go into the mountains and he didn’t want to take time for breaks and eating. It was all work. 

He realized he was overworking Cloyd again and told a lie that he didn’t believe there was gold in this vein and that Cloyd could go into the mountains now. Walter wasn’t going to quit looking for gold and had Cloyd go alone and it bothered me that he couldn’t even go with Cloyd and show him around. 

Then he urged the bride through a mud hole that Blueboy didn’t want to go through and the horse got stuck. He was going to kick to get himself up and would have hit Cloyd in the head but when he saw Cloyd there he didn’t kick. He ended up rolling all the way down the hill. Cloyd knew he had almost gotten him killed and I was so irritated at his insistence of reaching the mountaintop.

His grandma had told him about the old Utes who would catch fish in their bare hands. Of course Cloyd did it on the first try. He has to do everything and he capable of everything he wants to do. So annoying.

But he saw a brown bear, when they were said to be extinct or very endangered and one hadn’t been spotted in decades. He couldn’t wait to tell Walter about his journey but when he got back, Rusty was there. He asked Cloyd if he saw any wildlife and Cloyd felt bad—and knowing everything he went through, hurting Walter and destroying his property because Rusty killed a bear—this dumbass told the bear hunter that he saw a bear. He wanted to prove that he saw a bear without doing any tracking to get it to come. You freaking idiot. You got so pissed he killed a bear you went on a rampage, and you’re going to tell the hunter who kills bears that there’s a bear in the area so he can go kill it? Dumbass. 

He thought Rusty was trying to make him out to be a liar and didn’t believe he really saw the bear. It took Walter to point out that Rusty was really excited about the bear and wanted to go find it. Cloyd realized his mistake for telling him right where to find the bear and didn’t know bear hunting was all year round. Yeah, you f’ing idiot, what did you think the bear HUNTER was going to do when you told him there was a bear? This kid is too stupid to live. 

Walter was almost as bad. He set off a charge but some of the dynamite didn’t go off and so the live charges were still in the wall. He knew they could go off and it was dangerous but he went back in there, wanting to see what the ore contained. Stupid. 

Cloyd left in the night to try to find Walter before he killed the bear, intending to scare it away. At one point he headed across a river to beat Rusty and I thought/hoped Rusty would mistake him for the bear and shoot him with his bow and arrow...Always a bad sign when you want the main character to be hurt. It would serve him right.

He was on a wild goose chase to find Rusty and when he finally saw the bear, Rusty was there waiting to shoot it. Cloyd yelled to scare it off but it was so windy his voice didn’t carry so it was all for nothing. He ended up standing there watching Rusty shoot the bear in the neck and chest and die. Way to go, dumbass. You wouldn’t have had to go through all this if you had half a brain and didn’t deliver that bear into the hunter’s hands. Live with that on your conscience the rest of your life, fool. 

In a completely unrealistic, stilted, staged, and heavy-handed manner that was convenient to the author’s purposes, the hunter’s brothers asked Cloyd how he knew the helicopter was there and how he’d known to come here. And then the warden asked how he knew the helicopter would be coming and if he knew anything about the bear...
Now why would these men even think, in a situation where someone’s life is on the line and time is of the essence, to question this boy how he came to find them for help? That was literally the first thing the men said upon seeing him, and the first thing the warden said during the ride. No one would ever do that. They could have assumed that he heard the helicopter and saw where it landed. They could have assumed he had been riding in this direction for help. It was all a setup for Cloyd to refuse to speak because he remembered his own vengeance on the peach trees and wanted to stop that. It was enough that Rusty knew he was there. Why would Rusty assume you had followed him or was out at night at the exact place he killed the bear?! What a leap! It was all for nothing. The whole reason he witnessed it was to sing like a canary to the warden and make this guy pay. 

Walter was getting worse and his kids wanted to send him to a nursing home but Cloyd knew he would die there without being on the farm. He asked the bus driver if the bus went to Walter’s house and it didn’t but of course the driver had heard of Cloyd helping Walter out and agreed to pick him up for school there.

The tribe said Cloyd could come back because the school was going to let him return, and his grandma’s job was going well and she might get her goats back. I was surprised the whole tribe was in charge of this decision. But Cloyd wanted to stay with Walter. 

Cloyd mixed the foundation of the house and mixed concrete—SO exciting!—and of course he could carry 100 lb bags of concrete all by himself and mix it and lay it. “He could do whatever he set his mind to.” Cloyd can do everything! He’s perfect! All the talk of looking like a man and acting like a man and making men’s decisions was ridiculous. Seriously, how old is he?? 

It went on in more detail about the process of jacking up the wall and getting the cracks out...so boring. Cloyd’s surprise was that he bought peach trees for Walter and when the delivery man said they don’t grow around here, they had an inside joke of trying it because his wife’s trees had worked out so well. At least he did what he could to right that wrong. When he went back home he’d take Blueboy because he’s his. He would have kids someday and tell them about Walter and name a son Walter. 

I hated to think of him leaving Walter alone and wished he’d live with him the rest of his life.The gold mine ended up going nowhere as we don’t even know if there was any gold. I hate he didn’t even get to have good strike before he had to quit. What happened with the bear? Did he get fined, what did they do with the body? How long does Cloyd stay with Walter? Does he ever come back to visit him?