Rating: 3/5

This review is presented in the form of an interview between myself and the massively underrated author Skippy Brennan: 

Me: OK, Skippy, what did you think of the book?
SB: Well, there were some funny parts, some acrobatics with the English language that were amusing, ranging from wry smiles to brief moments of out loud barking laughter. And a lot of good golf writing too, not surprising since Mr. Jenkins was a golf writer for sports illustrated for something like 40 years. That said, it didn’t age any better than blue cheese left in a toolbox up in the attic. 
Me: that’s surprising, because I know Dan Jenkins is one of the three people to whom you dedicated your best selling novel Boomer By God Sooner, the other two being Mel Brooks and some guy named James Scott. Tell me more about how you feel it didn’t age well. 
SB: casual use of the N word, even in a humorous ironic sense, is best left to Chris Rock and other black comics. Although Mel Brooks did OK with it in Blazing saddles, urged on by none other than Richard Pryor. The book came out the same time as Mr. Brooks’s movie, but I do think the movie ages better than that sort of language in the book 
Me. Anything else?
SB: plenty of raunchy sex jokes and sexist comments, which is to be expected from the author who once wrote that if women didn’t have genitalia (he actually used the P word) they would be hunted for a bounty on their ears. And with the context I wasn’t overly offended although the jokes didn’t ring nearly as funny as they did 50 years ago, but the attempt at Nazi humor really really put me off. I’m talking the scene where these drunken high school toughs lock up a Jewish woman in her pantry – she’s the mother of their classmate, who they also assault, stopping just short of rape – while yelling stuff at her like don’t insult the gestapo! That was just effing wrong, then and now. I will say there were times I thought Boomer by God Sooner was maybe too crude an inappropriate, but compared to this book it’s Little House on the Prairie. 
Me. Yikes, that does sound bad. I know you used to be a big fan of his, will you reread any more of his books?
SB: hey, let’s keep things straight here. You are the one who read the book, I am a humble little pen name that you dragged out for this cheesy interview book review. Also, I’m sure you’ve noticed today is 420, any plans for this evening? 
Me: thanks, Skippy, always a pleasure.