Rating: 4/5

Can Jane Eyre be Happy? More puzzles in Classic Fiction is a follow-up to John Sutherland's excellent first book of this type, "Is Heathcliff a Murderer? Puzzles in Nineteenth-century Fiction". It is another book of literary conundrums, ideal for enthusiasts of the Classics to get their teeth into. The author is a British academic, a distinguished Professor of English literature, and an author. The conundrums here all have their source in classic English novels, plus a couple of American ones, hence it is far more stimulating and satisfying topic for a reader who is conversant with the novels themselves. However, he writes so entertainingly that each piece could act as a trigger to read an unknown work.

The premise here is that a novel should be authentic and believable; both internally consistent and also true to the times. Thirty-two novels are chosen and for all except four, there are separate essays. Two are paired in a joint piece, twice. John Sutherland carefully analyses the text, highlighting apparent inconsistencies, anachronisms and oversights. He explains historical references, which a modern reader may not know, and also points out the context within the author's body of work. Sometimes it becomes clear though, that the author probably just forgot a minor detail. 

So are these all mistakes on the part of the author? Are we just trying to catch the great authors out? Well, it seems to vary. Here is one example: 

"What Does Mr Pickwick Retire From?"

It is possible that you have read the whole of "The Pickwick Papers", perhaps even more than once, assuming that you know the answer to this. In fact though, not only does Dickens never tell us anything about Mr Pickwick's profession, but he tells us very little about the character's history at all. Mr Pickwick simply starts to conduct his "club", as a sort of hobby in late middle age, already being retired from the hurlyburly of an unspecified profession.

Mr Pickwick is clearly educated and quite wealthy. We learn through events in the text that he has no knowledge of firearms, plus he is lost when confronted by lawyers, so he cannot have either been in the Army, or have had anything to do with the Law. We do not know if he inherited his money, although it is unlikely since he is "retired". Neither do we know how far his education was pursued; he never mentions any university friends or societies, nor any political affiliations. In fact he seems to have no friends outside the "club" at all. We do not know where he comes from. He has no regional accent, but does not seem to know much of London except the small area where he lives. The only things we do know, are the fact that he likes tomato sauce with his chops, that he lives in rented rooms on the third floor, and even people who have never read the book may well instantly recognise his genial, rotund, bespectacled appearance:

A little bit of background knowledge helps. "The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club" was written long before Dickens ever planned his novels. It was also published in serial form, with "no going back". He did not even invent the appearance of his hero, having been commissioned to write short pieces to accompany Seymour's plates, and make them into a sort of "picture novel" as was then the fashion. Of course he developed it into far more and it kicked off his amazing career. (For more about this see my review link here). In this case, the scenario was set up before Dickens ever came on the scene

It is therefore not surprising that the details are sketchy (if you will pardon the pun). The only clue we have to Mr Pickwick's erstwhile profession, is when he gives his final speech, 

"Nearly all of my previous life having been devoted to business and the pursuit of wealth..."

And that's all we get! John Sutherland points out another twist which had never occurred to me. In "The Pickwick Papers" is a boastful character called Mr Jingle. He has a habit of making ridiculous claims, seeming to have done everything, everywhere. He simply has too many pasts. Sutherland suggests that Mr Pickwick's past might have been deliberately kept mysterious, as an antithesis to Mr Jingle's, 

"this opposition between Pickwick (man with no past) and Jingle (man with a hundred pasts) is a joke that Dickens chose to keep running to the end of his novel." 

This is just one instance. You might prefer to read one of the double ones, "Why is Fagin hanged and why isn't Pip prosecuted?", or "How Good a Swimmer is Magwitch?". Or a single one by a different author, "Who Gets What in Heathcliff's Will?", (Wuthering Heights) "How Good an Oarswoman is Maggie Tulliver", (The Mill on the Floss) "Is Black Beauty gelded?", "Who will Angel Marry Next?", (Tess of the D'Urbervilles) "What cure for the Madwoman in the Attic", (The Yellow Wallpaper), or even, cheekily, "Where does Fanny Hill Keep her Contraceptives?"

In each of the thirty-two chapters, or essays, John Sutherland quotes extracts of other authors' novels, explaining how they can sometimes be seen as evidence that something else is going on below the surface of the book; something which is not explicitly described. It's a fascinating read for those who have a certain type of mind. For others, it might prove frustrating, seem to miss the point, or be merely irrelevant. If like me you enjoy these "brainteasers", you will be pleased to hear that the author went on to write a further third one in the series. They are nice to dip into just after you have read a particular novel, although some puzzle fanatics with good memories might enjoy reading the book straight through.

Here is an alphabetical list of authors, each of whom have an essay devoted to one or more of their novels in this particular volume:

Jane Austen (2)
R.M. Ballantyne (included with Dickens)
Charlotte Bronte (2)
Emily Bronte
John Cleland
Wilkie Collins
Arthur Conan Doyle
James Fennimore Cooper
Daniel Defoe
Charles Dickens (4 - plus 2 "doubles")
George Eliot (3)
Henry Fielding
Ford Maddox Ford
Charlotte Perkins Gilman
Thomas Hardy (3)
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Jack London
Anna Sewell
Laurence Sterne
W.M. Thackeray
Anthony Trollope (2)
Virginia Woolf