Rating: 4/5

"John Burningham's picture books are reading adventures with deep reading secrets" (Meek, 1988, p. 15). This informed my reading as I read the book several times to develop connections and comprehend the concept of the story. 

The spoken text is only provided on the page where the parents are, through one-line instructional language which potentially highlights their authoritative role. However, the monotone language and pictures together depict the realistic nature of parents, as they sit in the deck chairs with the mother knitting and the father reading his newspaper. This post-modern book enables the child reader to relate from their own experiences at the beach. 

On the recto Shirley's actions are only depicted through pictures. This breaks the convention of a regular story as the verso and recto do not seamlessly flow. Burningham uses this as an opportunity for the reader to envisage and interpret Shirley's journey through pictures. This encompasses the picturebook codes as the reader is required to grasp meaning from the pictures which contribute to the telling of the story (Doonan, 1992). Thus, two modes of story telling are used which are conventionally stereotypical of the characters, the adults represent realism and the child represents imagination and adventure. 

The reader is placed at the same level as the characters and looking straight-on throughout, suggesting the reader is travelling along two different journeys with the characters. Although, Burningham's use of frames suggest we are only allowed a glimpse into their world. Burningham uses a diminishing return through situating the parents in one scene and one position. Burningham uses watercolours, as he does in his other work. For the parents a black and white monotonous background reflects their boring nature. Whereas Shirley's adventure is detailed, with the use of bright colours, different positions and background on each page. 

I think this story enables a child reader to understand that Shirley's adventure is not realistic. However, they can relate to the situation of parents giving instruction and the child doing what they want, as this is what I related to, which will most likely be the case in many children's lives. 

Shirley is not provided with narrative, the parents continue to talk in spite of receiving no answers and then the book comes to abrupt end. This leaves the reader curious which leaves room for the reader to engage and interpret the book in different ways.