Rating: 5/5

I thought this was a nearly perfect novel. The New York Times had it right when they assessed it: "An exciting nervy thriller that fulfills the demands of the genre while resonating on deeper frequencies." Well, if it's a "genre"novel, is it literary, some might wonder? I think it will satisfy readers who generally shy away from genre novels. If "literary" means nuanced, rich in negative capability and symbolism, a book that's much more than merely a plot and some characters, a book about the weirdness of being human, then yes, it's a decidedly literary novel. 

 But because it almost dovetails into the crime novel genre, the book follows certain conventions of that genre. One expects the prose to be rather limpid in this genre. Wilcken walks that fine line between readability and weird philosophical speculation. I thought of Fante at times while reading this. And Andre Gide. But I also thought about Kundera. It's that sort of book, cosmically-enriched and satisfying. 

 I won't do the plot synopsis thing. If you have a preference for dark stories, then this will probably be your cuppa. I could even see someone doing a reading of this as a novel with a paranormal slant. While the book doesn't overtly skew that way, there are so many uncanny coincidences in the tale, that one begins to wonder. I don't think this signifies an unreliable narrator. It could possibly signify an altered state of consciousness in the disturbed and disturbing narrator, perhaps paranoia, but the coincidences seem to have an objective reality that is befuddling. Maybe Wilcken wanted to experiment with the Jungian concept of Synchronicity. The novel is pretty much laid out along those lines. Weird correspondences occur everywhere in this book. It would take a much longer review than this to catalog them. They get under your skin and move about, like ethereal formication hallucinations.

 I found myself wondering whether I would consider this a masculinist novel. The genre to which it is usually assigned seems to have those tendencies. But I don't think that's the case here. There's so much pathos and subtle attention to what human emotions actually are, that one can't come away seeing this as masculinist. One could argue that the book is a deconstruction of certain human emotions and the complex they form in the thing we sometimes call romantic love. There is grit at the center of a horrible man which forms a pearl in a pivotal scene of the novel. In a way, this is a novel about the phenomenology of emotions. And it is a love story. A deeply disturbing love story. It just happens to be couched as a story about murder.

 This book also wants to explore the philosophical proposition that perhaps we sometimes convince ourselves we inhabit emotions, soi-disant, without experiencing them. This question of human sincerity or authenticity is examined and seen as problematic. The author seems to propose that many emotional states might actually be intellectual camouflage. (What might the camouflage be covering? ) This is a scary, heady idea. And the novel embodies it well, in the interactions between many of the characters. Things in this novel seem to happen in ways they happen in the quantum world. In a way, that "quantum" reading might explain some of the weird correspondences that happen across great distances in here. Maybe Wilcken is playing with quantum entanglement. This is very thoughtful prose designed to make you question your own hardware and software and how they interrelate.

 The one quibble I had with the book is a small arguing point about physics. I don't want to give any spoilers, but I'll say I had a problem with one sentence describing where some tulips ended up. On page 101. It was actually only four words, but it bothered me, because the visualization didn't follow through for me. That is the only point in the novel where I wanted to argue with the prose at all, and that's not a typical reading experience for me. I usually want to argue a lot more with an author's prose. But this book just cast a spell and the spell never broke otherwise during my reading experience.