Rating: 2/5

When I read this as a child, it was one of the books in the series that I decided not to re-read. It was all about the journey to Arabia to try to find The Black and persuade the owner to sell him to Alec. It was page 109 before Alec's party find the home of Abu Ishak. At the time, I found the long journey somewhat dull, just wanting Alec to get there and find the horse. However reading it now I see a lot more issues than a dull storyline. I know nothing about seaplanes or travel in that era so I'll stay away from that side of it. As it was written in the 1940's, I won't comment on the obvious stereotypes and cultural issues, as books were written in a different manner back then. I will focus on the plot issues.

Alec wants to reclaim the horse from the proven rightful owner. A man who has already refused to sell a valuable breeding animal that he has travelled from Arabia to claim. He is not going to sell it cheap to a kid who keeps a horse in an old barn. He enlists the owner of Sun Raider to help buy the horse, travelling to Arabia to do so. Alec, you need to get a grip and accept that it's rude to go to this guy's house to try to emotionally blackmail this man into parting with his precious animal because you want the horse. Too often in these first two books, Alec is given everything he wants. I have to question his parents letting him go on this trip in the first place. And if the cost of the camel renting is high enough to trouble Sun Raider's owner, he is not going to meet a rich man's sale price for a horse who isn't for sale. Yet this entire trip continues regardless.

The whole story is set up that Alec somehow deserves the horse because of what they went through together, and that the owner is a bit mean for not giving the boy what he wants. When Alec sought the information about the ownership of The Black to race him, did he not work out that there could be someone out there to claim him back? Had Alec kept a low profile, Abu Ishak would have assumed his horse was dead. The horse was stolen from him so it was a bit wrong to mildly paint him as a bad guy for wanting his own property back.

Frankly to journey across the desert in the hope that you can avoid deadly raiders and dying from heat or dehydration in the hope of finding a place nobody seems to know the location of, is all a bit silly. It's not a great book in the series and many later books are much better.

Childhood rating: 2
Adult rating: 2