Rating: 4/5

I haven’t watched any silent films, but I’m definitely going to change that. Despite having never watched any silent films, I’ve heard of so many silent film stars, which is remarkable to me - Greta Garbo, Mary Pickford, Buster Keaton, Lillian Gish, Laurel &amp; Hardy, Charlie Chaplin. But I had never heard of Clara Bow - possibly the most famous of them all. At least at the time. But she didn’t transition well to “talkies” (arguably entirely the fault of the studio for throwing her at the wolves and continuing to give her formulaic roles unbefitting of her talent) and she left Hollywood at 26 years old. Her story is tragic for so many reasons. She grew up in the slums of Brooklyn at the turn of the century, emotionally, physically, and sexually abused by both her parents. When she caught a fairytale break and moved to Hollywood, she became the biggest star of any studio and lowest paid actress at Paramount. She was treated like a commodity by the studio heads, but particularly Ben Schulman who was a real asshole, excuse my language. All that was missing from every description of him was a finger twirling mustache, and it was fully deserved. Clara quickly became a sex symbol - embodying the free spirited, sexually unrestrained flapper of the 20s - the first “IT girl” (that phrase didn’t exist before her). She was a natural actress, amazingly talented, but was put into formula roles; roles that exemplified her as the It girl and nothing more. And her schedule was grueling. There are blood-boiling memos from the studio talking about her like she’s chattel and ordering that she be used hard and squeezed dry until they could discard her once her star power dimmed. But it only dimmed because they refused to give her better roles. Granted, scandal did follow her and over time seemed to get worse. But the studio did nothing to help her, ever. She was kind and trusting, but also had many lovers; whereas other actresses were able to keep their private lives private, Clara couldn’t seem to, or didn’t see the point. She was “slut shamed” before “slut shaming” was something we talked about. And there were also plenty of rumors and libel that went around as well. Her fans turned on her, her studio eventually released her from her contract (through trickery), and she left Hollywood. After Hollywood things didn’t get easier for her, she was haunted by mental illness for the rest of her life.

She was a full of life character, vivacious, free spirited, generous, and kind. But wracked with insecurity. And she was basically used and abused her whole life. 

I know this all sounds like a dreadfully depressing read, but actually while it was definitely sad and Clara was such a tragic sympathetic woman, I loved reading about her. She was beautiful (on the outside and inside) and led a fascinating life. Can’t stand Hollywood though. What a bunch of tools. Ugh. Seems like not much has changed in 100 years.