Rating: 5/5

A fine sociological survey on how Hollywood shaped
and reflected America. The foreground is sexual but
this study uses the cultural and political climate as a
revealing background. The story stops in 1969 and a
new chapter (or book) could be written as the studios
have crumbled and power lies with agents and "packagers."
Has a lot changed ? Well, a bit, but we still read about
new heart throbs and their bogus romantic lives.

Hollywood has always been a small town with small town
(middle-class, pls, conform) values. Image is everything,
from the house you live in to the car you drive. Character
and integrity count for naught. Sexually, said one exec,
"if you gave them the right image, they [moguls] didnt
care what you did when you left the studio." The myth-makers
wanted an image from stars that translated into dollars.
"It could be awful," said a publicist. "You had to be vigilant
at all times." Quotes and anecdotes are sourced/footnoted.
The writing is impressive.

Directors, writers, film editors, designers, choreographers
and even publicists bowed to the Rules of the Game. Darryl
Zanuck at Fox was the most tolerant; Louis B Mayer of Metro
was the most odious. In sum, Hollywood was a schizophrenic world. Identity was consistently at risk. Yet it also recognized the fluid complexity, as with Dietrich, of the sexual experience.

The director William Desmond Taylor, found shot to death in 1922, palled around with Mabel Normand and Mary Miles Minter, but he was having a relationship w set decorator George James Hopkins, whose career went fr Theda Bara to "Virginia Woolf." Taylor's murder was never solved. Forgotten today, indeed, unknown, Lilyan Tashman was a comet in the early 30s, though women were advised not to go into the powder room with Lil. Her marriage to actor Edmund Lowe was non-exclusive. In Hollywood marriage was, and is, social protocol. 

George Cukor &amp; Kate Hepburn raised eyebrows w the subversive "Sylvia Scarlett" (1936). It was the story of a girl disguised as a boy who joins a gang of swindlers, among them Cary Grant. The producer claimed that he'd been conned into this disaster. When rereleased in the 70s, the gender confusion seemed modern, but after "Sylvia" neither Cukor nor Hepburn strayed far from civilized comedy.

As for the civilized scripter Charles Brackett, who collaborated w Billy Wilder on "Ninotchka" and "Sunset Boulevard," the Sunday lunches at his home gathered some of the smartest members of the colony -- until his unhappy wife couldnt handle the Bloody Marys. Brackett mentored a young actor, then made him an assistant..."One just  knew ," says Don Bachardy, when asked what was going on. 

"Being a queer and being in Hollywood was a potentially toxic mix," adds a survivor. There's fascinating research here as the author examines Dorothy Arzner, Gary Cooper, Zoe Atkins, Vincente Minnelli and Nicholas Ray. Finally, he reminds us that no individual story makes sense without the context of the place.