Rating: 2/5

I have moved around a lot in my life. In every town I settled in, one of the first things I would do, even before driver's license, is search out the library and get a new card. Once I had my card I felt like I was a REAL person. 

I believe in the magic of books, in the knowledge you can gain from books, in the friendships developed in books and because of books.

I have loved other books by Jerry Spinelli.

That said, I was hugely disappointed in this book. It didn't hold my interest. I have ADD and this was the hardest I have worked in a long time to keep reading. I kept hoping I would grow to like the characters and plots in this book, but I couldn't relate to any of them. 

&lt;&gt;

Have books been important to unsavory characters? Of course. Juvenile Delinquents can still find what they need at the library, even when we may think they need something else. Twelve year old taggers need books, too. I'm glad one of them found his niche. 

To those that are anti-TV I say there is more than one way to keep your mind busy. If you read a book and visualize what is happening, you are, in a sense, watching your own TV. Everyone from writer to costume designer to go-fers are employed to bring a story to life. No, not all shows are for all people. Not all books are for all people. Thank goodness there is variety out there for all of us. As a writer, I find TV fascinating, movies made from books, even more so. I love seeing how another sees, interprets. I think the school assignment that prohibited TV was set up by close minded people. They saw things their way and couldn't understand the 'stupidity' of others. Whether you are teacher or student, that outlook gets you no-where near understanding each other. Just because you are a teacher and know yourself as an adult, doesn't mean that the student and the family they live in is less than you. So saying, that the student character is so hooked in her TV-world so that she doesn't remember her own life is a way of putting students into a box... what understanding and growth can come of it? (And switching habits from TV/couch-potato to mall-money-spender is better?) I don't think the author gave this scenario enough imagination toward the assignment. A better assignment would be to have the student do a blog or vlog about their TV/reading habits and what they get from those habits. And the whole school should be a part of that experiment. Maybe a kid wouldn't be breaking windows of the other homeless peoples' car if he could find a "mother" to relate to on a TV. Maybe a Mongoose would find the amazing facts and more on Discovery, and with that kind of presentation a certain Weezer might be enjoying his friendship while doodling in their art journals.

Bookmobiles have been the home away from home for many of us. As I said I have made friends in books and because of books. Books-to-go are even more fun. Sad that libraries don't have the check out cards in the books any more. I have met cool people on those cards. I have enjoyed interesting friendships with the librarians in both stationary and mobile libraries. It didn't surprise me that the driver was so smart. But it might have been more fun to see a friendship develop between the driver/librarian and the pierced teen.

Maybe my biggest problem is that I don't like short stories, no matter how related they may be. I like getting into the depth of character and plot. These stories kept me on the outside looking in.