Rating: 5/5

This is not a book about the end of an affair. It is about a brilliant woman, Kate Ennis, and an affair that she has. We know very little about the man in the affair, Jake, which reinforces my notion that this is not a book about the affair. Even after it ends, Kate seems to still have this affair, she seems to possess it. It seems like she has it in a jar and watches. And is she in the jar? Is she out of it? 

  When the clouds shift, for one moment, or for several moments, and there is a possibility for action with absolutely no ingredient of reluctance – any action, shopping, playing tennis, getting out of bed – when there is a sense of the capacity to act, without any equal and dialectical incapacity to act, or desire not to, when the urge to move is, for a moment, some moments, freed of the urge to move another way, or not to move at all, or the drag of a rock, a doubt, a paralysis; then it is as though clouds did part, briefly, in a place where the climate is always and always inimical.

The mystery in this novella is not about what happened, it is about why it is happening. From the very beginning it is clear that Kate is brilliant, that she can see through the fog that she appears to be lost in, but she doesn't. That she could potentially act, in her best interests, but she doesn't. Is love a prisoner's dilemma?

  That is, the degree to which the creature is able to act, or to permit itself to be seen, reflects such a surface play of the energy, which, in its perfect conflict, has brought to the paralysis an almost convulsive force, that the energy appears active, liberated, even cheerful. Analysis has no access to this condition. It poses very radically, however, the question of what it is to be sincere.

When I was younger, I didn't quite understand how one could trick one's self. Now I do. It's a question of how may I be wrong. It's this imagination that the opportunities for happiness, satisfaction, love and joy are a zero sum game. If that were the case couldn't it be said of sorrow, pain, suffereing and misery? Surely, but to maintain a sense of proportion is hard. 

If it was the nearest thing to a real story to happen in her life, doesn't it make sense to stay till the end of the tale? And how do you make out where the tale ends when you are the story. In the mind, life doesn't flow linearly. Where would the end of such a story be? The structure of the book suggest that there may be no end, one just has to stop reading.