Rating: 5/5

I had largely forgotten this masterpiece, which seems extraordinary in this moment, when I have just finished it and am still caught in its thrall. Allingham was forever probing the boundaries of the mystery genre, and in The Tiger in the Smoke she threw out the rules entirely. There is no mystery here, other than the mystery inherent in humans’ failure to fully understand one another; the series hero, Albert Campion, plays only a minor observer role; and we spend almost as much time with the villain as with the victims, so we know what he has done and why. And yet the story is gripping and suspenseful and you can’t look away as disaster hurtles toward you.

The story begins almost on a sidebar. An engaged couple on their way to a train station. The bride-to-be has been getting messages purporting to be from her husband, who went missing during World War II and is presumed dead. Now she has been summoned to meet him on a train platform. The man is an impostor of course, and his motive for impersonating the lost husband never really adds up. It is one of several plot holes, and there are also massively implausible coincidences, but none of that matters. Because this is a tale that tackles the conflict between good and evil on an operatic scale, and verisimilitude is not the point.

The atmospherics—throughout most of the book the characters are all stumbling about in a dense London fog—are so vivid and insistent that they might as well be one of the characters. The human characters, though, are just as vivid, especially the criminals. In her early books Allingham often relied on the shadow of a vague criminal underworld of supernatural capability lurking in the background; here those underworld figures come into the light and are revealed in all their shocking banality. She stares clear-eyed at all the harm that can result from excessive devotion to venial ideas, and counters that image with a heart-rending portrait of the opposite—the power and vulnerability of true goodness and largeness of spirit. I love this book’s ambition and the discipline that carries it off.

In the face of that clash of cosmic forces, the actual plot, which involves a sort of treasure hunt, can’t really hold one’s interest, so the ending chapter or two feel a little anticlimactic. The war has already been decided and the final skirmishes are almost incidental. But the larger conflict is so riveting and its conclusion so gratifying that I was happy enough to return to earth in the end.

If I were a graduate student I might want to choose as a dissertation topic the puzzling question of why in the 1950s, that deeply banal era, War in Heaven was such a recurrent theme in the popular literature. Perhaps it was a variant of PTSD—minds tuned to extremes of good and evil by the global conflict of the previous decade, returning over and over to the mental stimulus of those high-stakes years. Or perhaps I shouldn’t write book reviews at three in the morning.