Rating: 4/5

Carlyle was one of the most prominent writers and thinkers of the mid 19th century. This is a short polemical work he knocked off as a break from a writing a serious history. It is mostly Carlyle opining about the social ills of his time, but wrapped around a comparison with medieval life, illuminated via a newly-discovered monastic chronicle that Carlyle summarizes for us.

The book is vivid, illuminating, and written with the authors idiosyncratic but peculiarly powerful prose style. The problems he is interested in -- the social alienation of laissez-faire capitalism, corrupt incompetent political leaders, grasping selfish aristocracies -- are all very much still with us. He's not simply a conservative or an apologist for tradition. He thinks radical social reform is desirable and necessary - and in particular, reform to improve the condition of the poor.

It is also one of the wickedest books I can remember reading. The author is either one of the last enthusiasts of feudalism, or else one of the first proto-fascists: he is firmly in favor of hierarchy and rule, and not particularly fond of democracy. He speaks approvingly of things to make a modern reader shudder -- like medieval monasteries clearing their debts by having the Jewish money-lenders exiled or killed.

And yet...I have the sense that Carlyle does have useful things to say and teach. Liberal democracy is the "default" view in the western world today, but there are a great many opponents of liberal democracy. It is tempting, but wrong, to think that those opponents are either thoughtless or blinded by selfishness, anger, or some other mental condition. But this is not right -- there are people out there who really disagree, and Carlyle is an unusually articulate, informed, and _relevant_ critic. If we cannot answer the philosophical challenge he offers, that suggests we are wrong in our beliefs, or at least confused about them. I don't think Carlyle is right, but I think it's important to do the mental work to understand where and why he goes wrong.