Rating: 5/5

5/5
YESSSS THE TIME HAS COME THAT I GIVE A FIVE STAR. AND NO OTHER BOOK DESERVES IT LIKE THIS ONEEE. The best way i could describe it was that this book was like "ignite me" out of all the books in the shatter me series. IT WAS JUST TOOOOO GOOOOOOOD. And as ways, Mr Crepsley 🔛🔝

SPOILERS!!
 
In this book Darren is in the vampire mountain attending the vampire council and has to face trials to prove himself a worthy vampire. 

Okay not gonna lie the ending kinda made me a bit annoyed and it's making me wanna smack stars off this book but like nope this book was incredible. Also i loved Mr Crepsley this entire book but like at the end, where was heeeee. Darren was about to die and he idk i guess he still did try and fight for Darren but he was gonna end up dying in the end. My husband let me down 😢 Nah still love that guy though. Him this entire book was chef kiss 💋

Okay let me talk about this book based on the events that play out. 

first trial: the water maze
LOVED this one and it literally got me so hooked onto the book. I also love how it brang all the characters together and closer to Darren. HOW CUTEEEEE.

second: the spikes
no idea what it was actually called in the books lol sorry but yeah this one was pretty decent. I found myself not as interested in the details but still sickkkk. Wait i remember now i think it was called something like the hall of needles or something. 

In between these two trials was the vampire festival. It was sooo nice to see it literally felt like such amazing world and character building. Again just loved reading about these 3 days 

Third: a room with fire coming out bursts from the floor
This one was so amazing in the way that it was written. Like i loved especially how delirious Darren became. That scene was sooo amazing. But what was even better was what came after. OMG poor Darren he was absolutely finished after this trial :((( but what those surrounding him came up with was sooo smart :) ahhh and it was so sad to see that even later he was stilll suffering so much due to the injuries faced in these trials.

 Wait i just remembered that in these trials his hair got burnt off and so it maybe can't grow back 💀 OH HELLLL NAAAHHHHHH i can't imagine Darren without a head of hair. I guess i'm gonna convince myself otherwise like i do with Mr Creplseys crop of orange red hair 🤢

OKay but here is where the real stuff goes down. PLOT TWISTTTTTT Kurda is evil... i actually wouldn't have agreed with that had he not killed Gavner. That was my g and this guy just sheffed him 😥 But other than that, yeah i kinda did suspect that Kurda was a bad guy from the beginning just by his extreme interest in the Vampaneze, but i forgot about it because he kept doing good AND kept finding ways to save Darren. 

Nahhh but can we talk about the ending pls. DARRENNN my poor baby. Him struggling for his life through the tunnels just to warn and save the people who previously tried to trial him to death pulls on my heart strings. The endingggg of when he chooses to go into the stream rather than be saved by Kurda and the Vampaneze was such a poignant moment. 

BUt just by observation and my guesses, book 6 is the same colour as 4 and 5? so i think a time jump won't happen. AND the book is called "the Vampire Prince" so i guess Mr Tiny's prophesy does come true 🤭 NAH WAIT WHAT IF KURDA IS THE VAMPIRE PRINCE BECAUSE HE IS/WAS SET TO BECOME A PRINCE. OMG OMGOMGOMOMG THE PLOT THICKENSSS. Lets see if i'm right 😉

But yeah i think i've said all that needs to be said. The length of my review speaks volumes of how much i loved this book. AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH the next one is gonna be SOOOO interesting!!!