Rating: 5/5

John and Philippa are no human children. They are Djinn: powerful, magical beings that are much like the genies in the old stories. They have a dream about their uncle nimrod, which their uncle sent to them as a message. It turns out their uncle and their mother also are djinn. After some lessons and training, they set off on a quest to egypt to find the tomb of akhenaten, an evil spirit who once was a wicked pharaoh. Unfortunately they are encountered by Iblis, the most evil djinn of all. He will thwart them until they drop. Want to know how it ends? READ THE BOOK!!
Children of the lamp, the Akhenaten Adventure by P.B. Kerr is good for people who like books with fantasy &amp; adventure genres. I recommend to children who have read the Harry Potter books and liked them. I also recommend this to readers of the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series. This has a similar plot to the harry potter books, only it is modern and doesn’t take place at hogwarts. It has humor in places, which I like. I also like how the author based the idea of djinn off genies. Djinn can turn into animals, make things appear and disappear, grant wishes, and even fit in lamps! Djinn can grant more than three wishes, but if you ask for a fourth one, it undos the first three. I feel this is in comparison to the Harry Potter and Percy Jackson books because they do not realise who they are until they are told who they are. Plus, in all of the books, the main characters are all are really powerful and sometimes do not even realise their own strength. Some key themes in this book are 1) identity, 2) mystery 3) excitement! I also like how the author sort of goes into a character’s shoes and writes it as if he actually is the character in that situation. Here is an example of that writing on page 135-137:
“What?” exclaimed Philippa. “But I don’t want to be a camel. They’re so gross.” Her disgust at the idea of being a camel increased rapidly as one of the camels started to pee on the ground. “Nonsense,” said Nimrod. “These are very beautiful camels. The best in Cairo. What is more, the camel is a very important animal to our tribe of djinn. The Marid have been turning themselves into camels for thousands of years. Besides, this sort of experience is going to be very useful to you when you’re djinn.” 
For those of you reading this, Children of the lamp, the Akhenaten Adventure is a wonderful 355 page book for all ages. (unless you’re too young to read) This book was published in 2004 by Scholastic Inc. Enjoy!