Rating: 5/5

Within the first few pages of Zola's striking masterpiece I was completely sucked into his vision of the poverty suffering and slave driven folk of the mining world. First published in 1885 it holds the power and importance for today. As we start with young unemployed railway worker Etienne Lantier wondering the cold and punishing landscape of northern France in search of work, and without a penny to his name is desperate to land just about anything that pays. After stumbling into a small mining community during the night he is pointed towards the Le Voreux mine who may have an opportunity for him, and after befriending the Maheu family where most of them are employees he soon discovers just what a hard life they truly live. The way Zola goes into detail of the daily routine for the miners is both powerfully compelling and squalidly heart wrenching, with shifts starting long before the break of dawn; men, women and children march off into the dark depths of the pits where the air is thick and stuffy and work exhausting, and in a matter of minutes most are black from head to toe with coal and sweating so much some of the weaker few can barely stand up. In the eyes of Etienne they are all buried like moles under the crushing weight of the earth with burning lungs and little pay for their efforts while owners and bosses reap the rewards with a fine and wealthy standard of living and no interest in those who help line their pockets. Over time Etienne sees this has got to stop, things just can not continue in this way, struggling to buy even the most basic food for survival; and things only get worse when the company offers a new pay system that will see them less off. Slowly Etienne starts to gather support from the workers for a strike, a strike that would see the numbers go from the few to the hundreds to the thousands and cause massive repercussions for the chaos and mindless actions that are about to unfold...

At well over five hundred pages, at no point was I ever going through a period - even brief - where I felt the narrative dropped off. Although the main theme running throughout is the lead up to the strike, beyond that there is so much more going on, with many others in the community studied in just as much of a way that you really feel for the whole village. Another thing to note that I couldn't quite believe is the amount of sexual tension between residents, as even in times of complete despair and hunger they seem to be at it like rabbits - in the bushes, behind buildings and abandoned barns. Generally, the women are treated appallingly, and there are those who lost their innocence without wanting it. I guess from their viewpoint they may be poor, starving and on the verge of death but sex is at least some joyful respite from their misery if only short lived. After Etienne eventually moves in with the Mateu family I knew this would be a problem as he always had feeling for the pale and hard working daughter Catherine, but she already had a brute and nasty man in Chavel, and the two would come to blows over her. The pity for workers is only escalated when you see the sort of meals the rich fat cat bosses indulge in while the miners try to to beg, steel, cheat and sell household items just for a loaf of bread, and in the case of the Mateu's their home is almost striped bare in the end, with not even a candle for warmth; old grandfather Bonnemort is left staring at the walls coughing up black phlegm from years in the pits while the rest of the family who's minds are shattered just see death as their escape clause. 

But its the actions of the strike that I will truly never forget; things get out of hand pretty quickly as the marching horde of hell-bent miners go from mine to mine and cause utter carnage and maximum damage to the pits in a show of savagery. All control is lost and a blood lust of frenzy takes hold, even the women turn into crazed wild animals, this is no longer a strike but a violent wave of terror; the poor many against the wealthy few, and when the owner of a local shop meets a gruesome end they now realize that a boundary has been crossed and there is no going back. There is some calm after the storm before a tense and claustrophobic finale left me reeling. I went through just about every emotion one could go through from reading a novel, and I'd be surprised if I read a better 19th century classic for a long time to come. Germinal is an out-and-out masterpiece.