This 1995 book is the sixth collection of the monthly columns which Gould (1941-2002) wrote for "Natural History" magazine. He was a brilliant essayist. His basic approach was to start from an odd fact or a question which nagged at him and then unfurl the answer and the consequences and implications that followed. 

He was also one of the great science writers. He did not pander or simplify. He seemed to relish the challenge of explaining subtle and complicated scientific riddles in clear sentences. 

His great subject was evolution and Darwin. His big insight was that evolution was not typically a gradual process of change. He argued that the fossil record showed that species would go through periods of relative rapid evolution, "rapid" in the evolutionary scale of millions of years, followed by much longer periods of very little change. He called the theory "Punctuated Equilibrium". 

It is interesting that he developed this theory while he was writing these essays. When he started them in 1977, he was an orthodox Darwinian. By this book in 1995, he was committed to his new view. 

This is an excellent collection, but not as good as his earlier ones. He seems to be more of a preacher than an explorer. More of these essays start with a grand point or theory and then find a fact or story to illustrate it. His earlier essays tended to start with the specific and move to the general. 

It is interesting to see his excitement about the introduction of the sophisticated DNA technology which revolutionized paleontology. He is still somewhat suspicious of it. 

He still comes up with great stories. Edgar Allan Poe wrote a hack book on mollusks, clams etc., which was cribbed from a scientific book on the subject. Gould weaves a fascinating story of how that happened and the interesting scientific points to be learned from Poe's book. 

Gould was a very smart guy. He was passionate and learned about a very important subject. He had a unique skill to translate that passion to non-scientists without losing its complexity. All of these collections are invigorating to read.