Rating: 5/5

Four hundred forty-four (444) ratings, 48 reviews, GR average rating: 4.40. I was almost sure this is artificial. Maybe Eduardo Hughes Galeano has many friends, Latin American friends. How can a book possibly get an average rating of 4.40 from almost 450 readers? Could this not be the champion of all GR-rated books?

No. Memory of Fire is a trilogy. The second book, Memory of Fire: Faces and Masks is even more eye-popping: 274 ratings, 12 reviews, 4.51 GR average rating.

You might say nothing can get higher than that with more than 250 individual ratings. But hey, take a look at the last book of the trilogy, Memory of Fire: Century of the Wind. From 330 individual ratings, 23 reviews, it has an average GR rating of 4.59!

I don't have a copy of the 2nd and 3rd books yet but I've never desired a book this much until now.

In the preface to this volume the author wrote that he does not know if this is a novel, or an essay, or an epic poem, a testament, chronicle or what. Well, I know what it is. It's a newspaper! When you wake up in the morning you read the papers and learn about what happened to the world the day before. Memory of Fire: Genesis--divided into short chapters, each with a footnote (or footnotes) disclosing their sources--tells the reader what happened to the Americas starting sometime before their colonization (with their mythologies) up to the 16th century. It likewise mirrors a part of the history of my country because the Philippines was also colonized by Spain within this specific time-frame. In fact there is a chapter here too about Ferdinand Magellan and his Spanish fleet.

A newspaper, however, can't possibly get an average of 4.40 from 444 readers. The difference here is this: in a newspaper one gets to know the bare facts. Here, it is facts plus emotions. Galeano's language is poetic and his creativity is almost god-like: out of the dead and confused details of the centuries past he has molded a coherent, engaging, living and breathing history. A history that you experience through the magic of language.

The very first chapter is aptly entitled "The Creation" and its footnote says it is taken from a book called "Watunna: Mitologia Makiritare." Galeano presented it this way:

"The woman and the man dreamed that God was dreaming about them.
God was singing and clacking his maracas as he dreamed his dream in a cloud of tobacco smoke, feeling happy but shaken by doubt and mystery.
The Makiritare Indians know that if God dreams about eating, he gives fertility and food. If God dreams about life, he is born and gives birth.
In their dream about God's dream, the woman and the man were inside a great shining egg, singing and dancing and kicking up a fuss because they were crazy to be born. In God's dream happiness was stronger than doubt and mystery. So dreaming, God created them with a song:
'I break this egg and the woman is born and the man is born. And together they will live and die. But they will be born again. They will be born and die again and be born again. They will never stop being born, because death is a lie.'"

For "Language", Galeano referenced the mythology of the Guarani Indian nation and wrote:

"The First Father of the Guaranis rose in darkness lit by reflections from his own heart and created flames and thin mist. He created love and had nobody to give it to. He created language and had no one to listen to him.
Then he recommended to the gods that they should construct the world and take charge of fire, mist, rain, and wind. And he turned over to them the music and words of the sacred hymn so that they would give life to women and to men.
So love became communion, language took on life, and the First Father redeemed his solitude. Now he accompanies men and women who sing as they go:
'We're walking this earth,
We're walking this shining earth.'"

How beautiful were these Indian languages? Galeano didn't need a long discourse on this. In a short chapter which he gave the heading "Language of Paradise", which he took from a study of the language of another Indian nation, he simply wrote:

"The Guaraos, who live in the suburbs of Earthly Paradise, call the rainbow 'snake of necklaces' and the firmament 'overhead sea.' Lightning is 'glow of the rain.' One's friend, 'my other heart.' The soul, 'sun of the breast.' The owl, 'lord of the dark night.' A walking cane is 'a permanent grandson'; and for 'I forgive,' they say 'I forget.'"

Echoing Adam and Eve is a chapter "Love." This charming tale reads:

"In the Amazonian jungle, the first woman and the first man looked at each other with curiosity. It was odd what they had between their legs.
'Did they cut yours off?' asked the man.
'No,' she said. 'I've always been like that.'
He examined her close up. He scratched his head. There was an open wound there. He said: 'Better not eat any cassava or bananas or any fruit that splits when it ripens. I'll cure you. Get in the hammock and rest.'
She obeyed. Patiently she swallowed herb teas and let him rub on pomades and unguents. She had to grit her teeth to keep from laughing when he said to her, 'Don't worry.'
She enjoyed the game, although she was beginning to tire of fasting in the hammock. The memory of fruit made her mouth water.
One evening the man came running throught the glade. He jumped with excitement and cried, 'I found it!'
He had just seen the male monkey curing the female monkey in the arm of a tree.
'That's how it's done,' said the man, approaching the woman.
When the long embrace ended, a dense aroma of flowers and fruit filled the air. From the bodies lying together came unheard of vapors and glowings, and it was all so beautiful that the suns and the gods died of embarrassment."

Then the Spaniards came (and, later, the other Europeans). They had their guns, swords, cannons, their lust for gold and spices, and their attack dogs. These dogs--some of them given ranks and salaries in the army--didn't hunt birds or rabbits. They sniffed out the native Indians. One of these dogs was named "Becerrillo." In a chapter carrying this dog's name, with the time and place of the incident indicated (1511: Aymaco), Galeano gives us the following account:

"The insurrection of chiefs Agueynaba and Mabodamaca has been put down and all the prisoners have gone to their deaths.
Captain Diego de Salazar comes upon the old woman hidden in the underbrush and does not run his sword through her. 'Here,' he says to her, 'take this letter to the governor, who is in Caparra.'
The old woman opens her eyes slightly. Trembling, she holds out her fingers.
And she sets off. She walks like a small child, with a baby-bear lurch, carrying the envelope like a standard or a flag.
While the old woman is still withing crossbow range, the captain releases Becerrillo. Governor Ponce de Leon has ordered that Becerrillo should receive twice the pay of a crossbowman, as an expert flusher-out of ambushes and hunter of Indians. The Indians of Puerto Rico have no worse enemy.
The first arrow knocks the old woman over. Becerrillo, his ears perked up, his eyes bulging, would devour her in one bite.
'Mr. Dog,' she entreats him, 'I'm taking this letter to the governor.'
Becerrillo doesn't know the local language, but the old woman shows him the empty envelope.
'Don't do me harm, Mr. Dog.'
Becerrillo sniffs at the envelope. He circles a few times the trembling bag of bones that whines words, lifts a paw, and pees on her."

An Indian chief can carry a chapter too. Here is one--

"1511: Yara
HATUEY

In these islands, in these Calvaries, those who choose death by hanging themselves or drinking poison along with their children are many. The invaders cannot avoid this vengeance, but know how to explain it: the Indians, 'so savage that they think everything is in common,' as Oviedo will say, 'are people by nature idle and vicious, doing little work. For a pastime many killed themselves with venom so as not to work, and others hanged themselves with their own hands.'
Hatuey, Indian chief of the Guahaba region, has not killed himself. He fled with his people from Haiti in a canoe and took refuge in the caves and mountains of eastern Cuba.
There he pointed to a basketful of gold and said: 'This is the god of the Christians. For him they pursue us. For him our fathers and our brothers have died. Let us dance for him. If our dance pleases him, this god will order them not to mistreat us.
They catch him three months later.
They tie him to a stake.
Before lighting the fire that will reduce him to charcoal and ash, the priest promises him glory and eternal rest if he agrees to be baptized. Hatuey asks: 'Are there Christians in heaven?'
'Yes.'
Hatuey chooses hell, and the firewood begins to crackle."

A vignette of one, insignificant Indian life--

"1618: Lima
SMALL WORLD

"The owner of Fabiana Criolla has died. In his will he has lowered the price of her freedom from 200 to 150 pesos.
Fabiana has spent the night without sleeping, wondering how much her guaiacum-wood box full of powdered cinnamon would be worth. She does not know how to add, so she cannot calculate the freedoms she has bought with her work through the half century that she has been in the world, nor the price of the children who have been made on her and taken from her.
With the first light of dawn, the bird comes and taps its beak on the window. Every day the same bird announces that it is time to wake up and get going.
Fabiana yawns, sits up on the mat, and inspects her worn-down feet."

And slave trade, the most profitable business of those days (even better than piracy)--

"1672: London
THE WHITE MAN'S BURDEN

The duke of York, brother of the king of England, founded the Company of Royal Adventurers nine years ago. English planters in the Antilles bought their slaves from Dutch slavers; but the Crown could not permit the purchase of such valuable articles from foreigners. The new enterprise, set up for trade with Africa, had prestigious shareholders: King Charles II, three dukes, eight earls, seven lords, a countess, and twenty-seven knights. In homage to the duke of York, the captains burned the letters DY with hot irons onto the breasts of the three thousand slaves they carried yearly to Barbados and Jamaica.
Now the enterprise is to be called the Royal Africa Company. The English king, who holds most of the stock, encourages slave-buying in his colonies, where slaves cost six times as much as in Africa.
Behind the ships, sharks make the trip to the islands, awaiting the bodies that go overboard. Many die because there is not enough water and the strongest drink what little there is, or because of dysentery or smallpox, and many die from melancholy: they refuse to eat, and there is no way to open their jaws.
They lie in rows, crushed against each other, their noses touching the deck above. Their wrists are handcuffed, and fetters wear their ankles raw. When portholes have to be closed in rough seas or rain, the small amount of air rises to fever heat, but with portholes open the hold stinks of hatred, fermented hatred, fouler than the foulest stench of slaughterhouse, and the floor is always slippery with blood, vomit, and shit.
The sailors, who sleep on deck, listen at night to the endless moans from below and at dawn to the yells of those who dreamed they were in their country."

I could go on and on. I had lost count of how many dog-ears I had made on my copy of this book.