Rating: 5/5

A couple of small spoilers are included.

Emil Brod was an interesting character. He was 22 and we meet him on the first day of his new job as a homocide detective. He sounds like a young guy full of naivte and enthusiasm, but we quickly learn that he has already killed a man, and watch as he attacks and beats up the chief suspect in his first case. It is fun to listen in as he operates with such an openly defiant approach from within an office full of careerists. The other detectives seem to be as afraid of actually solving something as they are of the Russians. 

This was a time when ex-Nazi's were trying to reinvent themselves against the backdrop of the emerging Cold War and the Berlin Airlift and the era and sense-of-place sets the stage for a handful of other interesting characters. I liked the grandfather as a character. He was an avid Socialist, but with a secret, and very much in the mold of those who bought into what the Russians were selling. I also liked the girl. She seemed like a survivor in an impossible world and the romance was a nice touch, but not overdone.

There were other signs of belief in a system so very foreign to our own including when Brod himself was offered assylum in West Berlin, but turned it down. 
 
The major story line was in the end, plausible and very complex. The solution to the crime did not reveal itself until the end. However, the character of Emil Brod makes this story. He will surprise you at every turn.

.......

Note on a minor subplot:
 
My favorite crime scene in the book was secondary to the main story and involved a girl who was being sexually abused by her father. She had decided to give herself to a young boy, and to then confess to him afterward that she was not exactly pure. She was worried that the boy might not take it well, so she arranged for her best friend to hide in some bushes with an axe and watch the encounter. Indeed, the boy does NOT take it well and strangles the girl, whereupon the friend jumps out of the bushes and kills him with her axe. I could not help but think that whenever CSI develops a "CSI Eastern Europe 1948" this will be their first crime scene.