Rating: 4/5

This was one wild ride, literally! If ever my mind drifted from the story I was quickly brought back again by phrases such as: “A woman in the Times Square information center, about forty with a smooth powdered neck he wouldn’t have minded biting.”

Or, how about this wild statement: “The engine was idling but making no more noise than a rat peeing on a sack of cotton.”

Overall, this was a unique read which I enjoyed very much for the way the author caught and captured my attention and made me think.

When their father dies Norwood Pratt returns home to care for his sister Vernell described as a large girl and a bit of a baby. She is grief stricken and spends her day moping around. When she starts asking Norwood for recreation money he decides she needs to become more independent and earn her own money. His efforts are rewarded when she not only gets a job, but also meets and marries Bill Bird. However, Norwood cannot get on with Bill and decides it’s time to move on.

Norwood undertakes a cross-country journey to deliver two cars for Grady Fring, a man of dubious character. Norwood questions his daily allowance which he suspects won’t be enough to cover the expenses of New York City. Grady explains that on “These warm nights you can just pullover and catnap in the car if you get tired. Most of the drivers drive straight through.” I wondered if anyone would give this advice today!

A billboard states: “Grady is ready to loan you up to $950 in the privacy of your own home.” I wondered about the sneaky cleverness of this offer that takes advantage of people’s shame of borrowing money.

Grady tricks Norwood into taking a passenger, the feisty Miss Yvonne Phillips on his cross-country journey and this was one of their conversations that interested me: “The missionary Baptists, they go all over the hooks. I think the free will Baptists just get together at somebody’s house.”

Later in the story, Norwood hitches a ride from the bread man who charges him one dollar toward gas. Norwood wonders whether the bread man driving the company van must pay for the gas he uses. It seems more likely that the bread man sees an opportunity to make money that helps him overcome his suspicion of hitchhikers.

At a stop at a grocery store where the bread man retrieves old bread and sets the new bread on the shelves, “Norwood noticed that he was poking finger holes in the competitor's loaves. Their eyes met just for a second and the bread man looked away. He tried to recover by doing peculiar things with his hands as though he had a funny way of arranging bread.” This act of sabotage left me incredulous!

They return to the truck and go on their way. Further along the road, the bread man stops to pick up a hitchhiker, a man with a sack of tomatoes and they resume their journey. However, when it transpires that the man can’t pay the one-dollar toll, the bread man stops the van to let him get out. A discussion ensues. The bread man states that it is unfair to Norwood who has paid the one dollar to allow this man to ride free. Norwood has no objections.

Then, the man with the sack of tomatoes says, “I’ll tell you what, if you let me ride, I’ll do something nice for somebody else on down the road. I’ll return the favor that way. I’ll do somebody else a good deed and tell them to pass it on, maybe it will go all the way round the world.” Could this be one of the first instances of ‘paying it forward,’ I wondered.

However, the cynical bread man who will make nothing out of this deal drives on leaving the man at the side of the road. Chalk it up to one more life experience for Norwood.

My favorite of Norwood’s encounters is when he buys coffee at the counter at Penn Station. He calls the server back over to question his change. The server is described as having “black hair piled up high and dark tiger eyes.” She returns to Norwood and gives “the counter a quick wipe with a blue sponge that had one cornflake riding on the stern.” I fixated on the cornflake and thought about what a clever inclusion that was. Throughout the story there are details like this that held my attention. 

Next, “she looked at the dime and nickel in his hand. That was right. People watched furtively over their papers, this guy with the hat was going to start something.” Then, Norwood repeats some news he heard earlier on the radio, “The weatherman said, ‘No change today.’” I wondered if Norwood was being clever, and using it as a way to engage her, and score a date, or if Norwood had taken the weatherman literally!

Priceless advice: “Don’t let your mouth write a check that your ass can’t cash.”