Rating: 5/5

A Generation Writ Across the World

This is my second time through The Drifters, I originally read it when I was in my twenties. Michener's prose is just as lush as I remembered. He captures the desperation, amazement, intense questioning and driving need of a generation to break free of their parents value system.

Flung across the gorgeous landscapes of frozen Norway's Trömso, Africa's British colonies in turmoil, Spain's sunny and free Torremolinos, Portugal's quiet and intimate Algarve, down miles of Africa's unspoiled coastline to the ancient city of Marrakesh, our Drifters story plays out.

Through the eyes of Mr. Fairbanks of World Mutual Funds, we meet Britta, a dazzling Norwegian girl who desires to escape the dark nights of Scandinavia and her father's obsession with Ceylon, a land he'll never get to see.

Monica, the stunning daughter of English parents just barely holding onto power in a British colony in Africa, contemptuous of her father's fear of failing, is eager to flee the coop.

Gretchen, a lovely, intelligent girl from Boston, runs up against the tension between the protesters of the Vietnam War and the Police. After a seriously violent encounter, her parents beg Mr. Fairbanks to take her away from Boston for some healing.

Cato, a bright and inquisitive black man from Philadelphia, is rising to the top of his peer group. He is tired of watching his neighborhood and friends being beaten down by the system. A mentor sponsors his flight to find better answers.

Yigal or Bruce, as he's known as by his American grandparents, is caught between two worlds. He becomes known as'The boy from Quarash' for his part in the six day war in Israel. But his Grandfather wants him to give up his Israeli citizenship for a life in America.

Our Drifters meet Joe, an American young man, faced with the emotional choice of fighting an immorral war or running from the draft and facing jail, in Torremolinos, Spain. 

Their adventures begin at the bar called The Alamo, where Joe tends bar and holds down the business for a friend. This sweeping tale will entertain, amuse, educate and break your heart. This is a read for all generations.