Rating: 4/5

Despite Fall’s assertion that he is an academic and not a journalist, his book reads in the casual conversational style of the archetypical 20th century war correspondent. Each chapter stands alone as a study of some particular French Army unit, minority group or ill-fated operation. The individuals are vividly rendered but rarely lingered upon, usually sketched out by only by a couple of sentences before moving on to the next vignette. It is sometimes scattershot and its organisation is mostly thematic rather than coming to an overarching point but Fall’s writing had sufficient momentum to keep me moving.

Fall is clearly irritated by a reductive vision of this war as arrogant white professional soldiers confounded by near-magical jungle spirits in black pyjamas. The French Union forces he describes are an desperately under-supported army mostly comprised of colonial subjects (Moroccans, Algerians, Senegalese as well as more locally raised Viets and Laotians) fighting a startlingly conventional war against regiments of well armed Viet Minh regulars. I appreciated this clarification, even if it was mostly directed at the then contemporary class of American advisors being dispatched to South Vietnam. It does not change anything about the overarching context of the war but plays a big part in Fall’s focus on the strategic successes of the Viet Minh.

I thought his final chapter on revolutionary war (a term he prefers to guerrilla war) convincing, even more so in hindsight of the Second Indochina War where he would be killed a few years after writing this book. For all that, there is plenty of mid twentieth century racism, mostly in the condescending colonial thinking that was so inherent to the French Union and those serving it. Fall’s eyes are focused squarely on the French Union troops. The Viet Minh are ants more than people, a seething mass of limbs and weapons pouring over the parapets or swarming over French armour. The rest of the population are mostly defined by their suffering, at the hands of the communists or the French, and even that mostly happens in absentia. 

A good book, if you are interested in the French failures on a strategic level and Viet Minh successes and also on the operation of the French Union forces on a more personal level. It does not delve beyond that though.