Rating: 4/5

Written almost 60 years ago, this 4 Star account of Gallipoli is still fresh and informative. I was only minimally familiar with this campaign. Fixed that! Moorehead takes you through the inception, planning, execution and final withdrawal with precision and care for all participants. The Allied and the Turkish forces fought bravely, often in desperate battles for small gains in the historic lands near where Xerxes crossed the Hellespont, Achilles and Hector fought on the Trojan Plain, where you can swim between Asia and Europe in an hour. After Moorehead’s description I want to go stand on Sari Bair and look over the battlefields.

Moorehead clearly explains the origins of the plan, Churchill is key but not the only one responsible. The naval campaign to force the Dardenelles was new to me, I thought the land campaign started at the same time but no, The RN and the French tried to break through to the Sea of Marmara first. The failure to force the passage translates to a “victory” for the Turks, bolstering some of the leadership. Later, we see the forces build up, not as strong as they should be. It was quite a collection of forces gathering in Egypt: 
  

  

  This in itself was something of an achievement, for the force that was now assembling itself in Egypt was a very mixed bag indeed. There were the French, a splendid sight on the parade ground, their officers in black and gold, the men in blue breeches and red coats. There were Zouaves and Foreign Legionaries from Africa, Sikhs and Gurkhas from India, and the labour battalions of Levantine Jews and Greeks. There were the sailors of the British and French Navies. There were the Scottish, English and Irish troops. And finally there were the New Zealanders and the Australians.

	These last were an unknown quantity. They were all volunteers, they were paid more money than any of the other soldiers, and they exhibited a spirit which was quite unlike anything which had been seen on a European battlefield before. A strange change had overtaken this transplanted British blood. Barely a hundred years before their ancestors had gone out to the other side of the world from the depressed areas of the United Kingdom, many of them dark, small, hungry men. Their sons who had now returned to fight in their country’s first foreign war had grown six inches in height, their faces were thin and leathery, their limbs immensely lithe and strong. Their voices too had developed a harsh cockney accent of their own, and their command of the more elementary oaths and blasphemies, even judged by the most liberal army standards, was appalling. Such military forms as the salute did not come very easily to these men, especially in the presence of British officers, whom they regarded as effete, and their own officers at times appeared to have very little control over them. Each evening in thousands the Australians and New Zealanders came riding into Cairo from their camp near the pyramids for a few hours’ spree in the less respectable streets, riding on the tops of trams, urging their hired cabs and donkeys along the road—and the city shuddered a little.

The initial landings by the British, ANZACs and the French are covered in all their confusion. One complaint is that the French land forces are almost ignored. The British landing at Cape Helles is “hellish”. The ANZAC landing is similarly difficult. The Turkish force response is better than expected. The future dictator of Turkey makes his mark on the day as he opposes the ANZAC force:

There is an air of inspired desperation about Kemal’s actions this day, and he even seems to have gone a little berserk at times. Instinctively he must have realized that his great chance had come, that he was either going to die here or make his name at last. He was constantly at the extreme front, helping to wheel guns into position, getting up on the skyline among the bullets, sending his men into attacks in which they had very little hope of survival. One of his orders was worded: ‘I don’t order you to attack, I order you to die. In the time which passes until we die other troops and commanders can take our places.’ The soldiers got up from the ground, and ran into the rifle and machine-gun fire; and presently the 57th Turkish Regiment was demolished.

Only 9 months will pass between first landing and last man out. So much sacrifice in between. Initially, the ANZACs thought of the Turks as monsters or animals but Moorehead relates the growing respect for the opponent as the battle rages. In a May 1915 battle, the Turks lose heavily trying to push the ANZAC forces back. In the truce that follows, you can see flashes of the famous Christmas truce in Europe. Each side gains the respect of the other.

The British landing at Sulva Bay is just heartbreaking to read. Victory was there for the taking. Moorehead was not as harsh as he needed to be on the generalship in this battle. Just so terrible to how good leadership could have won the day and saved so many lives. Conversely, the account of the withdrawal of forces from all three beachheads was inspiring. Very clever and almost no casualties incurred. I was very glad to have read this book and hope to find more books focused on individual parts of the campaign. This passage was very sad:

In the many books that were written about the campaign soon after the first world war, there is a constantly repeated belief that posterity would never forget what happened there. Such and such a regiment’s bayonet charge will ‘go down in history’; the deed is ‘immortal’ or ‘imperishable’, is enshrined forever in the records of the past. But who in this generation has heard of Lancashire Landing or Gully Ravine or the Third Battle of Krithia? Even as names they have almost vanished out of memory, and whether this hill was taken or that trench was lost seems hardly to matter any more.

As I write this on the 100th anniversary of the Second Battle of Krithia (and coincidentally the 70th anniversary of VE Day), let us not forget these brave men. Read this book and commemorate the action.