Rating: 4/5

“But his dreams were as gigantic as his surroundings were small.”
I realize wistfully that I cannot revisit all books I read and loved a long time ago. Oh, how I regret not having an endless existence to go back and revisit my most precious memories. However, I have so many new celebrated novels yet to explore. 

I read Jude the Obscure when I was in college, I was so young but used to read whenever I did not have class or did not have to study. If I remember correctly, I discovered it in an English Literature class. I was exposed to marvels through it that are never far away. Yes, I loved Thomas Hardy’s appealing protagonist. I liked that he wanted to advance himself, but no effort would be enough for him to rise above his social status in those times. He is continually knocked out in his aspirations. His love life is no more successful, as he seems to choose unsuitable women.

  “People go on marrying because they can't resist natural forces, although many of them may know perfectly well that they are possibly buying a month's pleasure with a life's discomfort.”

Thus, Jude represents almost every men of his time in England or maybe many other places. From the title we understand that he is an obscure man for his choices make no sense. If I remember correctly, all along we are reminded of what could have been. Nothing could be more melancholic. Despite my lack of maturity at the time I read it and the gloom that involves the novel, a feeling of amazement still rises in me when I think of it. Thomas Hardy must have been a master to inspire me so at my youth. 

  “Somebody might have come along that way who would have asked him his trouble, and might have cheered him by saying that his notions were further advanced than those of his grammarian. But nobody did come, because nobody does; and under the crushing recognition of his gigantic error Jude continued to wish himself out of the world.”

I might one day yet decide to go back to this great book.
___
Note: quotes from Goodreads.