Rating: 4/5

The Confusion is Book Two of the Baroque Cycle. While it is an excellent book it did not strike me as profoundly as the first book (Quicksilver). But even a mediocre NS book tends to tower over any rivals and this book, by no means, is to be considered mediocre.

If you are familiar with the Baroque cycle, you know that the story centers around a few "main" characters through whom the events of history are viewed. The first book introduced us to the Baroque age and all the changes occurring in society. This book picks up where the other left off (good thing since this is the 2nd volume). However, the key focus of this book is money. The development of the modern economy and NS even hints at concepts like price manipulation, currency exchange rates, banking and even the value of specie in relation to the amount of gold or silver in supply.

Does this sound like a yawn-inducing MBA primer? No worries there is plenty of sex, violence and humor. It is a NS book after all. There are two novels in this book (as the first) and they are "Bonanza" and "Juncto". This time the stories occur concurrently instead of during different times.

Bonanza follows Jack Shaftoe's adventures in escaping as a galley slave and then joining the "Cabal". His strange voyages have him go from India to Japan. Jack is a great character and a pleasure to follow his ribald adventures. 

Juncto follows Bob Shaftoe and Eliza. This overall, with Eliza, follows the foundation of the Bank of England whilst Bob is working with Leibniz and Newton, as well as setting up what will one day be M.I.T.

Perhaps the idea of the book focusing on the monetary aspects being developed during this time made it slightly less interesting to me than the first book which focused more on scientific methods. Still the future is evident here as countries try to break away from using precious metals to paper money and bills of exchange. In undergraduate and during my Fulbright I had suffered through enough economics/finance and random Business classes to titillate most hard-core MBA types (I'm a history guy myself..just well educated) to see the brilliance of NS taking horridly boring concepts relating to finance and then dressing them up as a story to convey many financial principles that econ textbooks have trouble elucidating. Some might read the entire book and being caught up in the events never even realize the solid economic principles being espoused. Credit to NS for taking such dry topics and spicing them up using the vehicle of storytelling.

That being said the relentless emphasis on all things financial can make this a book that isn't as fun to read as the first volume. Hence the 4 stars. ios this a good book? Certainly. A great book? Some might find it to be so. I enjoyed it and would recommend it with the caveat that the first book is more exciting (perhaps because it was original).

A nice little read. Can't say I am in a huge rush for book 3. But should I run into it before the year is out I may likely check in to see how the story ends. Highly recommended for anyone that likes NS. Anyone who wants a story introduction to how modern finance came about will also enjoy ferreting out the history and the logic of these events. Want to give your brain a bit of a workout? Go for this one.