Rating: 3/5

This is a bold fearless work and definitely not for the faint-hearted readers. I am not surprised that when this was originally published in 1991, it created lots of controversies with the Catholic Church condemning Jose Saramago for harboring anti-religious vision and his own Portuguese government asking the European Literary Prize to remove this from its shortlist because of the book’s offensive content to religion. Despite this book’s existence, Saramago won the 1998 Nobel Prize for Literature.

This is my third Saramago (Blindness, Double were my others) and my fourth book in what seems to be an unnamed genre: re-telling of the life of Jesus Christ. Last year I read The Last Temptation of Christ (1960) by Nikos Kazantzakis and Christ the Lord: Out of Egypt (2005) and Christ the Lord: The Road to Cana (2008) by Anne Rice. In my “book,” Temptation came first and I am glad I read it first so the idea of twisting the canons by a mere mortal who lived in our generation is not new (translation: not shocking). For me, Anne Rice’s books now seem to be just afterthoughts of these two works.

But why re-tell the life of Jesus Christ? Because of the mysterious gap in his younger years? Because of the weakening fate of the believers? Because more and more people are now turning into atheism or other religions? This depends on what we believe or what each of us was taught to believe when we were younger. However, since this book is about the life of Jesus Christ who’s being venerated by more than half of the people in the world, then I don’t want to dwell on religion. I am leaving this kind of discussion on faith to some other forums like my review on my long staying currently-read book: The Holy Bible: Revised Standard Edition that I started reading in September last year and currently in The Book of Ezekiel and hope to finish all books before the end of this year.

I picked this book because I loved the two works of Saramago. Also, it is Lenten Season and I thought that a Nobel laureate like him would not blaspheme, paint false pictures or mock Jesus Christ. Yes, he did those in this book. I almost wanted to say that this should rather be called The Gospel According to Jose Saramago but for me, it is disrespectful to a great mind like him. After all, he is already dead, was an atheist and a writer so it is not nice for a mere literary enthusiast like me to criticize a dead person (who can no longer defend himself), argue with his beliefs (as he did not believe on any god and said to be a pessimist) and he can invoke poetic devise (twisting facts for the sake of telling a grappling story). In other words, he had or has all the right to come up with a work like this and his cries for oppression due to censorship when the Portuguese government or the Catholic Church called for banning of this are, in my opinion, all uncalled for. 

Jesus having sex with Mary Magdalene in the whorehouse without the blessing of marriage. The demon asking Jesus to use a sheep for sexual release. An angel posing as a beggar during the Annunciation scene. The same beggar-angel walking with Mary to Bethlehem provoking jealousy to the doubting Joseph. Three shepherds instead of 3 kings visiting the family in the Bethlehem. Joseph crucified and dying on the cross mistaken as a zealot. Jesus seeing God in the desert. Jesus riding on the boat with the God and the Devil. These are some of the shocking deviations from the story that Saramago imagined and incorporated to come up with an “irreverent, profound, skeptical, funny, heretical, deeply philosophical, provocative and compelling work.” (Source: Harold Robbin who says that this is his favorite work of Saramago. So far, I agree).

So, how do you rate a book with a disgusting content yet beautifully written? Think J. G. Ballard’s Crash, Marquis de Sade’s 120 Days of Sodom or Bret Easton Ellis’ American Psycho or even Lolita by Vladimir Nabokov. The first time I read them, I was totally disgusted and hated them to the max. Now I realized I missed the whole point. They are really written to shock so their authors can bring the message to the table.

So, what message does The Gospel According to Jesus Christ want us to realize? For me, it is beyond further humanizing Jesus Christ. It is more what choices, regardless whether he is man, god or a their combination, he had before he said yes to his Father for being the sacrificial lamb to propagate Christianity in the world. 

But more than the message, one thing that I enjoyed reading this book is its storytelling style. Many parts are totally hilarious and that style when Saramago directly addressing the reader and he opens your thought by throwing contemporary works and philosophy is just awesome. I have never seen this in any of the works of novelists whose books I so far sampled. 

I am rating this with a 4 (I really liked it) but will probably not recommend this to anyone. I'd rather that they decide for themselves. If they are as open-minded as my friend and reading-buddy Angus, then I would say go. If not, then check how strong is your faith as Saramago can sway you to question your long-held beliefs. It's like having an clever, sweet-talker and well-read atheist in your Bible reading group come one Sunday and he starts questioning what is written in the gospel but he is not obnoxious because he knows what he is talking about. If you are still in Cathecism 101, don't ever dare open this book.