Rating: 5/5

270315: bleak, believable, banal, beautiful- best dystopia of which i had never heard, written by a woman poet. some reviews characterize Kallocain (1940) as kind of a Swedish 1984(1948) or Brave New World (1932), but i suggest the lineage more fruitfully explored is We by Zamyatin (1921). this is a lyrical, poetic, rather mundane world without either the melodramatic oppression, the great names, the obvious powers of orwell's book- ministry of truth, thought police etc.- or the conspiracy of intellectual powers, seductive technology, behaviourism of BNW, this world, this worldstate, seems more plausible, more human, more philosophical. partly because there is no big reveal, no real, identifiable, irresistible powers- only surveillance, informing, group psychology, personal ambitions and emotions radically redirected to the worldstate. when the narrator is less than heroic, when his truth is often revealed accidentally, rather than confessed, and the truth of love is the final private sense of humanity... when this goes under to the power of kallocain truth serum... are we human anymore...?

300619: decided to sum up several dystopian works read in this review, add others later...

200519: 1984. ok so it is time to read this again. i will find it in french. just read web article on guardian about continuing relevance/changed relevance of book in our world. i remember popular version of ‘real’ 1984 think i saw movie 1984 that year... 2017 is impossible to imagine from ‘real’ 1984 as much as ‘real’ 1948(9) when book 1984 was written/published...

i mention ‘brave new world’ in review but that does not have the same hold on my memories. too much (your) tech, science, culture is bad, (our) knowledge special, stupid people (everyone else) need leaders (us), we are smart (thus worthwhile) we have culture (yours is shit) etc. and if you are woman you are slut, stupid, simple, and should be nowhere near thought of. give her o (toys! clothes! fun! etc) she is happy. and then plot=lost boy discovers he is actually prince! (mistaken for lesser when he is real smart...), savagery ok that is how to be real! and read shakespeare dammit all else ever written anywhere by anyone else is just not worthwhile... ok just my early impression...

‘animal farm’ is parable. once you know horse=this, pig=this etc there is only argument about how accurate are the impressions...

‘we’ is beautiful. that is one problem, probably why i love it, but also too abstract for most readers. and then translated as ‘well-doer’ or ‘benefactor’ well which is it? so i read this later at u. more cynical about politics/art vs politics but still really loved gatsby (!) bc he seemed to have more personal meaning. but this somewhat obscure, difficult, poetic book written in 20s? by somebody in what some other language no red-blooded etc (not in cold war anyway) would read! no it is not global (read western?) phenom...

‘handmaid’s tale’ bothers me bc i am young man think young man thought think women etc. possible that there would be (in 1984!) such retrogressive men who would what do this (imprison, rape, kill etc) to women? no. too much feminist paranoia. impossible not now (1984) not in near future not in 2017 alabama where men love women so much they will never let little woman kill little clump of tissue (fetus is baby!) unless said clump is going to kill her! so... i am wrong. but see ther’s this miniseries that only those elitist intelligent leftists watch, wins awards, makes money! and, and then there’s this blonde captain someone and just last year wonder someone and, and alabama, well hey there’s this movie in it...! so maybe handmaid’s will become global phenom...

there are too many other bad places (dys?) i have read since 1984 but yet to find equal... so it is somewhere i like to visit, at least in writing, but no i do not want to live there... i have aa-dystopia bookshelf full of them, not many ya, but this is the book i will always remember...

1984: ...??? childhood: another favorite i have neglected to place, i read this first when i was 12/13/14 or something, an old hardback at home, about the same time as great gatsby. i have read this at least 3 times. so an interesting intro to literature of ideas, something particularly bleak. the vision of switching enemies, getting your hate on, of power for sake of power. the essay on new english made me cognizant of the power of words to distort or even create realities. so many ideographic terms, from thought police to big brother, insures this will never become dated even now after 1984. hard to believe it has given a name to so-called reality tv. i have to be aware of the power of media only just becoming apparent at the time written, brave new world is the one to read for that...

.??? 1980s?: i read ‘brave new world’ much later than Orwell’s 1984 (adolescent first ‘adult’ book), and what bothered me then still bothers me, on this second or third reading. this is that the book suggests a value conflict between science and art, in politics. and gendered relationships with the few women being represented as empty-headed, smiling, greedy, sensual addicts rather than thoughtful, mature, sensible, as men, aargh... not very advanced conceptually there, even if it is of its time. very good elaboration of our misuse of technology in empty amusement, but the idea we need suffering to create art of any consequence (maybe great art yes, more certainly miserable lives), the idea we can condition humans to fit determined roles (existentialist in me rebels at this line of thought, this suggestion humans are entirely determined), that of course we will recognize natural leaders in those who have any sense of art of Shakespeare (culturally blinkered eurocentrism), all seem curiously naive and quaint after the horrors of mechanical warfare, the horrors of genocide...