Rating: 3/5

Poet and novelist Karin Boye’s Kallocain wasn’t at all what I expected, billed as dystopian fiction bearing traces of Kafka and elements of Zemyatin’s We, it read more like a detailed, psychological character study. When Boye wrote this, WW2 was in progress, the Soviet Union and Germany were allies, highlighting possible global domination by one or the other’s particular brand of totalitarianism. This had been an anxiety of Boye’s for some time. During the 1920s as part of radical Stockholm group Clarte, she took part in an official visit to the Soviet Union and was shocked by what she witnessed there. Then in the 1930s on a trip to Berlin she fell for a young Jewish woman Margot Hanel. They returned to Boye’s home in Sweden but Margot’s experiences and Boye’s perspective on Germany’s future set off concerns about National Socialism’s destructive potential. Yet Kallocain has none of the urgency or melodrama of Orwell’s later 1984 or the explicit world-building of the earlier We. Instead, it’s an introspective account presented by Leo Kall, for twenty years he’s been imprisoned far from his home in Chemical City No. 4, World State, possibly held by its rival power. Kall’s a scientist, he looks back at his time in Chemical City No 4 and his role in the invention of a new drug, he’d hoped to name Kallocain. The drug’s a truth serum of sorts, a single dose results in a subject freely confessing to their crimes or exposing their innermost thoughts. Its operations reminded me of Boye’s extensive involvement in psychoanalytic circles, like a perverse twist on the therapeutic process. 

Kall’s tale unfolds slowly, in austere tones. Almost half the novel’s centred on drug trials on live subjects, interspersed with Kall’s private reflections, often drily related. Information about World State’s provided in dribs and drabs or gleaned from brief comments. The overarching features of his society are familiar, citizens are under constant surveillance, organised according to strict hierarchies, children are inculcated with the regime’s beliefs, and there’s an all-pervasive atmosphere of paranoia and distrust. But this isn’t, at least initially, a problem for Kall, in fact it’s welcomed, mistrust and lack of communication between people are the foundation on which World State was built. For Kall its institutions provide order and security despite their focus on perpetual readiness for war. What Boye appears to be doing with Kall is providing a test subject of her own, a means of exploring a personality formed by immersion in or submission to a totalitarian state. 

Kall’s a less ideal member of his collective than he claims, he’s ambitious, self-interested, intensely jealous of colleague Rissen, someone he believes may have an emotional connection with Linda, Kall’s wife, that he doesn’t. Kall further justifies his dislike of Rissen by categorising him as possibly anti-social, an outsider posing a threat to World State. Kall’s state of mind suggests his carefully controlled world’s a façade masking a system prey to manipulation by petty individuals, in which he’s as ‘guilty’ as his human guinea pigs. Boye’s underlying critique also deals in issues of gender, Linda’s creative, empathetic role in the narrative’s presented in opposition to Kall’s and his increasingly damaging behaviour. It appears Boye’s not primarily interested in outlining the specifics of an all-encompassing system but in how it might be reproduced and exploited by individuals within it, those who crave power, people not in themselves monstrous but capable of monstrous deeds, and who convince themselves of their superiority in relation to an undesirable other. But in Linda she also offers a form of hope and an alternative way of being. I thought this was an interesting, well-crafted novel, although the arguments it's presenting could be clearer. But, except in its intense, claustrophobic final stages, I didn’t always find it a particularly engaging piece. It was hugely successful on publication, its circulation in occupied parts of Scandinavia aided by its status as science fiction. Unfortunately, Boye didn’t live to see its full impact and continued popularity, she committed suicide in 1941 not long after its initial appearance, Margot followed her a few weeks later.