Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars

  "Are people so unhappy when they love?" 
"Yes, Christine, when they love and are not sure of being loved."

I would like to start my review by saying that The Phantom of the Opera was not the story I was expecting to read. I had an idea in advance, a really wrong idea, about this novel: I thought I would find a love story with a 'happy ever after' through its pages. While the last fact (a happy ever after) might be true or false and it's completely up to you whether or not this is a happy ending, my first assumption turned out to be wrong: we don't have a love story here; instead, we have the story of an obsession and a dangerous man who has lost his mind. 

Needless to say, this novel was really disappointing for me. It was not so bad though, since I really enjoyed Leroux's narrative quite a bit, and in fact, I might be interested in reading another novel written by him, if for instance, I come across one of his other books in the future; however, my problem with The Phantom of the Opera was basically the plot and the characters; and so you can imagine that my experience overall was not successful. 

If for a moment we ignore the fact that I was expecting to find something different inside this book, and even though I enjoyed the prose and some elements used by the author, such as different narrators throughout the novel, and therefore, different points of view which together complete the story at the end, good descriptions (not so impressive as Victor Hugo's descriptions of Notre Dame of Paris in his homonymous novel) of the Paris Opera House, and so on, the characters (mainly after the middle of the book) were not enjoyable at all, many of their decisions were not right, and the story itself felt sometimes ridiculous, other times annoying.

For instance, two of the main characters, the Opera Ghost and Raoul, were so 'insane' and their behaviors made me feel really uncomfortable, each of them in their own way. 
The Opera Ghost has a completely wrong idea about what love means, and although his background is in the way it is, this fact cannot be used as an excuse; furthermore, there is something called politeness and respect, which are traits that this character doesn't know at all. As for Raoul, oh gosh! I am not pretty sure, and I can't put my finger on it because I can't remember all characters I have come across in my life, but I think Raoul is the most childish, selfish, and annoying character I have met thus far. I would prefer not to say anything else. 
As for our heroine Christine, she is not a bad character but she might have been better, she could have had a better development for instance. I felt as though she was kind of flat, that it was impossible for me to know her deeply at the end of the book.

Sitting on the fence is not something that happens to me so often when I have to review a novel. Eventually, everything comes down to how much I have enjoyed the novel that I have read. However, in this case is certainly hard for me to say if I really liked this book or not, since there are some things I enjoyed reading and other elements that I really hated.
In short, is The Phantom of the Opera a good book? It is, but maybe it was not for me.
Did I enjoy reading The Phantom of the Opera overall? I would say 'yes', but not as much as I had wanted to do so.
So, if you were interested in reading this novel, I would say 'do it, you will probably have a good reading experience'; you know, in the end the last decision is up to us.