Rating: 4/5

I don't know if I can pin down exactly why, but so far this is my favourite book in the series. There was way less time spent on the romance, and yet it was one of the better ones.

The bolder twin of the sisters, Abigail, expects that she'll be able to land Harry Devers where Jessica "failed," since they're a genteel family who can't use the scandalous word legs, let alone talking about her sister being brutally assaulted. However, Miss Trumble is on the case to stop the girls allowing the curse of Mannerling to draw them back in. The girls are reminded of Harry's brutality and Abigail comes to her senses as Lord Burfield comes on the scene.

I rather liked Lord Burfield. He starts out one of those men in want of a wife, but mostly because he's bored of not having one and doesn't really want to be a bachelor for life. Marriage is desirable, finding the woman to marry isn't. At first he is enticed by Abigail's boldness and her masculine interests in his exploits as a soldier.

There is quite a bit of pointing to gender differences at the time, and most especially that if any of the Beverley girls had been a man instead, then his devotion to getting back the family home would have been seen as noble rather than vulgar. Heroic rather than mercenary. Never mind that every other woman tried to marry with money in mind.

Just when it looks like the girls have put Mannerling behind them, Harry Devers gets himself a concussion and has to stay with the Beverleys. Much like Jane had to stay with the Bingleys in Pride and Prejudice. He wants out of the army (again) and knows that his parents won't let him thanks to the scandal with Jessica Beverley. The only way to smooth over the scandal is to marry one of the other sisters.

Because Lady Beverley is worse than ever, she is totally cool with this. She also got rid of Miss Trumble because she, Lady Beverley is a dizzy cow. It's totally believable, too: Lady Beverley dismissed her because Miss Trumble wore a nicer gown to a party.

The only contrived part is how Harry gets injured in the first place. But I thought it was hilarious, so honestly, contrive away. I laughed out loud when it happened.

While the girls nurse Harry back to health, he strikes up a redemption romance with Rachel, Abigail's twin. It all looks like a nice story to those who don't know what a villain Harry is, until Rachel starts to get scared. As Miss Trumble would say, "a rake never reforms." And he doesn't. However, they're already engaged, the wedding approaches, and if she cries off, the Beverleys will be pretty much irredeemably unmarriageable. So Abigail gets an idea out of The Parent Trap.

They switch places, and Abigail goes through with the wedding under Rachel's name. She doesn't think much beyond the moment, until she realises that Harry is not exactly going to wait to consummate the marriage. Long story short, he freaks her out with his drooling lechery and she runs (unintentionally) into the arms of Lord Burfield.

Rachel is saved, and Abigail is to marry the gentlemanly and honourable Lord Burfield. He was already interested in her, and now he doesn't have to do any work at finding a wife. He pretty much says the latter outright. Most of the book from there is about people trying to stop them from getting married. His mother is against it, since Abigail is scandalous and doesn't really have any money. Prudence Makepeace thought that he would marry her, so she would like to see Abigail burst into flame. And Harry has had the humiliation of the century to go on top of his Need Revenge sundae.

Abigail and Lord Burfield have a slap-slap-kiss romance filled with jealousy and petty prideful stubbornness. They even bicker in the last chapter after they finally are married. Miss Trumble continues on quite mysterious, although a major suspicion has been confirmed. Harry is mad as a box of frogs. I can't wait to read the next book.