Rating: 4/5

“He is of medium height, about five feet eight or nine, and strongly, compactly built. Animal joy in his being is implicit in all his movements and attitudes. Since  earliest manhood the center of his life has been pleasure with women, the giving and taking of it,  not with weak indulgence, dependency, but with the power and pride of a richly feathered male bird among hens. Branching out from this complete and satisfying center are all the auxiliary  channels of his life, such as his heartiness with men, his appreciation of rough humor, his love of  good drink and food and games, his car, his radio, everything that is his, that bears his emblem of  the gaudy seed-bearer. He sizes women up at a glance, with sexual classifications, crude images  flashing into his mind and determining the way he smiles at them.”

Stanley Kowalski is the male equivalent of Faulkner’s Dewey Dell who proclaims “I feel like a wet seed wild in the hot blind earth”. Here is raw, primal, lustful sexuality that pulses and seduces a reader (or audience).

“Stell-lahhhhh!’”

The poker scene was made famous by Brando’s performance and Kazan’s brilliant direction, but before the 1951 award-winning film was Tennessee Williams’ masterful scene of primitive love and attraction.

“I’ve always depended on the kindness of strangers”

Blanche DuBois is an archetypal feminine tragic figure on the literary scale with Hemingway’s Lady Brett. But whereas Brett is the domineering, tyrannical alpha female, Blanche’s contribution to our dramatic culture is of the damaged, broken woman, heir to an inheritance that is literally and metaphorically lost.

Tennessee Williams New Orleans play, with the “blue piano” and polka music playing in the background is one our most powerful dramas.

A must read, but like all plays, it must also be seen.

** 2018 - I watched the 1951 film recently and was again amazed at the theatrical tension the play produces, especially when acted out by such talented actors. Interestingly, and sadly, Vivian Leigh, who suffered from bipolar disorder, later in life had trouble distinguishing her real life from that of her character Blanche DuBois. Also, Leigh was paid more than Brando for her performance. Both had previously played these roles on the stage.