Rating: 4/5

Think William Burroughs's Naked Lunch (5 stars) and then add chess as the turning point of the story. I am not an alcoholic. Neither am I a drug user, vagrant nor grew up in a dysfunctional family with abusive father. I have not been into a sport but I box only as part of regular physical fitness. My father and my two older brothers are good chess players. When I was a young boy, there was a chess tournament in our hometown and my eldest brother got the first prize while the second got the second place. I tried playing it but I just could not think prior to moving my piece. This part in Healy's narration did not come to me: 
  "After we'd been playing for around two weeks, something clicked in my chess mind and I started to think before making a move, instead of making a move and then thinking."
Healy was 30 when he started playing chess. I am now 52 so even if I anticipate my opponent's move, I don't think I will be a great chess player. Healy even says: "Talent and youth - that's what's needed for success at chess; with the emphasis on youth."

So that's it. I and this book has nothing in common and it could neither be an escapist book for me. Towards the end, when Healy was in India, I even thought that he would be like Elizabeth Gilbert in her very popular (and I don't know why) Eat, Pray, Love (1 star). Good that Healy did not go to Italy and Indonesia. Otherwise, I would not have given this a 4-star rating that in Goodreads means "I really like it!"

So, why did I like this book? The writing: it felt sincere. It is devoid of difficult words and literary style that sometimes are used by authors only to impress. The telling is straightforward and the short sentences felt urgent and you can't stop reading while wondering if there is really that "grass arena" in the seedy part of London where guys with no bottles of booze can get killed (or those who don't share bottles can get killed too).

In summary, it is a self-confession of an alcoholic in London. Then he discovers chess and it brings him back to sanity.

Thank you to Whitaker for swapping this book with my "Noli Me Tangere". My eldest brother, Joselito and our common friend Emir Never (both of them are good chess players as well as bookworms) are patiently waiting for me to finish this book so they can borrow. Haha. My brother says that this is a rare book and they've been looking for this book since many months ago. Only to find out that I have it in my to-be-read folder.

A must read for all chess players and readers.