Rating: 5/5

[Lady] Antonia Fraser, married to the playwright Harold Pinter (now deceased) and so forming a formidable intellectual household, is a popular narrative historian who is always highly readable and never patronising. She entertains as she educates and never talks down to her reader.

In this book, she looks at a theme rather than a period, centring the story of warrior queens in reality and in legend initially on a tale familar to the British, Boadicea (or Boudicca if you prefer), but extending her analysis to a series of strong women in history who meet her criteria.

She moves effortlessly from first century AD Britain to such interesting characters as Zenobia of Palmyra, Matilda (or Maud) who fought for the throne of England with Stephen, Tamara of Georgia, Isabella of Castile and many others through to a comparison with Mrs Thatcher.

She does not neglect other continents with chapters both on Jinga of the Ndongo in Africa and the Rani of Jhansi in the British Raj. She allows comparison and contrast - political successes like Elizabeth I with noble failures like Matilda of Tuscany and complete failures like Louise of Prussia.

Fraser is one of those writers who might be called feminist if the term had not been destroyed as a positive one by a generation of grievance specialists and moral fanatics who sit as part of that exercise in group-think that purports to be the Western Left.

She is to be regarded as a strong voice for the female point of view without a collapse into ideology. She sits alongside Simone de Beauvoir, Camille Paglia and, in my view, Virginie Despentes as someone who gives voice to women and makes men stop, think and, when necessary, change.

Above all, she is an excellent historian. I cannot think of one occasion where I felt I had to dispute a judgement she makes on the evidence placed before her. She thinks in the round, able to see how her narrative relates to culture and society then and now (1988 in this case).

When she points out the sometimes absurd manner in which a largely male culture has reconstructed these women - often too positively it might be said because of the chivalric impulse or the will to believe in a 'queen' or 'goddess'- she does so without moralising. 

It has some useful insights into male absurdity and is more useful in pointing out that women are capable of anything (should they choose to want to do anything) than all the dull or shrill tracts thrown at men in outrage or bitterness. 

I will be gifting this book to my daughter as an exemplar of good writing and sound historical sense but it is not just a feel-good book for women (which I hope it will be), it is also a book that any man can profit from reading. I recommend it on that basis alone.