Rating: 5/5

In a time before I first read this novel I was still young enough to believe I was going to have to eventually place myself in one of the many categories that other people seemed to be placing themselves into. Then after I finished reading it and because its characters didn’t fall into any available categories I knew from my small little world, I felt a sudden and overwhelming sense of relief. I suddenly believed I was right and had always been right about the way I despise stereotypes, clichés and the way most people always seem to want to be part of big groups. 

  (...) if you walk around looking like someone other than who you are, you could end up getting the wrong job, the wrong friends, who knows what-all. You could end up with somebody else’s whole life.

This time after I turned the last page and found myself in love with these characters again, I also realised that I actually despised stereotypes even more fiercely than I did nearly seventeen years ago! However, I was very surprised to find myself feeling exactly the way I did all those years ago; that I still have a life of possibilities ahead of me. 

  We become the stories we tell about ourselves.

Because strangely, or maybe not, stories filled with melancholy and feelings leading to introspection are always the ones that take me closer to what I believe to be my true self. The real me! It’s not like sadness is what I look for in literature or even in real life. No. What moves me about stories, life itself or people’s lives in general is and always has been their honesty; their capacity to gently and subtly show themselves in a mirror-like kind of way that would reflect or even completely reveal myself and give me a completely new perspective of my life. Because, let’s be truthful, life never seems more beautiful than it does in that moment when we think about the pain we’re not feeling but we know it’s there under our skin ready to strike at any moment. Or when we look at a stunning sunset and let ourselves be carried away by that powerful feeling of certainty that that sense of beauty comes from the fact that moments like that have been happening every single day. Since ever and forever.

Beauty and pain are always going to walk hand in hand. 

Art is our anchor.