Rating: 5/5

Sometime in my teen years I all but stopped reading fantasy, and this was because I was only familiar with the dozens of modern purveyors, all of whom I felt were just trying to ape Tolkien in the most awkward and pandering way. I hadn't yet realised that Tolkien had many contemporaries who had their own voices, styles and abilities, who could have taken the genre in wholly different directions had they been as well known. One day, I happened upon the first volume of the Dying Earth tales, and, vaguely remembering having read something about him being a science fiction writer in the past, decided to give it a try. Within a few pages, I was completely drawn in, and there was simply no escape for me. What accomplished this, without doubt, was Vance's unparalleled wit and the effortless beauty of his grandiloquent prose. I believe at the time I was already familiar with the decadent fantasies of Clark Ashton Smith, and with Vance's Dying Earth I was much reminded of the stories of lonely Zothique, the last continent on an Earth at the end of its natural life. Vance occasionally allows himself to become incredibly unrestrained, such as in the early battle of two wizards, and it was this sense of wildness and dreamy delirium that utterly won me over with the early Dying Earth tales. They read like the myths of some far-flung, decadent and ancient culture, where magic and science are the same thing and both spoken of with equal wonder. There's a mad logic underpinning everything and the setting is as alive and potent as in something like peake's Gormenghast. Reading this, my sense of the otherworldly and alien was kindled to such an extent that there was simply no way I wasn't going to track down everything else by the man, and he became a favourite author, even if most of his other work doesn't have quite this feeling of the fantastic and strange about it.

This omnibus volume is the perfect way to experience everything about the Dying Earth. In the first set of published stories, one becomes familiar with the setting, and, if you like, the "mythology" and its function. Here the characters are not so important, but I aappreciate the way Vance uses brief mentions of characters or situations from one story to lead into the next, where that character or situation will tend to be the element of focus. I think this is particularly well handled with liane the Wayfarer, who proves himself to be an utter bastard in his brief and accessory role in one story only to appear to escape scott-free, and then in the next tale our attention centres wholly on him and we learn of his eventual fate.

The second and third books deal with the exploits of "Cugel the Clever", so named by the man himself, which is a neat trick because he's really not so clever at all. It's here that Vance's love of the absurd and picaresque really comes out, and we're given rapier-sharp humour and dry wit that's sometimes extraordinarily clever and sometimes just a bit ribald and often elicited laughs from me. Some of the jokes might even go over your head if you don't have a dictionary handy, and some of them only make sense after they're repeated a few times (I particularly like the bit about the Blue Concentrate!). Cugel's misadventures are classic stuff, and these two books make up the "novel" part of the series and form a full, coherent narrative. I groaned and laughed with delight when at the end of Eyes of the Overworld it transpires that Cugel basically has to cross the world all over again because of a stupid mistake, and so he does this, but travelling in the opposite direction in the next book. A cool thing if you ask me is that these stories are basically just a conceit for Vance to take us all over his Dying Earth, so we can meet an unbelievable host of bizarre characters, visit dozens of strange places with even wilder customs, and learn how it is that Vance manages to create interesting quirky societies all as though it were nothing at all to him. There were times when I just stopped reading for a bit and shouted aloud, "just how does he dream up all this stuff?" They're basically travel books in a fictional universe told more-or-less from the perspective of a total scoundrel who tries to get the upper hand in every dealing but usually ends up with the short end, even if he never entirely realises it. I was sometimes reminded of Gulliver's Travels, or Candide, which is high praise indeed.

Finally, the last book in the series, Rhialto the marvelous, is all about the arch magicians of the Dying Earth: their rivalries, foibles, travails, and the various tools at their disposal. I enjoyed reading about their antics, and Vance takes great care in explaining here how magic really works in this universe, without making it at all boring and tedious, which is quite a feat. However, I feel like he must have been having some bad times while writing this one, because the sense of justice throughout is, to put it mildly, pretty skewed, and the ending kind of left a bad taste in my mouth. I'm sure this was deliberate, and maybe Vance was getting more cynical in his older years, but the tone doesn't quite seem to connect with the rest of the series, and the last story in particular is a bit of a downer...strange, me saying this, as I tend to be attracted to "dark and doomful", but this was just kind of bloodyminded. Still, Rhialto is a joy to read and contains some of Vance's most flamboyant prose.