Rating: 4/5

The Of Mice and Men was a sad novel written by John Steinbeck. This story tell about two man Lennie and George being some reson must need to Leave their home and go to reach at up north. Most important part was happen in the farm. they has meet more character in farm, such as Curley and his wife, silm, candy and the carlson. they have different personality. 

 At the end of this story was so sad. Because I can feel what they feel and understand how did George feel form break his dream and kill his best friend. I don't have energy word to describe how I feel. If I am George, I don't know if I will change the end or doing same as george. He get a bad choice in this novel. All the people in the farm, they get not choice for their life.No hope! No dream! No Lennie any more! I can't think how hurt George was. whole Novel was exciting and sad, But it was one of my favorite novel.

 The best things I like to read of this novel was the relationship between every character. The best example was Lennie and George. George always took care of Lennie-like a big brother would. Even thought Lennie got into lots of trouble, George didn't just leave him alone to overcome his challenges. What he did was help Lennie out of his difficulties and protect him. When Lennie was going to meet the boss of the farm, George told Lennie to remember to not say anythings. George Knew that If the boss heard Lennie speak, he might not let him work on the farm.George Always reminds Lennie what he can do and what he can't do. Even I finish whole novel and read George Kill Lennie at the end, I still think George are really like George and want to protect him. George was the only people who understand Lennie and care him. This kind of friendship was the best one I always want to have. Because I was break out with my friends. So, I has to feel envy toward about their friendship.
 Another reason I like The Of Mice and Men was the setting of this book. Every character has different meaning and relate with the real society. Lennie are show the child life in early 1920s. George showing the working class's life. Curley's wife are represent the whole woman during that time. In 1920, all the worker might same as George. They work during their most life to get money for buying a house and they have same dream. 

 This novel bring me a lot thinking about life. Life always change and fast than our change. When you start to plan your dream and about your furture, but world already change. When we start to read this book, we read their dream and hope. But, at the end, all the hope are already broken. Nobody can change it.