Rating: 4/5

4.5/5

First book by Agatha Christie.

Death Comes As the End by Agatha Christie revolves around the main protagonist Renisenb, a young widow of Khay, who returns home after 8 years to live again with her family - with her father, three brothers, sisters-in-law and their children. When she returned home she found that everything had changed. Life seems more abstract and confusing to her. And she live with the fear of everything—with the fear of death—for which Christie gave no specific reason. Apart from this, why she left her home 8 years back was not even explained. Her house is always full of unusual fights between her sisters-in-laws, who fight with their husbands in an attempt to win her father's favor. After some days Renisenb's father returns home with a young beautiful but wicked and evil concubine, Nofret. NOFRET - suits with her personality. NOFRET in Egypt means "extreme beauty" for which she was exquisitely portrayed. On the other hand Nofret in Hindi means "hatred". I often pronounced it as "नफरत" because the hatred immediately breeds in the family after her arrival. It seems that she had a personal prejudice for Rheinsenb's family and now she is back- evil is back to take revenge on everyone. Although she was later proved innocent when her body was found on the cliff and from that moment, the mystery of the book began….
There are a lot of mysteries in the book - some usual the most unusual ones that makes you wonder what's going to happen next, who's going to die next, and when it seems like you've found it, something strange happens and changes everything beginning another mystery......

What I love most about this book is its setting in ancient Egypt. The names of the characters, the ornaments they wore, the places, religions, and especially the names of the Egyptian Gods- was excellent overall which ensures realistic atmosphere of ancient Egypt.
The only thing I didn't like was how the central character Reinsenb was portrayed. I remember that Renisenb decided to visit Hori at Cliff because Hanet told her even though Renisenb knows that Henet is her enemy; she hates Renisenb. Renisenb sometimes made strange decisions in the book. She were also sometimes portrayed as naive and foolish women in my view. I have never liked her much as a central character. My favorite character was Hori. Quite a visionary person.

The ending:
And in the end, the real killer was….no…no, I am not going to open the biggest twist here. Read it yourself to find it out but I'm sure you will be shocked when you find it.