Rating: 2/5

Finished reading on Thursday, April 16, 2009. . Yipes, the first couple of pages are turning my hair grey. Early experiments with gunpowder. Lets just fire a projectile out of a metal tube and watch its passage toward a distant target, then lets swiftly check whether or not we can re-fire out of the same tube? Most importantly have the seams held? Hey, lets just pour more gunpowder down into this hot metal tube, to see? 

Hold on a minute, I’m thinking… Hot metal tube and gunpowder, and a query over whether the seams are holding. Lets get back to that word - HOT!!! 

There was an amusing start here, the 1st couple of pages of ‘explosive’ scene setting were entertaining then I got bogged down around page 14 because of the pages of military history I had to negotiate to get that far, I had started to zone out a little… I trotted on through that though and really was enjoying it till I put it down, somewhere in my flat… and it must have fallen into a wormhole! 

ADDED – 21 March 2010 ~ Updating my reading records and have realised this review had not been added to my online records - till now! 
I am such a Cherryh fan I did want to read this but it took me some persevering to complete, the creation of the epic tale, lots of back story political shenanigans and chunks of military history causing me to zone out more than somewhat. Also the nature of the tale told necessitated some periods where the activity drifted and during some of the lulls particularly near the end I felt I was on hold waiting for something to happen. 
 
The book starts with a dramatic breathless race, determining friend from foe as a company of artisan inventors prepare a large group of people, in secret, to flee a city under siege; escape into enemy territory that once had belonged to some of the fleeing group, scary evasion of pitiless warriors; the search for historic artifacts of power or at least answers in a now ruined and abandoned, cursed ancient city; setting up credibility under assumed personas, and finally establishing a economic stronghold hidden deep behind enemy lines while, in essence, developing superior weaponry! 
 
This ended up feeling like it had blended two or three stories together and in the process left many loose ends most of which I anticipate would not be picked up in the following sequel. That was another issue, I hadn’t focused on the fact before reading this that the cover stated this was Book 1 of the Sword of Knowledge, and so had no idea as I read it that it was one of a series, and that was disappointing as I wanted a greater sense of the story rounding off. I finally realised a sequel was in the offing as the closer I got to the end, the feeling of another sequence of events just kicking off started to alert me. 

In retrospect I recall that despite having some brilliant passages and intriguing plot trails it left me feeling flat though it certainly had many points of interest throughout.