Rating: 4/5

What can I say? It's Chaucer. Yet, it's not his typical work. I was fascinated by the premise of this poetic piece. 

Told in rhyming couplet, Chaucer places himself as the main character of the drama. He has a dream that he meets the god of love, Cupid, and Alceste. He praises Alceste for being the most beautiful of all women, to which, Cupid scolds him for approaching her. He tells Chaucer that his translations of "Romance of the Roses" and "Cressida" are disgraceful. Alceste steps in to the rescue and pleads with Cupid not to be so harsh. She grants Chaucer grace in her presence and tells him to write more about noble women, praising them and the beauty of love. Before the scene ends, she asks Chaucer to begin with Cleopatra. So, he does. Telling the bare bones stories of Cleopatra, Thisbe, Dido, Hipsipyle, Medea, Lucretia, Ariadne, Philomela, and Hypermnestra, he attempts to uplift love in these tragic love stories.

I've never read a piece of medieval literature like this. The culpable narrator seems to fail the quest given to him by Alceste. As in many ancient tales, the women who pity men in their situations, end up being extremely attractive, yet vulnerable. And men who see a damsel in distress are painted as charged predators. It appears that Chaucer could not perform his task. He even claims to leave out the whole story of each tragedy, stating that he doesn't have time to finish or that he needs to skip ahead to spare the reader of becoming bored with the details. Every woman in these stories is betrayed and every man rides off into the sunset with whatever or whomever he wishes. So, in once sense, there is a bit of comedy in it, because it is clear Chaucer is unable to do his task or he refusing. These stories are horrific. For the most part, they all end the same in Chaucer's version. Yet, we know that in these actual stories, a couple of these women end up just fine in the end. Could it be that Chaucer intentionally made himself look incapable or unwilling to demonstrate a point to writers in the medieval period?