Rating: 5/5

The first time I read this was when I was 13, and the hold that this book has had on me ever since...

The story follows LaRaine Evans--or Rainey, as Travis lovingly calls her--a struggling actress. ("Actress" is a bit generous since by LaRaine's own admission, she can't act her way out of paper bag.) She's a spoiled brat, there's no way around that, and the first half of the book is a little rough because everyone expects the worst of her, so she just decides to give them what they want. If she were a side character in another book--and based on some conversations about her past, I'm assuming she's been in two other Dailey Harlequins--I would probably hate her, but I just can't here. LaRaine is actually rather honest with herself: she knows that she doesn't have a future in the film industry, she's aware of the dire financial straits she's in, and to top it all off, she doesn't have a friend in the world. I just end up feeling bad for her. 

Through a series of unfortunate events, LaRaine finds herself on Travis's doorstep, working as his housekeeper so she can earn enough money to get back to California. This is where the book gets good, and it more than makes up for the first half of the book. Travis has been a background character in two previous Dailey Harlequins, and it's nice that he's getting a starring role here. (And a happy ending.) He's a little more sarcastic here, but he's not biting or cruel. He spends most of the book amused by LaRaine, and he's really the only character that doesn't expect the worst of her. He calls her out on being spoiled, but he also sees past the bitchy front she puts up. 

I like how the story unfolds over the course of (a little over) two months. Granted, two months is still way too fast to fall in love and get married, but this isn't the real world, and it's a vast improvement over stories where the two leads spend just a week together before they're falling head over heels in love (although, let's be honest, if done right, I love those too). You get to see their relationship develop over time, and there a lot of sweet, fluffy moments between the two of them. Also, they renovate the house together, and all of those scenes are wonderful. 

Is it cheesy? Yes. Is it cliched? Yes. But LaRaine and Travis have wonderful chemistry, and I'm always a sucker for bratty heroines falling for a more serious men. This was the first Janet Dailey I ever read, and I still think it's her best.