Rating: 2/5

Jeff Baker is granted the gift of eternal youth. However, it's not all it seems...
Set around 2040, Seventy-eight-year-old Jeff Baker has revolutionized the world by inventing the ultimate method of information storage and allowing free use of it with no profits going into his own pocket. Because of this generous act, he is chosen by the European Union to be the first recipient for rejuvenation technology, which will leave him with the body of a young man. As part of the deal, he will support the re-election of the EU president.
I’ve noticed some after reading and reviewing more books now than ever. The story plot can be amazing and the writing terrible or the other way round. In this case, Misspent Youth had an interesting idea, with great writing, but the story progression just went down the drain. 
I’ll start with what I like because I don’t actually hate this story, I just felt dissatisfied. 
It’s essential a story about a father, his son and their struggle to connect again after the intrusion of advanced (medical) technology in their lives. It deals with the physical, but mental psychological after Jeff undergoes. 
The start was great, creating a futuristic England with an uptight Sue, a tired out Jeff and a young Tim. From the very start, I can tell that these characters weren’t the epitome of good and that’s what makes the character realistic, promising character progression. Hamilton’s style of writing is descriptive, something that I’m not used to reading, but done in a way that’s not long-winded.
The reason why I got this book out was because of the title, and when someone old is given a second chance at life in a younger body, the hope would be not to screw up! (And low and behold Jeff royally screws up). 
I wasn’t too keen with the whole EU, the separatists, and the development of technology aspects but he wrote it with interest that sets up the Commonwealth Universe. 
BUT - I wish I could have picked any other book by Hamilton to read, but this one is a mistake. If I wanted to read a book about sex, I would have picked some other book, but this one was just so URGH! The characters were pretty much a ‘you love them or plain right hate them’ and in my case they turned unpleasant; Jeff just wants to have sex with anyone, Tim is the average moody teenager with no redeeming quality. The women like Sue and Annabelle didn’t have a personality, other than sex objects or gold diggers. The only science fiction element was the whole rejuvenation aspect. Cut that out and this was like a soap drama ending in disaster. 
And the ending was terrible because it suddenly ended on a soppy note, leaving me with a ‘WTF did I actually read!’ 
Oh man, I wish wholeheartedly that I read another book by Hamilton. Misspent Youth is not the book you should read first if you’ve just started reading anything by Hamilton. Although I do like his style of writing, sadly the way the story progressed was dreadful with an unsatisfied ending.