Rating: 2/5

Two points of importance: 

1. I expected this book to be biographical so when it turned out to be more of "devotional" in nature, I was disappointed.
2. Reading about Mother Teresa's beliefs was interesting, but I feel like this book would have been a much more powerful experience for someone in her religion. 

I do highly respect her and appreciate the opportunity to ponder some of the lovely ideas that were presented. 

"The fruit of silence is prayer.
The fruit of prayer is faith.
The fruit of faith is love.
The fruit of love is service.
The fruit of service is peace"

"You must be full of silence, for in the silence of the heart God speaks. An empty heart God fills. Even Almighty God will not fill a heart that is full- full of pride, bitterness, jealousy- we must give those things up. As long as we are holding these things, God cannot fill it. Silence of the heart, not only of the mouth- that too is necessary- but more, that silence of the mind, silence of the eyes, silence of the touch. Then you can hear Him everywhere: in the closing of the door, in the person who needs you, in the birds that sing, in the flowers, the animals- that silence which is wonder and praise."

"Love to be true has to begin with God in prayer. If we pray, we will be able to serve and therefore today let us all promise that we will give out hands to serve the poor. That we will give our hearts to serve them for they too have been created for the greater things..."

"Hunger is not only for bread, hunger is for love, to be loved, to be wanted. That terrible loneliness of the old and the ... people is a terrible hunger. Nakedness is not only for a piece of cloth but nakedness is also that want of dignity, that beautiful gift of God, the loss of purity of heart, of mind, of body. Homelessness is not only for a house made of bricks, homelessness is also being rejected, being a "throw away" of society, unwanted, unloved, uncared [for]. There among these people you can put and I can put my love for God in a living action. There are many people I am sure in hospitals that have no one to visit them. Maybe just a little visit, a little smile, a little shake of the hand can bring joy in the lives of these lonely people who have no one."