Rating: 5/5

Mysticism isn’t a line of thought separated from religion. They both share a basis in the human soul – the feeling that the world is no accident or blind force and that the human spirit and body are closely linked with the universe and its Creator. The pagan who made a god of stone knew full well that the stone by itself could neither hear nor help him. He often carved it himself, but the stone was part of the rocks, the mountains, the rivers - of all nature. When addressing the stone, the idolater spoke to Creation and to its forces. Primitive as he might have been, he felt somewhere within him that if one learned the essence of the stone, its origin and its secret, one would know everything. The idol to him was the symbol of the mystery of the world. Those who deified animals or men had similar feelings.
 A Little Boy in Search of God: Mysticism in a Personal Light ~~~  Isaac Bashevis Singer

I'm going to tell you a secret ~~ I consider myself to be a mystic and a seeker. To me, life is not a series of random events. At an early age I started to see patterns in my life. At six years old I told my mom that I would be starting my life journey at seven. 
  Yes, I was a weird kid.
 Thank god I eventually encountered  Isaac Bashevis Singer.
 
I first read  A Little Boy in Search of God: Mysticism in a Personal Light when I was in high school. It was a book that fell off the shelf at my feet while walking thru the stacks at the public library; I took this as a sign that I should read it ~~ for me, it was a mystical moment ~~ 
  I told you I was weird.
 I have been enchanted with this magical book ever since.

Singer returns to his childhood and youth in Poland to chronicle the his religious boyhood which which was greatly influenced by Jewish Mysticism. He also shares his intrigue and growing awareness with science ~~ thanks in large part to older brother  I.J. Singer, philosophy and human tragedy.

Singer shares recollections along his journey: incantations mumbled by a small boy, debates over free will between his devout mother and his skeptic, older brother, a winter of hunger and illness, and the continual abuse of poor Jews by thugs.

Ultimately, Singer comes to define life as a synonym for death, protest, goals, suffering, having, wanting, countless questions and even more contradictions.

Sadly, 
   A Little Boy in Search of God: Mysticism in a Personal Light
 has been out of print for many years. It is worth the effort to track down a copy of this wonderful book. 

Highly recommended.