Rating: 5/5

I was wondering how much of "Amberwell" and "Summerhills" was in this sequel, "Still Glides the Stream" and not until near the very end did I find out that not much additional information, except Roger and Mary had twins. It was still fun to hear about them and Stephen and Emmie. The time frame is a couple years after "Summerhill" ends and it has to do with two family estates nearby. The toll of World War 2 is quite clear and the effects it has to the families. As I read I took notes and it is funny about my guessing of the love matches as I read on and change my mind. This time D. E. Stevenson fooled me but then again I guessed several things before they occurred. A delightful read as all her novels are, they are engaging and make me want to read straight through until I finish, when all is over, I would love to hear more about her characters.

Story in short- Will Hastie comes home to help his father with their estate and looks to see his neighbors, who are truly friends but there is a sadness from the loss of their beloved son, Rae, Will's friend.

💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢💢❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌spoiler alert❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌❌
In the end I was happy that Will and Patty married, Rae would be happy besides Julie had been right, she could only love once in a life time, that would be selling Rae short if she married Will, he did not love her enough, otherwise he would have tried to change her mind and followed her to France. I think Julie will probably fall in love with Andre after they have a baby, they will have that special bond.

Will Hastie is coming home after travelling and thinks of his childhood friends Rae and Patty Murray, their father Colonel Tom Elliot Murray. Broadmeadows is the Hasties' place and Langford is for the Elliot Murrays. Will's father travelled a lot and he spend a lot of time with his friends. Will had enlisted during the war and stayed on after, his father let Broadmeadows for 10 years so that while working in London, they could make money on the estate. Will has not been home for 10 years and when he had leave, he stayed with his Dad in London. Rae was killed during the war and it has taken a toll on Colonel Murray. Will feels deep sadness when he sees him. Will sees Patty at the church and they walk home to Langford. Patty wants Will to tell her how much he thinks her parents have changed. Will notices an engagement ring and she tells of her fiance, Hugo, who is her cousin. After Rae died, Hugo wrote a letter to the Murrays about being sorry and he came to stay. Langford is entailed and goes to Hugo. Will seems upset, maybe he loves Patty? Will has lunch and finds out Mrs. Murray thinks her son is away not dead. The Hestons are friends, they come from London. It seems there is another Murray that might be an uncle of the colonel, his father's brother, who has a son. That would ruin Hugo's plans to take the house. Patty tells Will about a letter Rae sent before he died, thinking he can explain to his parents something and for them not to worry. Maybe he found a girl at the farm and she was going to have his baby, maybe they married? Hugo wants Patty to marry him soon but she is not wanting to leave her parents, he decides to wait some more. Patty has wanted to talk to Brenda Heston about the Murrays she knows, that might be Patty's cousin but of course Hugo is not interested and wants her not to write them, he might not be entailed to the estate. Will has seen Hugo at the post office is not impressed, he has stayed away from Langford but when his father and him get invited over, he decides that he must go. It seems like Patty and Hugo like each other a lot but Margaret Murray does not think they like each other that much and are fooling themselves. Colonel Murray told Patty that she must firm up the marriage, Hugo was talking to him. He wants his daughter to come back and be mistress so her children would inherit their home. Patty is not aware of his feelings, she just feels like staying home and not marry too soon. Will is invited to party for Patty and Hugo but he does not want to go. The couple decide to go on a hike and he wants to climb to the top on Cloudhill but it is getting cold and Patty is afraid of getting lost. Hugo tells her to go own herself and he continues to climb. Patty trips and almost hurt herself, she is mad at Hugo, Rae and Will would have helped her down. Hugo has not come back and she starts to worry but then he shows up so self assured and she is quite upset at him. Hugo has placed the rock on top and tells Patty. Will decides he rather go on a trip for he does not like Hugo. Will has planned to go to the farm in France where Rae was before he was killed. Even though he told Patty that Rae's letter was probably nothing, he feels it might be something that he wanted to tell when them, when he returnned home on leave. I bet he married a French girl and they had a baby boy. Father Anton showed Will the grave and he mentioned Julie was the widow of Rae. He had married them himself. Julie puts fresh flowers on his grave yearly but sometimes she can not come herself but a package does. Jean Leyrisse is the farmer who Rae stayed with and is wife and Julie had to leave the farm after the farmer died, soon after Rae. The Leyrisse's son also died in the war. The Father does not know Julie's address but they live in the south, Will took the postmark from the flowers with him to take to the post office. While waiting for the postmark, Mr. Hastie had written his son and he tells of Patty's visit, she wants Mr. Hastie to tell Hugo and her parents that the wedding is off, Patty told him something happened between the couple which caused her to change her mind. Will travels to Nivennes and still nobody has heard of the Leyrisses. Will wonders if he should still look for her and decides that Rae would like him to find and help her, need be. Will is at a restaurant and drinking some wine, he asks the usual question about Leyrisse and finally it is known that she lives nearby with her mother who is sick. The restaurant waiter finds Julie at the market, she knows he is Will &amp; a boy around 11, Rae's son Tom is near by. They both speak English. Julie and Will talk and then Will talks about Rae's parents wanting to see them and that Tom will own the estate. Julie is afraid and Tom can not be shared and Will tells Julie that Rae would want his son to be at his home. Tom is very adventuresome and comes to see Will to watch him shave before school. Will meets Julie's mom who is not happy with him. Will tries to tell Julie that it is important for Tom to be brought up in Scotland and learn what he needs to know about the estate. I was thinking Patty and Will, but there is a slight chance less 1% that Will and Julie marry. Tom visits Will and talks about going to Langford. Madame Leyrisse does not want her daughter to go and does all she can to stop this. Julie does not show up and Will worries but Tom comes the next day saying that his grandmother was faking an illness so Julie will stay home. The grandmother hates Will. Will has a letter from his father about Colonel Murray not doing well and he must fly back to tell them about Julie and Tom, this might help him have an interest in life after Patty broke the engagement. Julie promises to come with Tom to Langford soon. It seems they like each other a lot, as friends. Miss Vernon tells Will that she knew about Tom's grandparents but Julie told her that she did not want to write but she would have told sometime later. I think it is 50% that Will marries Julie. Will is to fly out and wants Miss Vernon to keep an eye on them. Will tells his father about Rae's son and his wife. I think Will will marry Julie. Will has told the Murrays about Rae's family and they are about to come to Langford. They are looking for a pony for Tom from Roger Ayrton from Westkirk, has one that his son has grown out of. Will remembers Roger from the war. Patty wants to go with Will to look at the pony. Patty notices a difference in Will since coming back from France. He talks a lot about Tom but hardly anything about Julie. Will loves Julie, I bet and does Patty love Will? If she did she would never have considered marrying Hugo. As with the last book "Summerhills" the Roger and Mary Ayrton are married and have twins. It seems that Patty does not herself think of marrying Will but I think he will marry Julie. Stephen Ayrton and Tom are about the same age, maybe they wil be fast friends. Will and Julie will marry I am sure now. Colonel Murray is not worried about Hugo. Julie and Tom arrive and the Murrays are stricken how Tom looks just like Rae did as a boy. Patty heard that Julie was beautiful, but thinks she is only attractive. Julie asks about if Patty thinks Will as a brother. Tom is excited about the pony and the Colonel since knowing about Tom is excited about living. Patty sees that the reason Julie asked about Will and her because she likes Will and the way they look at each other. She sees that she did not love Hugo and that she must bare the hurt in her heart because she realizes she loves Will. She saw a stone in the car that she saw before, the one Hugo said that he put up on the mountain, he had lied and she had no regrets. Brenda, Patty's friend sees her friend suffering about Will and Julie; Brenda suggests they go away for few days to see the Murrays from Canada in London and Patty agrees she needs to get away. Patty finds out that indeed the Murrays from Canada are relations for the locket of a grandmother was the same picture at Langford. Brenda is engaged to Duncan Murray. Patty is enjoying the dance and sees Hugo, she mentions the stone and Hugo is speechless. I was wrong, it is Patty that marries Will. Will has gone to friends after he proposed to Julie. She had said no because she sees things in the long run. She would not be happy in Scotland and even though she is not in love with Andre, a man that has wanted to marry her for a long time but she had Tom and could not. He leaves, he thought she had loved him and thought she was cold in marrying someone she did not love. She told Patty the same thing and she wanted to go away before Will came back. Tom will stay at Langford and Julie will go home, and it will seem like she is coming back but then she will write that she will marry Andre. Patty wanted to ask her about loving Will but she can not. Will comes back and Patty tells her messages about Andre and Julie, he says he has been a fool and that he loves Patty. Julie had told Patty that she was very young when she married Rae and they had loved romantically but that had been a fairy tale. I think Julie sees that she would be unhappy in Scotland but I think she does love Will, romantically and that is why she wishes to leave before his return, so she will not cave, knowing that he had proposed. She saw this cleary and I agree with her, she did the right thing, especially since unknown to her Patty loved Will. It would have been hard for them both. Patty and Will come to Nivennes and Will does not want to see Julie but Patty does. She sees Julie is happy and Andre is pleased. She told Patty the reason she left Langford was because of what Rae had told her about Will and Patty love each other, they do not knows it yet. So Julie would have loved Will but knew this to be true. Julie is happy to hear Tom is at Summerhills and he is doing well. Patty and Will have a little girl and been married 2 years, Julie and Andre are expecting a boy and then hopefully a girl. Mrs. Murray has died. I am sure Patty will tell Will about what Rae said about them and he will no longer be upset about Julie.