Rating: 4/5

My gut reaction to this book is that it is a "Harry Potter meets Pennywise the Clown, set at the Dark Shadows house and edited by Darren Shan" spook-fest. If that statement sounds like a criticism, you are wrong! I love the boy wizard, Stephen King, Barnabas Collins and the author I consider to be the middle-grades/YA master of horror. Ravenscliff is a creepy YA horror series that I would love to see grow its readership!

I'm a huge fan of horror lit and movies and this first novel in a series sets up some interesting paths that it could follow. I know that "Sorcerers" was originally published in 2002 and that the e-book that I read courtesy of NetGalley is an updated re-issue of that title. I could tell that the technology and pop culture references had been freshened up a bit, but the underlying narrative I'm sure hasn't changed. Fun fact - I actually bought this book way back when it was initially published for my former school library's collection. It remained on my "to-read" list for the four years that I was there, and when it went out of print, I didn't consider buying it for my current school. 

Devon March knows that he is different and throughout "Sorcerers" he begins to find out exactly how different he is. The man he thought was his father has died and he is sent to live at the Gothic Ravenscliff at Misery Point. I chuckled at the Dracula references that are tossed about during Devon's journey to his new home. He meets a motley crew of characters who become his friends and he begins the quest to figure out where he came from and why he has magical powers that give him dominion over demons. Did I mention that there's a really creepy clown on a demented children's show that only certain people can see? I've been leery of clowns since I read/saw "It" like most sane people.

There are plenty of mysteries that are set up in this story that I hope will pay off in later books. Very few things are resolved by the end of this tale, but it does have some very exciting action sequences. The sequel Demon Witch: Book II: The Ravenscliff Series is also due to be out soon to be followed by a third book, Blood Moon, that was not published before in English. Hopefully, Devon and company will get at least a 4th book, as I've read that the 3rd book ends on a cliffhanger. 

It's always good to find new horror lit for young people that doesn't involve paranormal romance, as my male readers are mostly not into that. Welcome back, Geoffrey Huntington!