Rating: 5/5

A fabulous book, one I would suggest that everyone should read. Early editions did not contain as complex an amount of introductory material and in that regard were more readable to one interested merely in an informative and engaging introductory text on philosophical argument and fallacies of logic. Of course, this is a college textbook and therefore its compexity is bound to increase over time. 

Don't be fooled however, if you don't really care for philosophy but still want some pointers on how to reason better and see the flaws in others reasoning (whether it be on the basis of religion, politics, or any other field of interest) this book is superb. The treatment Engel provides of the informal fallacies of logic are clear and easily understood. The style in which he had written does not require one to be familar with the topic previous to reading this text in order to comprehend it.

I am partciularly fond of the following excerpt:

"Unfortunately, in argument the one who talks longest, loudest, and last often comes out looking like 'the winner,' even though he or she may not have argued well at all. This is because if no one has answered the argument—if no one has actually shown that the argument is weak or unlikely, we are left thinking: the arguer could be right and, moreover, no one can point to anything wrong, so.... This is why we bother to dispute a point at all—if it goes undisputed we and others may be subtly or even heavily influenced by it, may in fact be weakened in our original disagreement with it, and may find it hard to refuse other arguments or even calls to action that derive from it. All of which can lead us to feeling that we have no choice but to say and do things that we do not, at heart, chose or believe in." (S. Morris Engel, With Good Reason: An Introduction to Informal Fallacies, Sixth Edition [Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2000], pp. 5-6.)

Anyone who has engaged in debate at any level will recognize the truth of this statement. Silence has always been intepreted as tacit agreement even if that is not the intention. This book will arm you with the ability to respond more intelligently.

Entertaining, informative, and educational. One piece of advice however: unless you are attending a college course, get the Instructor's Edition which includes an additional section at the back of the book with the answers to the quizzes/tests within its pages. These are very helpful and the answers will allow you to test your own understanding of the material more fully.