Despite the title, cousin Bette does not, at least apparently, play the lead role. Balzac's attention is not so much draw to the biography of a character, as to the biography of that epoch.
 Intriguing, voluntary, sadistic, tenacious, hypocritical, the modest cousin embodies in a synthetic portrait the features of the class of the time she is going through. It can be said that, as the presence of a virus unleashes the plague, the ambitious woman radiates evil, giving the whole picture a gloomy meaning. Under her seemingly innocence, Bette disguises a ferocious soul. 
 Ancient rages did not cover their faces, but this modern Fury wears an angelic mask.
 The realist Balzac folows the alternations between the apparent and the hidden content, the interest going beyond the plastic of the picture, to the depth, in fact, in such pictures the history of the French bourgeoisie appears critically reconstructed, its morals being seen from within by a bourgeois for whom there is no secret, the pen of the realist reaching deep wounds , the word becoming an act of accusation against the bourgeois order and false values. 
The anatomist concerned with the dissection sees the details, the physiologist Balzac sees the relation between phenomena, he studies morals, seeking like a scientist, performance and laws. 
 It would be difficult to judge a man only on his own, for the honest Mrs.Hulot, Bette is a kind of idol, but Bette is an idol who - unable to reach - will rejoice in the ruin of the rich. Baron Hulot ruins his family, and Bette offers him all the support in that direction, but playing the role of a guardian-angel. She leads a surprisingly natural double life. 
 Here, is a fundamental feature of the balzacian technique : one single side of the heroes, defining for a character, appears exaggerated to the point of monstrosity. You could have the impression of a journey through the lands of Dante, among dehumanized apparitions. 
 Here I see the Human Comedy just like it is, of a crisp realism. Glacially in appearance, Balzac penetrates the intimacy of things, beyond what a photographic plate offers. As a writer, he addresses intelligence, the whole epic seeking to highlight meanings, inapparent connections . How does " the one who studies society" explain Bette's wickedness ? In an old-girl, only one side of character develops, to the detriment of the others, virginity favoring the imbalance :))
 With such beings, idealized in the opposite direction, we are co-opted into a world that, if it weren't outrageously real, it would seem like a tragic fairy tale. 
 In fairy tales, takes place the battle between good and evil, but here, on a large stretch, the darkness persists.
 Like other balzacian novels, " Cousin Bette " - has a moving, dramatic structure. In the Dante's comedy shadows and ghosts dialogued, here - we meet people, people of rare vitality. 
 What I noticed about the creator of Human Comedy - is that the future does not exists, everything represents the present.