Rating: 3/5

Written in 1980, One Day of Life takes place sometime in the mid-70s in El Salvador, and details the unrest of the rural communities which preceded that country's civil war. The book's primary voice, Guadalupe Guardado, speaks about her day, beginning in the predawn, and continuing throughout the day. At first there is a sense of being alive, but as the day goes on, more and more of the injustice and horror that she experiences is revealed. 

Interspersed between the description of Lupe's day are accounts from various other personalities, including Lupe's granddaughter, her grown daughter, an unnamed police officer trained by the U.S., and other voices which add background to the events that Lupe experiences. Together, the two strains of narrative combine to highlight the tragedy of this family--and, by extension, the rural population of El Salvador. 

Judged purely on its literary merits, I found the book slow going for about the first 3/4s of it. A reader more attuned to the history of El Salvador, or someone familiar with the politics of the time might not have this problem--in some ways, for me, it was like trying to catch a moving train. But aside from that, the introductory chapters with their attention to the peasant way of life were not very eventful. This starts to change toward the end of the book, and it's an unfortunate fact that what makes the story more gripping is the tragedy that was no doubt true in a general sense if not the particular. 

A few years ago, I read a very similar book, published only a year after this one, called El Infierno, by Carlos Martinez Moreno, which dealt with the struggles between the government of Uruguay and the Tupamaro guerrillas. While One Day of Life did try to personalize the tragedy by placing the character of Lupe foremost as a kind of center around which to build the narrative, both novels rely heavily on vignettes to communicate the events, vignettes which seem to be the anonymous voices of survivors who just want someone to hear their story. The fractured style of these novels, with their disrupted timelines, their disembodied voices, and their atrocities, may actually be the best way to intimate the confusion and sorrow of the time, regardless of literary merit. It may be a bit difficult for someone not entirely familiar with the history to catch on at first, but they are certainly effective at communicating the tragedy of that time.