Rating: 2/5

blech. more like one &amp; a half stars, maybe? this was the last book i read before i gave birth to ramona. kind of a weird book to go out on.

this book was incredibly self-indulgent. basically, naomi wolf got pregnant &amp; made the same mistake that every pregnant-for-the-first-time woman makes in thinking that no one has ever been pregnant before in the history of humanity. it would also appear that she knew next to nothing about pregnancy or birth or the medical model of maternity care or anything before she got pregnant. it was like she thought she would give birth on a bed of moss in the woods &amp; she was dumbfounded when she discovered that sometimes being pregnant means that people will want to do blood tests on you. 

the narrative thread running through the book is wolf's constant shock &amp; amazement that maybe pregnancy isn't as easy as she expected it to be. it's just kind of embarrassing to read about all the stuff she didn't know. she's all like, "hey guys, did you know that babies used to be mainly born at home with midwives? crazy, right? but then doctors swooped in &amp; took over &amp; started giving everyone episiotomies all the time! what the fuck is that about?!" she decides to give birth at a local hospital with beautifully appointed labor rooms, but she is stunned &amp; horrified when her labor is somewhat complicated &amp; she ends up in a less beautiful room. she makes it sound like a slaughterhouse &amp; then she spends her first few weeks of motherhood moping around about not getting the pretty room with the four-poster beds. i just want to be like, "listen, naomi, my pregnancy ended with a week of bed rest &amp; an emergency cesarean that i don't even remember because they had me on so many fucked up drugs to keep me from having a stroke. my baby was in the NICU for her first month of life &amp; i didn't even get to SEE her, let alone hold her, let alone try to breastfeed her, until she was more than a day old. so kindly SHUT THE FUCK UP about the four-poster beds, okay?"

the more i think about this book, the more pissed off i get. &amp; then i feel angry at myself because it's like, what? i'm somehow SURPRISED that naomi wolf wrote a book dripping with entitlement &amp; self-centered anecdata? am i new here or something?