Rating: 3/5

The problem with this book is that while Anthony Lane is an excellent writer and has many interesting and insightful things to say who wants to read nearly 400 pages of film reviews, even good ones, from the 1990's? Being devastatingly clever or funny about films like 'Con Air' or 'Showgirls' is great but who is going to laugh now. The book has the almost antique, before the deluge quality, of memoirs written before a great revolution. Not quite Saint Simon on the court of Versailles but it was the final pre-internet, pre-social media, pre-downloads, pre-everything - people could only go to the cinema to watch movies. Those hysterical Leonardo di Caprio fans went dozens of times to watch him free Rose by drowning on the Titanic. Who now remembers diCaprio as such a skinny little pretty boy looking like a victim of child molestation when having sex with Kate Winslet? Well no one really, diCaprio is now fifty and a host of pretty boy actors and musicians have come and gone since then. At least diCaprio has allowed himself to grow up, something Nicholas Cage might think of trying, how long does he think he can go on playing someone in their thirties?

Anthony Lane writes about more than movies, he also writes articles about books and authors and does profiles of people, places and events, many of them film related well over half the books 750 odd pages. They are a particular type of New Yorker writing but, like almost all journalism, it dates if only because its subject matter ceases to be newsworthy. Karaoke Sound of Music evenings are not currently filling theatres, not even the Rocky Horror Show can do that any more. Mr. Lane's views on Cyril Connolly and Evelyn Waugh are intelligent but hardly of any depth or insight. The New Yorker encourages a great deal of clever superficial literary pyrotechnics, plenty cross cultural references and little mote justs, just in case anyone reads the articles rather then skimming them while enjoying the advertisements and cartoons.

I have given it three stars because I can't say that anything in it is bad, I can't even claim to have read every page, who would? I didn't see Sleepless in Seattle or Speed when they came or subsequently so I'm not going to read a review now. I have reached an age when I can admit to myself that I will die without knowing the work of Jan Svankmajer not because it isn't any good but because life is to short and there is to much else to do know and see. As for reading a twenty year old profile of Karl Lagerfeld? Before he became skinny and wore those silly collars and died leaving a mystery about who inherits his fortune? Why bother? and that is my response to most of this book. Plus the final question of what do I do with this doorstep of a book? Is it fair to unload onto a charity shop? Is it right to just throw it away. It is after all just a compilation of magazine articles. You throw the magazines away - why not in published form? I don't know what to do with it but I know I won't be reading it again.