Rating: 5/5

This is a story of male friendship. We have the king of Sicily, Leontes, and the king of Bohemia, Polixenes indulging their fondness for each other. From the very outset, we see how these two friends socialize and enjoy the pleasures of being together. Even if they both have wives in tow (however, Prolixness is visiting Leontes without his queen), it is still a queer friendship. For instance, they both are kings, but Polixenes have the time to spend nine months with Leontes. Conventionally, this would have made more sense, had he actually been in love with the Leontes' queen, Hermione. But this is not the case, he is in the kingdom of Sicily only because of Leontes. Their bond is unique; it is based on loyalty, concern, and tenderness for each.

Clearly, in those times, it must have been difficult for men, especially for noblemen– more so for the Kings– to love other men the way they could keep any number of women. But there must be a way, there must have been spaces where homosexual-urges could find nourishment. This is not to suggest that the kings in the play are sexually involved, but to say that their friendship has a distinct flavor of same-sex love to it.

After spending nine months together, Polixenes wants to return to his kingdom. (Such a long stay in the case of a king was itself odd. One would have understood such a carefree, long sojourn if they were both poets, or at least one of them was). One wonders how could Polixenes stay such a long time with Leontes. Who looked after his kingdom, his queen?

Now when he wants to leave, Leontes does not want him to go. As if being a king, having a wonderful queen Hermione and all the pleasures that come with it are not enough for Leontes, as if his life would be less on his friend's departure. Even after having him for long, Leontes is not sated. He begs Polixenes to extend his stay. These pleadings are the pleadings of a lover. When his pleadings do not work, Leontes involves his wife and asks her to intervene and implore Prolixenes to prolong his stay. This works, but finally, this has severe consequences. Leontes turns suspicious and wonders how come Prolixenes agreed so readily to stay on the requests of the queen and ignored his pleas.

These freakish thoughts tinged with jealousy again tell us about the dynamics of his relationship with Prolixenes. He becomes furious less like a friend, more like a spurned lover– whose love interest has somehow ditched him by giving in to the beseechings of Hermione; something that is withheld from him. In reality, Polixenes might have been moved by the queen's request to stay; as if her asking him validates, in some fundamental way, his friendship with Leontes (Sadly, such a possibility never occurred to Leontes, in his passion and blinded involvement, he could not see it).

However, once the jealousy and doubt emerge, they cloud Leontes' mind entirely, and he commits atrocities of the most ignoble kind. But the play, at last, ends happily. The unmistakable hints of same-sex love (if not an outright homosexual relationship) that we see in the first few acts are finally subsumed in the final act. The Princess meets his Prince, The King his Queen, and somewhere in the background, 'a male friendship' is restored. In other words, the straight narrative exerts itself in the final act and takes center stage, whereas the unruly male friendship is pushed to the margins.