Rating: 5/5

1914-1991: the Short Twentieth Century, an Age of Extremes. It was an "era of religious war, though the most militant and bloodthirsty of its religions were secular ideologies of the nineteenth-century vintage, such as socialism and nationalism, whose god-equivalents were either abstractions or politicians venerated in a manner of divinities." The Age of Empire, particularly European, sowed the seeds of its collapse with the calamitous Great War, with empire ending in the contiguous sense with the fall of the USSR in 1991. Science, truth, and capitalism advanced, but became impossible to separate from "their conditions and consequences." 

Hobsbawm lived through much of this period. Hence, this book, in part, is a historical-reflective attempt to understand how such extremes happened. Hobsbawm's prose is exceptional, and his historical narrative is a pleasure to read. But why did the Age of Extremes happen? In short, Hobsbawm argues that it was the failures of communism, fascism and capitalism. Communist and fascist failures need little explanation. Embedded capitalism transmogrified into chimerical neoliberalism which Hobsbawm elegantly debunks: "the belief that unrestricted international trade would allow the poorer countries to come closer to the rich, runs counter to historical experience as well as common sense." 

Pericles once stated that just because one may not have an interest in politics does not mean politics does not have an interest in you. The twentieth century exemplifies this axiom. If one extricates themselves from civil affairs, they will be swept aside by someone who does not. In my opinion, citizens of liberal societies have a philosophically republican (not to be confused with the Republican Party) duty to engage in the affairs of the state. By internalising and proselytising this philosophy, society can advance the principle of freedom from interference. This maintains a civil order that benefits the common person and avoids the pitfalls of ideological demagogues, who tend toward inhumane confrontation.