Rating: 4/5

The Execution is told by Matthew Bourne, a PR specialist working for a human rights organisation, Africa Action. The book opens with an unusual sequence in which Matthew feels compelled to accompany his colleague Christian, a man with whom he does not have a particularly close relationship, to a hospital after the apparent death of his (Christian's) wife in a car accident. Soon afterwards, Matthew becomes obsessed with the idea that his own wife, Marianne, is having an affair, despite the fact that he is carrying on a dispassionate and not exactly discreet affair himself. He starts following her to meetings with the man he assumes is her lover; their marriage begins to disintegrate. The title seems to refer to a case Matthew is involved with at work, that of Jarawa, a political dissident Africa Action is campaigning to save from a death sentence – 'he'd either be executed or he wouldn't be', says Matthew in his typically blank style – but it isn't long before it takes on a rather different meaning.

Matthew narrates in a voice that is cold and often unnecessarily detailed yet somehow vaguely conversational – perhaps like someone giving a statement to the police, trying to give all the required information but not quite managing to cut every vestige of informality out of their voice. Given how the story ends, I can't help but wonder whether that's exactly what it's supposed to be. And yet, for all his lack of emotion, there is something dreamlike about the whole affair. The Execution is a clear precursor of Wilcken's later novel The Reflection, but it also reminded me of Keith Ridgway's Animals: both deal with a man's spiral into paranoia and delusion; both are set in a slightly out-of-focus London; both feel hallucinatory without there being any obvious markers of fantasy.

There's always a sense that something strange and menacing lurks just below the surface of Matthew's deadpan monologue. I kept feeling that even the simplest details were deceptive – obscuring something darker. This could just be me, but even the name of the main character threw me off. It took until after I finished the book for me to realise that it's not the same as the protagonist of the Bourne films/novels; I was conflating Matt Damon and Jason Bourne. After much more of that niggling feeling that this was a name I should somehow know, I finally googled it and realised that Matthew Bourne is the ballet guy. Has the author made a deliberate choice to use a name that may be weirdly familiar – without being immediately identifiable – to many readers, or is it just a coincidence?

It also seemed odd to me that Matthew was only 29; he reads as middle-aged; I just couldn't picture him being that young. Again – author's misstep or deliberate attempt to disconcert?

It's difficult to decide whether The Execution's quirks (other examples being the distinct lack of commas in many sentences, and Matthew's habit of saying 'though' and 'for some reason' over and over again) are intentional. That in itself makes the story difficult to interpret. If they are intentional, then it's all a bit, well, amateurish – like a practice run for The Reflection – but isn't the fact that I'm even wondering about this a sign of its cleverness? Either way, I was gripped by it, even as I was often repulsed by Matthew; the clean, flat style makes it a fast read, and Wilcken makes a horrible character intriguing to the end.