Rating: 1/5

I like this author and I'll continue reading Her School of Manners series. On the other hand, will definitely not continue with this series, since this book was dreadful. But at least it was short.

Minerva was such a prig, I think there is only one time where I found her ok, which was when she was being mean to her suitors. I liked that she was honest and that she didn't try to appeal to people just because it was the norm. She didn't like parties and the debauchery of London society, and that was fine. She also had a funny scene when she was reading to her aunt while said aunt had her lover under the sheets. And that's it. All the other times she was so prim, giving lectures, being too serious, too martyr... And then, at the end of the book, she makes a 180 degrees transformation: from a girl who wasn't into frivolous stuff nor physical to "take my body" and throwing herself at the Lord. MEH.

Her father is awful, her sister Annabelle is awful... Truly, all characters are awful, with no morals, no virtues... There is plenty of adultery in this book, and it is seen as normal, acceptable. There are men who makes wagers over who is going to take Minerva's virginity, and at the end, said men are willing to gang-rape her (of course Minerva is the damsel in distress and there comes the hero to save her). Everybody talks about Cyprians and harlots (high-maintenance mistresses) like it is nothing, her aunt, who is vulgar, talks about "fornication" and "vaginal" in public (she meant "fortifications" and "virginal").

Annabelle is the second sister and of course I am not going to read her book. She is nasty, she is selfish... Her story takes half of this book and I was bored to death. She is only interested in being pretty and be with men (she has a suitor in this book, who is a slave trader, but he is handsome). And by the end of the book, after seeing her sister's fiancee for the first time for like, 2 minutes, has a tantrum in the privacy of her room, where she cries (paraphrasing) "why can't I have him? I will make him mine, he is not married to my sister yet". Awful! Do I need nore reasons to not read her book? Also, Minerva is black-haired, Annabelle is blond, another sister is auburn-haired, another is brown-haired... is that even possible?? (I am not an expert in genetics, but it seemed too far-fetched.. 8 children all with different color of eyes and hair).

Her father is the priest of their little town, and has 8 children with his wife, but takes a lover every now and then. He makes Minerva write his sermons, he is more interested in hunt and hounds, take Minerva to London to make a deal and why not, having a good time with some girl, and also has the fantastic idea of having his eldest daughter have her Season so she marries well and bring money to the family. But oh wait, he is sorry he did that.. after the hero gives him a lot of money to free Minerva. He also knows one day that Annabelle has been seen too friendly with some guy in the stables, but she has always being incorrigible, he isn't sure of what to do. Awful!

Sylvester, the hero (I love his name) was ok, since he has a sense of humor. Nevertheless, I can't understand why he falls for her. He is twice her age (ew), has plenty of mistresses, has a sense of humor (she doesn't), seems pretty intelligent although somewhat sadistic (puts Minerva in danger twice), is pretty decent until the end, where he can't control himself and takes her virginity, making me dislike him in that moment. Next day he has a duel, drunks until he passes out... and ok, bye hero.

This is not the kind of Traditional Regency I like. I am not very familiar with this period, except a little bit of their fashion, and although it was interesting, it was also truly ridiculous. Was this period so full of debauchery and vulgarity? This is not what I am looking for when I pick a Traditional Regency book. And this one is supposed to be light and funny. Yeah right.