Rating: 5/5

Bugger all on the interweb about Trask really, which seems a serious shame. For example (from the bits and pieces I have been able to find): 

"Translator and scholar Willard Trask was the private secretary to Ford Madox Ford. Although he was self-educated, he was a National Book Award winner and a recipient of Bollingen grants for work in medieval and primitive poetry."

and 

"Willard Trask, the son of American parents, was born in 1900 in Berlin and died on August 10 1980 in New York City. Because his father was an engineer who travelled widely, Trask lived in Germany, France, Russia, England and Panama before the age of ten. He attended Harvard University, but dropped out and moved to France to study medieval poetry. Returning to the United States during the Depression, Trask supported himself “by odd jobs in the sewers of literature” until an editor suggested he try translation. Thereafter he translated works from Spanish, French, Portuguese, German, Italian, Chinese, Finnish, Catalan and Wendish. "
 

https://www.goodreads.com/search?q=wi... gives you a taste of his range and achievement. 

and 

“I have learned since his death more than a decade ago that Willard, like Casanova, had numerous inamoratas. There is, in fact, a certain class of Manhattan woman now in her late sixties, attractive, sophisticated, and on her own, who when I meet her at a party or some such, I am almost always certain to wonder if she was not one of Willard’s lovers. I will simply ask, “Did you ever know a gentleman named Willard Trask?” and watch for the lingering grainy afterglow recede from their faces after all these years. Willard truly seemed to have made his way among the women of New York, and I have never hear any one of them speak bitterly about him.” 

 
and this from the more recent translator of Cas, which does little but make me want to give him a slap (I do not think I need to highlight the particularly egregious sentences): 

 "Casanova was a particularly interesting case because, as an 18th-century Italian writing in French, his style is full of Italianate quirks and tics that are utterly foreign to the simplicity of 18th-century French. I tended to clean up his prose, however, in the translation, especially since there’s already a complete translation, by Willard Trask, of his immense, 3,000-page Story of My Life that renders his style pretty much the way it was written, and I find it for the most part unreadable. Ours was a selection (about 600 pp., Penguin Classics) of several outstanding episodes from the Story of My Life, and we decided to make it as readable as possible for the contemporary audience. (I say “we” because I translated it in collaboration with my wife, Sophie Hawkes, though I did the lion’s share of the work.)"