Rating: 5/5

This is one of those books I thought I'd have a lot to say about, but now that it's time to write the review, I don't think I'll say much. I loved this book from the beginning. So many of Merton's words are powerful, and his expressions are beautiful. I'd read sentences and then stop and reread and go, "Whoa." Thought-provoking, evocative, and also gently corrective. I learned a lot from this book at this point in my life, lessons that I hope I take with me as I continue to grow in the Lord. 
Some that stand out: 
1. God's will for us is in our everyday lives. Our lives, as is, demonstrate what God wants us to learn and where we need to grow. 
2. God's will for us is good, just like God's will in general is good. 
3. We can't love our neighbor without loving ourselves. Jesus said to love our neighbors as ourselves, which means we actually have to love ourselves first.
4. Walking with God includes any number of seeming contradictions, like #3. 
5. Being little is great--it means we're being ourselves.
6. People don't like people who are okay being in solitude because our solitude reminds them that they can't stand their own solitude. 
7. The unique suffering we go through is to grow us in the direction of being ourselves. 
8. Being ourselves is highly important--we can't give anything if you don't know and like ourselves. 
9. Things of the world aren't bad. God created them. If we reject them simply because they're bad, our rejection is false, and we won't grow.
10. Put God first, always and in everything, and this corrects everything else. Love is supreme (what Merton calls charity, referring specifically to agape)--love of God, striving to love Him and live and speak and act for His glory, love of ourselves, love of created things, love of other people. 

There's so much more I could say about this book, but suffice it to conclude with the fact that I strongly recommend it if you need to read about suffering, love, solitude, silence, mercy and justice, being and doing (oh, he writes beautifully about what living really is, how we don't have to "live it all the way up" (to quote Hemingway) all the time, that what we don't get to do can be so much more powerful than what we do, that work and activity are two different things...), vocation, and so much more!