Rating: 4/5

As a she-cub is whelped with a coat that is white, / And a human child stolen to suckle the Sight..... 
 

This is probably the most difficult review I've had to ever put together for any book, and that's because I'm trying to mesh my childhood enchantment at this book with more critical analysis. I've come back and edited this draft a few times now. 

I'm going to skip telling the plot, if only because a hundred reviews have done so before me. Needless to say, it's a drama between talking wolves, with an evil she-wolf whose plans involve taking over the wolf military and ruling the wolves with an iron fist (paw), while chasing her sister's pack to the ends of the earth. She has a fledgling magical power, known as the stuff of myth and legend in wolf culture, and she is looking for another just like her as was foretold. Together, they can unwind reality itself....unless a sacrifice is paid.

The thing is, The Sight is many things to many people. For some, it's a classic. For others, it profoundly misses the mark. 

However, I found this Gothic tale - that's what it is, full of European settings, castles, dark religion, temples, blood, ravens, empires, prophecies and, well, wolves - to be marvellous. A cursed family, fleeing the inevitability of fate amidst a beautiful setting -what a beginning! It's completely hat-stand mad. The key to reading this book is to just leap in, and suspend your disbelief. 

Perhaps that is the reason why it doesn't quite ring true for some readers - because ultimately it's hoist by its own petard. If it had been published next to Dracula, or had been some old text by an author that we barely know anything about, the melodrama would be accepted. The novel appears to have fallen foul of the recent literary fatigue for certain themes and ideas, and that, for the record, isn't its fault. It's a casualty of the current literary thinking and the trends that dominate the book market. I'm not saying it's a part of the Western canon (though, to be honest, the canon is complete and utter bollocks), but I'm saying that this is a book that probably would've been received better a few decades ago when people were first exploring fantasy instead of the Noughties, when the fantasy genre started to bloat. This novel is also a lot like Clement-Davies' last offering, The Fire Bringer, which is not nearly so good.

  With blood at the altar the vision shall come / When the eye of the moon is round as the sun..... 

The novel isn't the only thing that is sort of out of time. And that's because everyone in this novel is out of time - or, rather, so engrained in their own as to make even reading it out of its setting seem bizarre and unnatural. I'd kill to be able to read this in the Carpathian Mountains. It's steeped, almost marinated, in traditionalism. Everything is reminiscent of what we have seen before, not in the sense of rehashing old things but more in the idea of revelling in repetition, in ritual, in the established way of things (this is, again, something that goes against the current literary trends). The wolves are a proud race with their own concept of honour, the idea of something ancient to be adhered to. There's a glory to, and a longing for, the old times within every character; there exists a melancholy that can't quite be shifted, a feeling further emphasised by the dramatic irony that, of course, the time of the wolves is coming to an end. Soon, the world will change. This isn't the only source of dramatic irony: the tradition that is so adhered to, the one that the characters prize so much, is, in the end, the very thing that leads to the family's doom. It’s cyclical, and more to the point, it traps the reader in the same cycle of remembering and forgetting as its main characters. It is not a spoiler to say the lera, the wild animals, forget. We do too. There is nothing new under the sun. 

Its ideas about prophecy, about magical talking wolves, about this mystical world where mysterious powers intertwine....it does seem to have aged into some sort of cringy, hackneyed attempt at a plot, and you can see that through other, more brutal reviews of the title; a lot of reviewers see this edge. But I find this book works well when you envelop yourself in its mysticism. It's wintry, it's brutal, and under its odd expressions and furry protagonists is a story that is actually quietly profound. 

   In the citadel raised by the lords of before, / The stone twins await-both the power and the law.... 

This whole novel is incredibly allegorical in tone. It's fatalistic, and some may say gloomy, but tragedies remain a source of entertainment - probably because we can explore sad things 'safely' but also, probably, because there's something inherently soothing about a closed circle, about a fate you can't escape. What is going to happen happens, and in that, you can find peace. There's no worrying about what's going to happen. The course is set; the words are written; the friendly jaws of the trap kiss each incision into your skin. It's partially a bildungsroman, partially a meditation on family, and partially....something older. It's incredibly cinematic in its scope. 

The thing is, it might be easy for some people to dismiss The Sight based on its young fanbase. But not only was I part of that fanbase once upon a time, and it helped me a lot when I was younger and gave me something else to concentrate when times were tough for me - which is valid - but I've said it before, and I'll say it again: just because kids like something doesn't mean it's automatically bad. If anything, I'd say the reason kids seem to love it is because they haven't encountered the same literary influences as adults have. It wades into subject matter that kids haven't quite touched on yet, so it seamlessly fits in with what they read later. As an adult, however, it appears like much of the same. It's a weird kaleidoscopic book where no one sees quite the same picture. 

   And who shall divine, in the dead of the night, / The lies from the truth, the darkness from light?

Some people have mentioned the lack of accuracy when it comes to wolf behaviour, and probably chiefly the fact that there's the pack 'sikla', or omega (the research that introduced the alpha, beta and omega systems in wolf packs was based on artificial wolves in an unrealistic environment - they're family sets in real life). However, come on - this is entertainment. You can suspend disbelief. I don't think Clement-Davies (god bless his parents for their unoriginality) was trying to write something accurate here. Even my childhood self as an absolute animal fanatic was willing to put my otherwise picky nature aside to enjoy the fiction. It's like the romance genre in that talking animal books are always going to be a niche interest. However, if you go into this novel knowing that, you will get on with it better. 

 The only reason I don't give it a full five stars is that I'm not blind to its faults. Others have mentioned the sexism of this book, and to be honest although it didn't give me too much grief at the time - I saw it more ritualistic than anything - I can see their point of view. The fact that the female main antagonist is sterile is seen as a perversion, and that definitely hasn't aged well. It also relies heavily on Judeo-Christian themes, which may be hit-and-miss for some people. This is also certainly not a straight realist animal novel: this is fantasy. 

However, if you took the tropes apart, I think more people would like this book. You've got a brother and a sister pair, one doomed to darkness, the other light; a power couple forced to fight one another, the 'resistance', persecution, a creepy soothsayer, a quite honestly very cool prophecy poem, doomed lovers, the idea of mystical elements; animal companions; brutality amongst beauty; I could go on. The imagery and symbolism of this book is half the fun. The planets, history, an epic battle, a holy citadel; what more could you want? The Sight is very richly textured. Clement-Davies gives us a lavish feast for the senses in this novel. It is rich in embroidery, in ornate trappings that all add to the doomed majesty of its characters. This book revels in incorporating all of the primal elements of a fairy tale in a new way, and I wish that half of the readers who enjoy modern fairy tales, and all of the really popular 'reimaginings' that are currently on the market try The Sight first. And again, remember the young fanbase - leave it to the kids. They recognise a fairy tale when they read one. 

I'm persuading myself to read this again now. 

Tl;dr - the takeaway is that this book has divided opinion, and will probably continue to do so. I, however, loved it and will continue to love it. Perhaps now is the right time for The Sight to make a return, as it itself did, as it will do, and, I am convinced, as it will, perhaps with a better response.

  Like the cry of the scavenger, torn through the air / A courage is needed as deep as despair...