A short book that feels hard to talk about, partly because it is fairly simple in terms of the subject matter and easy to throw away spoilers.

It is a late work, one of Goethe's few novels. I had read it once before, Issicratea's Review reminded me of that and planted the seed that it might be an idea to read it again some day, fate eventually intervened to ensure that I did, and it turned out that I had read the book originally with no great attention as I quickly noticed that my recollections of the book were mangled up.

Set among the minor aristocracy, the story concerns a married couple, Charlotte and Eduard, this is a second marriage for both of them, from her first marriage Charlotte has a daughter who is away at boarding school with Charlotte's niece Ottilie. Anyway Eduard wants and does invite his friend ,the Captain, to stay with them, about 3/4 of the way through the book we learn that the Captain has a name - Otto, but he is called the Captain throughout, until he becomes a Major, all of which is by the by. Charlotte then invites Ottilie to join them, then eventually the relationships shift and realign, at which point war intervenes and various ups and downs occur as they do in a novel until it closes.

Stylistically Goethe quite likes to burble on for several paragraphs before having a sudden twisting sentence that conveys some sudden and important piece of information, it reminds me of that Hayden symphony, maybe 'the Surprise' with it's 'hey, don't snooze, pay attention' theme, or perhaps it is a stylist legacy of Goethe's output as a poet and playwright.

The wonder of the work for me comes from several metaphors and an internal story with also deals with the theme of relationships.

Chemistry
The first metaphor is of die Wahlverwandtschaften or Elective Affinities, as the novel is known in English, a metaphor taken from chemistry, perhaps dating back to Alchemy. That certain chemical elements will break apart and bond with others more strongly. This is laid out explicitly in the text when the Captain is reading a chemistry book and a chemical discussions ensues. This describes the action of the novel as the initial couple breaks up. Although we speak of chemical attraction, or of the chemistry (or lack of) between people we don't view relationships as purely a matter of chemistry. The novel then is posing questions, is the metaphor helpful? Are relationships purely deterministic, or do we stand by legal institutions and social expectations that are nonchemical?

spacial
The novel also plays out in a particular space. A house, a (formal) garden and then the (informal) park, this too reflects the narrative drive of the novel, a movement from a highly ordered space with set relationships: marriage, husband, wife, friend, niece, to increasingly informal spaces and hazy relationships: lover? rival? This element led me to think of  Jane Austen because her novels work in entirely the opposite direction, they start with the unclear and unsatisfactory, instead ending in highly ordered 'neat' states: marriage. This may be neat but is also naive. Goethe's view is more open in every way, marriage, any relationship is a beginning, not a closure, and that I suppose is the subject of the novel. Equally gardens, parks and houses are spaces designed by people, as a metaphor about relationships this allows for a combination both of intention and response to nature. 

The movement from ordered to progressively less ordered is also a movement from safety and comfort towards the increasingly hazardous and inconvenient, a passing English Lord in the story remarks to Charlotte and Ottilie that one travels more or less to make life difficult for oneself, you are better off staying at home where all your books are  he has to travel on account of 'political' difficulties, and his son is in India, beyond the estate war occasionally rages and we see one man return from the fighting without a hand.

There's also a sense of needing to be in the right soil to flourish, Ottilie is struggling at school, but brought home to Charlotte's estate she blossoms. There is a potential dychotomy then in the novel's outlook between the sense that it is inevitable that relationships change and end (as the silly song goes - everything comes to an end, only the sausage has two) and the value ascribed to stasis.

temporal
We are told that the plants that flowered in the spring, bear fruit in the autumn, and this is a novel that exists in time, as the seasons change we see the succession of birthdays and the ageing of the characters, time implies a natural cycle of growth and decay which leads us back to the idea of chemistry.

story within a story
Most of the novel is omniscient narration, but with sections from Ottilie's diary - these tend towards aphorisms, some letters, and a mini story about two neighbouring children who when young were great rivals but who thanks to a lucky unlucky accident end up happily married suggesting that relationships grow over time out of close proximity and similar temperaments or chemistry...

It is an organic work, closely interwoven, posing questions rather than giving answers. I felt there was a sharp change of tone from the first to the second part when suddenly the bell toils for thee, loud with intimations of death (in capital letters), I could turn round and usefully read this book again, and probably again after that. This novel also features in The Tin Drum in which it is one of the only books that provide Oskar Matzerath with his education!