Rating: 3/5

In her heyday, Peg Bracken was a clever satirist and deft with the personal essay; it's a pity that throughout her career she was forced (somewhat reluctantly, one gathers) to maintain her writing focus on cooking and housework, two of her least favorite pastimes. 

My relationship with The I Hate to Cook Book is somewhat complicated. My mother kept a copy on her shelf, and as an early reader fan of Hilary Knight's charming illustrations for the Mrs. Piggle-Wiggle books, I'd paw through it to enjoy his campy line drawing contributions to Bracken's wry and weary prose. Apparently I grew up eating many of Bracken's recipes, as well. While re-reading the 50th anniversary edition, I recognized Bracken's 'Saturday Chicken' as the dish set before us under the name of 'Chicken with Celery Soup.' My father weekly made 'Chilly-Night Chili.' Given that my mother disliked cooking and never turned down a recipe that involved no more than a preheated oven, two cans of soup, a protein, and a sleeve of crackers, I'm unsurprised that many of Bracken's time-saving suggestions made their way into our dinner table. 

But none of the recipes are really keepers, sadly. Saturday Chicken would never make an appearance on any of my own menus, any more than I'd contemplate passing off 'Heidelberg Soup' (two cans of Campbell's cream of potato into which Bracken tosses salami and cooked bacon) as gourmet fare. 

In fact, I suspect most modern home cooks would consider many of the recipes unpalatable. In her mid-century reliance on canned vegetables, canned mushrooms, and canned soups, Bracken conjures up some truly stomach-flipping fare, including her Beef a la King, which involves dumping chopped hard-boiled eggs, pimentos, and chipped beef into cans of Campbells and tossing a handful of cheese on top. I cannot contemplate without antacids her Italian Tuna, which is basically spaghetti mixed with unseasoned tomato sauce and tuna, again covered with cheese, or her Tuna Curry, which involves canned fish in canned soup spiked with more hardboiled eggs and mixed with curry powder.

Read the book for Peg Bracken's dry, martini-scented humor. Do yourself a favor and skip the recipes.