Rating: 5/5

Booky Teaches History In Her Journey 

Her name is Beatrice Thomson. Her nickname is Booky. But it feels pretty obvious this is really all about the author, the late Bernice Thurman Hunter. 

Booky A Trilogy is three novels, That Scatterebrained Booky from 1981, and With Love from Booky from 1983 and As Ever, Booky from 1985 and the short story Visitors from Saskatoon from 1981, make up the tale of this young girl growing up. 

And yes, this is one of those fictionalized biographies just like Mildred D Taylor and Watson Choy and Louise Fitzhugh and Betty Smith have done as well. 

Booky has one big advantage for these other books, which I dearly loved, in that it takes place in my hometown Toronto, and the other big advantage is that it is filled with history. Two great things together! 

But back to the story of Booky itself. 

Booky is Beatrice’s childhood nickname, a young girl living in Depression era 1930’s Toronto with her loving family. Her dad looks for work, they go by Eaton’s department store, have to money, move quite abit, hang around relatives, write letters, and many many many more small adventures over the course of time. Booky lives and learns and loves and becomes the person who will one day, when she is much older, write a version of her life. 

To compliment this journey, Hunter has photos and old ads scattered throughout the book, which massively helps brings this past to life. 

While family love and surviving the Depression being major themes here, another is the turmoil in Europe leading to World War Two. Many books cover this same territory, and from the youth perspective, so some would say Booky just adds to that chorus. My diplomatic response is…. so what? World War Two was one of the most traumatic world events ever, and every story, whether fictional or non-fictional or semi-fictional, should be documented. Because we hope we all learn from it so it never happens again. 

Thankfully the Booky series was extremely popular, so its lessons could be absorbed. To help with this, Booky was made into a television movie and a play, that I have never seen. 

I got this amazing volume at a Little Free Library and is so very very very glad I did. 

Scoopriches 

https://scoopsmentalpropaganda.wordpr...