Rating: 5/5

The wolf criers and Chicken Littles of the world are always right eventually, even if they have to wait a hundred years for the beast to enter the village or the sky to fall. We’re not there yet with coronavirus, but we’re closer today than we were two weeks ago when I jested on my blog about Quarantine Reading. I don’t know what it’s like where you live, but here in Oregon our schools and libraries are closed, as are most restaurants and shops (including Powell’s); the shelves at the grocery stores are bare; those who can do so are working from home; the police no longer respond in person to anything but life-threatening situations; the governor has prohibited public gatherings of more than twenty-five people, and the archbishop has been forced to cancel all public Masses through (and beyond) Easter.

And yet I can’t help but think we’re a generation of pansies and fraidy-cats. The threat of coronavirus is real enough, I suppose, but the scope and quality of the social panic we’re witnessing (and giving in to) is dismaying. Did you see Sam Mendes’ 1917, the movie that should have won the Oscar for Best Picture? I saw it twice. And just now I finished reading Iris Origo’s War in Val d’Orcia. Origo’s diary covers two years of WWII from the fall of Mussolini’s regime to its reinstatement by the Nazis to the Allies’ liberation of the Tuscan hills. The paranoia, rumor-mongering, and scarcity of provisions she describes are oddly familiar, but they feel more justified. Sometimes, when I think of the generations that survived the twentieth century’s two big wars, I wonder if anyone born since has really deserved the Earth.

Iris Origo's book is understated in tone and style but all the more powerful for it, an important piece of historical writing and an important piece of literature. If War in Val d'Orcia moves you as much as it did me, make sure you read Eric Newby's memoir Love and War in the Apennines, which covers similar historical and geographical territory but from the perspective of an escaped POW living rough in the mountains of central Italy.