Rating: 4/5

"I have always been a soldier. I have known no other life."

I have lots of thoughts on this one, I will see if I can set myself the Herculean (or Alexandrian?) task of ordering them here.

First off, the framing device of a mature Alexander sitting by the campfire regaling young page boys with his manly triumphs couldn't help me thinking of the infamous "Canteen Boy" SNL sketch.

Is my beard too scratchy, Itanes?

Next, almost inevitably in books about Alexander III of Macedon you get plenty of juicy dialogue or mentions of his academic tutor, Aristotle. It's irresistible stuff for most authors, of course: one of history's greatest thinkers influencing a man who would go on to become on of history's greatest conquerors. The way this book is written, though, is as a soldier's memoir and Big A is focussed on passing on his experiences as a leader and a campaigner to his audience, not the inner workings of his soul or philosophical musings.

Looking for Aristotle Content?

There are scattered flashes of self-awareness but don't expect much else by way of humility from the world-conqueror. The Alexander who acts as narrator is arguably at the height of his powers, before the death of his beloved Hephaestion and still scheming to invade and subjugate every corner of the known world that has thus far escaped his passing. Expect a lot of discussion of his "Daimon", an inner demon more in keeping with the pagan Hellenic tradition that what you see in the Exorcist, as it possesses him to states of exultation and rage at seemingly minor triumphs, set-backs and slights.

Definitely a bro who gives himself his own "cool" nicknames

Ultimately it is a compelling narrative that neither lionizes nor demonizes the historical Alexander but attempts, as much as can be possible, to place him in his own context. I recommend.

I got you in my bleary sights, Romans!

A note on the Audiobook narrator: I can only wish I had a rich, sonorous baritone like John Lee but I feel his stentorian patrician cadence somehow didn't fit the first person perspective, particularly for scenes like when Alexander is delightedly recounting how some of the passes in the Hindu Kush were so steep they'd make a mule's asshole whistle from the effort of climbing them. But perhaps I'm just letting myself be too influenced by the memory of Colin Farrell's Irish bumpkin version of some years ago, which probably strayed too far to the other extreme.

It IS true that Alexander was said to be rather short and stocky...