Rating: 5/5

This book leaves me feeling both satisfied and dissatisfied... but then I wonder if that isn't the point - or at least one of the many points. This slim novel (142 pages) with its straightforward style is deceptive in that it is crammed full of thought-provoking ideas.

The story begins well-grounded in reality with Motion reflecting on the nature of biography, and specifically what truths the discipline can tell and what truths it leaves out, as well as what is known and what is unknowable about a life. 'Recently', Motion declares, 'I've cast around for new ways of doing things.'

Within a couple of paragraphs we are matter-of-factly introduced to Dr William Tabor (1802-1851), who is an invention of Motion's, though so perfectly grounded in his life and times that one wonders for a while why one hasn't heard mention of him before in other scholarly works. In turn, Dr Tabor introduces us to Dr John Cake, likewise an invention.

Motion explores the notion that Keats survived a crisis of health in Rome, but let it be thought that he has died, and took the opportunity to reinvent himself. When he eventually returned to England, it was to live and work as Dr Cake, in a village in Essex. His friends and family were left in ignorance to grieve for Keats.

Motion doubles Keats' lifespan, and we are assured - if we needed any assurance - that Keats had years of happy fulfilment, that he was 'more vigorous ... more remarkable ... more wonderful ... more passionate' than other men. However we only meet him again as he is finally dying, and that shades our view of him, as it shades Tabor's. Was the deception worth all the pain and grief it caused? Cake is loved and respected by the people he served, both high born and low, and he knows that he has done much good in this 'second' life. But in the end he also feels deeply what he has lost.

There is something to be said here about choices made, and how they create some opportunities while closing the possibility of others. Motion says it less baldly and more wisely than I.

While this is fiction, it is written as if 'real' - perhaps the biographer travelling down a byway that is too speculative to be included in a scholarly tome. An appendix, if you like, to Motion's masterly 'Keats'. It allows Motion, via Keats himself, to speculate about who Keats was and who he might have been. It also explores the question of whether creative talents can ever last a full lifetime.

In summary: Highly recommended. I would love for other biographers to also explore 'new ways of doing things', if this is the kind of richness that results.