Rating: 5/5

If you feel like reading a complex psychological novel that will make you ponder the meaning of life, this is a book for you. Not that you will be provided with any definite answers, mind you. Victory strikes me as a rather ambiguous work, one that is (intentionally left) open to interpretations. Consequently, if you like clear questions and answers, this is not a novel for you, for there is a lot to ponder in this one. Nevertheless, I must hurry to add the novel is not written as a meditative/philosophical essay or anything like that. Not at all. This philosophical aspect of the novel is what first comes to my mind because it is what (personally) interests me the most, but really there is the main story, sub- stories, plot and all- for some perhaps this main ‘story’ is the most important aspect of the novel. For me it is the character study, but these things are always subjective.

So, If I were to be more objective, I would have to add that there is a romantic story within this novel. On surface, it is a love story with elements of adventure. You have a typical 'damsel in distress' syndrome- a young lady in love with a man who offered her protection plus a whole cast of villains to spice things up. That does sound like an adventure, doesn’t it? There is more than romance and adventure to this novel, though. Once the action picks up, Victory turns into a psychological thriller. In a way, perhaps it is possible to say there are elements of psychological thriller from the very start- but naturally this is open to interpretation. I won’t attempt to put this novel into any fixed category. However, I will say that if you go into this one expecting Conrad to weave infinite meaning into a story and show off this mastery over language, well you won’t be disappointed. 

 Basically, many typical ‘Conrad’ elements and formulas are present in this one. In Victory you will find an impressive cast of characters, introduced and described within a complicated narrative that somehow manages to feel intimate. I always wondered how Conrad manages to do that, but now that I think of it, he’s hardly the first English author who has used a complicated narrative voice (think of Wuthering Heights) and managed to make it sound plausible. Conrad is a great writer, no doubt about that- and as I already said, Victory is written in his signature style. Typically for Conrad, the protagonist of the novel will face moral dilemmas and re-examine his view of the world. The setting for this novel is a tropical destination, inhabited by both locals and Europeans. Hence, there are some ‘colonial’ references. I would say that a motif of cultural and civilization clash is present, but not very prominent. The ending might appear rushed, but I think it was actually carefully planned. The slow introduction is necessary because of the detailed character study. 

The protagonist of this novel, Heyst, needs a long introduction because it is the only way we can truly understand his actions (in my opinion). Imagine if we didn't know anything about his past, well, we (readers) would probably judge him insensitive. Personally, I found Heyst absolutely fascinating. As a young man, Heyst was disappointed in life. His dying father installed mistrust towards life into him, resulting with the young man somewhat autistic attitude towards life. He is content with only observing life. However, when Heyst stumbles against a desperate Portuguese man, he decides to pay his depth. This bounds him to his man, both in friendship and in a feeling of responsibility. For isn’t a feeling of responsibility one of the defining characteristics of friendship? This friendship is perhaps the very first connection between the reader and the protagonist because it is what makes us emphasize with Heyst and see him as a real person. What follow is a sad but memorable tale. The sadness of this novel is for most part subtle, only reaching its peak towards the end, but for me that makes it none the less profound.

I have read the Note to the first edition written by Joseph Conrad himself, but I'm still not certain why this novel is called Victory. Taking in consideration the ending and the atmosphere of Shakespearean tragedy, one does wonder what the title is supposed to mean. Conrad explained it as a some kind of omen, saying that: The last word of this novel was written on 29 May 1914. And that last word was the single word of the title. Those were the times of peace. Now that the moment of publication approaches I have been considering the discretion of altering the title-page. The word “Victory” the shining and tragic goal of noble effort, appeared too great, too august, to stand at the head of a mere novel. There was also the possibility of falling under the suspicion of commercial astuteness deceiving the public into the belief that the book had something to do with war.
Of that, however, I was not afraid very much. What influenced my decision most were the obscure promptings of that pagan residuum of awe and wonder which lurks still at the bottom of our old humanity. “Victory” was the last word I had written in peace-time. It was the last literary thought which had occurred to me before the doors of the Temple of Janus flying open with a crash shook the minds, the hearts, the consciences of men all over the world. Such coincidence could not be treated lightly. And I made up my mind to let the word stand, in the same hopeful spirit in which some simple citizen of Old Rome would have “accepted the Omen.”

Historical circumstances set aside, the title still made me wonder. Perhaps Conrad himself acted on an impulse when he choose it. Not that it wasn't a good impulse. Stil.... Who is really victorious? I gave the matter some thought and an answer presented itself. Why, Lena! Previously I read several works by Joseph Conrad ( Heart of Darkness, Lord Jim , Nostromo )but never have I met with such a powerful female protagonist. This was most refreshing. Lena's capability for love and loyalty is all the more impressive taken the circumstances of her life. This is the first novel of Conrad's that I read, featuring a female character that takes things into her hands. Lena, a young woman who finds herself growing up and living in the most unhappy of circumstances, is anything but a victim. Ultimately, you could say she's the victim of life (but haven't we all) yet there is nothing about her that suggest a victim. In other Conrad's works that I read, female characters were (almost always) distant figures. Lena takes not only her own life at her hands, but she is ready to act to save the lives of others. Needless to say, I really warmed up to her. Moreover, this character is such an important part of this story. Lena offers a fascinating study not only of relationship between the opposing sexes, but between a society and an individual. Despite being an outcast of some kind, Lena has a very strong sense of morality, of herself. She is very much a defined character and an individual.

If I remember the Author’s note well, Conrad explain that he was inspired by an actual woman when he was creating Lena- it was a brief but obviously memorable encounter. On one occasion, Conrad saw a young women being pinched by her (presumably) mother while she was performing (playing piano) on stage. This cruelty inflected by one woman to another, moved him. In a similar way, the protagonist of this novel, Heyst (often called the Swede) was moved by witnessing Lena’s terror and the abuse inflected on her. Like the actual young woman, Lena was a performer (against her will). When the two (Heyst and Lena) meet, there is more than longing (on her part) and pity (on his part). I saw it as a meeting of kindred spirits and was honestly moved by it. 

Both of them are remarkably innocent. Perhaps their 'innocence' might seem absurd to the modern reader, but it makes sense in the context of their lives. Lena is attracted by Heyst because she senses that he is different from others- and vice versa. Aren't they clearly different from most people? First of all, they both lack emotional attachment to other people- more due to circumstances than to their own personal capacity for such emotions. One could say that Heyst in unemotional, yet his life proves it is not really the case. His hermit life is something that needs to be examined to be understood, and it seems that Lena instinctively understands it- perhaps we could call it female intuition? Interestingly, in their relationship Lena seems to be the active party, she is the one who asks for help- in a more direct way than the Portuguese (who had prayed to God but found Heyst instead). Nevertheless, I wouldn’t say that Heyst is completely indifferent and passive. If he was, where would be the tragedy? And there is a lot of tragedy in this novel. 

As a character Heyst might appear passive but paradoxically I think he is a man of strong will. It is just that his will was directed towards renouncing the world and now he finds it difficult to find his place in this world. For all the good that exists in his heart and perhaps precisely because of it, Heyst is unable to truly become a part of this world. The author put it like this: ...It is only when the catastrophe matches the natural obscurity of our fate that even the best representative of the race is liable to lose his detachment. It is very obvious that on the arrival of the gentlemanly Mr. Jones, the single-minded Ricardo, and the faithful Pedro, Heyst, the man of universal detachment, loses his mental self-possession, that fine attitude before the universally irremediable which wears the name of stoicism. It is all a matter of proportion. There should have been a remedy for that sort of thing. And yet there is no remedy. Behind this minute instance of life’s hazards Heyst sees the power of blind destiny. Besides, Heyst in his fine detachment had lost the habit of asserting himself. I don’t mean the courage of self-assertion, either moral or physical, but the mere way of it, the trick of the thing, the readiness of mind and the turn of the hand that come without reflection and lead the man to excellence in life, in art, in crime, in virtue, and, for the matter of that, even in love. Thinking is the great enemy of perfection. The habit of profound reflection, I am compelled to say, is the most pernicious of all the habits formed by the civilized man. 

I do recommend Victory, especially if you're a fan of Joseph Conrad. There are many complex messages and questions hidden beneath its touching love story and adventurous plot. There is much more than meets the eye in this one. At its core I would say that Victory is a profoundly sad novel with elements of pessimism but somehow it is also a novel that carries a message of hope. You will have to wait patiently to get to the action part of the book (the second half of the novel) and even longer for everything to unfold (the last few pages are the defining one in terms of characters' destinies). Nevertheless, as readers you will be rewarded for your patience, for this novel is not only beautifully written, but written with great mastery, care and thought.