Rating: 4/5

The Pride of Chanur is the introduction to the fascinating Compact, a part of the Alliance-Union universe. The Compact is a trade agreement and region of space occupied by seven of the most unique and compelling alien species in writing. The story is a somewhat shallow space opera from the perspective of a space lion, but it is serviceable and establishes this fantastic setting. 

As I said, the plot is pretty basic. The good guys save a prisoner from the bad guys, and desperately try to outrun the bad guys to safety. Once there, the good guys must defend their home from the bad guys. This plot may be simple, but it provides plenty of action and suspense. I was personally satisfied with the story. In fact, I only noticed the simplicity of the plot in retrospect.

The more important part of The Pride of Chanur by far is the setting. The Compact is literally a trade agreement among seven species, but it also generally refers to the region of space occupied by those species. Four of those species breathe oxygen - hani, kif, mahendo’sat, and stsho - and three breathe methane - t’ca, chi, and knnn. These aliens are all unique and interesting. I would say they are among the most memorable aliens in fiction. (My favorite are probably the t’ca, yellow serpentine aliens with six brains that speak in matrices.) The species have complex relationships and various motivations, creating opportunities for conflict and drama. The Compact was a nice change of pace from the Federation style societies or military alliances I see much more often. Exploring the Compact alone was worth the time.

The Pride of Chanur has a few outstanding strengths. It is a rare story from a nonhuman perspective. The entire story is told in third person close from the perspective of the hani Pyanfar. It actually feels like she has an inhuman psychology, and I LOVE speculation about alternative intelligences. Not just is the story told from an alien perspective, but the reader gets to see a human from through alien eyes. The Pride of Chanur is also a space opera that cares more about economics and culture than military action. I liked that approach a lot. Cherryh created a setting with uncommon amount of depth and detail.

I am glad my science fiction book club chose The Pride of Chanur. I may never have gotten to it on own, and that would have been a shame. Now I am eager to continue the Chanur novels, and the wider Alliance-Union universe as a whole.

CHARACTER LIST (abridged) 
Pyanfar Chanur - protagonist and perspective character, hani, captain of The Pride of Chanur, chooses to save Tully, protects her brother Kohan from an unfair challenge, violates taboos to take her husband Khym into space, establishes contact with humanity
Hilfy Chanur - hani, niece of Pynafar and daughter of Kohan, crewmember of The Pride of Chanur, regularly called imp by Pyanfar
Haral - hani, crewmember of The Pride of Chanur, oldest crewmember
Tirun - hani, crewmember of The Pride of Chanur,
Geran - hani, crewmember of The Pride of Chanur, sister of Chur, 
Chur - hani, crewmember of The Pride of Chanur, sister of Geran, smallest crewmember, 
Akukkakk - kif, captain of the Hinukku, demanded Pyanfar return a stolen item that is strongly implied to be the unknown alien
Tully - Outsider, human, escapes the kif to stowaway on The Pride of Chanur, asks to join the crew, provides translator tapes, helps establish contact between humans and the hani
Lihan Faha - hani, captain of the Faha’s Starchaser, aunt to Hilfy, killed by kif when trying to make cover for The Pride of Chanur 
Ahe Stasteburana-to - Mahendo’sat, stationmaster of Kirdu Station, seems to be a group, makes deal with Pyanfar for human language tape,
Goldtooth/Ismehanan - mahendo’sat, captain of the Mahajiru, makes deal with Pyanfar on Meetpoint, accuses Pyanfar on Kirdu Station, 
Dur Tahar - hani, captain of Tahar’s Moon Rising, not friendly to the Chanur, pressures Pyanfar for information about Tully, provides passage to the survivors of Faha’s Starchaser, collaborates with the kif to make charges against The Pride of Chanur at Gaohn Station,
Kifas Luln - hani, in charge of Gaohn Station
Khym Mahn - Pyanfar’s mate, quiet, patient, witty, lazy, challenged and overthrown by their son Kara, badly hurt and allowed to live destitute on Chanur holdings, fights Kara when he challenges Kohan, helps liberate Gaohn Station, joins the crew of The Pride of Chanur in contravention of gender roles
Kohan Chanur - large male hani, brother of Pyanfar, clan lord of Chanur