Rating: 2/5

I've been reading some Margaret Summerville books after adoring Sensible Cecily but, unfortunately, I'm not having as much success with the subsequent ones. This book is the opposite of what I liked in Sensible Cecily. Instead of a friendship developing between the protagonists, then love, it is a full case of insta-lust.

Athena writes articles for her father's revolutionary newspaper. They write scathing articles about the aristocracy and the peerage system. Athena's cousin from Scotland inherits money and moves to London, and shares with Athena the fact that the Earl of Glencairn has committed some atrocities in his Scottish holding. Athena writes an open letter to him in the newspaper condemning his behavior and he goes to demand satisfaction. That's when the insta-lust happens. She's beautiful and he's strong and impressive. The Earl says he'll investigate the incident and Athena thinks he's not so bad after all. I wonder if she'd think that so quickly if he were short, skinny and had a weasel face.

Just to keep things short, the Earl forcibly kisses Athena when he visits her home and she likes it. They go to the same ball and he only dances with her (very poorly which was funny and unexpected) and pays attention to only her. Gossip starts that he means to make her his mistress. Athena's father refuses to let the Earl visit her but eventually the Earl finds her alone and, guess what... he forcibly kisses her again and she's cool with it. The father catches them, the Earl offers marriage, and Athena refuses (bad aristocrats and all that).

Eventually, they meet in Scotland (he follows her there) and have a happy ending. My main issues is that they had zero opportunity to fall in love. Even when they meet, there's very little significant talking. Athena doesn't think he's all bad and we hear from others that he's not a bad guy, but I saw nothing to support that. He hangs out with Prinny, drinking all night; he's cranky in the morning and his staff suffers the brunt of it; he's rude when attending social functions; spends huge amounts on race horses; and is not very nice to his brother (to be fair, he does eventually support his brother with some of his endeavors). If he also spoke up at the House of Lords for, let's say the poor, and donated to good causes, I'd be a bit more understanding of Athena's admiration for him. But, as he's presented, he's just another bored aristocrat who cares only about himself and his immediate needs: exactly what she abhors.

To be fair, the Earl realizes how selfish he's been, takes some actions to rectify the issues in Scotland, and promises to do better. Unfortunately, that's the very end of the book and not what makes Athena eventually fall in love with him. As the previous reviewer mentioned, I also wonder what their married life would be like and how the newspaper would fare after the event.