Rating: 4/5

Recently, to pass the time pleasantly before going to the dentist I stopped and picked up some fresh-made crusty sourdough bread to eat with dinner.

Yummy!

And for some reason I thought of another trip at an earlier time of my life, which had a similarly pleasant prelude, and then an identically tough-to-handle ending when I entered into hard, cold reality - like getting down to the pain of dental surgery...

Heaven knows why that happens.... why really bad things follow the really good!
***

Back when I was nine, I had my tonsils out.

In the fifties, it was a not uncommon operation for kids. My parents had noticed I breathed through my mouth - yes, through my mouth (Fergus, WHY couldn’t you have breathed normally)!

You see, they wanted a Normal Child, like the infamous Dr. Spock preached was optimal for the Fabulous Fifties. Needless to say, the best-laid plans of mice ‘n men gang aft aglay.

And I never really WANTED to be normal, anyway!

But when they were checking me in to the paediatric ward, there was THIS book in the waiting room - luckily enough, a new Curious George.

Though I was now well into the ‘Classics Illustrated’ phase of my life, I had loved to read and reread the first Curious George book as a tot.

So, hours later, when they wheeled my kid’s size bed towards the OR, I asked if I could bring George with me. 

The nurses were all too willing to comply, knowing full well they’d yank it out of my hands a few moments later, as soon as that ether mask dropped over my face!

Well, I was awake at midnight that night, sleepless after those unfamiliar fumes conked me out for what must have been an appreciable length of time.

But - and here’s the GOOD part - next to my bed on my night table, lit by the cozy white snow glow from the window sill and street below - was CURIOUS GEORGE GOES TO THE HOSPITAL!

My consolation prize.

You see, my Grade Five classmates and their parents had attended the speeches and prize giving ceremonies for our class Public Speaking night that very evening...

And I sorely regretted not going and giving it my best shot.

But now, here was a new Curious George book, all mine to read and reread throughout my entire recuperation process!

So, sometimes... the best-laid plans DON’T go aglay:

And everything turns out perfectly OK.