Rating: 4/5

Hither came Conan, the Cimmerian, black-haired, sullen-eyed, sword in hand, a thief, a reaver, a slayer, with gigantic melancholies and gigantic mirth, to tread the jeweled thrones of the Earth under his sandalled feet.
  

I’ve finally come around to reading sword and sorcery, and by Crom, Conan was the perfect entrance!

Conan has always been synonymous with Arnold Schwarzenegger in my mind, but that’s all been changed now that I’ve read Robert E. Howard’s original creation. I wish I could put down some specific comparisons, but it’s been so long since I’ve seen those movies. All I know is that when I was reading these stories, I had a very different picture in my head than what I was expecting, and was pleasantly surprised to find that I liked this Conan more than I thought I would. 

Interestingly, Conan reminded me of one of my favorite characters of all time, Uhtred of Bebbanburg from Bernard Cornwell’s Saxon Series. Maybe that’s why I enjoyed these stories so much. But research as I might I couldn’t confirm my suspicion that Mr. Cornwell may have been influenced by this great barbarian. Not that it matters anyway. It wouldn’t change my view on either character. I guess I just love that they share a freedom from the constraints of civilization without losing basic human decency. 

As far as the stories themselves, they were a lot of fun, but since they were written in no particular order they did feel disjointed. Each adventure is from a random moment in Conan’s life - as Howard once explained - “I’ve always felt less as creating them than as if I were chronicling his adventure as he told them to me. That’s why they skip about so much.” At first, I admit I was waiting for a connection between the stories, but the more I read the more I just enjoyed them for what they were. Memories. And although, the stories themselves may seem a bit shallow, a brief history of the world is provided at the end of the book. This gives the reader a better look at the mythological time of Conan, which I was very surprised to see was pretty in depth – making me all the more eager to get my hands on Howard’s only novel ever published, Conan the Conqueror. 

I’ll tell you what made these so enjoyable for me - besides my Uhtred connection. Howard’s writing is so beautiful and expressive. Not to mention, for a set of stories written in the 1930’s, they feel fairly current. Here’s a taste of his skillful imagery:

  …the allied army moved forward like a shimmering ocean of steel.

  The whole plain shook to the rumbling avalanche of hoofs, and the shimmer of gold and steel dazzled the watchers on the towers of Shamar.

  Rising above the black denseness of the trees and above the waving fronds, the moon silvered the river, and their wake became a rippling scintillation of phosphorescent bubbles that widened like a shining road of bursting jewels. 

I highlighted many similar lines as I read. They didn’t have any particular relevance – I just loved how wonderfully vivid all his descriptions were. The images were so crisp in my mind I felt like I was right beside Conan in the midst of his adventures. Howard does all the work for you. All you have to do is sit back and enjoy. 

Unfortunately, the e-book from my library was missing all the awesome artwork that graces the pages of the paper edition, but I had little choice other than buying it (which I may do anyway), as the only other copy was put into storage – apparently it’s not a very popular book, which is unfortunate. These stories may not get the credit they’re due because of the films, or maybe the fact they were first written in the 1930’s, or maybe even because not everyone enjoys short stories, but I’m here to tell all you adventure loving readers looking for a break from your usual fare– These are worth your time.