Rating: 3/5

3.5 Stars! This was picked for me for my March Pick-It-For-Me read. It hadn't been on the TBR for too awful long. I'd previously only read the author's Bride trilogy before, but I really liked them, so I was kind of looking forward to this one. I'll admit the idea of heroine as smuggler was intriguing, so that and the pretty cover is what caught my interest. Going in, I could tell it was an older romance, the whole tone reminded me of the ones I used to read when I was younger. I liked the setting in Cornwall, the caves especially with their secret passages. I highly enjoyed putting myself into the location. I liked Merrie, though I didn't always enjoy her many faces she put on, especially the dopey one she showed her neighbors. But I liked her determination, and her attitude about the smuggling and the risks associated with it. She was brave, and smart. Damian was ok too most of the time, but I found myself wearied by his refusal to accept her answer, at least until he could figure out a better way to convince her. But his high-handed way of forcing her into society, forcing her to accept all kinds of things he did... wow, got aggravating. Another reviewer said it better, about him being manipulative and such. Was spot on. Every time she tried to make a little stand against him, he was there to steer her away from it. I found myself wanting to just tell her to tell him to f off and smack him in the face, especially that scene there when she's getting ready to return to her home, and he comes in and forces her into her clothes like a child and hauls her off in his carriage because he's pissy. Or when he takes command of her horses and tells everyone they ran away with her, making her seem an idiot, because he didn't like where she was driving. Yea, so while her stated arguments about why she didn't wish to wed him were weak at times, I still was frustrated right along with her. At other times though, I liked Damian just fine. He won't rank as a favorite hero though. He was too high-handed for my taste. The development of the relationship was ok, though I think they were in love and proclaiming it a little soon. It was an entertaining read though, I quite liked it. I'm definitely going to read more by this author, which is a good thing as I have a couple more on the TBR by her :)