For February, I read The Truly Disadvantaged by Julius Wilson. The book focuses on the changes that occurred in ghettos across the nation from the 1950s-1980s and the state of those who are “truly disadvantaged”. The main idea is really on the fact that the middle and working classes left the ghetto during this time period leaving only the “underclass” to remain. The author believes this outward migration had many negative implications for the nation’s ghettos. Without the presence of the middle and working classes, the underclass became socially isolated from mainstream culture and could also no longer rely on those with greater resources to support neighborhood necessities such as stores and places of worship. It also led to the worsening of unemployment, violent crime rates, welfare dependency, single parent households, and other factors. All of this happened despite groundbreaking civil rights legislation and strong public assistance programs designed to fight poverty. 

One of the major points argued by the author is how racism contributed to the degradation of the state of the underclass. He says we must first separate the idea of historical and contemporary racism. Without a doubt, historical racism created ghettos and the African-American underclass. However, the author states that contemporary racism is only a minor part of what is keeping people in the underclass. He adds to this argument by claiming that if a magic wand could remove all forms of racism from our society, those in the underclass would not see an immediate change and may not see any change for many years. The main reason for the lack of change to the underclass would be due to changes in the economy such as the outflow of jobs from central cities to suburbs and other nations, the reduction of manufacturing and other qualified jobs due to technological advances, the increase in high skill jobs for which the underclass are not qualified, and an increasing population competing for a shrinking pool of qualified jobs. I have to agree with the authors agreement. Simply eliminating racial bias will not eliminate the disparities created by historical racism. It will take time to provide the underclass with the resources they have been denied for all of these years.

The author's recommendation for improving the conditions of the underclass is to create a comprehensive policy that equips the citizens with the tools needed to compete for available jobs in the private sector. He makes it a point to call out that these policies need to address everyone and not be race or class specific in order to receive enough support in legislation. Secondary policies can be created that address race and class issues in a way that the public does not perceive them as the main policy. An afterword is included in which the author speaks on how this related to current times (as of 2012). The author believes that little has changed and that the research is as relevant today than ever.

Reading this book really got me thinking about trends in the low income community that I had never really thought of before. It also got me wondering whether or not CTEP is reaching the population that the author coins as the underclass. The skills taught by CTEP are certainly part of the equation in helping our citizens to get the skills they need to be workforce ready, however, if those in the underclass are as socially isolated as the author describes, maybe our service isn't reaching them.