Rating: 5/5

truly astonishing how someone who wrote what is essentially an allegory against nationalist eugenics is very far-right wing and basically every type of bigot you can possibly envisage. did he read his own novel? was this novel the work of a tiny, tiny part of his subconsciousness that was raging at the fact that the main part of his consciousness was an absolute nazi trainwreck? we may never know. 

no, literally, how the fuck can someone write an anti-eugenics book and then be a neo-Nazi?? how the f- 

anyway i'm going to stop being political now (he says, as though his Politics Mode can even be turned off) and talk about the book itself. 

  ~*~THE BOOK!!~*~

so i'd never heard of this until my auntie's boyfriend lent it to me and said "you'll really like this" and damn, i didn't know he knew me so well?? 

if i had to sum up this book in a sentence it would probably be "a gothic, gory version of Garfield in which Garfield is actually a feline philosophical detective" and if that doesn't get your attention i don't know what will. 

like mentioned, it's anti-eugenics. it's anti-master race. it's anti-dictatorship. (so how the fuck does the author hold the beliefs he does, what the f- ok nemo you've already mentioned this, sssh, the book, talk about the book). despite dealing with dark subject matter, it ends on a positive note (which is my favourite sort of book), and basically says that although life can be really shit and dark at times, it's not always like that and we should always have hope and faith, which is really nice; not sugarcoating reality, but at the same time not being an utter pessimist about life either. 

i also really enjoyed the writing style. to begin with there were Gothic overtones, which added to the overall suspense and the sinister vibe, and there was an undercurrent of black humour running throughout which worked really well. 

the premise was very original and entertaining. aside from the fact that the narrator is a cat, which is novel in itself, the mystery was intricate and complexly woven, with so many possibilities as to who the murderer was and even what their motives were. i tried to guess, but got everything terribly wrong. (not sure this is saying much though, as i'm notoriously bad at guessing the culprit in mysteries.) 

this truly was a superb novel, and i'd recommend it if you can handle dark and gory subject matter. although i think people should be aware that the author is... highly unpleasant, and therefore if you wanted to read it without supporting him you could get it used or something ;) i also mention it because i know some people feel uncomfortable reading books by authors like that, although bear in mind none of his far-right-wing views are reflected in the novel (the reverse is true, as mentioned, which is very strange).