Rating: 3/5

I've heard a lot of great things about Zig Ziglar, so I'm a bit perplexed as to why I didn't like this book more. I'm tempted to give Zig the benefit of the doubt, because I read this on the plane after being up packing most of the night and getting only about three hours of sleep. But I'm pretty sure that this book doesn't have the sharp direction that I'd expect. While there is useful information in here, and while I think the book on the whole has some promise, individual chapters tended to wander, the examples given are more cutesy than useful, and much of the advice is rather generic. Perhaps if I had attended any of the courses mentioned, I would have the background needed to connect the dots, but it seemed as though Zig was in too much of a hurry to put everything together. Often times I found myself a bit confused, and had to go back and reread a sentence or a paragraph, and I realized that Zig expected me to read between the lines and jump to the same conclusions that he had jumped to, without quite explaining what that conclusion was until after he had decided to explain how that conclusion wasn't quite right.

The book has three other co-authors, but I found it rather confusing to know what was written by Zig and what was written by his co-authors. One of the co-authors was credited in the text rather extensively. Another was credited once or twice. And I have a hard time remembering if I saw any passages explicitly credited to the third author.

What may have been my favorite chapter, a list of key learnings, was presented almost exclusively in a list format, with little or no explanation of how any of the items could be put into practice. It may be worthwhile to go back and re-read that chapter several times, but I with there were a little more meat there.

Other chapters seemed to wander aimlessly, and then suddenly the chapter was over and a summary was presented making you feel as if you should have known how the different parts of the chapter were supposed to relate to each other.

Maybe I was just too tired to really get this book, but my reaction was that it wasn't as wonderful as I would have hoped.