Rating: 4/5

Published in 2002—years prior to the Pink Himalayan salt craze—Mark Kurlansky’s “Salt: A World History,” is still both a great, and a relevant, read. 

This book is arranged into three parts: Part One: A Discourse on Salt, Cadavers, and Pungent Sauces; Part Two: The Glow of Herring and the Scent of Conquest; and Part Three: Sodium’s Perfect Marriage. In just twenty-six chapters, Kurlasnky takes the reader on a world tour of the history of salt making. 

The author’s writing is geared to a non-academic, general public and includes not just Western countries—like in Europe and the United States—but also includes salt making in places like ancient Egypt, Rome, and the Middle East, Africa, China, and India. However, the majority of the writing does focus on European communities, including the US, and China. 

The book’s ending seemed a bit stifled. It was clear that by Chapter 26, the author could have quite literally gone ‘on and on’ but had to stop out of necessity. And while Kurlansky went out of his way to include short discussions of colonialism and slavery, these discussions were generally short because his subject was so broad that he could have created an entire multi-volume encyclopedia on the subject.

Being geared towards the general public, the author kept his scientific discussions to a minimum, but was able to incorporate information on numerous other types of salts other than just sodium chloride. What I really loved about this book is that the author showed readers how a single commodity can have such a huge impact on world history and economics, spanning from the earliest recorded history and up to the present time.

The author chose to avoid the use of both in-text citations and footnotes/endnotes, but did include a bibliography. While I wouldn’t consider the bibliography to be exhaustive, it was entirely acceptable. “Salt: A World History,” was a fantastic read. There is no doubt as to why this book has become so popular and why people are still intent on reading it.