Rating: 2/5

Michener is known for his beautiful writing and his grand historical epics. This, his last novel is very different, written towards the end of his life when obviously there were important things on his mind.

Andy Zorn is a young disgraced obstetrician working in Chicago. We meet him as he is packing his bags and heading south. He is despondent after a nasty divorce and the realization that he can no longer afford the increased premiums for his liability insurance,the result of losing two fraudulent malpractice cases. The fact that these cases were won by one lawyer who used devious tactics to accomplish his goal does not help him. So Andy has decided to pack it in, leave his chosen profession and his prosperous clinic and head to Florida to take a position as a manager for a large retirement complex near Tampa. He will not be taking on medical duties, only the administrative aspects of bringing this high class facility called The Palms to better profitability. From this point on, as the narrative unfolds, Michener explores the different challenges Zorn faces in managing the facility as well as the numerous challenges every grown adult faces as he ages and realizes the inevitable, that he will soon exit this life.

Michener is well known for his prodigious research, an important initial step when writing his novels. This one is no exception. Through his characters he explores the issues of aging, feminism, and the difficulties the elderly encounter when trying to negotiate the healthcare bureaucracy. He also comments on the unusual complementarity of bizarrely mismatched couples and how personal, professional and academic lives can be destroyed by controversy. Now as they prepare themselves mentally and emotionally to make their departure from this life, the residents of the Palms spend time recalling significant moments from the past including their regrets and failings. They remember those old times when they saw things so clearly. The characters at this facility do not brood about death but it comes often into their thoughts. 

Medically, Michener tackles the mysteries of Alzheimer’s, human genetics, AIDS, cancer treatment and the proliferation of litigation medicine. In terms of the challenges facing administrators he enlightens us on the management of a profitable health care facility with its complicated financials and even the more mundane but equally challenging aspects of providing food everyone enjoys and the perils of allocating parking spots. Additionally he educates us on the thorny issue of living wills and the tyranny of hovering mean spirited children expecting big payouts when their parents die. 

The plot of this book is weak and the discussions Michener shares with his readers feel like small essays tacked on to this frail vulnerable frame. The characters do not drive the plot, the narrative about the complex is the driver, and so only two of the characters (Zorn and Nora, his head nurse) are fleshed out to any extent.

The romantic excursions were a bit off putting and felt to me more like a soap opera than something belonging in a Michener novel. I also found the inner dialogue of the rattlesnake somewhat unusual and unnecessary. However, I must also add that Michener’s writing shines through as always and therein lies the small pleasure in this book.

It is interesting to note the passages on suicide and euthanasia given the way Michener ended his life. He died at the age of 90 after noting that he had accomplished everything he wanted to do. And so, he chose to stop the thrice weekly dialysis treatments that had maintained his health.

Given the book was written in the mid-eighties when Michener was already 87 years old and was published in 1994, some of the medical information is dated by new knowledge. That is to be expected, but many of the daunting issues Michener raises are still before us today. This last novel was in part inspired by the time he spent in a nursing home towards the end of his life and he completed the research and wrote the book while he was there.

This is not one of my recommended reads. It is a manageable 540 pages and it is thought provoking at times, but on the whole I was disappointed. However when you realize what this author produced at his age and consider the total of 41 volumes in his lifetime, you must admit he had a very productive life. I must say I do feel uncomfortable criticizing such a well known and recognized writer, however one can never expect an author to produce high quality work every single time.