Rating: 4/5

When the Barshinkeys, a Russian emigrant family, moves into the small English village where Sophie Willoughby lives, life begins to change for her family.
 
 “I still do not really understand what drew the Barshinskeys to us and even stranger, what drew us to the Barshinskeys. They were little better than tinkers, we were ‘peasant gentry.” They were poor, dirty, but free; we were well fed, comfortable but confined tightly within our barriers of respectability. Sometimes I think our fascination for one another began because of that particular summer – I look back and remember everything bathed in a golden haze, and it is not just the magic memory of childhood that makes it so. I have spoken to old men and women about that summer of 1902, and it was a good summer, a strange one, when wild geese flew across the skies every evening, when there were bumper cops of wild strawberries...” 
 
The story takes us through Sophie Willoughby's growing up years but changes perspective with the characters of Edwin, her brother, and Daisy May, the more stable member of the Barshinskey family. As war begins and then the Russian revolution, the changing fortunes of each family member comes into play and the author does a great job of involving the reader into the hardships and triumphs of the characters. 

Edwin is on the road to success and following his dream of becoming a train engineer when suddenly he jettisons everything to pursue an infatuation with Galina, Daisy's unstable, unpredictable sister. Offered a position on a steamship, he berates himself at first but then finds strength and hope as he considers the end result of his drastic choice:

 “He would survive the stokehold – of course he would survive. He was young and strong and if he pulled himself together and stopped wallowing in self-pity he could achieve whatever he wanted. It was a hard work, hideous work, yes, and he was condemned to loneliness because he was ‘different’ from his fellow stokers. But did that matter? Wasn’t it much better that he should be apart from them, free to follow his own pursuits, to see Galina whenever he could? And in his mood of rising hope and determination he knew he would do whatever he had to, follow whatever path was necessary to continue seeing Galina...” 
 
Throughout this sad story, Edwin has this hope that his love is going to change Galina. Hope on, hope ever... sometimes just simple faithfulness, perseverance and goodness *can* evoke change. But there are also instances where it does not. Human nature is not a toy, a plaything we can manipulate like dolls into behaving according to our wants and wishes. Life has a way of interfering with the most carefully thought out plans, and in this novel, a world war and revolutionary upheaval is going to have a radical effect on all of Edwin's plans.

"The Summer of the Barshinskeys" was a long, emotion-building epic that kept me reading, even though there are many sad situations and hardships portrayed. We hope, so hope, with Edwin that Daisy’s sister Galina will mature and cast aside her promiscuous and self-centered behavior. Is there hope for Galina to become all that Edwin dreams of? We cheer Daisy May as she ventures into unknown territory, the vast land of Russia, seeking to rescue Edwin and Galina caught within the throes of suspicion and the Russian revolution. We suffer along with Sophie when Ivan is drawn to her older sister and doesn’t seem to notice her. 

There are times when the author's lyrical writing carries the reader into a place and time that is forever gone, and conversely there are moments when we want to take a character by the scruff of the neck and shake some sense into them. What a story! A story of a lost England and the effects of war on two vastly different families that intertwine throughout the years of a turbulent period in Europe’s history.