Rating: 5/5

Incredible writing skill! She says more in a colloquial and sometimes brutal (within both its intent and its semantics meaning) phrasing than most authors crowd into an entire chapter. 

Hagar not going quietly into that good night! What rage against a dying of the light is merely from years, physical condition and experience of a tired and frustrated 90 year old? And what was always there at 5 or 6 or 8 years of age? Margaret Laurence lets you know.

What I thought absolutely the most superlative in this whole novel? It was that this author had Hagar always complaining of some mettle in or by "the other". And regardless of who "the other" was or became, she did exactly that same brand of mettle or worse herself in the very next paragraph. Oftentimes in the very next sentence. She loves exactly what she hates too. But never calls that first by any name, word, condition that would be connected to it either. 

It was not 5 star in enjoyment after the first 200 pages. I found the last 1/3rd difficult and as I recognize that souring and disaffection and plies to escape among the very closest to me in the over 90 year old range - I held much more Marv &amp; Doris feelings to heart. 

Tough. A survivor. How she survived and in her era when it was not all that easy- also quite stubbornly independent. Even when that independence harbored immense deficits, selfish and self-serving judgments- it always occurred as planned. It did. No one owned Hagar. She didn't even know herself how much she was always and continually cutting those binds that tie. 

It's also a fairly perfect window into the context/ worldview of that era and economics too. And how women served a road to their own powers that had any results. Or found, like Hagar, some road blocks signs of barricade which always screamed "I'm here, I'm here". 

There are quotes in this book which have to do with description and sensibility that are 6 star. Most of them are brutally, brutally hurtful, sharp as knives to others. (The one about the yeast smelling in-law comes to mind.) And others that are physical, natural world embedding like few I have ever come across. More toward the poetic levels too than most fiction writers of modern verbosity ever approach, those word choices and predicate pattern! 

One of them in that last category here for just a taste:

"It was spring that day, a different spring from this one. The poplar bluffs had budded with sticky leaves, and the frogs had come back to the sloughs and sang like choruses of angels with sore throats, and the marsh marigolds were opening like shavings of sun on the brown river where the tadpoles danced and the bloodsuckers lay slimy and low, waiting for the boys' feet. And I rode in the block-topped buggy beside the man who was now my mate."

Hagar stayed strong (as did many women in this era) by cutting off all of her own mental and emotive sensibilities at the knees. It gave her a feeling of control. And it did- control! And letting her intelligence only go "so far" to really learning factual anything for depth. Hagar was mean. Her soul and cognition quite like the "Stone Angel" she insisted be righted to its rigid vertical after a abusive topple. All of the disconnects of her own childhood repeated but the stone edifice raised high and visible.

It does not at all surprise me that Margaret Laurence committed suicide, choosing her own method of death, when she herself was gravely ill.