Rating: 4/5

Once upon a time there were two brothers. One was a family guy and the other was a douche-bag who wanted to kill his nephew. 

The family guy was pretty sketch of his bro (rightly so) and sent his baby to live with a centaur. Jason and the centaur lived in a cave until he got a powerful need to see his daddy-o. 

Jason meets an old woman with mad strength. He makes his way to the kingdom where he meets his d-bag uncle. The uncle wants to kill him but realizes, like a vicious twitter roast, all the people who hate humans won’t let him get away with it. 

Jason thinks that being a king is pretty dope. But Jason’s dad uses his eyes to say “dude, no, you can’t trust this jerk.” Jason wants lots of fame and adventure so he doesn’t care and boldly declares: “I’ll get that Golden Fleece!”

Lots of big name heroes gather together and a magnificent ship is built. Dad is super sad because his son is a glory-hound. 

The Story of the Golden Fleece
A jealous wife wants to kill her husband’s mistress’s children. She concocts this super elaborate crazy plan to get them sacrificed. (I guess poison was too mundane at this point.) The mistress prays to a mystic golden ram who saves them, sort of, because the daughter still falls into the sea and dies. The jealous wife gets turned into a seagull and the king is turned into an eagle. Seems legit. 

Jason and his crew land on a shore where a ferocious king comes and insists someone box him. If they don’t, look out!! 

Then comes the Amazons. Luckily the men built all the houses before they were kicked out, because, you know, there’s no way women could build houses! Since they’re starting to get older they decide to have the great heroes stay for awhile. The men are so overcome with the lovely women they give up on adventuring. Lots of stories are told. 

The Story of Pandora
The gods come up with this awesome idea to build a perfect woman. Voila! Pandora! Pandora is given every lovely gift and a titan falls in love with her. He takes Pandora and her jar down to the people because he wants everyone to gawk and admire her. All the simple-minded people do. But then the women start to get jealous of their hubbys spending all this time admiring Pandora. (Weird, they wouldn’t like that.) So, they go get Pandora’s jar hoping it will make them beautiful but instead they let out all the awful things in the world. As usual, everything is blamed on women. 

The Argonauts continue on and come to the mountain where Prometheus is chained and his liver eaten everyday. (Zeus has very creative punishments.) Heracles insists he needs to stay and beat the vulture so they leave the poor guy there and head on. 

Jason is finally able to get the fleece but, he’s not really the hero. Medea is. I like how that part is conveniently passed over. Medea is rightly mad when she is used as a pawn. 

Jason and the Argonauts continue on, meet Circes, pass the Sirens, and come to a beautiful island. Many other stories are told. 

Finally they come home but Jason gets some bad news- his uncle has gone even more cray-cray. Now Jason can’t go home and show off his shiny fleece. 

Lots more stories are told about all the fellas of the Argonaut. Basically all the stories show what a bunch of show-off jocks the lot are. They all think they’re god’s gift to the world and in some cases, I suppose they are. 

Reminded me a lot of reading The Odyssey or Iliad but in a kid-friendly version. All the guys are d-bags who think women are prizes to be won. Also, they don’t really do anything brave, they’re just given special gifts that allow them to do something miraculous leading us to learn that all depends on the will of the gods. 

I suppose that is the lesson I learn from myths- Fate’s a bitch. She doesn’t really care what happens. Sometimes good things happen sometimes bad and we don’t have a lot to say about it. 

All that said, I quite enjoyed this audio book. I think myths are a lot of fun and I liked the simple easy way all the stories were told. Some were a little different than I have heard before but all the classics are there. One of the better Newbery Books I’ve read.