Rating: 3/5

An uneven, messy, but somewhat satisfying supernatural thriller. 

Hexes overachieves, and that is its weakness. 

Coming from a horror paperback line that churned out accessible, occasionally disturbing, but always relatable and straightforward books, Hexes goes the opposite route, turning what would have been a standard blood-and-boobs fare into a puzzling, confounding, and very impenetrable black magic thriller. I wonder what magic (see what I did there) Don D’auria had to do to keep this book still palatable to the mainstream market. (See also the vastly different versions of Gary A. Braunbeck’s   In Silent Graves , from its Leisure version to the new Journalstone edition) 

Piccirilli does hook you right into the proceedings, with the visit of the main character Matthew Galen to his recently institutionalized friend A. G. It seems that A. G. was caught digging children’s bones and trying to perform a ritual, which is compounded by the fact that this happened during a recent spree of disappearances in their town. During their meeting (where not a word was spoken), Galen learns that the evil they discovered underneath the lighthouse years ago has had its steady grip over the town ever since, and it is returning to claim more victims. 

Then Piccirilli unleashes the flashbacks, containing multiple characters, allusions to demon-lore and black magic, absurd recollections that might not be true, stream-of-consciousness ramblings to accentuate the occult atmosphere, etc. Damn, that’s a lot, especially for such a short book.

This is the point where Hexes fails for me; it could have been told simply and still achieve the same effect. A story of a guy trying to fix a past that is way beyond repair using magic should not be mired in confusion and pretension; it’s a very strong theme and should be played straight. Maybe if it was a ghost story or a Cosmic Horror one? 

It has two saving factors: 1. Piccirilli plays the occult themes to the hilt, overloading the reader with occult and magic references that would otherwise be not mentioned at all. We have mentions of Crowley, Father Grandier, and assortments of demons. (Galen even fights them!). 2. The disturbing graphic violence that is presented in all its sickening glory. This is apparent in the final act, with a slaughter that almost tops the finale of Masterton’s  Feast . (Sorry Pic.) There is a scene involving a lady with her tongue nailed... ah just read it. 

For fans of Tom Pic, it’s a must-read. For everybody else, don’t read it unless you want a mental workout to go with your black magic horror books.