Rating: 5/5

This book is a gateway into evolutionary biology. It takes the universal animal "condition" of aggression, a facet of the fight or flight response, that has over time become refined by social rituals and "cultures" of behaviors, and goes full-blown behavior-study-analysis into how this could occur, and further extrapolates what this means for humankind, having evolved from "lesser" (lower-tiered among certain strata) animals. The definition of aggression is important to get right here: Lorenz sees it as the fight of "fight of flight," but that fight can be and often is channeled into other outlets that signal other types of interactive behavior, such as mating rituals and pair bonding. 

Lorenz's writing is lucid and on point with every beautiful detail. As an expert ethologist (he studies animal behavior) he does not miss a detail, from the slightest neck movement of a greylag goose to the angular direction of movement of a cichlid. As in observing people, it is not the what they say that reveal their realities, but the subtle cues of how they act. Any good psychologist knows this. Lorenz, in observing animals, digs even deeper. He often refers to Kant, citing what biological "mechanisms" must underly his a priori categories as necessary generational developments borne out of evolution. It is in these areas that our vocabulary obscures what is the heart of the matter--the disciplines at the time this book was written, and still today, lack the language necessary for elucidating processes of multi-generational biological emergences. Lorenz's genius in writing is his ability to communicate these things in a way that readers can digest. 

There is a lot of tediously observed and tested behavioral science in this book, but it hardly ever gets boring. Each chapter opens up a whole new layer and shines with an enthusiasm for life as it is expressed in all sorts of living things. This infectious enthusiasm, combined with revelatory insights into evolutionary biology in every chapter, gives the book a storylike progression. Eventaully, Lorenz applies everything he's unraveled to human beings, unwrapping the social world with such a refreshing perspective that your attention is challenged by the suspense of "getting the answers" to how this all works inside of and all around you. Yet, the book is taken best at a slow pace, because there is a lot of insight in it, and unless you have primed yourself in animal observation well beforehand, it is almost too much to take in. Evolutionary biology t is a deep, labrynthine rabbit hole to explore.

Each chapter could be taken in alone as a mind-blowing essay that is still as fresh today as it must have been in 1972 (albeit more controversial back then). There are challenges that Lorenz makes to standard assumptions that still linger today. They basically are the aspects of biology that brush up against the outcomes (though not the opportunities) of social idealism. It is important to keep in mind that this book is a scientist's observations, and that Lorenz is aware of such charges he will evoke. The book is offered as an insight into human nature, and on the premise of "know thyself," because only once we do can we take control and responsibility for who we are--and who we are (as a species, alive today, with ancestors that go back way longer than we can account for) is mind-bogglingly complicated. Taking our distant cousins (other species) as models from which we can learn about ourselves is a genius idea. Life, after all, is hard to argue. Life is something we can intuitively know, so much as we look into the eyes of a deer or a dog and look into the window of its soul. We see it grow up from birth, get old, and pass on, and we know that it is alive, just like us. 

Lorenz is a truth-seeker, an admirer of beauty, an advocate of the method of science, a humanitarian, an expert in his field, and a gifter teacher. Science, done earnestly and prudently, cannot eradicate beauty, but merely plunges its dedicated followers (or tool-users, if you will) into a more and more deeply comlex and beautiful world. Is science self-eradicating? Possibly. Does it requre a humble soul to use it? Certainly. What remains of Lorenz's research is an eternal awe of the animals he loved, and the echoes of how much we are part of that kingdom of life, no matter how much we try to moralize and abstract ourselves out of it. This sometimes is a hard pill to swallow. In the end, it is the irrefutable basis for all future morality and abstraction, and source of who we are.

Addendum: I am eager to read more Lorenz, and having just stumbled upon him on YouTube, learn more about what's going on in the world of evolutionary biology today through Bret Weinstein.