Rating: 3/5

An okay collection of "wholesome" talking animal stories, by which I mean they all have "happy" (as in nonviolent) endings despite the fact that several of them involve at least one animal trying to eat at least one other animal:

"Rats on the Roof":
A dog couple is upset by rats on their roof making music through the night and keeping them awake. They hire a cat, who has very different ideas of what the job of Cat means and sets about the job of being a cat—lazing around and looking elegant. When the dogs mention they meant for the cat to do something about the rats on the roof, the cat throws a fit and makes a huge fuss, as he hates rats. This scares off the rats, who leave a note for the dogs that they are leaving, haha.

"A Sheepish Tale":
Two sheep get lost in the woods because one insists he can read, then misreads all of the signs DIRECTLY WARNING about the presence of wolves instead as signs that have nothing to do with wolves at all. When the wolf in the woods realises two sheep are headed his way, he disguises himself as another sheep and greedily waits for them to fall asleep in his house at his invitation rather than attack one at the risk of the other getting away. However, the wolf falls asleep instead, and the sheep see the wolf's disguise fall off, immediately running away, so the wolf wakes up to believe he only dreamed the sheep had been there.

"The Mouse Who Got Married":
This is the most Kevin &amp; Kell story in the book: A cat reads a wedding announcement for mice and decides to crash the wedding to have a nice mouse buffet. The mouse bride, though, turns out to be bigger than the cat and throws him out. Really unbelievable that animals so close in size can exist in a society like this, but suspension of disbelief or other, I guess?

"Eat Your Vegetables":
An owl finds a brontosaurus eating her tree and enlists friends to drive him away by sitting on every branch he tries to eat. Cute story about the power of friendship, but why is an owl THAT bothered by a leaf-eater eating leaves?

"Swan Song":
A cow helps a swan hide from a fox by having the swan pretend to be her hat. When the fox compliments the cow's hat, the swan laughs at the fox for being tricked, which causes the cow to run away in order to protect the swan from the now aware fox. Safely away, she scolds the swan as actually a "silly goose."

"Ooh-La-La":
A vain frog notices his legs are very attractive and starts gloating about it to everyone he meets. Then he notices an article in the newspaper describing frog legs as a delicious delicacy. The frog freaks out and goes back around telling everyone that his legs are actually hideous and undesirable.

"Miss Jones":
Miss Jones is a swan? duck? goose? with poor eyesight who lives alone and is informed by a friend that she has some new neighbours. She introduces herself to the Carusos but does not quite see that they are wolves and are interested in cooking and eating her. What saves her is the stove in their apartment is not yet turned on, and though she offers to let them use hers, she suddenly feels a furry tail and realises her neighbours aren't canaries like they said they were. Miss Jones scares them off by describing surgeries having removed her gizzard and liver (the Carusos' favourite bits) and pretending that she is covered in fleas. Later, she complains to the landlord that the Carusos—if that is their real name—were wolves, which SOMEHOW was news to him and is the most unbelievable part of the whole book.

I don't know. For young reader stories, I guess they're okay and easy to read, but from a Fridge Horror standpoint, the idea of a world where all animals are sentient is in fact pretty horrible.