Rating: 3/5

Too much craziness and not enough romance. I'm not sure why this book has the highest rating on here over her other gothics, it was my least favourite of hers. Firstly about the craziness, well the first part of the book has everyone who meets Julie wanting to kidnap, assault, rape or murder her, it was almost comical, the amount of attempts on her life throughout this book is insane, every 20 pages she goes unconscious either due to almost dying or being poisoned or attacked in some way lol. Julie also becomes insufferably stupid in the second half, she will never tell victor anything. Despite the fact that he has a right to know not only because he cares about her but it's happening under his roof, his servants being murdered, and his guests that attack her, try to rape her, murder her etc. but she won't tell him anything and she tells others not to let him know.........I found this infuriating and it made her deserve whatever was coming to her. 
To further add to her stupidity, there had already been several attempts on her life including poison and yet she doesn't even question when a box of chocolates shows up on her bed with no name attached to it......I can't. To add more fuel to the fire, after poisonings, pushed down stairs, stabbed with a needle, deadly fumes in her room etc. she then gets shot after wondering off alone and then says "I never expected someone would try to shoot me"??????? how can someone be this stupid? She also overhears a very incriminating conversation between two characters that could expose them as being responsible for all the murder and once again she refuses to tell Victor, so while I liked Julie at the start, I was kind of hating her by the end. 

Which brings me to the end, another reason I'm very disappointed with this book, barely any romance in it, Julie and Victor are barely even alone throughout the book. This author often does leave us lacking in the romance scenes but she usually might redeem herself with a nice ending or at least have the hero and heroine alone a lot with likable conversations throughout but this she didn't. Like I said there was always someone with them in most scenes, never really any intimate conversations between them which is a must for me to care about a couple. The ending was also so abrupt and lacking in romance, they just get together in the last page. I waited 288 pages for 1 page of them just getting together. This author also always makes her heroines completely hide all feelings for the hero and have her act like she feels nothing at all for him, it's honestly annoying and I wish she didn't, she was crazy about Victor since the very second she saw him yet he has to beat the feelings out of her in the last page? ugh. Victor and Penny are what saved this book for me. I much preferred "The Dark Opals of Harrow Island" "The Lost Wives of Dunwick" and "The Midnight Heather of Bridee Castle" by this author.