Rating: 3/5

3 1/2 Stars ~ Jessica Steele has a penchant for stories where the heroine is caught in the most incriminating of situations that any possible explanation completely lacks credibility. In this love story, Tully is 22 and she always seems to be cleaning up her brother's messes. When she discovers that he's stolen money from his Company's safe, she argues with him to put it back. Richard is bitter over the money their step-father has stolen from their inheritances and the life Richard had wanted to pursue as a vintner, and so he when the opportunity arose, he stole from the Company safe, justifying that he deserved his vineyard. When Tully finally convinces him of the folly of his thinking, he admits it was a horrible mistake, and he in turn convinces Tully that she is the one to put the money back. So in the dead of night, with Richard's keys in her possession, Tully sneaks into Richard's offices. And just as she's putting the money back into the safe, she's caught red-handed by the owner of the Company. 

Yate is shocked to discover the robber is a woman, one pleading for him not to call the police and promising she'll do anything he asks. Determined to find out which employee is her accomplice, he takes her into his personal custody. It doesn't take much to discover the keys Tully used were Richard's, but Yate isn't certain the brother knows what the sister has done. Confronting Richard, Yate is told he'd lost his keys on the way home and without proof Yate leaves Richard believing he's in the clear. Tully on the other hand, he threatens with reprisals for her brother unless she do as he bids. Yate needs a mistress for the weekend and Tully will suit just fine.

This is one of Ms. Steele's very first books. While the heroine has a few moments of complete confusion, she's spunky and often lets her mouth get away from her. Yate, though he clearly wants to punish Tully for her crime, he finds her touching his softer instincts. I found myself laughing out loud at some of Tully's cheek, and how aggravating Yate finds her. These two belong together, and Ms. Steele gives them their HEA (though rather sappy).