Rating: 4/5

{Revised, spoilers hidden 8/26/2]

This is a good story, a Japanese police procedural. 

Someone is killing people near a resort in Japan. The deaths seem connected to an ancient legend hereabouts about the Demoness Maple. The Demoness killed her ancient enemy by serving him poisoned sake, and here is the first victim, poisoned right under her mythical tree on the Poison Plain. 

The second victims were a married couple, both found with arrows in them, just like the arrows the Demoness used. The deaths get a lot of attention in the press because one dead man was a member of the Japanese Parliament. The other was a wealthy Master of the Universe type planning a new local golf course development. 

I liked the realism of the book and it’s one reason why I read translations of foreign novels. For example, as an older American, I grew up hearing of the stereotypical image of Japanese men in World War II like the Kamikaze pilots, happily going to their deaths with live bombs strapped to their planes and no way to land without them exploding. So imagine my surprise to find that both of the first two male main characters were draft dodgers of a sort.  One man went AWOL and was hiding out in a secret apartment in a mansion with his girlfriend. The other served briefly and was wounded in his leg, so he made sure to exaggerate his limp in public so he won’t have to go back to the fighting.  There’s realism for you! 

We quickly learn that the reasons for these deaths may go back to WW II.  The wealthy developer was the guy hiding in his girlfriend’s secret room. There’s a professor that the police repeatedly question who was a household servant at the time who knew them both – he’s the wounded vet with the limp. 

The police detective is a lot like the detective in the American TV series Columbo. In fact, the author specifically mentions Columbo, telling us that the Japanese detective wears an old ratty raincoat like Columbo. He drives an old car (although an underling usually drives it for him), and presents himself as a stumbling, confused kind of guy. 

The detective is 33. He's always stopping to eat wheat noodles. He has empathy for the criminals as well as the victims, so some of his colleagues consider him a 'bleeding heart.' Because of the wealth and political stature of the victims, the higher-ups are immediately on this stumbling detective’s case. 

In this story, the Japanese police working on the case are in two separate divisions that seem more in competition than in cooperation with each other. I guess we are lucky in the US that police and the FBI seem to work well together. The Japanese situation reminds me of the competition we read about in French detective novels between the National Police (Police Nationale) and National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie Nationale). And in Italian murder mysteries we hear about the rivalry between the Carabinieri and the national civil police. 

Our detective’s unit focuses on the logistics and forensics of the crime scene; the other unit does the 'white collar' work, looking into the backgrounds and the relationships between victims and possible perpetrators. Luckily our detective ignores these boundaries and pretty much handles the whole case himself. 

The story is set in the Togakushi Mountains around Nagano in central Japan west of Tokyo. We learn a bit about the symbolism of Noh stage performances. As a geographer I appreciate the geographic details, but I skipped the occasional list of towns in the prefecture or of rivers in the local area. 

And a note (a plea) to translators, if any of you happen to read this review: please give your foreign readers a break! It’s hard for an English reader to process foreign names. The first three main characters we meet are Takemura, Tachibana and Takeda. Later we read about others named Taira, Taki, Tsuneda, Takano, Tsukamoto and Tokuoka. Come on! 

The author (1934-2018) was a well-known Japanese writer of detective novels. He wrote several series with different detectives and many were made into Japanese TV serials. His books have been translated into many languages and more than 100 million copies have sold worldwide. 

Two photos of scenery with the Togakushi Mountains in the background. Top photo from previews.123rf.com; second photo from cdn.zekkei-japan.jp/images
The author from prabook.com