Rating: 4/5

William Trevor doesn't need a plot. He makes do with little plots. Quotidian plots. People drink Ovaltine or a Nescafé. They'll have a Fray Bentos steak-and-kidney pie, Bird's Eye peas, and a packet of raspberry mousse. They marry; they misjudge. Men boast, fudge. Women hope, rue.

Three women enter the Cheltenham Street Women's Hospital, there for hysterectomies. There is Miss Samson, facially disfigured at birth. And Sylvia Clapper, with false teeth, and a low criminal boyfriend. There is also the eponymous Elizabeth, recently divorced (her adultery) with three daughters. They join little Lily Drucker, who had miscarried again and again, and now is on bedrest, pregnant again.

There is a large cast of characters who surround them.

I read this, a sometimes literal reader, with the title in my head. Elizabeth Alone. But Elizabeth was not alone. Yes, her husband left her (that infidelity), and the paramour did not take his place. But she had the children, and friends, and a devotee in the hapless Henry, a fatally flawed character who loved her.

It was Miss Samson who was truly alone, who would always be alone. She fantasized a love for Mr. Irbbs, a religious man who created the home where she lived. But Miss Samson read his posthumous journal and found his doubt.

----- ----- ----- ----- -----

'I'm sorry about Henry,' Lily tells Elizabeth.
'If he'd lived I'd probably have married him.'
'But Elizabeth, you didn't even love him. You couldn't have sacrificed yourself for a failure of a man.'
'I sacrificed myself for a success of a man.'
'But you loved him in the beginning.'
'In the end it didn't matter.'
'But why on earth would you have thrown yourself away again?'
'Because it's lonely when you're forty-one and your children are rowdily growing up . . . I've never been much good at being alone.'

----- ----- ----- ----- -----

I write this tonight after another mass tragedy had occurred, this time in my city. I was alone then; not now. Large things might not touch as much as small things might.

----- ----- ----- ----- -----

So, Miss Samson, the one character who was truly alone, stirred her cold Nescafé. A small thing. A thing alone. She blew her nose:

'I make do,' she said. 'The doubt comes, and then it goes away again. At least it goes away. There's that to be cheerful about.'