Rating: 4/5

The Starry Rift deals with areas where little exists between the galactic arms. There are three stories about the rift from different times. These are given to two young Comenors wanting to learn about Humans from the early days of the Federation.
The first tale is from a time when humans had little FTL capabilities. It follows Coati Cass, a young lady who was given a little space-coupe on her 16th birthday. She tricks it out with additional fuel tanks with the idea of exploring space beyond the northern borders of the rift. She leaves FedBase 900. She encounters a message pipe from another starship and a small, gold speck falls onto her arm. 
The speck turns out to be an intelligent life that enters her body and travels to her brain. She goes into cold sleep to continue her journey and the life form uses that time to explore her brain. When Coati comes out of her cold sleep, the entity uses Coati's voice to communicate with her. She learns that her new companion is an Eea named Syllobene. During their journey together, Coati learns about the Eea and Syl and the eventual results of Syl's growing in Coati's brain. Coati is able to record a message pipe to send to FedBase 900 and warn them about the Eea.
In the second tale, FTL communication did not exist and FTL travel was only for emergencies. Raven does salvage work and spends much time in cold sleep on trips to his salvage destinations. He responds to an out-of-fuel call. One of the people on board the ship he comes to help is a silver-gilt haired girl named Illyera. She goes by Illya and is a well-known celebrity. Raven learns there is more to Illya. He sees that over many years she has had extensive cosmetic surgery and eventually realizes that they had been romantically involved years before. Because of his decades in cold sleep, he has aged very little compared to Illya. 
Raven provides them with the fuel they need and warns them about the route they choose to take. They ignore his warning and soon encounter another ship which connects to theirs. Raven is able to connect to them and disable the hostiles. He discovers a young version of Illya, her grandclone named Illaine. Raven is still in love with Illya and now finds that Illaine is interested in him. In the end he is faced with a difficult decision.
The third tale describes a human encounter with the Ziellor. They are fur covered with a large tail they use for hopping. They have an extra pair of smaller arms and have only one eye. As the humans get closer to Ziellor space some of the crew have impressions that they should have tails and extra arms while knowing nothing about the Ziellor. 
The Ziellor have had horrible encounters with what they call Zhumans. Zhumans are Black World humans that have waged war with the Ziellor. A young female Ziellor named Zella has learned some human language and eventually becomes a translator. The human ship, Rift-Runner eventually lands on Ziellor but have taken steps to disguise themselves to look more like the Ziellor. Eventually things fall apart and the humans flee Ziellor pursued by a Ziellor warship. They grow low on fuel and cannot outrun the warship. However, the warship is also low on fuel but has called for a supply ship. It comes down to the two ship captains to come to an understanding and prevent a war between the two worlds.
This is an interesting story in three parts and was very enjoyable.