Rating: 4/5

Here is he whom you read, whom you search for, Martial, known the whole world over for his witty books of epigrams. He to whom, while still alive, you have given, studious reader, a glory which poets obtain but seldom even after they are dead. 1.1
__________
Here you may read some good things, some indifferent, but more bad. Not otherwise, Avitus, is a book formed. 1.16

Yet if there be any man so prudishly critical that, to him, plain latin may not be spoken on any page, let him be satisfied with this Preface or, simply, with the Title. Epigrams are written for those accustomed to see the games of Flora. Let no Cato enter our theatre, or, if the does, let him look on only. 1.pref
__________
These things, dear Martial, are the elements of a happy life: wealth acquired by inheritance, without labour; welcome fields; an ever burning hearth; no lawsuits; seldom a toga; a tranquil mind; the strength of a freeman; a healthy body; unaffected simplicity; agreeable friends, pleasant guests; a simple table; nights without drunkenness and free from troubles; a bed both virtuous and voluptuous; sleep which shortens the darkness. Be satisfied as you are, and ask no change; neither fear, not hope for, your last day. 10.47

A good man broadens his life; he who can find pleasure in his past life, lives twice. 10.23

__________
While tolerant enough in most matters, martial shows clearly that the pretence and hypocrisy of the artifical age in which he lived were unnatural to him, for they seldom fail to arouse his scorn. (M.S.B., Introduction)

It is shameless to exercise ingenuity on another man’s book. 1.pref

You would pass, Cotta, for a pretty man and for a great man too. But, Cotta, he who is a pretty man is a little man. 1.9

To live tomorrow is too late: you must live today. 1.15

Diaulus, formerly a doctor, is now an undertaker. He still lays out his patients as effectively as ever. 1.30

I love you not, Sabidius; I cannot say why. I can say only this: I love you not. 1.32

When Gellia is alone, she does not weep for her lost father; if any one comes, the tears, at her command, spring forth. One who weeps to be praised, Gellia, is not afflicted; one who truly sorrows, sorrows alone. 1.33

It is a rule of sprightly poems to be unable to please unless they are prurient. 1.35

The book you declaim, Fidentius, is mine. But your wretched reading almost makes it yours. 1.38

When glory is past, life can, without blame, seek the repose which remains for it. 1.49

He wishes this: to cultivate a field, a small field, of his own: to live tranquilly in a small way. 1.55

When I dine so poorly, Flaccus, why should I bathe sumptuously? 1.59

Abandoning her husband, she followed a youth: arriving a Penelope, she departed a Helen. 1.62

Search for unknown verses which have never seen the light . . . 1.66

No one in the whole city was willing to touch your wife, Caecilianus, when this was allowed; but now the you have set up guards, the swimmers come in droves. You are an ingenious man! 1.73

Drink, then, copiously, and, with wine, destroy your sorrow. 1.106

You complain, Velox, that I write long epigrams; but you write none. Yours are the shorter. 1.110

Why are you not satisfied to be what you are? 2.4

You declaim prettily; you are a pretty advocate, Atticus; you compose pretty histories and pretty poems. You write mimes prettily, epigrams prettily; you are a pretty grammarian, a pretty astronomer; you sing prettily and dance prettily, Atticus. You are a pretty lyre player, a pretty ball player. Since you do nothing well, but everything prettily, would you have me to say what you are? You are pretty much of a trifler. 2.7

How is it that your kisses smell of myrrh and there is always some foreign perfume about you? Your being always so well scented, Postumus, makes me suspicious. Postumus, he who is always scented so well is not well scented. 2.12

Why do you defile the bath, Zulus, by impressing your buttocks? To make it fouler, Zulus, plunge in your head. 2.42

Cry for wine, crown yourselves with roses, perfume yourselfes with nard: but a god bids you remember death. 2.59

While you hesitate as to what you will be, you will be nothing. 2.64

You wish to know what Lyris is doing? What she does even when she is sober. She is fellating. 2.73

You love to drink through the night; I forgive you this, Gaurus: this vice was Cato’s. You write verses, unaided by Muse or Apollo; I can but praise you for this, for Cicero did likewise. Your vomiting was Antony’s vice; your luxury, Apicius’. But your fellating—tell me, whose vice was that? 2.89

“Quintus loves Thais.” “Which Thais?” “One-eyed Thais.” “Thais lacks one eye; he lacks both.” 3.8

Your lands are yours alone; your money is yours alone, Candidus; your gold plate is yours alone; your murine vases are yours alone; your Massic wines, your Opimius’ Caecuban, are yours alone; your talent is yours alone; your genius is yours alone. Everything yours is yours alone—who would expect me to deny it!—except your wife, Candidus, who belongs to everybody. 3.26

You wonder at the foul odour of Marius’ ear. It is your fault: you talk, Nestor, into his ear. 3.28

The imperfection which is hidden is imagined worse than it is. 3.42

Olus built a pantry but sold his lands: now Olus lives in a pantry. 3.48

You lend Veientan wine for me, while you drink Massic. I would rather smell your cup than drink mine. 3.49

You bought a house, Tongilianus, for two hundred thousand: an accident, common in the city, removed it. A million was subscribed. I ask you, Tongilianus, could you not be suspected of having, yourself, burned your house? 3.52

The fragrance of an apple bitten my a maid: the breath from corcyrian saffron: the perfume of a vine blooming with early grapes: the perfume of a meadow newly cropped by sheep: the scent of the myrtle of the Arabian perfumer, of powdered amber, of the pale fumes of Eastern frankincense, of the earth after a light summer rain, of a chaplet dripping with nard: with all these, Diadumenus, cruel boy, your kisses are fragrant. 3.65

Since the boy has a sore mentule and you, Naevolus, a sore anus. Although I am no diviner, I know what you have been up to. 3.71

Your mentule is so long, Papilus, and your nose so large that, at each erection, you can smell one with the other. 6.37

The foul odour of a dried marsh; of the thick vapours of Album’s springs; the putrid stench of a marine fish-pond; of a slothful he-goat mounting a she; of the boot of a worn-out soldier; of a stuff twice dumped in purple; of the breath of Sabbatarian Jews; of the breath of a condemned criminals; of the dying fumes of foul Leda’s lamp; of unguents from the dregs of Sabine oil; of a scurrying wolf; of a viper’s nest: all these I would rather endure than your stench, Bassa. 4.4

You sent me six thousand when I asked for twice six. To obtain twice six, I will ask for twice twelve. 4.76

Not one person, in the whole city, can show that he has swived Thais, although many desire and beg her favours. Is Thais then, so chaste? On the contrary: but she only fellates. 4.84

Thus we seek for the old shade of Pompey’s Portico and old men vaunt the ignoble temple of Cattulus. You, O Rome, read Ennius while Mary lived; and the age of Maeonides laughed at him. Menander honour of the theatre, was seldom applauded; only Corinna knew her Naso. Then be not too eager, my books; if glory comes only after death, there I no hurry. 5.10

Thus we are—you and I: you cannot be what I am; but anyone can be what you are. 5.13

A maid, sweeter voiced to me than ancient swans, softer than the lambs of Phlanthian Galaesus, more delicate than Lucrine’s pearly shells, preferable to Eastern-pearls, or the polished tooth of India’s beast, new-fallen snow, or the untouched lily; whose hair outshone Baetic wool, the knotted hair of Rhine women, the golden dormouse; whose breath was fragrant as Paestan roses, as new Attic honey-combs, as amber warmed by the hand; compared with whom, the peacock was dull, the squirrel odious, the Phoenix common. 5.37

You are always saying, Postumus, that you will live tomorrow. But, tell me, Postumus, when will this tomorrow of yours come? How far away is it? Where is it? Where should it be looked for? Is it hid among the Parthians and Armenians? That tomorrow is already as old as Priam or as Nestor. For how much could that tomorrow be bought? You will live tomorrow? You are already too late, Postumus, to live today. The wise man, Postumus, is he who lived yesterday. 5.58

Let my hair be wet with flowing perfumes and my temples covered with coronals of roses. 5.64

Since the Julian Law was re-established, Faustinus, and Chastity returned to our dwellings, no more than thirty days, at the outside, have passed; and Telesilla already has her tenth husband. She who marries so often does not marry at all; she is but a lawful adulteress. An honest whore offends me less. 6.7

You bid me be always erect for you, Lesbia; but, believe me, one’s mentule cannot be rated like a finger. You may urge me with a toying hand and soft words, but your face is infallible to defeat you. 6.23

But superior merit is given but a short life and, seldom, an old age. Whatever you love, pray that it may not please you too much. 6.29

Your mentule is so long, Papilus, and your nose so large that, at each erection, you can smell one with the other. 6.36

Charinus’ rump has been split to the umbilicus and yet his prurience is just that much greater. What lust possess this wretch! He no longer has an anus and yet he wants to be predicated! 6.37

Once no woman could be preferred to you, Lycoris; now no woman can be preferred to Glycerol: she will be what you are, but you cannot be what she is. Such is the power of time; I desire her; you I desired. 6.40

Because you are always coated heavily with cassia and cinnamon and perfumes from the nest of the superb bird, and because you smell of the leaden jars of Niceros, Coracinus, you laugh at us who do not smell at all. I would rather not smell at all than smell too well. 6.55

A book, to live, must bear the imprint of genius. 6.61

Do you ask, Pannychus, why your Caelia possess only eunuchs? Caelia wants swiving only, not offspring. 6.67

Long years are not life: healthy years are life. 6.70

Even when dead, you should not be carried by six men. 6.77

You are sad amidst happiness. Be careful Fortune does not find this out, Lupus. She will call you an ingrate, if she knows. 6.79

. . . so bright with roses was every path he followed or saw. 6.80

“Are you”, he asked, “the Martial whose spicy jokes are known to everybody and who has, at least, no barabrous ear?” I smiled and, with a little gesture, did not deny that I was the person in question. “Then why,” he asked, “do you wear a bad cloak?” I responded: “because I am a bad poet.” That such a thing may not happen too frequently to a poet, send me, Rufus, a good cloak. 6.82

Although not even a woman could find fault with your face: although no blemish marks your body: do you wonder why you so seldom excite passion and new desires in a lover who hasn’t swiped you? You have a defect, Galla, and a great one. Every time anyone starts with you, and your enclosed bodies work, your coyote makes a great noise while you keep silent. How much better if you would speak and it remain silent! Better, rather than its scandalous prattle, to hear its neighbour which, at least, says Symmachus, amuses in easing itself. But who could laugh at the prattling of an impertinent coyote? When it resounds, what gallant’s mental and wishes would not fall? At least say something, and cry louder than your coynte; if you were really mute, its babble would teach you to talk. 7.18

May the gods, Philaenis, give you better sense, if you think it manly to lick women’s coyntes! 7.67

He who live everywhere, Maximus, lives nowhere. 7.78

You write a few quatrains brightly enough and turn a few distichs agreeably, Sabellus; I congratulate you, but I am not surprised. It is easy enough to write a pleasant epigram: to write a book is difficult. 7.85

You buy everything, Castor: you will end by selling everything. 7.118

Then hear what is truer than truth: you do not want to hear the truth, Gallicus. 8.86

Although Galla can be swiped for two gold pieces and more than sliced for twice that sum, why do you give her ten pieces, Aeschylus? Even Galla’s fellating is not so dear as that. What is, then? Her silence. 9.4

You wish to marry Priscus; I am not surprised: you are wise. Priscus does not wish to marry you: he is wise also. 9.5

A name born among violets and roses, after which the year’s fairest season is named, that respires of Hybla and Attic flowers, that is perfumed like the nest of the king of birds: a name sweeter than the divine nectar, envied by the beloved boy of Cybele and he who blends the thunderer’s draught; to which Venus and Cupid would answer, were it called in the Palatine Hall . . . 9.11

Although you go about, Christus, with bald-plucked testicles and a mental like a vulture’s neck and a head smoother than a restituted anus: although not one hair shows on your legs, and your lips are mercilessly plucked clear: you babble of the Curii, Camilii, Quinctii, Numas, Ancuses, and al the hairy philosophers we have ever heard of, and you declaim loudly against the theatres and the times. But if in the midst off your talk, you happen to meet, freed of his pedagogue, some young sodomite whose turbulent penus has been recently unbuckled, you would quickly sign to him; and I m ashamed to say, Christ’s, how your C atoms tongue would act then. 9.27

Ponticus, because you never swive, but use your hand as mistress to minister your pleasures, think you that nothing foul is done? Believe me, it is an abominable crime, too great for you to conceive its enormity. Horace, in a single copulation, generated three infants; and Mars, at one time, rendered chaste Ilia the mother of twins. All these had been lost if both has masturbated, demanding base pleasure of their hands. Believe that it is Nature herself who cries: “This which you waste with your fingers, O Ponticus, is a man!” 9.41

You talk of Democritus, Zeno, enigmatic Plato, and of every philosopher, barbarous and hairy, set up before us, as though you were successor and heir to Pythagoras, while a beard, no shorter than theirs, overgrows your chin. Yet, your pliant buttocks love the stiffness of that member so slow to rise with foul old goats and hairy men. You who know so well the origins and octrins of the different schools, tell me this: what dogma is it, Pannychus, to be a pathic? 9.47

Thus may I be read among ancient poets; may you prefer few to me, and may you place me above all but Catullus. 10.78

Are you surprised that Afer does not go to bed? Do you not see, Caedicianus, the woman with whom he is reclining? 10.84

I have written books that Cato’s wide and the stern Sabine women might read. But this book, from one end to the other, I give to laughter, to be the most rakish of all. It shall be soaked with wine and not ashamed to be stained with Cosmic essences, it shall play with the boys, love the girls, and speak in no circuitous way of that from which we come, the parent of all, which holy Numa called the Mental. But recall, Apollinaris, that these are Saturnalian verses; this little book does not show my own morals. 11.15

May she enjoy but a single husband and enjoy, always, her three sons. 11.53

Since the gods have given you everything: if you will not accept what you already have, what will you accept? 11.57

Why, Polla, do you send me fresh coronals? I would rather have roses you have shaken. [Note: With a second meaning: “roses” referring to charms and “veto” (to shake) meaning: to drive to and fro: to jostle up and down.] 11.89

I have noticed, Lesbia, whenever you rise from your chair, how you unfortunate tunic predicates you. With your right hand, with your left, you attempt to pull it away, wrenching it out with tears and groans, it is so constricted by your mighty Symplegadian buttocks, in the straight pass of your Cynanean anus. Would you remedy this unhappy defect? I will tell you how: neither get up, Lesbia, nor sit down. [Note: The Cyanian Rocks, or islands, at th entrance of the Bosphorus, were supposed to crash together and crush ships. “Symplegades” was another term for the same.] 11.99

I would not have, Flaccus, a skinny mistress, for whose arms my rings could serve as bracelets, who would spare me with her lanky thighs and stab me with her knees; from whose spine a saw would protrude and from whose anus a spear. But neither would I have a mistress weighing a thousand pounds. I like flesh but not fat. 11.100

Can you, Flaccus, see Thais, who is so thin? Then I think, Flaccus, you can se what does not exist. 11.101

The Phrygian slaves masturbated themselves behind the door when Hector’s wife rode her husband as a horse; and, when Ulysses was inclined to snore, even the chaste Penelope was accustomed to play a pleasure-giving hand. 11.104

I know I should in some way justify my three years’ idleness; yet no excuse could absolve me, even amidst the occupations of the city, which make us appear more troublesome than dutiful and still less so in this provincial solitude where, unless we continually study, there is neither consolation nor excuse for the retirement. 12.greeting

With as much frankness as though you lived with me, Callistratus, you have often told me you have been a passive. You are not, Callistratus, as frank as you would have me think: he who tells such things, conceals more. 12.35

Rather than praise the deserving, Callistratus praises everyone. Who can be good to one to whom no one is bad? 12.80

Never live unguents or wines to your heir; leave
˙ɟlǝsɹnoʎ oʇ ǝsǝɥʇ ǝʌᴉƃ ʇnq 'ʎǝuoɯ ɹnoʎ ɯᴉɥ 13.126

Some say I am no poet; but the book-seller who sells me says I am. 14.194

She quivers her thighs and excites such lasciviousness that she would have made Hippolytus himself a mastubrator. 14.203