Rating: 3/5

In the age of flower power, the Summer of Love and an era in which a generation sought peace not war, The Doors came out of the darker corners of man's desire.

Harbingers of evil? No. This is about the conduits of humanity in all its beauty and horror. 

The Doors embodied yin and yang...

I found an island in your arms 
Country in your eyes 
Arms that chain 
Eyes that lie 

In No One Here Gets Out Alive, Danny Sugarman has put together the comprehensive legend of Jim Morrison's life, as well as the birth and death of the band that made Morrison godlike in the eyes of millions. 

While keyboardist Ray Manzarek, guitarist Robby Krieger and drummer John Densmore were adept musicians, they were a mere back-up band for the wildly enigmatic, charismatic Morrison. Sugarman treats them with deference, but they are relegated to the background here too. The author knows what his readers have come for and he gives it to them. 

The phoenix rises and bursts into flame with the blazing sun of the southern Californian, mercurial late '60s music scene as the backdrop. 

The sun-drenched Whisky-a-Go-Go on the Sunset Strip in Los Angeles, site of The Doors early triumphs

No One Here Gets Out Alive is "sex, drugs and rock'n'roll" and as a teenager reading this, I LOVED it. So why only 3 stars?

The problem is it's rather sycophantic and not well-written. How could you expect anything more? Danny Sugarman was perhaps the most diehard Doors fan of all time. At the age of 12 he started working for the band answering fan mail. Before he was even out of high school he was managing them. After they dissolved, Sugarman managed Ray Manzarek's solo work. How could this book not be partisan? After all, there's a reason armies are made up of 18-year-olds.

All the negatives aside, this was the Bible to the kid version of me, who was a hardcore Morrison fanatic (he and I share the same birthday, which I thought at the time meant I could pretty much see into his soul...ahhh teenagers), but No One Here Gets Out Alive is not a biography about Jesus. It's just about a fucked up kid who landed in a band of fairly accomplished musicians who were willing to put his bad poetry to music, creating songs that found a disenfranchised audience at just the right time. Interesting story about an interesting individual. Really, that's it, even if it means so very much more to many.

If you're a Doors fan, this is essential reading. You've discovered the right place to geek out. If you're a fan of late 60s music, especially the L.A. scene, you'll find plenty to sink your teeth into. If you're everyone else? Then this is not the droid the book you're looking for. 

Frankly, this could be given any rating, Five to one... One in five... No one here gets out alive.