Rating: 3/5

.

DESCRIPTION:

Fanny and her groom had been tricked! Parents on both sides, all impoverished, had decided to recoup their families' losses by marrying their children to the progeny of a wealthier neighbor. The joke was on them however when it was outed that neither family had a penny to its name.

Charles was not the dark rogue of Fanny's girlish fantasies, but he was chivalrously determined that she should meet someone more appropriate for her than he. And for her part, Fanny was determined that Charles find a woman of greater means who would, perhaps, be the answer to his prayers. Yet as each lover set to find someone for the other, each was left with the nagging notion that true love might have nothing to do with riches.

ABOUT THE SERIES

The Endearing Young Charms collection are lighter romances from the countryside with highlights including: a botched marriage, a witty governess, unexpected inheritance, and the courtship of prime Corinthians.

M. C. Beaton presents another historical romance in The Glitter and the Gold, which brings out her master story-teller fashion with humor, wit, and historical accuracy. The premise of the story was based on a comedy of errors, unrecognized romantical feelings, and putting others before yourself. Just how it will conclude can only be determined by reading the entire tale.

 The Endearing Young Charms collection are lighter romances from the countryside with highlights including a botched marriage, a witty governess, unexpected inheritance, and the courtship of prime Corinthians. 

M. C. Beaton is the pen name of bestselling novelist Marion Chesney. The author has written under various names, most notably as M. C. Beaton for her Hamish Macbeth and Agatha Raisin series. Marion has also has written under the names Sarah Chester, Helen Crampton, Ann Fairfax, Marion Gibbons, Jennie Tremaine, and Charlotte Ward. One of her most enjoyable series was entitled 'The Poor Relations'.

---------------------

The Glitter and the Gold 
(Love, #10) 
(Endearing Young Charms, #4)
by Marion Chesney
Print Length: 208 pages

..

..

..