Rating: 3/5

This work of literature is particularly significant because of when it was written. Published in 1792, it is often referenced as being the founding text or manifesto of Western feminism. The author was writing in reaction to contemporary Enlightenment philosophers who had extolled the use of reason for determining proper political and social reforms, but had failed to properly consider the role of women. 

Mary Wollstonecraft in her writing was concerned that some of these age-of-reason writers had incorrectly (i.e. failed to use reason) in determining the proper role of women. Many of these writers had suggested that women should only concern themselves with domestic affairs and stay out of the political arena. In her response she acknowledged she herself was critical of the prevailing behavior of many women, but she maintained that their undesirable behavior was a product of their lack of correct eduction and social and cultural expectations imposed on them.

Wollstonecraft maintained that women will be either the companions of men or their slaves. She believed that in a true age-of-reason men and women should be companions adhering to the same truths and moral values. She also thought it was important that women be well educated to enable them to teach their children to become good citizens. 

It is my understanding that most intellectuals responded favorably to this book when it was first published. However, later hostility to the work arose because of the demise of the author’s reputation caused by her husband’s memoirs published about her life. In this memoir he mentioned her frequent disregard of traditional 18th century morality. In that regard she was ahead of her time in more than one way.

The writing style is obviously a product of late 18th century vocabulary and social concerns. In particular her frequent used of the words “sensibility” and “virtue” require some elaboration for a 21st century reader. I’m not sure I’m qualified to clarify their meanings, but I’ll provide my general impressions. It seemed to me that “sensibility” as used by this author refers to susceptibility for having emotional feelings, and when applied to women those feelings are often irrational. 

With regard to the word “virtue,” I was also bothered by what the author meant when she at one point admitted that “men seem to be designed by Providence to attain a greater degree of virtue.” In this context she must be including physical strength as part of what constitutes virtue. During a discussion of this book with Great Books KC it was pointed out to me that the word "virtue" comes from the Latin root vir, for man. Thus the early definition for virtue was manliness or valor. Over time it settled into the sense of moral excellence. Thus Wollstonecraft may have been influenced by her knowledge of the word's origins when she made the statement quoted above.

Another thought I've had about this book is that it's kind of like the Bible. It contains so much varied narrative that by selectively choosing certain quotations a reader can come to a variety of contradictory conclusions. This is apparent in the Wikipedia article about the book. There have been a variety of commentary's written about the book's contents that have reached differing interpretations. 

One interesting issue to note is that Wollstonecraft was not sufficiently extreme in her call for women's rights to fit the definition of feminism as it later evolved. Thus my statement in the first paragraph of this review about it being the founding manifesto of the feminist movement needs an asterisk explaining that not all feminist would be comfortable with that characterization.