Rating: 3/5

Written in journal format this is part history part travelogue of Corfu. Lawrence Durrell lived on Corfu for little over five years with his first wife Nancy Myers. Nancy has been airbrushed out of Gerald's account "My family and other animals" and doesn't feature much in Lawrence's account. When she does feature she is dubbed "N". He moved to the island when he was twenty six years old. 

"It is April and we have taken an old fisherman's house in the extreme north of the island Kalamai. Ten sea-miles from the town, and some thirty kilometres by road, it offers all the charms of seclusion. A white house set like a dice on a rock already venerable with the scars of wind and water. The hill runs clear up into the sky behind it, so that the cypresses and olives overhang this room in which I sit and write".

Lawrence wanted to live the bohemian life and indeed it did sound like a salubrious existence spending time engaging in 'pirofani' (night fishing), swimming naked in the bathing pool near the shrine of St. Arsenius, writing, drinking good wine and spending time with other intellectuals such as Theodore a doctor and erudite naturalist who features largely in Gerald's book "My family and other Animals". The wonderful Spiro is also mentioned. He is a taxi driver, procurer of goods, tour guide and friend to the Durrell family. There is Zarian an Armenian poet, artist, polyglot and arts journalist. 

There is a section on the island Saint, St. Spiridion who is interred in a sarcophagus in a chapel that pilgrims can visit. Spiridion was not a local but a Cypriot shepherd originally. Many saints seem to have started their careers as shepherds. There are some great descriptions of traditional finery and dance. 

He captures the Greek people perfectly when he draws a comparison between the citizens on Corfu and the characters in Homer's 'Odyssey', "it is a portrait of a nation which rings clear to day as when it was written. The loquacity, the shy cunning, the mendacity, the generosity, the cowardice and bravery, the almost comical inability of self analysis. The unloving humour and the scolding. Nowhere is it possible to find a flaw".

Another little observation was the peasant measurement of time and distance which is done by cigarettes. "Ask a peasant how far a village is and he will reply, nine times out of ten, that it is a matter of so many cigarettes".

Lawrence's Corfu is a waking dream of languid detachment from English concerns and a salubrious existence.

This book didn't always engage me. I found it to be too fragmented and unedited and as a result sometimes not self explanatory. Having visited the island I recognised one of the locations he described but if I was recommending a book to take to Corfu it would be Gerald's "My family and other animals".