Rating: 5/5

Rex Miller was an amazing, truly underappreciated (or under-remembered) writer who rose to brief prominence in the paperback horror field in the 1980s and ultimately died in 2004 at the age of 65. SLOB was his first novel. At the time it was released, it was nominated by the Horror Writers of America for Best First Novel. Rex Miller was, and SLOB continues to be, a powerhouse. This book and Miller's writing are tremendous.

When you read this, your first thought is, there's no way this novel would be published today. In an era where everything is expected to be sanitized, family-friendly, and PC, there would be no place for SLOB. And that's a shame. How can one write about the darkest of the dark side of humanity without writing in such an uncompromising manner? In a lot of ways, Miller himself was, as a writer, as much of an uncultured, hulking and powerful beast as the killer he writes about. As a writer, he cruelly and sadistically demolishes everything he comes into contact with with a sort of giddy glee. And like his novel's antagonist (or is he actually the protagonist?), Bunkowski, there is more there--a sort of genius method to the madness. 

Rex Miller, like Bunkowski, knows exactly what he's doing, despite the crude-looking nature of his writing. Miller's writing has a brilliant unsophistication to it. All my life I've heard in writing classes that you have to "know the rules to break the rules." I never quite understood what that meant until I read Rex Miller. Rex knows how to write and he damn well knows the rules, but then he systematically breaks almost all of them, crafting something that, at first glance, appears rudimentary but is most assuredly anything but. Rex Miller's writing is something to behold. It is the darkest, grimmest, most vile slice of life (and body parts) you are likely to read, but the tone feels exactly right for the grotesque people and scenes he's depicting. His writing makes Thomas Harris' Hannibal novels look as lame and tame as a newborn kitten in comparison. (Which reminds me: there's a scene in which animals are hurt in the book, which is big a no-no in 2021. Somehow it's okay to depict the grisly deaths of people, but not animals... And I'm not condoning cruelty to animals, but we're talking about fictitious pain inflicted by fictitious people to fictitious animals. And for the people who believe that reading and seeing such violence makes people go out and do it, no, you're wrong. If that were the case, everyone from Generation X would be a mass murderer and worse. But we're not. We're mostly just assholes. But I digress...)

Miller was a force to be reckoned with, that much is sure. Right now most of his work is out of print (perhaps for the reasons I mentioned), and that's a shame. Miller was uncompromising as a writer in just about every way imaginable, and because of that there is a purity to it. It is not watered down by societal expectations or any sort of hope or begging for approval. Author Joe R. Lansdale has many times advised that a writer should "write like everyone you know is dead," and that's exactly the way Miller writes. SLOB is everything that gritty crime and horror writing should be. It's the grittiest book you will ever read. It will give you nightmares and send you rushing to take a shower to wash away the filth.