Rating: 2/5

Read as a buddy read with Lisa Vegan, Gundula and Abigail, we read a chapter a day, each chapter named after a day of the week. This book is written as a novel but based on the author's life.

I was looking forward to reading the last book in the Out of the Hitler Time trilogy and having absolutely loved When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit and having quite enjoyed The Other Way Round I found this book very disspointing. Many chapters were 1 star for me, if this wasn't a buddy read I would probably have given up or skimmed to the end.

The story focuses on Anna's relationship with her mother, there were many arguments to read through, I found these very boring. There were views that were dated  there are many discussions around Mama's elderly boyfriend Konrad who was having an affair with a young girl in his office. There are some awful remarks about this which does reflect the attitudes of the time  Mama behaves in a horrible way to Anna and it feels that the story was written by Judith to air the feelings she had about her own mother, things perhaps she had never said and felt resentment for, which if Judith Kerr's mother behaved like Mama in this story you can certainly understand why. However cathartic this may have been for Judith this didn't make for good reading. I also felt if Judith was going to write about her problematic relationship with her mother and her mother's mental health problems it would have been more appropriate to do this in a biography. The part in the last chapter where Anna thinks she might turn this into a book one day made me feel a bit uncomfortable. 

Another disappointing element to this book was that Anna's return to Berlin could have been so interesting to read about. How it had changed, her memories of her birthplace which was barely touched upon. I have no idea why Heimpi who was like a mother to the children before they left Germany was not mentioned, I think she is referred to once in a memory but surely someone so important would have at least been mentioned in terms of wondering if she is okay and where she is now. Even if Anna was afraid of finding out she wasn't okay I cannot believe that being back there she wouldn't have wondered.

Another strange thing is that this book or indeed any of the trilogy does not mention that Judith Kerr's mother was a talented composer who had written an opera. It seems that Judith chose the character of Mama not to have this talent, although this doesn't excuse the behaviour of Mama who comes across in the story as spoilt and selfish it would have helped to explain perhaps why she was so unhappy as she was frustrated and unfulfilled. I can only assume Judith Kerr was very unhappy with her mother and writing this book helped her to say things that in real life she couldn't say.

The last chapter was slightly more interesting and in some ways brings a new beginning  the news that Anna is pregnant brings further meaning to the title and we hope relationships will be better next time round But we are left not knowing if the main storyline which is Mama's unhappiness and mental health problems get any better.

I actually read this from the trilogy Out of The Hitler Time but changed my edition otherwise I would be rating the 3 books in 1. I'm glad I read this last book in the trilogy and it was fun to read as a buddy read and discuss with friends.