Rating: 4/5

All I want for Christmas… 

This is a well-known, poignant, and rather dated and sentimental short story demonstrating the generosity of love. 

Della and Jim are newly married, and quite poor. Each is privately determined to buy a special gift for the other. The sacrifices they make prove pointless (at least in the short run), profound, and maybe amusing.

The title obviously refers to the Magi (aka Three Wise Men) who brought gold, frankincense, and myrrh to baby Jesus. However, I assume their gifts, though valuable and symbolic, did not dent their wealth much. The closer Biblical analogy is the parable of The Widow’s Mite (see Luke 21: 1-4). Nevertheless, O Henry makes a case for his Magi comparison:

“Let it be said that of all who give gifts these two were the wisest. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are wisest. Everywhere they are wisest. They are the magi.”

... is health and happiness - and normality

2020 festivities and gift-giving at Thanksgiving, Hanukkah, Diwali, Christmas etc will be unusual and tinged with sadness, worry, and heartbreak. The continuing coronavirus pandemic and lockdown restrictions mean we won’t see all the loved ones we would normally see, even if they and we are alive and well. 

Nine months of fluctuating restrictions has changed the ways we live, work, and think. It’s taught hard lessons about priorities: who and what we most value, compared with the things we can happily do without. 

Meanwhile, many are struggling to survive, whether from direct or indirect consequences of the virus. 

Image: Foodbank parcel of staples (Source.)

I don’t believe Jesus is my saviour or even the son of God. But this year, I feel that even as an atheist, I’m learning the true meaning of Christmas. 

We plan a tiny gathering of five, rather than 17. We’ll have food and fun.

UPDATE 4:15pm on 19 December 2020: Much tighter lockdown. It will be just the two, or possibly three, of us. We have too much food and my parents-in-law will need to get more - and there are no online delivery slots available. Less mixing IS necessary here, but it's always imposed just too late. 

Technology means we will see, chat, and play games with those we cannot meet in person. We’ve sent a few gifts: modest amusing ones, or necessary ones, and we are making and requesting donations to certain charities. No extravagant unwanted fripperies that will head straight to the loft, ebay, or regifting drawer. Next year, although I hope for a big gathering again, I want to continue this year’s gift-giving. 

Discover the story

Read the original 1905 story free, on Gutenberg, HERE. It's only about 4 pages.

Alternatively, you can get the story from a four-cell comic, though some may think the language inappropriate:

Image by RobDenBleyker (Cyanide and Happiness) (Source.)