Rating: 5/5

And so a difficult truth about human courage was played out among those trees. A truth we resist for what it suggests about our lives. But sometimes the most gallant actions, those requiring a summoning of all our will, access to bravery beyond easy understanding or description...have no consequence that matters. They leave no ripples upon the succeeding events, cause nothing, achieve nothing. Are trivial, marginal. This can be hard to accept

(about half a page of stuff happens)

A hard truth: that courage can be without meaning or impact, need not be rewarded, or even known. The world has not been made in that way. Perhaps, however, within the self there might come a resonance, the awareness of having done something difficult, or having done ...something. That can ripple, might do so, through in a different way.

This inexplicitly has a lower rating than every GGK book except Ysabel. I don't understand why, I thought it was fantastic.

You can start with this if you want, although I don't see a good reason to, unless you really like vikings, which is the setting this has.

Anyway, it was great. Three main group of characters all of which I loved, and as they often do with GGK, I feel like all three groups were the primary group, because of how well I feel I know basically the entire cast. Alum, and Dai, the brothers are probably my favorite though.

This book also has a good amount of the supernatural, less than most books, but more than most GGK books, and he is just so good at making supernatural elements feel otherworldly. 

 Her voice, simply speaking words, made him realize he had never, really, made music with his harp, or sung a song the way it really should be sung. 

Like, how good is that.

GGK also does this thing, it kinda reminds me of The Little People in Abercrombie books. Where you basically somewhat quickly see the life story of a characters who life only briefly intersected with a part of the story being told. I love these, both to see how there is so much going on outside are story, but also to see how an afterthought in the story of one persons life can be a defining moment of another.

Also nitpick time, not just for this book, but for multiple GGK books, and really a huge amount of media.

GGK, if somehow you read this, and are still doing this. Please stop knocking people out via hits to the head, and have them be fine a day later. They need to recover for like...a while, they probably have brain damage. Casual knockouts to transport someone, so they can wake up and other than a headache and be fine are not a thing.

Anyway, probably no reason to start here, but it was a compelling, and emotional read as almost all GGK's books have been, and the mans writing is truly next level. 

Oh also there is a bit at the start of chapter 12, that is 8 pages, and I have no idea why it was there. I guess maybe it was one of those little people type things, except I don't think it intersected with the main story at all.

9.1/10 I do not understand why this books rating is so low compared to the authors other works.