Rating: 1/5

This book gets a one star because of James. James is the reason you shouldn't read this book or recommend it to any teens you know. James the creepy adult who owns a succesful business and decides to date one of his highschool aged employees. Who thinks it is okay to make a move on said employee. And the the goddamn author treats it like a non-issue.

This book would have been standard YA fair. A good junkfood read about an uptight girl who learns to let loose and re-evaluate her priorities. Something that could be a Disney Channel movie. It wasn't spectacular but it was a fun quick read. But then James happened.

Mara the main character is 17, lives with her parents and is very emotionally and finacially dependent on them, is very book smart but is ultimately emotionally immiture, and doesn't think much for herself. In order to remedy the broken heart Mara starts the novel with Mackler introduces a love interest for her. Unfortanely this love interest is an adult man who is her boss. Yes this adult man is only 22, only 5 years the protagonists senior but at this point in time that is a big age difference and it is not the only issue with their relationship.

This book really romanticises the relationship between these two characters as healthy and glosses over the problematic elements of Mara and James dating going so far as to compare being short and being Mara's adult boss as being equitable reasons for them not to date. Here is the problem: being short is a cosmetic issue that doesn't mean that much while a teenager dating their adult boss is a distinctly unbalanced power dynamic that creates a false sense of security for the teenager while making them vulnerable to a creep who at best is an aloof idiot who doesn't understand why age isn't just a number when it comes to minors (and is thusly too immiture to date his own age group or date in general) or he is a manipulative creep who groomed a girl who has been under is emloy from the age of 16 into dating him.

Other problems with James is that he goes out of his way to avoid dating people who are his peers because he thinks he can get with a minor. As a boss he also creates situations for him and his employee to be alone together and is very explicitly romantic with her prior to dating. As well as using work time to fool around with his teenage girlfriend once they start dating. While James is comfortable telling the employees about their relationship he is fine hiding it from Mara's parents (until she tells them after several months of dating) which implies that he knows how they would react and why.

The majority of Mara's changing her future plans also revolves around her ability to spend time with James which is beyond messed up. Like yeah if you want to have a social life outside of school and have time off before starting uni and find yourself go ahead. But you can't tell me that quitting a prestigious program to spend more time with an adult man who is your boss and has fabricated situations for you to spend a lot of time together to the point where you are now having a semi sexual relationship is not the MOST FUCKED UP THING since Lolita. (The difference being Lolita is actually about how these creepy guys can manipulate people while this book glorifies it)

I'm mainly upset because I read this as an adult (26) and know what it is like to be 17 and 22 respecively and I think it is fucked up that the author makes it seem like it is okay for a relationship to have that sort of imbalance. I have been 22 and can confidently say that no healthy normal 22 year old wants to date a highschooler. I have also been 17 and can say that no matter how mature a 17 year old is they are not as mature or experience in life or at recognizing unhealthy behaviour as someone who has been exposed to the adult world for half a decade. And by making a book that says otherwise Mackler is making teens succeptable to the wills of some shady people.