Rating: 2/5

When someone needs an ear rather than problem solving, I listen and don't give advice. Generally, people don't want advice. They want to ventilate their hearts, make their own choices, and have these choices affirmed. Friends and loved ones expect this. Renate Adler asks the reader for a novel-length session of this pose, listening to the narrator feel overwhelmed by tiny problems when she actually wants to spin her wheels about her married-man problem.

I was biased. I set out to like this one more than Speedboat, because Pitch Dark has a more cohesive narrative, and fuck, everyone is supposed to love Renate Adler right now like it's your job to reinforce everyone's New York literary credentials ("God, what's wrong with you that you do not love her? Do you just not get her ironic, articulate, harried aphorisms? Are you saying you're better than David Foster Wallace? Because he loved these novels! I guess you aren't literary enough"). Scene-ster guilt may keep me up at night.

A journalist flees her long-term affair with a married man, has a fender-bender in Ireland, gets paranoid about the potential consequences of the fender-bender,  and reflects on her rich-but-lonely life in page-long aphorisms. Then she returns home and processes her feelings.

Kate Ennis, the journalist of high society wealth and connections (naturally), muddles through her flight, ruminating on her smallest thoughts, floundering because she lacks what passes for common sense. Her distinct lack of common sense allows her to penetrate deeper into her own thought processes and paranoia, and to comment ironically on larger points concerning human interactions, and the underlying brutality, disappointment, and boredom of life. Her advantages and loneliness isolate her, and she is unable to flesh out her personal life in a fulfilling manner. 

Adler adequately captures how grief and melancholy can colour daily life until small tasks seems difficult, and paradoxically how fleeing to another country is comparatively easier than the daily grind. The overly-analytical, lovelorn journalist stumbles in each small transaction, and casts about for answers while avoiding meaningful contact.

Kate struggles with tipping servants who dislike her, handling business propositions that crop up in small talk, dealing with cruel and conspiratorial bureaucrats, fretting about rental car insurance, leaving a country under an assumed name (in the early 1980s when no one cared about international transit enough to check passports at some crossings) and the incompetence of phone company billing. The novel focuses on the ceaseless flood of prosaic-but-paranoid problems as Kate tries to sort whether she can cope with continuing her affair or altering the arrangement.

Mostly, I spent my read muttering "Don't tip that housekeeper... She sucks and hates you anyway... Smile over your drink and edge away... Buy a plane ticket and head home.... Complain loudly to the phone company or pay your bill, even though they screwed up the billing. Needlessly seething about it won't come across as a principled protest...God Kate, get it together...I mean, there, there, Kate. Life is hard."

Pitch Dark is less quotable than its predecessor. Some of the best quotes are devastatingly sharp, but veer off at their ends into banality and keenly irrelevant points. The anecdote about the sick animal and the wildlife commissioner is the strongest piece in a collection of anxious rambles (In the 1983 ed, see pages 13-18). That anecdote would have been a powerful short story on its own.

Also, I sense some padding in the last 5 pages where Adler accurately explains the broad features of courts and jurisprudence in plain English. It stretches credulity that Kate the journalist makes an attempt at analogizing her foregoing ruminations to a mini-lesson on the purpose and method of jurisprudence. This portion reads as if Adler, who trained as a lawyer, needed to reach a certain word count and decided to rap about court to get there.

If you want to inhabit the mind of a well-heeled, waspy woman who can't decide where to convalesce in order to worry about her affair, but also can't escape the middle-class anxiety of manners and billing, read Pitch Dark. Or, better yet, go on with your life.