Rating: 4/5

”He took his right hand carefully out of his overcoat pocket, and looked at the bandages swathed round it. It throbbed and ached abominably. If that was what a bullet graze felt like, he thanked his stars that the bullet had not really hit him.

He looked around the cabin, accepting his presence in it as he had accepted so many other absurdities since he had returned to his hotel in Pera the night before. The acceptance was unquestioning. He felt only as if he had lost something valuable. In fact, he had lost nothing of any value but a sliver of skin and cartilage from the back of his right hand. All that had happened to him was that he had discovered the fear of death.”

An English engineer by the name of Graham is on a business trip to Istanbul. His country is mired in a war that will soon be called World War Two. He wants to do his part for the war effort, but doesn’t realize that by doing so he has put his life in jeopardy. He surprises someone in his hotel room and is shot. This was supposed to be a business trip; how did it become a nightmare of international intrigue? 

What he knows and what he can do is something so vital that, even if he disappears for six weeks it could change the scope of the war. As he makes his way home by ship, German agents are trying to stop him from reaching London. Turkish agents are trying to make sure he has safe passage. Guns appear and disappear. An exotic dancing girl, too gorgeous to resist, is a lovely distraction, but Graham is not a fool. ”Every movement, every piece of affectation was calculated: it was as if she were still dancing.” It’s not only women like Josette he can’t trust; it is everyone, allies, enemies, and everyone in-between. 

Graham is going to have to save himself. 

The reason Eric Ambler was so popular back in the 1930s and 1940s is because his stories felt like they were ripped from the newspaper headlines. I can imagine many people from that era picking up his latest book in the train station or airport to distract themselves on their travels. Certainly on my next train trip across the country, I will make sure I have an Ambler in my hands to go with my crisp fedora, a snappy red and gray striped tie, and a London Fog trench coat. This was light, quick reading, with a few improbable situations, but it was a time of improbable things. I had my own trepidations for the fate of our hero Graham. I also wondered where Josette will be undulating her sinuous hips next, tempting some man with less fortitude than Graham into her web of deceit. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten and an Instagram account https://www.instagram.com/jeffreykeeten/