Rating: 5/5

Read this as a companion piece to the Mark Rozzo book "Everybody Thought We Were Crazy: Dennis Hopper, Brooke Hayward, and 1960s Los Angeles". I wanted to figure out why Brooke stayed married to Dennis for as long as she did. I know it was the 1960's and women tended to put up more with awful behavior but jeez, not leaving a guy after he breaks your nose or after he chases you &amp; your young children around the neighborhood with a loaded gun....what's up with that?

I think what's up with that is Brooke suffered after her parents divorce and she didn't want to do that to her kids. Or maybe the relationship with Dennis felt comfortable to her because she was used to pacifying her narcissistic parents? She definitely filled the cliched role of the oldest child, being responsible and feeling protective of her younger siblings.

I've read a lot of books about old Hollywood so found the childhood stories she told fascinating. I like to read Goodreads reviews of books before writing my own review and noted that one of the big complaints of Haywire's one and two star reviews is that Brooke was rich and wrote about an exclusive lifestyle and about famous people. Uh.....why would you read this book if you didn't want to hear about famous people and a luxury lifestyle? What did they think the book was going to be about? It's like buying a book about baseball and then giving it a bad review because it's about baseball. Brooke was writing the truth about her life which includes things like having Jimmy Stewart as your godfather, Jane Fonda as your best friend and living in beautiful houses in wealthy neighborhoods.

I found her story to be quite moving. For all the wealth and fame surrounding her, Brooke had a pretty miserable childhood and youth. I thought her brother Bill put it nicely when he expressed the desire to have grown up in one house, going to public school and having a consistent stable home life. None of which happened to them. I was shocked that both Bill and Bridget were shunted off to mental hospitals for typical teenage behavior. It was upsetting and led to their tragic suicides. The chapter towards the end of the book when BIll and Brooke are discussing suicide and Bill mentions that he would shoot himself if he were going to commit suicide and then googling him and finding out that that indeed is how he ended up killing himself....so so sad. Ugh.

 I've read several memoirs by children of Hollywood stars (children of Lana Turner, Bing Crosby, Henry Fonda, Joan Crawford, John Huston, Eddie Fisher, Debbi Reynolds, Ryan O'Neal etc) and the one common thread - besides the famous parent of course - is that they all had miserable childhoods. Brooke's memoir is sadly more of the same. 

My one quibble about the book is that I there were more photographs included.