Rating: 2/5

It started out a little strange. This strange connection between him and pumpkins. He felt as though he had hatched from a pumpkin.There’s a cracked pumpkin as if he did come from one. It’s out in the field, which is literally right outside the overlarge window. It says the sun rose as a pumpkin, and as I look at it after finishing the story, the sun has been drawn like a pumpkin. Which is too much. A simple orange ball would have done. 
In the beginning it seemed to be all about comparing love. He loved pumpkins almost as much as his parents. Then he loves drawing almost as much as pumpkins. It isn’t a competition of what he loves most.
Then there’s the owner of the general store, that loves pumpkins almost as much as Angus does. Here we go again with the competition stuff. The pumpkins were supposed to be in a window, but it’s weird to have shelving in front of a window like that. &amp;then there’s this cat sleeping. Is it inside the window? Why does the wooden paneling not look like the bottom of the store? 
In the scene of him running home, he looks like an old man! &amp;he looks so funny running. Why do one of those guys have fangs??
I thought it was weird/stupid to say he couldn’t hang his pictures up, because he was late getting home. It’s weird how he only seemed to draw on Halloween day. &amp;his dad seemed to carve jack-o-lanterns the day before Halloween day. Does he only draw pumpkins? Why can’t he draw other days of the year? 
‘he soon felt tired and fell into a deep sleep.’ So how did it go to: ‘though he could not have told you how it happened, he found himself high up in the barn loft.’ Then he sees his mother set out a pie in the windowsill. But wasn’t it nighttime? 
I know he was dreaming of pumpkins floating and going to the barn. So I thought he was still dreaming when he suddenly ends up in front of his house and eats a pie, and then runs to the field to eat it. &amp;a scarecrow comes to life. I thought this was a dream, and he’d eventually wake up and readers would realize it was all just a dream. So it was surprising what happened next. 
The story got weird when the scarecrow turned him into a dog. &amp;is so mad over the fact that he ate pie after being told not to. It wasn’t that big a deal. 
‘Until a forgiving soul carves it’ sounded a little stupid. I wish it was worded better and sounded cooler.
When his dad said “maybe he’s been taken over the fields by an angry spirit” it was weird, because the story didn’t seem to be supernatural, or that his parents knew of or believed in the supernatural. It was a blasé thing to throw out there, and it wasn’t addressed after. The mom didn’t even comment on it. 
In the scene where the parents are upset, and the dog shows up. The scarecrow is seen in the field, looking sad. It’s his fault in the first place! Now that I think on it, it’s none of his business. It was a way harsh punishment that really just hurt the parents. It’s the parents place to punish their kid. 
Angus looks funny when he appears in the light after the pumpkin is carved. Very weird-looking smile.
‘Sometimes he thought he could almost hear sounds from deep within the pumpkin. As if messages from the sun and the moon somehow entered through the pumpkin’s stem to rest among the silent seeds.’ that didn't sound great, and I wish it had been cooler. you could have just said it a soul lived in the pumpkin, or there was magic inside. not moon&amp;sun coming through the stem and into the seeds. 
How did it go from his mom carving the pumpkin, to him appearing &amp;then it mentions ‘the light was so bright Angus could not see’ so it seemed to be continuing the same scene and then it says he could see two figures&amp; his parents were putting his pictures on the wall. I expected his mom to be really surprised and exclaim that their child had been the dog that’s been around for a year.&amp;his dad to come running in. What a surprise that should have been! Well imagine my surprise when there was no surprise! 
It was a huge oversight to not include his parents reactions.
The characters had the same colored outfits on the last page. 
Omg he’s an old man! It’s supposed to be a picture of a dog, but it looks like a scene outside the window. In this book, paintings and drawings look like real life, like the people do. It has to be drawn in a way that makes it look like a painting or drawing. The ending isn’t right for an adult book. Idt they wanna see him old. it would be good for a young adult/adult novel.
Also, how did he know what he looked like as a dog that he was able to paint it? he would have had to see himself, or a picture of himself. 
I like stories like that. It reminded me of East of the Sun, West of the Moon fairytale. Which I love. 
When I finished the book, and looked back at the title, the name didn’t represent the book. 

I just read the bio as I was getting quotes off, and I read he used acrylic paints, so maybe that explains the texture of the clothing on the last page. &amp;I read he grew up on a farm, similar to the one in the book, and he likes painting pumpkins. He also has a dog Autumn. That was so cool to hear!