Rating: 1/5

I chose this book to fill a category of the 2015 reading challenge - a book by an author with your same initials - and if I hadn't needed it for the challenge, I would not have read past the 3rd chapter. 
 On the surface, this book is about the kidnapping of a young boy and the investigation and subsequent rescue attempt. In truth, it is a mangled mess, with characters who don't quite seem to interact in a normal way, sub stories that do not enhance the plot in way at all and dialogue that lacks any thrilling content.
 The two main characters, Stuart who is a policeman and Santini who is a mobster, hate each other and spend a great deal of time trying to interfere with each other's business, for no reason that seems to have anything to do with the plot of this book. When the child is kidnapped, Stuart immediately decides that Santini must be involved, based on absolutely no evidence. He rushes to accuse his enemy, who responds pretty much as anyone would in that situation, by mocking Stuart. The two continue to do battle with each other through the medium of the grieving mother. Each claims they will help her find her child, each falls a little in love with her, although she exhibits no personality throughout the book because, she is, of course, a hysterical parent of a missing 7 year old. Each tells her consistently that she is can't trust the other at all. 
 Through the entire story, it is never clear what happened between these two that inspired such hatred. There are allusions to an old murder that Santini allegedly committed, but that issue has nothing to do with the current kidnapping. As a result, the tension between the characters feels contrived and unrealistic. The same is true of the relationships each has to the Alice, the grieving mother. Stuart spends all of a few minutes interviewing her with regard to her missing son. Santini spends even less time with her. But both desire her, even claim to love her. 
 The action in this book moves along haltingly. At times, characters seem to materialize out of thin air or to be in two places at once. The dialogue is trite. 
 The story could have been much better if the author had left out the detailed descriptions of very minor characters, the thin references to past events on the island and the sub stories that detracted from, rather than helped move the story along. 
 My advice, if you enjoy a thriller, don't read this one.