Rating: 5/5

This, first in the trilogy of the Oxford classics major’s semi-autobiographical mysteries, ending in Gaudy Night (made a PBS Mystery series). Here’s a brilliant, multifold ironic tale, the best of the three Sayers I’ve re-read in the last month. Only drawback, a long early discourse, too dense in an old judge’s voice; it holds ten pages of legal summation, the trial of Harriet Vane mystery writer, who knows too much about arsenic. In her defense, the handsome Sir Impey Biggs notes Vane was researching her new novel, about such poisoning. The victim was her former lover, from whom she drove off when he proposed marriage. As I said, multi-ironic.

 Brilliant prose, for example, look at the verbs for typing. Miss Murchison "galloped" over the keys, "ornamented" the foot of the page, "threw over" the release, "spun" the roller, "twitching" the foolscap, "flung" the carbons, "shuffled" the copies, "slapped" them symmetric, and "bounced" with them (135)

 Sayers lades her tale with rich characters, like the best burglar-lockpicker in London, Blindfold Bill [Rumm], who holds packed religious meetings in his impoverished E end dwelling—only poor since his religion has cancelled his burgling. Mrs. Rumm offers Lord Peter dinner, “trotters,” pigsfeet. Bill undertakes to train a secretary in his skill, with the result that “Miss Murchison had acquired a considerable facility with the more usual types of lock and a greatly enhanced respect for burglary as a profession”(133).

 Lord Peter Wimsey, unlike so many detectives—say, Beaton’s Hamish MacBeth— stands 5’ 7” or so, his force deriving from his mental agility and knowledge, sometimes research of similar cases, as here. His brother, the Duke of Denver, stands horrified their sister, Mary, might marry a policeman (Scotland Yard). When Lord Peter defends Mary’s choice of Chief Inspector Parker, Scotland Yard, the Duke asks, “I hope YOU’RE not going to marry a policewoman?” Lord Peter responds, “No…I hope to marry the Prisoner— IF she’ll have me.” (The prisoner is Harriet Vane, detective novelist, a fictionalization of Sayers herself.)

 An American reader must translate a good deal, say “hob” for the top surface of a stove (English “cooker”), or “tester” for canopy over a bed, "mews" for old stables now human homes, or a "Morris chair"--first chair with multi-slant back--which we have in our family. But also, here’s a great education in fine things common to the great houses of England, but encountered in the U.S. among wealthy families: “buhl tables [inlaid with ivory and shells], mahogany chiffoniers [high chests, often with mirrors], Chinese vases [say, a Ming dynasty, worth tens of thousands], Sheraton bureaux." Lord Peter will not drink cocoa, even with brandy.