Rating: 5/5

{April 2024 Reread}

  "Hush, Olive," Hattie said. "Ella, go to your room. His Majesty can have no further need of you."

Char said, "I have great need of her."
  

  

  

The way this book holds uppppppp, oh my gosh. 🤌 Dang, I love it. Carson Levine's writing in Ella is leaps and bounds ahead of what I've encountered in her other works — so much so that I wonder whether it went through a more extensive editing process than some of her others. Perhaps the stars just aligned and she discovered how to capture lightning in a bottle for this specific moment in time. Whatever happened, it worked, and she deserves all the props for it. The writing in this book is still characteristically Levinian: still very simple, still somewhat stylized, and still conscientiously well-suited to an elementary/middle-grade readership. But it's also surprisingly, delightfully mature, nuanced, intelligent, and sparkling. It wouldn't work for every story, but it works marvelously for this one.

This remains one of my favorite reinventions of the Cinderella story. It cleverly resolves some of the bugaboos found in most iterations of the tale and feels very fresh and creative. The worldbuilding is sparse but effective. I love the setting(s), the characters, the dynamics between the characters, the romance (although I've officially hit the age at which it starts to feel a little trippy to read about literal teenagers being in love and talking about marriage (???!!) and whatnot), the humor, etc.

P.S. Why do I kind of like Sir Peter? Like, he's obviously a pretty worthless man so why do I feel like he has, like, a good sense of humor or some other vaguely redeeming quality?

P.P.S. I love aspects of the Miramax adaptation as much as the next person, but we need a screen version that's faithful to the book, too. I may or may not be contemplating a dream cast as we speak. *EDIT 04/29/24: Dream cast is now up on the blog! Click here to see it.

{2019(?) Reread}

This is such a cozy, happy, safe favorite to come back to again and again and again. Bless Levine for writing it.