Rating: 4/5

Pygmalion is one of those stories that reaffirm the old adage that the original is always better. The story of Professor Henry Higgins teaching and molding the down on her luck flower girl, Eliza Doolittle, into a “lady” has been done countless times (Pretty Women and My Fair Lady probably being two of the most famous examples), but Shaw’s original play still holds something unique and special.

Despite the story that is funny and endearing on the surface, Shaw utilizes his play to attack social hierarchies and the very idea of status. Eliza captures the audience’s sympathy with her headstrong and fight back attitude as well as her bold ambition to do whatever it takes to improve her lot in life and go after her own success, but she is more than just a mere flower girl. Instead the character of Eliza represents the lower classes of English society who are barred from achieving greater status, opportunity, and respect due to circumstances out of their control. Higgins, on the other hand, proud, arrogant, and privileged, represents those in England that benefit from a stroke of luck.
Such a juxtaposition reveals the central question of the work: what makes a lady or a gentleman? Their birthright? Their fortune? Their behavior? Their access to education?

Moreover, Shaw deepens this comparison between the two classes in presenting the higher echelons of society to be the most constricting and miserable. After achieving her transformation in being taken for a princess, Eliza feels lost and unhappy, realizing she has lost the ability to be herself. When poor and impoverished she was allowed to feel and display natural emotions as well as assert her own opinion without fear of rejection or judgement. After seeing her goal through, however, Eliza states she is no longer fit to sell anything but herself. Marriage has become her only opportunity while the thought of her own flower shop becomes a lost dream, begging yet another question: what is the price of status?

It is these questions that give the original play so much more depth. A depth that has a tendency to get lost in translation every now and then. So,no, I would not say the story of Pygmalion is one of an unconventional romance between a wealthy professor and a poor flower girl. That particular plot is one left for the movies and musicals. In fact, in Shaw’s original work Eliza doesn’t end up with Higgins at all.

That said, the play’s deeper meanings and critiques are hidden under witty banter that leaves them feeling a little less daunting (I found one of my new favorite insults a la’ Henry Higgins- “you draggle-tailed guttersnipe”). The adventures and trials Eliza must face in her attempts to pass as a lady are hilarious under most circumstances and entertaining under all. The clash of personalities and the pride of both lead characters will have you, if nothing else, laughing.

What I Liked:

1. The language. Reading Eliza’s cockney accent was like trying to solve a puzzle, and both she and Professor Higgins had colorful language to say the least. The banter and arguments that ensue give the play its more lighthearted feel and keep the play’s societal critiques from bogging down both the plot and its audience.

2. The female characters. Eliza and Mrs. Higgins, the main two female characters of the play, were both presented as headstrong, intelligent, and independent. Despite being of two different worlds, the two women admired one another for these characteristics and bonded over their refusal to allow men to dictate their lives and behavior as well as ignore their contributions and abilities.
Colonel Pickering. Eliza’s kind benefactor, who held two purposes: to act as a foil to Higgins and to remind the audience that another’s status is not determined by birth or behavior but in how you treat them.

3. The depth. As always, I love any story that can make me think a little harder about life, society, and everything in between. A book that can do that and make me laugh? It must be a score.

What I Didn’t Like:

1. Henry Higgins. Well, at least his attitude. Initially described as almost childlike and unused to getting his way, Higgins underwent very little transformation throughout the play, save realizing he did indeed enjoy Eliza’s company and in fact needed her around. Other than that, he stayed rude, petulant, and arrogant. While other characters chastised him or called him out for his bullying behavior, they often ended up meekly accepting the fact he would not change and moving on from there. I would have liked to see Higgins have more development and maybe a moment of humility.

2. The emphasis placed on Eliza’s ignorance. While it is mentioned that Eliza was a good student with a quick ear for language, the fact she is naive and ignorant in manners and education is also repeated again and again. So much so as to have her later repeat the same phrases. I don’t have a clear reason why this bothered me so much. I just know that it irked me to no end.
 
P.S. Did you know that the original idea for Pygmalion came from a greek myth of the same name in which a sculptor, Pygmalion, fell in love with one of his statues, invoking Aphrodite’s pity, as his love while true could not overcome the barrier of stone, so much so as to persuade her to bring the statue to life and present her as his bride?

***If you liked this review, please visit my blog at www.speakingacrosscenturies.com for more reviews and articles***