Rating: 4/5

Hell yes! This is what the sword &amp; planet genre is about! Lost cities, fanciful science, rayguns, monsters, cannibals, death chambers, romance, flying machines, commies, and zombies!

	My second dip into Burroughs' Venus series has some points superior to the first book, some inferior, and it's strangely just as surprising. It's not the lyrical planetary romance that the Barsoom books were, in fact it's sometimes guilty of the mechanical qualities of Burroughs' later works. There are familiar elements here that work very well, namely escapes, the old concept of two opposed-cities, and the requisite romantic tensions.

	The cliffhanger ending of “Pirates of Venus” is dutifully picked right up here and we are treated to Carson Napier's ordeal in a fiendish torture/execution chamber. His pursuit and search of his lady love, Duare, takes him through “Flash Gordon” type situations, such as trying to survive in the woods, make rafts, fashion weapons, and encountering mad scientists! 

	Unlike many of Burroughs' adventures, “Lost on Venus” benefits from the presence of a somewhat distinctive villain, Skor, who resurrects the dead into semi-conscious slaves and populates a city with them. 

	Absent here is the solid and direct narrative force that carried “Pirates of Venus” through. This sequel pulls back the veil of the uncharted Amtor some more and takes time unveiling other species and beasts. Burroughs' writing always has the necessary urgency (Lupoff didn't call him “master of adventure” for nothing), but segments of this work more like throwaway material. 

	What's probably most interesting about Carson Napier as a protagonist, at least to a Burroughs' fan, is that he is not a superman. Carson Napier is a hero, and competent, and he built his own damn rocketship, but he finds himself outmatched sometimes and actually walks away rather than fighting. Tarzan could always flip out and kill people with his mad jungle abilities, and John Carter could always be depended on to whip out a sword and “weave a web of steel” and... you know... kill guys... but not as much with Carson Napier. He's blonde, he's muscular... he can't seem to get a weapon when he needs one!

	Anyhow, this was a fantastic sequel! It maintains the tone of the first book and delivers on its promises while leaving us hungry for more, hungry for “Carson of Venus”! 

	Reading this was like medicine to me, the cure for that bad book I finished before this.