Rating: 3/5

Re No Longer A Dream - this one is another May/December with the h being 24 and the H being 39. CM starts us off with a smack, literally, to the h's behind. She wakes up naked in bed with the H and has no clue how she got there.

The last thing she remembers is telling the H's son that she was leaving his riotous party, she had initially accepted the invitation in the hopes of getting the H to introduce her to his father - a notoriously reclusive writer who was married to a big Hollywood movie start in the 1940's before her tragic death in a fire. The h is a writer and is doing a book on famous Hollywood marriages and the H's father was one of the couples picked for the books focus.

The H is a big time movie director and while he may be used to waking up with strange women, (hence the slap on the rear,) the h is definitely not and she isn't happy to think that she may have lost her chastity in a drunken romp. The h never drinks alcohol as she goes from upright to comatose in two sips. (Obviously she never plays the HP drinking game, she wouldn't make it past page 3.) She is suitably horrified and the H is suitably blase' when he does what most men would do with a lovely lady who has a nice chest, he starts to lurve her up. 

They are interrupted by the H's son bursting in, and the scene deteriorates from there - with the son making lewd and lascivious comments and the h growing more mortified and more angry. The son leaves and the h goes to shower, there are words between the H and h and the h is pretty agitated to confirm that nothing happened. 

The H's male PA wanders in at one point to, and it becomes too much for the h, she locks herself in the bathroom and the H is finally realizing that she may be telling the truth about her inability to figure out how she got there. 

He apologizes for thinking she was using his bed as the proverbial casting couch and she explains that she doesn't do men or relationships with men, she lost her fiance at 19 when he died on the way to their wedding and she hasn't completely recovered from that. The H is remarkably understanding - he has a prior example of his father mourning his mum for over 40 years, and gives her a ride home. 

Except the h keeps having these dreams about the H, he aroused her physically and she just doesn't understand what is happening to her. The H shows up to ask the h out unexpectedly and she tells him she just isn't interested in him or being part of his lady smorgasbord. 

 The H tries to convince her otherwise via the sudden and rapid stripping of her shirt and nuzzling of her chest, (something the H does every chance he gets in this one, srsly the h should have had a stopwatch, I am sure he had her shirt off and his mouth on her in less than 4.3 seconds and for a while there I was wondering if CM was using the h having to put her shirt back on as page filler, it happened so often.)

The h manages to deflect the H's attention by pointing out his son is getting into big trouble, the H acknowledged that the son spiked her drinks and had her put in the H's bed when she went comatose, and she tells the H he needs to step in and sort his son out before a tragedy happens. The H leaves and the h goes back to having dreams of unrequited longing for the H.

Then she gets an invitation to the H's private Scottish retreat to interview his dad. We also find out the son tried to drive his car off a bridge and broke his leg. The h accepts the weekend invitation, assuming the H is out of the country and won't be there to harass, er pursue her, but as we all know to expect - the H is the first person to greet her when she walks in the door. 

The H and h fight some more, he wants her badly and she is NOT GOING THERE, (at least not until chapter 7, anyways.) So the verbal sparing ends with the h's shirt off, again. ( I don't know maybe some kind of wrap to expedite matters should have been suggested at this point? It could be cashmere if warmth was the issue, thank goodness the H's genuine Scottish Castle had central heating.) The H manages to control himself and tells the h they are going skiing, she can meet his dad the next day.

The dad does introduce himself and the h looks at him and thinks the dad is dying, ( a bit of CM foreshadowing there.) The H and h are fighting again cause the H reminded her of her fiance, she explains that his mention of coffee made her realize she can't remember how her dead love took his and it made her unhappy. The H is very understanding and they have good time trying to teach the h how to ski. 

They get home and the h decides to bathe, the bursting boy son bursts into the bathroom while the h is in the tub. He showed up full of nasty remarks earlier and then he figures out the h is a virgin and they have some words. Later on bursting boy insinuates that the h is making up to both the H and himself and that leads to another fight. The h smacks bursting boy a good one, after the H storms off, and then feels bad about hitting a young man so obviously unhappy and physically injured.

She goes to find BB, but finds the H instead, she explains BB's set-up attempt and then gives into the passion and drags the H off to bed. Glorious rapture time over, the h decides she loves the H and thinks he loves her back. (Like it wasn't obvious the H was totally in love at this point, at least to the reader. ) 

She goes to interview the H's dad and finds out that the H's mum was wildly jealous and threw an oil lamp that started the fire, the H and his dad escaped but the mum did not and the dad missed her every day of his life since. He tells the h she has to move on with her life, that she loves his son and that it doesn't mean the h forgets her fiance, but he isn't there any more and she decided to live when the fiance died and she did not join him so she has to give love a chance. ( A bit morbid, but kinda sweet for an HP scenario.) Then the dad has a big attack and looks pretty bad. The h runs to find the H and he sends her home to London. 

The h is all kinds of hurt, why would he send her off when his dad is dying and he could use the support? She takes it to mean the H doesn't love her. BB calls her and tells her the H's dad died, the funeral is private and he apologizes for bursting so much. The h is sad, but determined to carry on and mopes around for a bit - she see's the H's ex-wife hanging all over him on the way to the funeral and so she figures she has been put out to pasture and there will be no more shirt removals. 

The h is all sad and lonely and goes wandering around London, snugly wrapped in her shirt. When she returns, the H is there and the reunion is joyous as she runs into his arms as he is taking off her top while he tells her he needs her and can't live without her. 

 He explains he did not want to subject her to another death and so he sent her away to shelter her fragile (and now quite bare) psyche. The h tells him she is a big person and can handle the bad with the good and it is mutual love and marriage with the HEA being kicked off with another smack on the rear. The H and h have a daughter and a happy marriage and it is all good for rump smacking with shirt optional in HPLandia.

This one was sweet, not too wrecky and the H was massively in love for most of the book. The h held her own against the H's advances and took her time about deciding about the H and made sure he was serious in his intentions before succumbing to the power of the club. Check this one out for a solid love story not hindered by close fitting tops and a nice HEA, affectionate swats included.