Rating: 4/5

4.5
An excellent collection of short stories several of which I read more than once. They need time and attention and more than repay it. I know I will come back to the book. Some notes on individual short stories I particularly liked:
 
Am Strande von Tanger - set in Barcelona - a couple sharing an apartment. Beautiful serene beginning. A friend (hers) a German woman comes over and the three of them go to the beach for the day - so little happens on the surface - yet beneath it everything shifts in the couple's relationship, the woman has completely changed the dynamics of the relationship. They return to the same apartment and yet the atmosphere has shifted profoundly. 
Twenty minutes - is a grenade of a story, exploded in my hand. It may well join my growing list of favourite ever short stories. A woman has a fatal accident while out riding - the important moments of her life pass by her, seen in vignettes. We get a very full picture of who she is and how her life was lived. The opening is intriguing - the narrator of the story meets the woman at a party and they talk about the dog she has rescued. How could he later be right inside her head except for imaginative reconstruction? 
The title story Dusk is elegant and sad and happens in just a small pocket of time as the afternoon turns to evening, yet so much is played out. A divorced woman lives along in a house on the beach tastefully furnished. Her child drowned years before. The odd-job man comes to call, to check if she needs any repairs done before the winter. They had an affair. It's over now because he is back with his wife. What does she have to look forward to? Loneliness spools out before her.
The Cinema is about the making of a Hollywood film on location in Italy from the moment the leading actress walks onto the set. A whole world is captured in the space of a few pages. Although the viewpoint shifts between the various characters involved in this project (actor, producer, director, secretary), the main one is clearly the writer, a young man on the periphery of the action, often overlooked or forgotten even though the words he has written are central to the whole venture. Loved the well-deserved happy ending.
Dirt - very simple but evocative story. Billy and Harry are laying the foundations of a house. Harry is older, and dyingbut he won't give up and works as hard as ever. Billy is asked at one point in the bar how much he's earning - it's clear that money isn't the thing that keeps him with Harry, so we need to work out what is. 
Akhnilo might be the best story in the book - very powerful. A man awakens in the dead of night and hears a noise. It might be a burglar and there have been burglaries in the neighbourhood. But as he listens, the quality of the sound changes. It seems to be coming from a shed. Eventually he makes out voices and distinct words. In the house he manages to write down only one (Akhnilo?) before he collapses. This is a story about a descent into a nervous breakdown and brilliantly done.
Foreign Shores Sexual tensions rise in a single-parent household when a woman takes in a "drab" dutch au pair to look after her six year old son. One of my favourite pieces in the book.