Rating: 3/5

Interesting contribution to the debate on National education. The gist of the book is that literacy is misunderstood. One can be proficient with a skill as a reader without having mastered comprehension of text. In other words the finite skill of interpreting letters into words and speed at which the reader translates them is only a small portion of comprehension. 

Unfortunately, the Rousseau/Dewey approach to education rejects content heavy curriculum because they believed it distracts from the honing of skills. The authors persuasively demonstrate through experiments, surveys, and tests that acquiring a narrow set of reading skills is obscenely limited. Readers must have a context of the vocabulary being referred to in the text. They must have some appreciation with the words being used and ideas conveyed before elementary comprehension can be achieved. 

To demonstrate this they present a newspaper article with words like foreclosure, Department of Agriculture, and Appeals Court. The newspaper article couldn't possibly be meaningful without at least a basic understanding of these words. They argue that everyone has a shared pool of knowledge which writers predict when producing their works. However, this overlapping pool is shrinking and authors can no longer feel confident that basic language need no further explanation. Imagine the absence of shared knowledge as a writer. New ideas will become next to impossible to disseminate to others without extensive explanation of supporting content that used to be understood by all literate persons. 

I appreciate arguments supporting Classically based education. They argue a need to know about Abraham Lincoln, George Washington, etc. They also argue for exposure to Shakespeare, Dickens, and other English Literature icons. I really appreciate the scientific approach to persuade for more Humanities and Social Sciences. Their arguments are based on a premise that educators and students want to have better reading comprehension and want to be able to more effectively communicate. The more knowledge literate Americans have in common, correlates with the efficiency of communications between one another. 

Although their book easily convinces me of the conclusions they made,I wish more points were made for the merit of the Humanities. The book had laser focus on one point (schools need more content in education to improve reading comprehension). This resulted in a redundant but very clear argument. I wonder, though, if I could have walked away from an essay containing the essence of their work with any less knowledge.