Rating: 3/5

One star off for the too long section of her being a deer which did nothing for me.

And one star off for the last chapter which was literally just the wish fulfillment we fantasize about when we imagine our ex's coming back to say how wrong they treated us and how much they want us back.

Small things: 

-The first quarter of the book seems to rest on the concept that the Stolen Land is safe in the day but the Unseen come out at night . . . yet later on it is obvious that the Unseen exist perfectly well in the daylight (they don't have any kind of vampire/ghost daylight aversion going on). So either I read the first part of the book wrong or it was never explained why they only attacked outside of Torbyrgi at night in the beginning of the book.
-The difference between the Ammian and Unseen religions -other than their origin myth- confused me. Reflecting now, I believe the Unseen were either agnostic or the type of Christian faith that values mythos for its lessons but doesn't take it as fact. Either way, their faith was revealed in a way that left me confused until after reading the book and reflecting which isn't a very good sign for your worldbuilding (this, as with everything in my reviews, was my experience. If you understood it on your first read and found it immersive good for you). 
-Also I just really wanted to see the inside of the abandoned capital city and I'm sad we didn't get to scour the gloomy unswept streets and see crumbling piles of bones. It could've been fun!

Themes/things I really liked or found thought provoking:

Sans the last chapter, the last few chapters of this book had me wondering if Iolithie was an unreliable narrator. Below I'll list out the two possibilities for Iolithie's relationship with Tykavn and Mehaar.
So either we get the reality confirmed in the last chapter - Iolithie is perfect, Tykavn is toxic and/or abusive and it was only a matter of time until he hit/left Mehaar, and Mehaar only cares about herself (yet prior to this she is only described as sweet and patient and a good listener??) - OR Iolithie isn't actually that great, as confirmed by everyone except Sigurthur and Mathrathur. Iolithie's parents don't love her even though they try to, Tykavn tells her she only left for herself and was extremely argumentative during his illness which led him to hit her when he'd never felt the desire to hit Mehaar (side-note: it is never okay to hit a partner, but in this context he frames his physical abuse as a response to her severe verbal abuse which is an important difference to how she recounts the events), and Mehaar says Iolithie never actually loved her and in fact only looked down on her as a servant. I think this could have been fun. There were enough twists in this book as it is, why not make Iolithie a sleeper anti-hero?

This book had a weird time travel/chosen one mythology element which I didn't quite understand on my first reading, but one could probably find some interesting themes on religion and myth creation through it if they wanted to. I was split between putting this here or in 'small things' column, as it was just a shade wackier and unresolved than I tend to like things. I did however like this quote on religion:
'"Only that I wish I knew what to believe in . . . I don't believe in [the good god or the evil goddess]. What else is there?"
"Then I will tell you something," said Mathrathur. "They are only names for things we can't see, and things we feel. Your gods and goddesses can be as real as you want them to be."'
And there were also several spots in the book where the narrator said that religion and ritual should bring comfort to its practitioners and if it doesn't do that then perhaps it shouldn't be followed.

Good versus evil:
Not a new theme but still a gooder, especially in a genre bereft of the pure-good/pure-evil trope:
"'Evil does not emanate from a distant violet star. We always seem to see it as coming from outside ourselves; reposing in the hearts of our enemies but never in our own. But it lies inside all of us . . .'"

And my favorite part! Ableism as a theme! (disclaimer: I am not disabled nor do I suffer from OCD. And there were certain parts of this that I don't stand behind as being good (ex. calling people 'mad') but overall I thought this was a really solid effort for having ableism as a theme, and especially coming from the nineties (and especially especially after reading some of Sheri S. Tepper's work from that time! Yikes))
I won't give spoilers but there are two main parts to this theme - mental illness and medication and being differently abled and 'fixed'.
For the person who dealt with OCD (or 'the disease of doubt'), it is acknowledged that mental illness does blur somewhat with personality (ex. some of their quirks or preferences may or may not have come about because of their illness, but regardless, they are part of with them even in their good days or periods) AND strongly pushes a pro-medication stance, with the character taking medication returning to, and even being more strong in, the person they were before their disease started straining their everyday actions.
For the disabled person (who in this case had the tips of their fingers on opposite hands fused together since birth) the narrative shows their family's unsurety about them getting surgically 'fixed', but ultimately assisting in doing something that they think will help their relative. After the surgery the person becomes very despondent and finds tasks that they had done before harder, or even impossible, to accomplish. I thought this was a very good literary retort to the question "But if you suddenly could be cured you'd want to be wouldn't you?" (For those wondering about that question themself, disabled people I follow online usually state that they'd rather you'd work towards creating a less ableist world - this can mean things like making education, healthcare, and architecture accessible in places it currently isn't. I encourage you to seek out differently abled voices online and read what they have to say!)
"'. . . the cure can be more terrible than the disease.'"

All in all, I really liked the themes in this book but it just didn't click with me on an emotional level (it happens). I'd say read it for yourself. (Also I wish there was more of Iolithie and Sigurthur's relationship! They had such a cute dynamic and he was almost canonically asexual (depending on how you read one of his last lines) and I love me some ace rep!)