Rating: 4/5

surprisingly captivating and i read it just about in one sitting. the anecdotes have great story power and they really ground the bialys in narratives into the pasts of aging members of the jewish diaspora. i also like the author's frankness and the times where you can tell her fervor for the kuchen had led her on this journey that took quite awhile to complete. (you can see how she fits this interest into her professional life-- only able to visit places because she is sent there and thus has to stretch out the development of the book over a period of time.)

sometimes sheraton uses her own personal analogies/imagery that seem a bit incongruous. they certain bring to light sheraton's own quirkiness and personality (comparing a picture of a couple to something about circles under the egyptian mummy eyes or something to that end and i distinctly remember another time about hebrew writing looking like the footprints of birds walking through ink) 

she has a very specific view of what a bialy should look like. and throws around the idea of an authentic bialy with no qualms, not stopping to think what authenticity means to different people. she does mention that everyone likes (or should like) what they grew up with, but she is very brisk (and perhaps careless?) with words and ideas i would consider very charged with meaning. 

in other words, i very much enjoyed reading the narration of her accounts with different people and their experiences growing up and eating bialy. personally, i would have liked more introspection and interjection from the author (and not just about how the taste of a particular bialy of a bakery she is visiting fit into her worldview of how a bialy should taste). perhaps more analysis and more cohesive exploration of the links between loss, holocaust, and the bialy. perhaps if she would elucidate more on the sense of home or security or identity, it would be so much stronger and more compelling.

i had a feeling she was writing this book for her. it was a very personal project. in that way, she directed as she saw fit, enough to tell the stories, but left open to analysis in terms of underlying meaning of it all. by collecting the stories and ending with the letter about the destruction of bialystok as the destruction of the bialy culture in the area, i think she brings to the surface many rich tales and much information. i would have loved to hear more about what she took from it. how the destruction of bialystok and the disappearance of the bialy from the lives of the residences there-- what does it signify? is it a metaphor for the loss of heritage? if the repasts were remembered in the heads and hearts of the people, how does this nostalgia speak about their lives now? how do people recreate their childhood or experiences of great innocence through these meals (especially in the midst of such tragic and devastating events to people so dear to them)? there seems like there's something there that can be really explored and picked through, if only she spent some more time really thinking about it all.

but i think that's beyond the scope of what she's interested in. she told the stories, recorded them and weaved together a fine book. i also very much liked how she opened the book coming to bialystok already pessimistic... the awful weather and the lack of bialy-rememberers. the whole scene was grey and somewhat tragic and i feel that represents the great sense of loss that the holocaust brought about perhaps not just in bialystok, but in much of poland. and there is a lot of underlying tension between survivors and their ideas of the polish. a lot of acrimony that could be aired out and better diffused and explored, as well (within the context of the bialy).

if the stories were not so rich and if sheraton were not so personable, i would say this deserves three rather than four stars. but b/c the tales were so compelling, i have to give it a four. there's just so much robustness and such a sense of nostalgia and devastation in the tales.

all in all. i was quite satisfied. now i just have to make my way to kossar's. perhaps the best thing about this was that it will undoubtedly lead me on a food pilgrimage to the lower east side of manhattan.