Rating: 4/5

Wow. This book. 

I debated giving it five stars, actually, was how insanely good this was. But I don't know, it just didn't feel like a full five star book -- not like Dark Shimmer by the same author so obviously was from the second I turned the final page. Still, it was dang close. Easily the best retelling of Hansel and Gretel I've ever come across, particularly in the literary department. I wasn't sure how I was going to feel about a cannibalistic witch being shown as sympathetic, or how that would even WORK. Napoli makes it work wonderfully, though. This is simply because our unnamed lead, known only as Ugly One, isn't a grinning, plotting monster who built a giant gingerbread house with the intent of luring children during a famine. This ISN'T the cannon movie tale's witch either, with her past victims baked into cookies to line her fancy yard (I wonder how that works though, as an adult looking back on a childhood favorite -- if she's eating them, how are they also lawn decorations? But alas I digress, let's make that a topic for another time).

No, Napoli's witch is an unfortunate, lured into a demonic pact thanks to a bossy neighbor and her own gentle pride. She makes her little candy house in the woods because she wants to be AWAY FROM people to protect them -- she DOESN'T want to have to eat a helpless child. Then come Hansel and Gretel, whom she wants to adopt but she fears the demons finding out she's got kiddos with her and forcing her to eat them. 

It actually comes up with a good reason why the witch was so obsessed with her clean house (and later, having Gretel clean while Hansel was in that cage); she's trying to keep the demonic familiars that can come in the form even of bugs out. It was heartbreaking seeing her just absolutely love these children, to the point where she has to rationalize why their stepmother would be so cruel to them to keep herself from going after the heartless woman in revenge for them, to having to lock Hansel in a cage and pretend not to know the wishbone he stuck out was not his finger. Then the way she had to hint to Gretel to shove her into the oven by giving her a prized possession she had promised to give her only when she died... Just wow. That just about broke my heart in two.

What really shocked me about this book is how it packed so much emotion into so few pages. Just to put it into prospective, it's shorter than Mermaid, and only very slightly longer than the average Princess Tale from Gail Carson Levine. And yet there is so much that happens, I felt like I'd been a long, novel-length journey while reading it. Usually in these kinds of fairy-tale backstory revamps, when the original characters show up they feel forced and their cameos short (think of Wendy at the end of Never, Never, or to a much lesser extent, Tiger Lily) but Hansel and Gretel really felt perfectly placed and drawn out. I felt I got to know them just as well as the Ugly One, and better than I did her daughter Asa, who appears earlier in the story. I've noticed a couple of reviewers claiming it was kind of a weak attempt at feminism having Hansel be slow-witted, and Gretel the brilliant, religious, sensible one who took charge, but that's really not how I saw it. Hansel was the typical younger, sometimes bratty brother ("the witch says you have to be nice to me, Gretel") and Gretel just happened to be more tuned in to what was happening to them and the overall gravity of their situation. And it bears recalling that this book was published in 1993. Back then the "smart sister, dumb brother" thing wasn't a gimmick or overdone cliché yet. I didn't see Gretel's cleverness being at Hansel's expense so much as just being what the plot and the Ugly One's story needed. 

As this is technically a children's book (though it feels mature enough for any adult to enjoy too, I thought), I can imagine some parents getting up in arms about the religious and demonic themes in this book. This is actually a brilliant teaching tool -- a family could discuss with children how the Ugly One was misled and how sneaky Satan can be when wishing to snare someone, or the corruption of the church in the Middle Ages, how it was all right with Exorcists but was ready to blame anyone they disagreed with for being a 'witch'. And it's kind of nice to see pagan rituals portrayed as dark and not 'fun' just because it's a children's fantasy story. I mean, it's entirely up to the parent if they are going to let their kids read this, but I absolutely would, if I had children.