Rating: 5/5

A TOP SHELF review, originally published in the August 21, 2015 edition of The Monitor

Of all the dramatists of Japan, Monzaemon Chikamatsu is widely regarded as the greatest; his work on a par with that of Shakespeare, Sophocles or Miller. Writing with no foreign influences during a cultural flowering at the turn of the 18th century, Chikamatsu has bequeathed us a startlingly modern tragedy infused with the mores of his time and country.

Originally produced as a joruri or puppet play in 1721 before being adapted for kabuki performances with live actors, “The Love Suicides at Amijima” relates the doomed relationship of Koharu, a 19-year-old prostitute and Jihei Kamiya, a paper merchant with two children.

Married to his cousin and childhood sweetheart, Osan, Jihei finds himself caught between two loves. On the one hand, he cares about his children and desperately needs his wife. Though her father deeply disapproves of his son-in-law’s philandering ways, Jihei clings to Osan, unwilling to abandon her to crushing fate.

On the other hand, Jihei has spent 29 months in an intense affair with Koharu, swearing that he will find a way to ransom her from the houses of ill repute that virtually own her. But, despite his wife’s frugality, his business is on the brink of insolvency.

The lovers’ solution is to pact suicide.

As the play opens, an arrogant rival merchant named Tohei has determined to outwit Jihei and ransom Koharu first. The young woman, unaware that Jihei has followed her to a “date,” confides tearfully to her samurai client that she wants neither to be with Tohei nor to kill herself with her lover. After a violent confrontation between the Samurai, Jihei and Tohei (who has also tracked Koharu down), the samurai reveals himself to be Magoemon, Jihei’s older brother.

Ashamed and angry at Koharu’s betrayal, Jihei rejects her vehemently as a conniving wench and throws back at her the 29 love letters she has sent him — one for each month of their relationship.

Ten days later, Jihei is moping about his home when his mother-in-law/aunt and brother come around, suspicious that the rumors circulating about Koharu’s impending ransom must have something to do with him. Osan defends her husband, affirming that he has definitively broken up with the prostitute, but the couple realizes that Tohei must finally have made his move.

Jihei is furious, ostensibly because Tohei will now publicly ridicule Jihei and damage his honor among merchants. Osan reveals to him that she begged Koharu in a letter to feign disinterest in Jihei so that he would turn away from suicide. Because this ransom by a man she doesn’t love will lead to Koharu’s suicide, Osan urges her husband to take their meager savings and rescue the girl. He is distraught at how this arrangement will marginalize his wife, but he agrees.

Their strange plan is interrupted by the arrival of Osan’s father, who sees confirmed for him all of his daughter’s sacrifices and humiliations. He drags her away, insisting Jihei file for divorce.

Abandoning his children, Jihei manages to get his beloved away from the brothel. After crossing many bridges and working up their courage, the two stop in Amijima, at the Daicho Temple, where in brutal and poetic fashion they carry out their fatal vow.

It is interesting to note that the events in these three acts take place over ten days in the tenth month, called kannazuki (month of no gods) because it is when the Shinto deities turn away from earth to meet in heaven. The implications are clear.

Blending coarse humor, poetic narrative and realistic dialogue in a way that transcends the artifice of both puppetry and opera, underscoring the empty tragedy of life itself, “The Love Suicides at Amijima” lingers in the mind like Jihei’s corpse, swinging at the end of his lover’s sash on a cold November morning.