Rating: 4/5

Duong Van Mai Elliott’s “The Sacred Willow” follows Vietnamese history from the fall of the final dynasty to the years following the communist revolution. It is told through the lens of Elliott’s own family, one whose centuries-long evolution runs parallel to the ever-changing state of their country. Every bit of the saga touched Elliott’s family, comprised of Confucian dignitaries, hardcore revolutionaries and western collaborationists alike.

Throughout the 474-page narrative, Elliott travels across north and south Vietnam, constantly fleeing the war, as well as to the U.S. Particularly intriguing to me was the moment in Elliott’s life during which she interviews Viet Cong POWs to study their morale for an American research corporation. She, a devout anti-communist at the time, began to see in the Viet Cong courage and depth where she thought existed only ignorance; integrity and devotion where she had expected wickedness. Through this experience, she begins to question her understandings between good and bad, the moral vagueness that first drew me to learn more about Vietnam.

Through this memoir, one will come to understand the roots of Vietnamese tradition and all the ways in which it was preserved or replaced by French values. You’ll learn why some chose to throw in their lots with the communists while others remained engaged with conventional governments, even those they loathed. You’ll be introduced to the life of a revolutionary, characterized by subsistence and hard labor in the mountains, as well as that of a western government official, surrounded by bribery and corruption in the city (which later pervaded the communist government as well). You will understand that the war did not begin with American involvement, not even close, and that it was from the beginning a war that western powers — and South Vietnam itself, propped up by the Americans with nothing of their own to fight for — were never going to win. You will learn why even those who did not agree with Viet Minh ideology, Vietnamese and Americans alike, would nevertheless come to respect the revolutionaries for their unwavering commitment to independence, and for their victory in a war against “the most powerful nation on earth.” You will see Vietnam with new eyes, not as a domino, but as a country whose flag bears weight.