Rating: 2/5

“Titus Crow? More like tedious Crow, amiright?” 

This one was probably the first Cthulhu Mythos pastiche I read fifteen years or so ago after being introduced to the work of H.P. Lovecraft and I recall being none too impressed by it. So, why did I return to Lumley’s pulpy, over the top action horror tales all these years later? Well, I guess I didn’t remember much about how wacky they really are, and wanted to see if my negative impressions were right. They were. There is almost something that could be entertaining here, a 1970s British action horror romp complete with, yes, a Tardis and Cthulhu’s noble and benevolent brother Kthanid, but it all comes to be just too much and we end up not giving a toss about Crow and his surprisingly boring escapes through time and space. 

This novel is actually made up of two smaller novellas featuring occult investigator turned cyborg godling Titus Crow and his sidekick, Henri Laurent de Marigne. For the most part, both take the traditional Lovecraft pastiche route of telling their stories through correspondence, personal accounts, and transcripts, to mixed success, dropping in references to myriad of Lovecraft’s stories as well as creating his own. On the other hand, Brian Lumley takes more in plot and style from August Derleth, creating more a rip roaring adventure tale than one of horror, complete with a secret society devoted to combating the forces of the “CCD” (or Cthulhu Cycle Deities, conveniently abbreviated). Lumley even brings a few interesting ideas to the table, improving on Derleth’s good versus evil plots. 

The first of them, The Burrowers Beneath, is a standard Cthulhu Mythos pastiche that was occasionally interesting, introducing the sentient worm like alien “Cthonians,” told through a series an investigation of strange earth rumblings across the UK, including the sinking of a deep sea oil rig in the North Sea. By the second novella, The Transition of Titus Crow, though, all of this began to wear a bit thin as the passive voice of the tale and the lack of any discernible personality from any of the characters mentioned began to drag things down, just as things ought to have become interesting with Titus Crow going on a “wibbley wobbley, timey wimey” jaunt through time and space in his Tardi-, er, I mean, Clock. Crow tells his stories of battling pteranodons in the Cretaceous, getting fitted out with a perfect robo body, and hanging out with dragons with all the verve of a boring relative’s holiday update letter. It all begins to feel inconsequential and anticlimactic. 

This is, apparently, only the first two installments of Titus Crow’s epic, continuing adventures and I’m not sure where it could go from here, only that I’m not really interested.