Rating: 5/5

LoveLoveLove this one. I'm a classical world fanatic and this book is narrated by Maggie aka Penelope and is set during the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta. Her name was Penelope during those times and she was a young noble woman living with her family in Athens. Her father was none other than Alcibiades, a general in the Athenian Navy, who after being sentenced to death ran away and sold out Athens to the Spartans. I really loved Ewing's incorporation of actual people, places, and situations in this book. I couldn't believe how cruel Penelope's sister Taemestra was to her. I know people like that did and o exist but I can't imagine why should would go to such murderous lengths to get revenge on something that wasn't even hers to begin with. It wasn't Penelope's fault that Taemestra had a higher opinion of herself than Hector did. I also have no clue as to why Hector would believe that he defeat the Atrox all on his own. I think it is amazing how long Maggie has been alive and all of the things that she has seen, done, and experienced makes me EXTREMELY jealous. That is the historian in me of course. The one thing about this book that is really frustrating, to me at least, is that some much is left unsaid. For example, who is supposed to take Maggie's place. This supposed goddess come to Earth in human form. Also who is Maggie and Hector's child!!! I read that and I'm like HUH? I really have no clue as to who it is? I knew that Penelope's Spartan friend Chrysippus was Catty's Chris and I am about 75% sure that Jimena is the goddess sent to guide the Daughters but I haven't any idea who Maggie and Hector's child is? I feel so bad for Hector and Maggie because I think they really did love each other but their relationship was pretty much doomed from the beginning just for the simple fact that Maggie had a vindictive sister. Also pretty cool that Maggie's father is Zeus I mean Taemestra had every reason to be jealous her sister was a demi-god and she was just a mere human. It was also good to find out that their mother was imprisoned by Hera and hadn't actually left them. No matter what a Taemestra said about the matter. I am not sure why Maggie's elixir of age regression ran out because the deal that she made was to live to see the Atrox destroyed and she dies in this book and there are three more after this one so her death shouldn't have happened yet. That is one big inconsistency in the story that the author didn't really elaborate on. Guess we'll see how it all fits together in the next three books.