Rating: 5/5

Our revels now are ended. These our actors,
As I foretold you, were all spirits and 
Are melted into air, into thin air;
Prospero, (Act IV, Scene i)
 The Tempest ~~  William Shakespeare

 

THE TEMPEST is my favorite of of all of William Shakespeare's works. THE TEMPEST is a marvel on several levels chiefly among them is the playwright's talent had not waned in all the years he had written for the stage. This is  Shakespeare's farewell to the stage and to public life. It is brilliant.

My take on THE TEMPEST is quite different from many others. I look at this work not as a reader, or even a theatre goer, but as a director.

Sir Peter Hall described THE TEMPEST as "The most blasphemous play Shakespeare wrote, THE TEMPEST is about a man on an island who's allowed to play God and who doesn't just dabble in witchcraft but actually performs it."

There has to be a quality of the fantastic about THE TEMPEST to make it successful, something to provoke a sense of wonder. 

I view Prospero not as a regal duke who attains God-like stature, but a man who has lived in nature for many years and has grown disillusioned with life. He is reluctant to take his dukedom back and leaves his island not triumphantly, but reluctantly. Prospero knows that everyone here, himself included, is beyond redemption except for Miranda and Ferdinand. 

Prospero is the controller of both the tempest, and THE TEMPEST. He is a very troubled man. Prospero is engaged in a race against time. This is the crux of his dispute with Ariel and his demand for freedom. 

Prospero has been exiled for 12 years. Over this time he has lost his princely virtures and has instead become a savage ~~ look at his treatment of both Ariel, and Caliban, and to a lesser extent, Miranda. Prospero is not tolerant; many of his speeches are more akin to outbursts. 

Antonio is the negative pole of THE TEMPEST. There is no forgiveness between the brothers, they are irreconcilable. But this is not the biggest blow to Prospero.

Ariel's leaving Prospero ~~ deserting him ~~ is the biggest blow Prospero suffers. Ariel is the love of Prospero's life. They are THE TEMPEST's power couple. The love between Prospero and Ariel is one of the most compelling relationships that Shakespeare ever imagined. This is the real love story of THE TEMPEST.

Let's be clear, Ariel is a slave. However for a slave Ariel also has tremendous power over Prospero. 

Ariel’s relationship with Prospero in the play is necessarily marked by his identity as Prospero’s slave. He must obey. But he wants more than this master-slave relationship. He wants to be loved:

Before you can say 'come' and 'go,'
And breathe twice and cry 'so, so,'
Each one, tripping on his toe, 
Will be here with mop and mow.
Do you love me, master? No? 
Ariel, (Act IV, Scene i)

 

To be clear on another point, Ariel is a male sprite. He was written as a male and is meant to be portrayed by a male actor. Too often, Ariel is cast as a woman and it weakens the play in general and the relationship between Prospero and Ariel in particular. Their love is homoerotic, but in  Shakespeare's time it was what it was. 

Ariel’s feelings for Prospero are complex. Proud to be of use to Prospero, impatient to be free, yet desirous of praise the relationship has something of love, something of servitude, something of rebellion. Should one imagine Prospero as a father figure? Or, is he Ariel's Daddy?

And what of Caliban? Prospero enslaves Caliban and keeps him subjugated by the use of magic to frighten or subdue him. However his need to do this may stem from his fear of Caliban, a virile young male whose sexuality is focused on his daughter. A figure of physical strength who Prospero knows would overthrow or kill him if he could. Prospero may be ‘brains’ but Caliban is ‘brawn’ and brawn at that who knows how to survive in the harsh island environment. 

The major theme of THE TEMPEST is reconciliation -- not forgiveness -- reconciliation. In the end, Prospero is reconciled with his brother and the king, but true forgiveness evades them all.

At THE TEMPEST's close, Prospero renounces magic, pledging to break his staff and "drown" his books. He frees his lover Ariel, makes peace with the threatening Caliban, and reconciles with his usurping brother Antonio, the Duke of Milan, who conspired to banish him.

In his final soliloquy, the play's epilogue, Prospero considers the diminishing of his powers and the ravages of encroaching age:

"Now my charms are all o'erthrown,
And what strength I have's mine own,
Which is most faint."
Prospero, (Epilogue I) 

Finally, he asks the audience for their applause, drawing the performance to a close and freeing him from his "project... Which was to please":

"But release me from my bands
With the help of your good hands...
As you from crimes would pardon'd be,
Let your indulgence set me free.""
Prospero, (Epilogue I)

Ultimately, I interpret THE TEMPEST as a farewell to the theatre, the broken staff a perfect metaphor for the writer laying aside his pen.