Rating: 5/5

After waiting four years, impatient fans probably thought this book reasonably worth the wait, (while at the same time sighing for three books that could have been). It was quite an exciting, interesting mystery.

One blooper I noted--when Wolfe mentions the title of the book, a character admires the turn of phrase. Wolfe states that Mr. Goodwin would admire it also, and adds that he had once stated that he, Wolfe, "rides words bareback." Mr. Goodwin did not. That was Paul Whipple, in A RIGHT TO DIE. Whipple was quoting his father's pet phrase for a man who used words well.

Wolfe grudgingly does a favor for one of the few men who can ask it of him, Dr. Vollmer. A doctor at a psychiatric clinic has a walk-in patient with "Lady MacBeth Syndrome"--blood on his hands. The patient seems to think that they can effect a cure without his giving them any information whatsoever, and his doctor finally advises him to either have his hands removed or go to Nero Wolfe and try to dodge his questions. Archie had naturally turned away the person who had called with such an oddball request. Having agreed to see him, Wolfe and Archie employ a very simple stratagem to identify the man. (I wonder what circumstances caused them to acquire that nifty little gadget in the first place? Or perhaps Archie convinced Wolfe to invest in it for future necessities.) The man was a witness to a recent horrific incident at the CAN building--a local news network. Wolfe is satisfied. Favor done. Back to his books.

Archie, with his eye ever on the bank account, takes another good look at the CAN incident, realizes that the widow of the victim is obscenely wealthy, and, for the first time since AN BE A VILLAIN, goes fishing for a client, this time without Wolfe's sanction. Mrs. Odell is rather like Mrs. Bruner of THE DOORBELL RANG, ready to spend whatever it takes to get what she wants. Wolfe accepts the job, although he's not impressed with his client.

The job is truly a tough one. A opens a desk drawer belonging to B, and is promptly blown to bits. Was B the target? Or did someone know that A was going to open that drawer, and seized the opportunity? Or was the target C, or D, two others inclined for poking around the desk? Or was A trying to plant the bomb, and inadvertently killed himself? The police are getting nowhere, and Wolfe is dismayed to find that he's getting nowhere as well. He finally reaches the point where he's ready to quit! Archie grabs an idea from Saul and presents it to Mrs. Odell, namely, that she offer a hefty reward for information. Wolfe knows perfectly well that Archie spearheaded the idea, but having it come from Mrs. Odell detours around his pride, and he's back on the job.

A book that I have, AT WOLFE'S DOOR, complains about a couple of points in this book. The first is the scene with the undercover Jewish terrorist who shows up to try and claim the reward. I think it adds a bit of contemporariness to the book. The part I found confusing about it was when the man asked if they were anti-Semite and Archie said that the only thing he had against Jews was that "...one of them is as good a poker player as I am. Sometimes a little better." I assume he's referring to Lon Cohen, because Saul Panzer is consistently a better poker player than Archie, but why didn't he mention him, too?

The other scene the book complained about was the "effects of male dominance on certain vulgar idioms of the English language...." I found that scene fascinating and funny. I wonder just how long Rex Stout had that idea percolating in his head. I think she made a valid point. A valid voint. I also found it shocking the very first time I read it, because I couldn't believe a woman would discuss such matters with a man she was barely acquainted with. I now realize that if you've got an idea you think is both interesting and important, you're going to want to share it as much as possible. No doubt "peeing and veeing" had long since become an inside joke at the CAN building. And the scene when Archie came home and reported! Of course, starting off with the description of the diet picnic was just plain cruel. He could have at least mentioned that the milk and Fritz's chicken got him through. Not to mention the pickles. Vickles. Wolfe's reaction to the discussion of vulgar idioms was priceless--and very much Wolfe.

After days and days and DAYS of not getting anywhere, it was wonderful to see Saul and Fred, almost simultaneously, bring home a big, juicy hunk of bacon, especially when it led to everyone's favorite obnoxious cop getting what for. With this vital information, Wolfe rapidly brought the case to an end.

SPOILER
I did have a problem with the ending. It turns out that two characters, right from day one, knew perfectly well not only who the killer was, but who the real target had been. They kept silent, apparently to try and hide their scandalous relationship--which practically everyone knew about! For nearly a month, they saw the killer in the halls of the CAN building, passed the time of day with him, waiting...for what? The police obviously weren't going to get him, and even Wolfe was stymied. What were they going to do? Wolfe should have chewed them out far more than he did. He should have pointed out that the killer quite possibly might have tried again, this time making it look like suicide. That would have closed the case as far as the police were concerned. It wouldn't have for Wolfe, but the killer wouldn't know that.

EXTRA SPOILER

I have always wondered just when Rex Stout began plotting the downfall of Orrie Cather. He started as an ordinary op, rather roughhewn (and tobacco spitting). He became younger and better looking, and more sophisticated (at least in his own opinion). He was more interested in his reputation as a detective than in his looks. Interestingly, just before the death of Johnnie Keems, Archie made the comment that Orrie had improved somewhat since he had GIVEN UP his ideas of taking over Archie's job. This, I believe, was the first mention that Orrie had such ambitions; Johnnie Keems was the one who wanted it. After Keems' death, his characteristics were transferred to Orrie, including his ambition. Was it at this point that Stout knew his future plans for Orrie? His vanity began to vie with his concern for his reputation, and he became more "Casanova" with women. Also, Archie and Wolfe both began taking snide little cracks at him, implying (and leaving you to infer) that he's much less competent than Saul or Fred. (But he's still on Wolfe's short list.) In DEATH OF A DOXY, he got into terrible trouble simply because he was stupid enough to take up with another man's girlfriend. In this book, it becomes clear that marriage has not made him "go tame", to use a phrase from THE MOTHER HUNT. He takes full advantage of his assignment at the CAN building to date up the women staff, (leaving the men to Fred and Saul, no doubt), and fights with Archie over charging an overnight trip to Atlantic City as a business expense, stating quite openly that he intends to sleep with the woman. And in the final book...at it again. Oh, dear, oh, dear.

Must go now. I have to vee.