Rating: 5/5

Beautiful beautiful telling of the story of Guinevere, Arthur, and Lancelot. I loved Mists of Avalon and The Crystal Cave and the rest of Mary Stewart's series, but this is my favorite of all. The love these three had for each other is so tenderly but powerfully told by Guinevere herself and for the first time I felt I came to know her. This time it was not as a sad victim, an unfaithful wife, or a woman destroyed by her circumstances. This time she was brave against extreme adversity, loyal to Arthur in spite of her love for his favorite knight, Lancelot, who he loves like a brother. Her love for Arthur is told in such a way that I will never feel the same about this wonderful legend again. The ties between these three are so strong and so easily understood in this book. The different times that Arthur handles one situation or another is the way that the author makes the reader understand what an incredibly intelligent leader he was beyond his being a great warrior. He comes across as the King of all kings. Mordred is handled in an entirely different way in this book, but then he seems to be written differently in all writings. In this book he is a sympathetic and tragic character, carried along by prophecy and circumstance to an end we all know. As the story went on, I of course, knew what would happen and know of Merlin's prophecy, but I kept thinking "in this book it just won't happen". I so did not want it to end the way of course it had to. 

All of the knights came alive, some in different ways than I have seen them before. After all, this is a legend, and each author can interpret the personality and agenda of everyone in the story as they see fit. 

I love the way this author began this story in the prologue. She starts at the end with Lancelot coming to meet with Guinevere for the last time and to tell her the details of Arthur's death and burial although she already knows he is gone. He tells her of a vision from Merlin after Arthur's burial where Merlin requests that she write her story so that Arthur and what has happened will not die but will live on forever. Thus with that farewell in mind, Guinevere begins the story in her words. I am sure this would be an amazing read for someone who does not know the Arthurian legend (does anyone not know?) or someone who has read and watched in movies the many versions. I have to say it is my favorite yet, and the author did just a wonderful wonderful job of writing this story. I cried in the prologue and I definitely cried at the end.