Rating: 5/5

The full title of this book is "A Brief History of The Hundred Years War". 

As you can see from the title, the war lasted 116 years but towards the end the English were a defeated army and perhaps should have withdrawn after 100 years to save themselves further bloodshed and embarrassment. 

As it was, in 1453 the English armies went home, had a bit of a rest in 1454, and then started fighting amongst themselves in 1455 in what history calls 'The Wars of the Roses'. I suppose once you have a taste for battle, it's difficult to stop!

How did the Hundred Years War come about?

The Capetian dynasty seemed secure during the reign of King Philip IV, who left three surviving sons (Louis X, Philip V and Charles IV) and a daughter (Isabella). Each son became king in turn, but died without surviving male heirs, leaving only daughters who could not inherit the throne. When Charles IV died in 1328 three candidates had a plausible claim to the French throne:

1) Philip, Count of Valois, son of Charles of Valois, who was a nephew of Philip IV and the cousin of his three sons who each died without a male heir. 

2) Joan of Navarre, daughter of Louis X. Although Philip V had used his position relative to his niece to take the throne in 1316, Joan nevertheless had a strong claim as the heir-general of Philip IV. 

3) Edward III of England, son of Isabella of France, the daughter and only surviving child of Philip IV. Edward claimed the French throne as a grandson of Philip IV. In England, Isabella of France claimed the throne on behalf of her 15-year-old son. In contrast to France, English precedent allowed succession through the female line (as exemplified by Henry II of England, son of Matilda). 

The French rejected Isabella's claim, arguing that since she herself, as a woman, could not succeed, then she could not transmit any such right to her son. Instead, they chose as their new monarch, option 1) Philip of Valois, who became King Philip VI of France. 

The throne of Navarre went to Joan of France option 2), daughter of Louis X, who became Joan II of Navarre.

Edward III option 3) didn't receive anything. He tried diplomacy and negotiation, but when that didn't have an effect, Edward III became a very unhappy bunny and realised he would have to back his claims with force to obtain the French throne.

This is how wars start.

All the battles are here, Crecy, Poitiers, Agincourt, Formigny, Castillon and the characters, The Black Prince, Joan of Arc, Charles the Wise, Henry V.