Rating: 5/5

Perhaps a mark of a great literature is that what appears tedious and 'too-much' for one reader, appears to another as exactly what was necessary to reflect the human truth.

Mickelsson's Ghosts is much as reviewers describe it. It is a writer's novel for its wonderfully-constructed prose (without fail); and a philosopher's novel for the persistence of profound themes and arguments (esoteric for some, perhaps hilarious for others). It is painstakingly detailed and staged, so that the reader never, ever lacks in vividness of scene and scenario (I will never forget that house in the Endless Mountains; so many episodes stay with me). It is filled with a rambling mixture of Peter Mickelsson's memories, pompous musings, genuine reflections, regrets, anxieties, fears, paranoia, rationalizations, self-condemnations, boring repetitions and standoffs with himself, along with his hopes, affections, aspirations, his summons to his own will-power - but these mixtures are never 'hodgepodge': there is always some rhythmic logic to how these passages occur, and at what stage in the journey.

Some reviewers are of the opinion that the characters in the novel are not likeable. I myself disagree, though I would not even concede this as a primary criteria of greatness. Gardner was interested in creating characters through which values (and their consequences) could be honestly explored. There is nothing stock about most of the personalities in this book; they are all messy and, at least once or twice, surprise you with their choices (and their speech). Those choices emerge from the action of the novel; it is a human world that, in its craziness, its actors somehow make sense of - through neglect as well as obsession, passion and deliberation. 

Peter Mickelsson is not 'lovable' in a clear cut way. The reader will surely cringe at his decisions and, equally often, his inaction (his dilly-dallying, his drinking, his diversion tactics). But I also found myself cheering him on throughout the novel - not just wondering what he will do next, but what one could possibly do next, given these circumstances, this string of decisions, and this inner life (which Gardner paints in exact totality). I believe we get everything we get from the writing so that the why behind Peter's choices and non-choices is clear. It makes for an incredibly real character who could not be anyone else.

Perhaps because, as a philosopher myself, I can relate to Peter's elastic sense of self (sometimes crammed, sometimes expansive) and his struggle to see the world as anything but shitty (despite all the potentially good things going) (and yes, a man can drink a lot of gin, and think over and over about Nietzsche...), I found Mickelsson's dilemma neither despicable or abnormal. He is simply a deep thinker (some would say an 'over-thinker') who is wrestling (nearly to the death) with his own capacity to act - and, beyond that, his capacity to take care (of a house, of others, of himself).

The haunted house that Peter buys, in his last-ditch attempt to save his own life, becomes the cipher and location of that struggle to act and take-care. Along the way he grapples with professional ideals, love ideals, views on the sanctity of life, views on society, the discrepancy between belief and behavior, attitudes toward his children, ex-wife, lovers, the fact of entropy, the idea of anything's improving... and then with all the other voices in his head pulling him in contrary directions and tearing him apart. He is haunted and watched by all these entities and influences (this is a portrayal of mental life), and his battle is to somehow keep going and forge a semblance of a way.

For my part, I 'loved' Peter to a degree that I could only concernfully watch him contort himself and try to get things under control (while also not trying enough, or not in the right way, because he was trying hard, no doubt about that...), dance high to one tune and stumble to another, all according to his own being - at times worrisome and chaotic, other times clearheaded, measured, and beautiful. I don't think you could cut too much from this book and still pull off the same effect; even the (one could say) 'boring' parts seem crucial to getting the full feel of Mickelsson's deadlock. It makes his moments of action, when they do happen - and they do - all the more triumphant.

Peter Mickelsson is a character who triumphs, in his own way, over his ghosts. This seems the exploration the author wanted to make come to life for us, the readers. Gardner, who cared so much about caring for his characters, cared especially for this one. Through all the brilliant writing that exposed the character and his world to me, I came to care deeply as well. I think Mickelsson's Ghost a great success and hope it will be read for generations to come.