Rating: 4/5

At eight years old, Gabriel Rainsford was sent to sea to die by his father-in-name-only, an evil-tempered earl cuckolded by his unloved wife. That Gabriel survived the brutal conditions of the merchant marines and eventually succeeded in life was thanks to his willingness to win at all cost and to a provident inheritance from an unknown relative. He returns to England years later as the new earl, and faces family resentments and insubordinate servants. During a solitary trip at Christmastime, he meets a calm, unprepossessing spinster who changes the course of his life when he decides to change hers.

When they meet, Verity Joliffe is nothing like the women he knows in Society; she's forthright, intelligent and without guile. She doesn't prattle or try to manipulate him. She loves her family though they treat her like a drudge; and her explanation for her feelings demonstrates her character and dignity. He decides, impetuously, that she would make him a fine countess. So he undertakes a campaign to make her love him. It doesn't go as planned. Along the way, however, he and Verity becomes loyal friends, who help one another heal old wounds. 

Verity, the object of Gabriel's impatient, irascible affection, comes into her own under his rough care. She falls for him quickly, but then she's led a sheltered, diminished life. She sees his sterling qualities through the bluster and never suspects his serious intentions. When he turns to her for help with domestic matters, or escorts her in society, she grows more confident of herself and her worth and loves him more deeply. But she anticipates losing his interest at any time. When she finally realizes her family loyalty is unreciprocated, she loses patience with them and strikes out on her own. 
 
Gabriel is consistently and often hilariously bad-tempered as his efforts to "make her" love him fizzle. He's also dictatorial and plainspoken; yet, he's sweetly vulnerable. After sacking his entire treacherous staff, and with Verity's help, he hires a motley bunch turned off unfairly by others. On day one, he brings his new housekeeper, butler and valet to tears - of joy - with his generosity and gets thoroughly annoyed (a very funny scene that says everything about his true character). Gabriel would be today's ideal alpha: he is very rich, utterly managing, sexy, capable of transforming the heroine's life, fiercely protective and he is a wounded soul deserving love. He's a big, blustery grouch to Verity, but dear when it matters most. He also makes the best, worst non-proposal I've read. While hauling her unceremoniously to St. George's with a special license in hand, he tells her, "Do not even think about trying to dissuade me, because I have completely lost patience with you, and I am not prepared to be at all reasonable in this matter."

If I gave plot specifics, you'd understand why the romance worked so nicely, but I'd be spoiling the fun of reading about all the ways she confounds him without meaning to till he's driven to take decisive action. It's OOP so keep an eye out at thrift stores or online. 

4.5 stars, she's a bit passive for my taste, though it's true to her character. And there's sloppy editing, with the main characters given different names in places.