Rating: 3/5

A collection of Marshall shorts.

Rats on the Roof- A pair of dogs are distressed when rats take up residence on their roof. After many a sleepless night they put an ad in the paper seeking a cat. A tomcat answers their ad and has a long list of demands but the dogs agree desperately; however, when the tomcat learns he's dealing with rats he runs for the hills. All of the racket disturbs the rats' daytime sleep and they inform the dogs in writing that they will be leaving. Long story short, mission accomplished.

A Sheepish Tale- A pair of sheep go walking in the woods despite all the wolf warning signs. One sheep assures the other that he can read and makes up nice things each sign they encounter says. When they finally cross paths with the wolf he has disguised himself as a sheep. The sheep talk late into the night in the wolf's cottage and the wolf falls asleep out of boredom. His disguise slips off and the sheep learn his true identity and leave quickly. The wolf, upon waking, figures it must've all been a dream.

The Mouse Who Got Married- A cat crashes a mouse wedding by hiding in the cake and is kicked to the curb by bride.

Eat Your Vegetables- It's the birds vs. the dino. A brontosaurus is eating the leaves on the tree an owl calls home. When he refuses to respect her home the owl calls all the birds she knows and they take a stand.

Swan Song- A cow helps a swan escape a fox by having the swan pose as the cow's fashionable hat. The plan almost works, but the swan can't help bragging that she outsmarted the fox. The fox chases the duo, but luckily they escape. The cow scolds the swan and recognizes she's just a silly goose.

Ooh-La-La- A frog boasts about his beautiful legs until he reads a disturbing article in the newspaper about how to prepare frog legs to eat! He vows never to be vain again, though just as he proclaims this he finds he's quite proud of his lovely voice.

Miss Jones- Mysterious new neighbors move in next door to Miss Jones. She welcomes them to the neighborhood and the neighbors plan to spend a holiday meal gathered around the same table. Miss Jones finds out just in the nick of time that the new neighbors are wolves and that they intended for her to be the main course at dinner. With some fast talking she assures the wolves that she is indeed a medical mess and therefore not tasty at all and the wolves quickly excuse themselves.

Funny, quick reads with black and white illustrations to break up the text. I like how the pictures fill in some of the details in the stories such as the pictures in A Sheepish Tale. It is only through looking at the pictures that readers know what the signs really say. These tales would make good read alouds or short bedtime stories.