Rating: 5/5

My first dip into the work of that grand vizier of Feminist Sci-fi, Joanna Russ, and I'm not sure I have the critical vocabulary to praise it with the precision it deserves. Here are five weird, witty, and skilfully furious short stories loosely framed as history lessons given by a robot tutor to a schoolkid in some future society wanting to know 'how the world was saved'. 

For all Russ' socialist leanings, however, she's too wise to down cheap bromides about utopia. The darker themes underlying these 'lessons' are about comprehending the cosmically horrifying scale of all history's persistent, accumulated suffering, the masks people wear to survive and navigate repressive social constructs, and the ways in which the addictive fantasies of genre fiction reinforce or evade the responsibilities such questions raise.

Remarkably, however, Russ does this without being moralistic. I'm not quite clear how she did that, but there's a firm worldliness to her wisdom that you never quite get in someone like Ursula K. Le Guin. Utopia is almost a dirty word here, even as it is taken seriously and quite possibly believed in. 

This appears most directly in 'Bodies', where a future society of feckless immortals decides to resurrect souls from the past. At first this seems fun, such as when they bring to life a closeted gay men from the early 1900s and give him a chance to go wild with all his desires in their sexually liberated culture. At first they find his eccentricities amusing, but there's an anxious insecurity and ransacked melancholy in his mind that ultimately just kills their vibe. Having grown up in muddy, exploitative social systems, the resurrected spectres of pre-history find themselves forced to build their own intimacies with one another, no matter what period they came from or how much they actually dislike each other - because there are scars they carry that the innocent children of the future simply cannot relate to. 

There's so much to merit in the other stories, from the incisive genderqueer performances of the protagonist of 'The Mystery of the Young Gentleman' (eloquently analysed by Lee Mandelo), to the clipped, rapid-fire surrealism of 'What Did You Do During the Revolution, Grandma?' In this latter story, which I interpret as an ambiguous deconstruction of sci-fi's colonial power fantasies, a woman dresses up as a male demon to masquerade as a faerie ambassador in a parallel dimension her universe seeks to exploit for cheap resources. What starts off as a picaresque anthropology field trip eventually unravels as she seeks to interfere in the patriarchal violence of a society that, technically, isn't really 'real', which inadvertently propels her into embracing her own questionable sexual fantasies with the population.

'Everyday Depressions', an epistolary tale between two women gleefully writing a collaborative outline for a lesbian gothic novel, explores similar themes as they satirise the genre and their own attitudes to its gender roles, before faltering in their attempt to moralise their story with crude political labels that cannot capture the complexities of their actual desires and the sad mundane sorrows of actually-lived life.

Nevertheless, the real highlight of the book is the opening novella, 'Souls'. It's the sort of story I can hardly talk about without embarrassing myself with overenthusiastic hyperbole. To buttress against that, let me get a caveat out of the way; the ending's redirection - regardless of its deft handling - still fractures the story. Sure, its thematic resonances echo nicely across the subsequent collection, but it does this at the expense of the initial story's unity of effect. 

There, I've said something negative, even if it's just to frame a Persian Flaw. Now let me gush.

The story concerns a twelfth-century German monk who, in the most gorgeously tender prose, recalls the life of an eccentrically kind, heretical abbess he grew up with, and describes her attempts to spare the convent from a Viking raid. I'm in awe at Russ' use of tonal and genre shifts in this story as she renders, with perfect dexterity, the horror of history within her narrator's particularly delicate and peculiarly 'contented' voice. As a case study in how to write about historical sexual and gender violence it excels in laying out the collection's general themes, though it does so at the expense of utterly overshadowing everything that comes afterwards. A deserved Hugo winner. I'm astonished that I've not heard it discussed more often in sci-fi circles, perhaps because of its genre trickery.

I acknowledge that my enthusiasm for this collection might be a little dependent on my anemoia for the New Wave's frequently pretentious ambitions, but 'Souls' alone is worth everyone's time. You're unlikely to be disappointed.