Rating: 4/5

The third book of Charles Dickens, Nicholas Nickleby, has some marked differences from the other Dickens books I've read. Except  Oliver Twist, which I read as a teen, I haven't read any early work by Dickens, a work written in his youth. So Nicholas Nickleby was a welcoming change and an opportunity to see a different side of Dickens. 

The original title The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby pretty well sums up the story, since it is about Nicholas, an honest, trusting, good-natured, and good-hearted youth who is thrown at the mercy of the world with his father's untimely death. With the care of his mother and sister weighing heavily upon him and with no sincere help from his usurer uncle, he struggles to find his way in the world and to raise himself from sheer poverty to respectability. Nicholas is an interesting hero of Dickens; quite different from any other Dickensian hero I've encountered. He is strong-minded, courageous, and persevering. A strong sense of duty and justice governs him. His nature is such that he is fiercely aroused at injustice, cruelty, and wickedness. At such times, one can say the young hero is impetuous, quick-tempered, and even violent. These contrary character traits make Nicholas one of Dickens' most chivalrous and spirited heroes.

Apart from Nicholas, we meet quite an interesting set of characters, both male and female. Of them, some are good, kind, and helpful; some are wicked and greedy; and some are silly and vain. Dickens is very fond of using many different characters in his books, and in each of them, he never fails to present the readers with some memorable ones. The general idea is that Dickens didn't create strong female characters in his early works and that they came only in his later works. But Nicholas Nickleby effectually silences this misconception with Kate Nickleby, Nicholas' brave little sister, who is a strong female character that we'll hold dear. 
 
Being an early work, Nicholas Nickleby shows a marked difference from his later works. This difference stems more from his style of writing. It is youthful, exuberant, fast-paced, and dramatic. It has the usual Dickensian satire, but not the depth and gravity that graced his later work. Dickens was himself a youth when he wrote this, so a lot of youthful energy is poured into the story and the character of Nicholas. This style of Dickens, which I'm not quite acquainted with, was very pleasing. It made the reading light and easy despite his inherent verbosity. 

This is another great creation by Charles Dickens. Reading it was a fascinating experience. The more I read Dickens, the more I understand why he is revered over the centuries. I never gave much thought to Dickens's position as the most outstanding Victorian author before. But I'm slowly on the way to forming the same opinion.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/