Rating: 4/5

If I could rate this book as 3.5 stars instead of four, I’d do so. It’s vintage ERB and better than the first book in the series (Pirates of Venus) and I rated that as three. I saw Pirates as being John Carter Lite. Lost on Venus is a match for my favorite Carter episodes The Gods of Mars and Warlord of Mars. Come to think of it, The Gods of Mars was number two in the series, too.

What I particularly enjoyed about this volume was the typical pulp inventiveness of Burroughs. Early on in the adventure, Carson Napier is faced with a worse dilemma than the classic “Lady or the Tiger” when he faces the dreaded Room of Seven Doors. Behind six of the doors would be deadly certain death while one (analogous to the dunking stool in the witch trials) allows life and, presumably, release from the death penalty. Of course, our hero is forced to choose a door because all of the food and drink in the anteroom is poisoned (except for one) and, after a sufficient amount of time has elapsed, venomous, carnivorous snakes appear to prompt the decision. And if you think the earthman chooses the door to freedom, you don’t know your ERB. Instead, there is a delightful resolution to the puzzle. Someday, I’ll put this one in a role-playing adventure. 

Another case of ERB’s inventiveness in this episode is the intriguing and seeming utopian city of Havatoo. If ERB gets in his critique of Communism with the Thorists in the first volume and this one, as well, he points out flaws in Eugenics in this portion of the episode. The architecture of the city (sort of a half-wheel with spokes), the government of the civilization (almost Platonic in its resemblance to Philosopher Kings—though these are more like Scientist Kings), and the social mores of the civilization (no need for police because everyone polices) are all worthy of note. To be sure, ERB’s knowledge of botany and the logical rationales behind his descriptions of other-worldly life forms (why would carnivorous beasts have parrot-like proboscises that would merely get in their way when trying to ingest like the kazars have and why would beasts of burden not have hooves instead of almost humanoid feet?) may not match up with the realism of Ben Bova’s Venus but the descriptions are entertaining nonetheless. 

Another joy in this novel was that the women were not helpless “mannequins,” pretty but useless in the core of the adventure. These women (to say who they were might be an unwelcome spoiler) were courageous enough to face potentially fatal situations, innovative enough to be of use in combat, and strong enough to be more than caricatures of an idealized femininity from an earlier era. I don’t know whether this was merely serendipitous within the context of this story or reflected a maturity on ERB’s part, but it certainly raised the bar for pulp heroines over those seen in previous works.

Yes, Lost on Venus follows the typical pulp adventure formula of having the protagonist move from one tight situation to another, one escape based on fortuitous circumstances after another, but it also has a few leisurely paced sections where exploration, innovation, and fascination rule. For me, it was like returning to the best books in the Pellucidar series with a mixture of the unusual and the expected. That makes for fine escape reading.