Rating: 4/5

The next stop in my time travel marathon (November being Science Fiction Month) was A Connecticut Yankee In King Arthur's Court, the 1889 satire by Mark Twain believed to be the first "time travel" novel ever written. Episodic in nature, delightful in fits and starts but long on text and quite short on character, there's a wonderful book in here if you're a fan of Twain's irreverence and patient enough to wait for it.

The story gets off to a marvelous start with a tourist at Warwick Castle meeting a man from Hartford, a "Yankee of Yankees" named Hank Morgan. For a Yankee, he seems to know a lot about armor and the old country. Bantering over hot scotch whiskey at their hotel, the Yankee reveals that his employment at an arms factory taught him how to make everything from cannons to engines, until one day, a blow to a head transported him to the 6th century, to the reign of King Arthur. 

The Yankee retires for the evening and leaves with his fellow traveler a manuscript which documents his experiences with the Knights of the Round Table. Rousted from his resting place under an oak tree, the Yankee is taken captive by "Sir Kay the Seneschal" and marched to Camelot, which he realizes is not a lunatic asylum but the realm of King Arthur, Queen Guenever and Sir Launcelot of the Lake and other big wigs.

Set to be burned at the stake, the Yankee befriends the squire Amyas le Poulet, who he names "Clarence", a boy whose youthful contempt for authority makes him a faithful sidekick. The Yankee uses his knowledge of astronomy to threaten his captors with doom and right on schedule, a solar eclipse the next day spares his life. This puts the Yankee in contempt of Merlin, "the mighty magician and liar". With the court awaiting another miracle, the Yankee uses Clarence to fill Merlin's tower with blasting powder and divines an explosion which topples the building.

The Yankee earns himself office as King Arthur's prime minister and becomes affectionately known as "The Boss". Like Robinson Crusoe, he begins to remake his environment to one befitting a 19th century gentleman. Over the next four years, he opens a patent office, starts a school system and publishes a newspaper. He builds factories and gathers the brightest young minds in the land to apprentice in new industries. He begins to chip away at the clergy by restricting religious teaching to the churches. 

The gullibility of people in the 6th century has both its benefits and its liabilities for the Yankee, as well as constant bemusement. "There was never such a country for wandering liars; and they were of both sexes. Hardly a month went by without one of these tramps arriving; and generally loaded with a tale about some princess or other wanting help to get her out of some faraway castle where she was held in captivity by a lawless scoundrel, usually a giant."

One such wandering liar arrives in King Arthur's court with the tale of her mistress and forty-four other beautiful girls held captive in a castle by three brothers, each with four arms and one eye, the eye as big as a fruit ("Sort of fruit not mentioned; their usual slovenliness in statistics.") Compelled to leave Camelot to mount an adventure, the Yankee dons full armor and rides into the countrywide with the girl, Demoiselle Alisande a la Carteloise, who he names "Sandy". Many misadventures and misunderstandings ensue.

The idea for A Connecticut Yankee In King Arthur's Court came to Twain during the book tour to promote The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn in December 1884. At a bookstore in Rochester, New York, novelist George Washington Cable suggested to Twain that Sir Thomas Malory's epic La Morte de Arthur might make good reading material for the trip. Twain began reading it and jotted the following note in his journal:

"Dreamt of being a knight errant in armor in the middle ages. Have the notions &amp; habits of thought of the present day mixed with the necessities of that. No pockets in the armor. No way to manage certain requirements of nature. Can't scratch. Cold in the head--can't blow--can't get a handkerchief, can't use iron sleeve."

One of the pleasures of reading this novel of time travel is its timelessness. The legend of Camelot might have been killed by Monty Python and the Holy Grail, but the popularity of George R.R. Martin's Game of Thrones has made this milieu as ripe for the razzing as ever. Twain's irreverent tone seems to have inspired Terry Gilliam's Time Bandits or at least proved a case artistic coincidence, with the Robin Hood sequence in that comedy demonstrating the same contempt for medieval legends as Twain does. Bloodshed, not chivalry, is their primary contribution to history.

Speaking of violence, this novel is exceedingly so, though not in a graphic way. Twain pinned blame of the Civil War on Sir Walter Scott and Ivanhoe, which he felt installed a bogus sense of rank, caste and entitlement on landholders the antebellum South -- which like Camelot, also practiced slavery -- and rather than use time travel as romantic tourism, Twain uses it to disembowel that system for all its worth. Much as he would in Huckleberry Finn, Twain jumps all over charlatanism and religious fanaticism as well.

Several chapters here are merely Twain the humorist speaking his mind on government, religion, law &amp; order without even attempting to disguise this in a story. Several of the adventures in the last half of the novel get a little long in the tooth and compared to his masterworks, I was disappointed how little room Twain made for other characters here. The Yankee's two friends Clarence and Sandy, and the cast of Camelot, are really only mentioned in passing. What rises to the surface is the protagonist and his colorful ranting.

This 2005 edition includes dozens of delightful illustrations by Dan Beard which contribute to the considerable whimsy of the story and break up a lot of the text, which as I mentioned, rambled on a bit too long for my taste. How much you enjoy the novel might come down to how much of Mark Twain's irreverence your metabolism can tolerate and how much story and character you need. For me, it was a very good novel, but not a great one.