Rating: 5/5

Oh my God. That was such a compelling debut novel. I'm so glad Philippa Gregory is an author and that this got published. I wish I had the sequel on hand with me right now, and I'm glad I had the foresight to order it from the library while still in the middle of this one. 

648 pages but I was never bored or wanted the book to end. In fact, I wouldn't have minded it being longer 😂😂😂 Most books I just want to end around the 300-page mark. This book was so hard to put down, and I stayed up very late, till 3 am or 3:30 just reading it. I was also super excited to read this book, and I guess I had some premonition that it would be gripping. 

I don't think I've ever read a book where a character was so consumed by their home and lands (though Bess in "The Other Queen" also by Philippa Gregory comes close) that they would do absolutely anything for them. This was the case with Beatrice Lacey, the main character, protagonist &amp; antagonist of Wideacre. I know a lot of people hate Beatrice, but I liked her 😂. (Though obviously, I didn't approve of everything she did.) She was a master at manipulation; I was impressed. By the end of the novel, when her age was revealed to be 20, I was so surprised. She seemed to be at least 23. The burdens of all the debts weighed heavily on her, and she was described as having slight wrinkles already. (Though she was outside in the sun a lot, so that couldn't have helped.) Also, 20 seemed too young to be that business-savvy.  I hope she was at least 21 when she died at the end of the novel. She and Harry died too young, younger than their parents' premature deaths. 

What was so frustrating to me was that had Celia accepted Beatrice's offer to provide her with another son (as Beatrice had fallen pregnant with her brother's child a second time), then Wideacre wouldn't have been ruined to raise money to make both Richard and Julia heirs of Wideacre. Richard would have been the sole heir if he had been raised as Harry's son (which he was actually). I had been wondering what would happen next because maybe the first half of the book, Beatrice was doing everything she could to keep living on Wideacre. The blurb made it seem like Beatrice was going to be married off and kicked out of Wideacre. However, that threat wasn't so imminent. Then it seemed she had gotten what she wanted, and I was like well, what's next for this book? What was next was Beatrice trying to set up a legacy for her children to inherit Wideacre. 

It also really annoyed me that Celia was so proprietary of Julia when Julia was really Beatrice's daughter! 

I was shocked when I read  Beatrice's plan to have Celia accidentally kill Beatrice's mother so she wouldn't reveal that she had seen Beatrice &amp; Harry having incestuous sex. Beatrice was indirectly responsible for the deaths of both her parents. I also cringed a little when she tried to kill Ralph by trapping him in an animal trap as revenge for killing her father. I really didn't like that part. 

I told my dad the plot of this story and he was like wtf, this sounds crazy! If we took all the parts from this book, the plot does seem OTT (over the top). But Philippa Gregory writes so masterfully that the story doesn't read like drama for the sake of drama. The whole book also has a touch of Gothic horror to it with Celia &amp; the mom having a sense of there being corruption in the house (from the incest of Beatrice &amp; Harry). 

I know I wasn't the only one who got Scarlett O'Hara vibes from this book... I feel like my review doesn't do justice to this book, and I'm sorry for that. This book was a masterpiece that I'm sure will stay with me for a while after finishing this book. This is my 1,400 book read on Goodreads. I'm so glad that a five-star read made that milestone for me. A good omen hopefully. 

 It seems like Ralph killed Beatrice at the end of the book. The way she left her room by the window to meet him outside and how she cried out his name like she missed him made me think she was still in love with him. 
I was also surprised that Beatrice didn't get pregnant from Ralph as they had sex so many times, but I guess it wouldn't have helped advance the plot. 
I'm pretty sure Harry was a virgin, so the virgin-hero tag reflects that.