Rating: 5/5

Ernie K. Gann was a pilot, an author, a conservationist and sailor. In spite of his misfortune of being born in Lincoln, Nebraska (you would have to understand what it means to be a fan of the OU Sooners to know the meaning of that tongue in cheek comment) I love his works. 

I first became aware of Mr. Gann's work when I read Fate Is The Hunter, a treatise on his life as a pilot as well as other aviation incidents. One of the most fascinating was about an Army Air Corps airplane that took off either in Iceland or Greenland; I don't remember for sure which, that became lost in a storm. According to his book the plane flew and flew while lost and unable to find their way home. They kept going until they ran out of gas and surely were going to crash. . . but they didn't. One by one the engines quit but instead of falling out of the sky they just sat there! Then they learned that instead of falling from the sky they had instead flown into a very gradual slope covered with snow. The incline was so gradual that they didn't realize they had landed inadvertently and were safe on the ground. 

One of many stories in the book, some tragic, some ironic. All factual, according to Gann. And who am I to disbelieve him?

But I digress - to a great degree it would seem.

What does that have to do with the aviation fiction of The Aviator? Other than it shows the vast experience of Mr. Gann and the art of flying. . .

Jerry is the aviator and Heather his young passenger in the pioneer days of airmail in 1928, traveling through the skies over Elko, NV (a place I lived for a short period of time in 2005) to Boise, ID, to Pasco, WA. Only they don't quite make it to Boise after taking off from Elko. 

It is a story of early flight, of aviators, of survival and most of all, love. Mr. Gann wrote very damn well of all of those.

There are other books about flight and survival that Ernie wrote. I plan to reread Fate Is The Hunter again and one you may have heard of; The High And The Mighty - yes, THAT High And Mighty. The one they made a movie of staring some guy by the name of Marion Morrison. . . what was his stage name? Oh yes, John Wayne. I remember now. I wonder if he ever was a star? Oh well, the movie was good but the book was better. 

Speaking of which, they made a movie of The Aviator and of Fate Is The Hunter. The Aviator starred Christopher Reeve and Rosanne Arquette and Fate was a film that would have been far better left in the can (that means unreleased) compared to the high quality of the book. I haven't seen The Aviator but it's different in many ways from the book. Good or bad I don't know. 

If you like books about aviation you will adore this one. Books on survival and love? I can only say that I loved all three facets of this story. And Gann is one hell of a story teller. Maybe you should try it. I only gave it 5 stars because goodreads doesn't have more than 5. It deserves more, many more. My only disappointment is that I finished it, that it's over and that it was far too short of a book at 148 pages.