Rating: 2/5

In fact, this book disappointed me. I've heard of Gordon as the academic who understood and respected Eliot's conversion, and I was excited when I stumbled upon a copy in great shape for $5 at the Strand a year or two ago. This year I decided I'd make a point of reading some nonfiction, and was eager to see an academic take that I thought would illuminate the ways Christianity reverberates and shapes the man and his poetry. 

While Gordon's research into secondary sources is certainly there (having read Tillich and a number of the Puritans), she chooses not to engage with the Bible directly (almost at all - the only direct reference she makes was, if I recall correctly, a foray into Isaiah). I forgot to mark the page, but somewhere in the book she footnotes Eliot saying that one doesn't have to engage with his religion in order to appreciate his poetry, or something to that effect. Sure, for a casual reader. But she is an eminent biographer writing, largely specifically, on his religion, and her lack of biblical literacy costs her. Gordon often tends to apply passages (either of Eliot's or of profound influences of his) that are rife with biblical allusion toward a narrative structured around the women in Eliot's life (women, it must be said, that Eliot largely treated quite badly). If not to love, then she applies those passages toward interpreting Eliot as following in the tradition of New England Puritans and Calvinists. 

Together, her book ends up becoming a narrative of a damaged search for love through the lens of a hermit-leaning, prophetic type of figure who rejected the world and for the most part was pretty despairing until, hey, he falls in love for real this time when he's 68. Undoubtedly, her research and her admiration of the man shine through but there is no real critical framework at play here, and so Eliot sounds kind of like a psychopath. And frankly, if Gordon did appropriately engage his religion I think it would illuminate but not excuse or cover over the man's flaws just because he's a great poet and cultural institution. 

Ultimately, Gordon's lack of biblical literacy and engagement make it difficult for me to trust her as his biographer. That's a shame because she absolutely has done her research into Eliot and his influences, and biblical literacy on her part would have deepened and added much exciting and illuminating nuance to her portrait of the man. 

(and just, for the sake of fairness: Gordon's written a lot more on Eliot and other notables since this was published in 1988! Much may have changed in her approach. Moreover, I learned loads about Eliot from her, especially around his relationships with women, which do absolutely reflect back on his poetry and open up new facets of Eliot to me, for which I'm grateful.)