Rating: 3/5

Before your precious "Firefly" was cancelled prematurely, Fox Channel axed the fantastic "Alien Nation". Fox went on to become notorious for killing great sci-fi shows within their first seasons, but "Alien Nation" was the O.G. They even realized their mistake and released TV movies throughout the '90s, continuing the story of the Newcomers in a sort of second season.

This franchise was started by Sci-Fi TV God Rockne S. O'Bannon (Farscape, SeaQuest, et al) in the '80s with the release of the James Caan vehicle of the same name. The TV show was better. The creator of the TV show wanted to tap a little more into the family life of the landed slaves as they adapted to life on Earth since he thought that was the most interesting part of the movie. The main scenario the movie has in common with the TV show is that it all takes place after the landing. All you ever get to know was that opening line: "This was the scene five years ago, over the Mojave desert..." as they show you a glimpse of the descending spaceship. This book finally allows you to see life on the ship and the inciting incidents that lead to the Newcomers arriving on Earth.

The writers of this novel are probably better known to "Star Trek" fans as prolific producers of Trek books. They really know how to capture the voices of the characters for which they are writing, which is on display again here. The only thing I didn't really care for was that Sikes got really smart when it came to astronomy. He always seemed like a Luddite to all things science in the show and the movie, so it didn't really jibe. I also thought it was a little cheesy that everyone from the show had such a big role in the events of the revolt and the landing. I liked thinking that Sikes and Francisco were two random elements forced together and I think that was mostly what the original writer had in mind too. But these writers had to give everyone the viewers cared about something important to do since the only people who were going to read this wanted to know more about what happened outside the show (like me).

The book was fun and entertaining but it was definitely made just for the fans. If you have no idea what I'm yammering on about, go pick up your "Firefly" action figures and play out season two again.