Rating: 5/5

Coram Boy is a fantastic read! It details the lives of the Coram children who were looked after in the Coram Fields orphanage, focusing on two boys in particular: Aaron and Toby. The book paints a realistic picture of life in the eighteenth century and is full of sinister characters and unusual happenings. The second set of main characters in the book are Alexander Ashbrook and his family. Alexander’s life is not easy, he is a talented musician but his father expects him to fulfil his role as head of the household and return home from Gloucester Cathedral choir school to do so. Meanwhile Melissa Milcote (the daughter of their Governess) and Alexander fall in love, Alexander realises he has to leave the family home to prove to his father that he can be a musician, not realising he is leaving a pregnant Melissa behind. 

The lives of the Coram boys and the Ashcroft’s join together as it’s revealed that Otis Gardener (nicknamed the Coram Man) is not in fact dead as previously thought and has transformed himself into Mr Gaddarn a Coram benefactor. Melissa’s mother gave her baby away to Otis Gardener with the assurance that he would be taken to Coram. His son Mishak has been living at Coram since arriving with his ‘Angel’ Aaron some years before . Toby is taken by Gaddarn to live with him and discovers that Gaddarn and his associates have set up a child smuggling ring, using Coram children. Aaron has the same musical abilities as his father and coincidentally Alexander and Aaron rehearse together for a performance of Handel’s Messiah – this chance meeting leads to the final drama of the story. Class is central to this story – both in terms of babies given away by mother’s of high social standing who could not afford the scandal of an illegitimate child and the scrabbling of Mr Gaddarn to climb the social ladder and hide behind respectability to commit horrendous crimes. 

I really enjoyed the style of Coram Boy, I felt swept along by the story and the level of detail that Jamila Gavin provides in her writing. The big events are dealt with sensitively and I don’t feel they would be traumatic for the age group this is aimed at to read. It was fascinating to learn about the Foundling Hospital at Coram Fields, having visited Coram but not knowing why it existed. The story itself does have a lot of coincidences which were a bit much occasionally, but I think the depth and pace of the writing made up for that. The book is aimed at children between 9 and 12 years old, although I would say dependent on their emotional intelligence. Coram Boy could be used in History/ Topic lessons as a background to society at the time – children could be asked for some descriptive writing on how the Coram children would have felt, the differences between Toby and Aaron’s experiences. Music is central to the story, in particular Handel’s Messiah – this could give opportunity for cross-curricular learning. There could also be a class trip to Coram Field’s Foundling Museum to further explore the topic for example finding an object in the museum to write about.