Rating: 5/5

This is a 1968 book by famous American mystery author Rex Stout. It is one of the later books in Stout’s long running series feature private detective Nero Wolfe and his assistant Archie Goodwin. This long mystery series started with the first book, Fer-de-Lance (published in 1934 when Rex Stout was already in his 40s) to the last book Death Times Three (which was published posthumously in 1985 after Stout has died). The Father Hunt is a very well written book. It comes with the full cast of recurring supporting characters, including Inspector Cramer, Purley Stebbins, Fritz the chef, Theodore Horstmann the orchid guy who works with Wolfe, as well as Saul Panzer, Fred Durkin and Orrie Cather. The setting of the book is in August of 1967 in New York City, long before the invention of modern day DNA analysis and paternity testing. Like all books in the series, the book is written from the first-person point of view of Archie Goodwin. As readers of the series would know, Stout inevitably discusses food consumed in the Wolfe household as part of the story, most of which are interesting. In this story, for example, we saw Archie eating egg with anchovy (I guess like the British food scotch woodcock) as well as broiled turtle steak. 

Spoiler Alert. The story started in August of 1967 with Amy Denovo (who was secretary to Archie’s rich girlfriend Lily Rowan) asking Archie to help her find out who her father is (hence the title “The Father Hunt”). Since Archie works full time with Wolfe, Amy has to become a client of Wolfe to get both Wolfe and Archie to work on the case. Amy wants to find out who her father is because she has been brought up only by her mother Elinor Denovo and Amy has never learnt who her real father is. A few months ago, in May of 1967, Elinor was killed in a hit-and-run and the driver was never found. After her mother’s death, Amy discovered her mother has $264,000 in cash in a box. It turns out that starting two weeks after Amy’s birth on April 12, 1945 and until Elinor’s death in May, 1967, Elinor has been receiving once a month a bank check for $1000. Elinor has cashed every check and put the cash in a box for Amy but has never told her until after Elinor died when Amy found Elinor’s letter to her. Amy assumed the money came from her father and therefore hired Wolfe and Archie to find out who her father is. 

Wolfe and Archie were able to trace the bank checks and determined they came from a retired rich banker called Cyrus M Jarrett, who was the President of Seaboard Bank and Trust Company, one of the biggest banks in the United States. Wolfe then looked at Cyrus’ inner circles to see if he or his son Eugune could be the father given Cyrus was 54 and Eugene was 20 back in 1944. In the meantime, Wolfe and Archie had to figure out who Elinor really is and to find a photo of her (not an easy task, not even Amy has one). They finally were able to discover the real name of Elinor Denovo is Lottie Vaughn, who was an extremely competent secretary to Mrs. Cyrus Jarrett starting in 1942 and lived in the Jarrett house with the family at the time. After Mrs Jarrett died in 1943, she stayed on as secretary to Cyrus. After a lot of work, Wolfe finally excluded both Cyrus and Eugene as being the father to Amy. 

Wolfe then decided to change course. He correctly assumed there are really two interconnected cases: to find out who is the father of Amy and to find out who killed Amy’s mother. Wolfe correctly assumed it is Amy’s father who murdered Elinor. So, if he could solve the 3-month-old hit-and-run case for Cramer, he could solve his own case of who is Amy’s father. Through some fancy detective work, Archie was able to identify a potential suspect, Floyd Vance, who owns a small and unsuccessful public relations firm. Archie was able to track down people who worked in Floyd’s office building in 1944 and he was able to discover Elinor was close to Floyd in 1944, the year Amy was conceived. Since Cramer has found the stolen hit-and-run car and were able to find some fingerprints, Wolfe decided to trick Floyd to unwittingly leave his fingerprints for comparison. They were a match for those found in the hit-and-run car and Floyd was arrested for murder. He later confessed. The reason he killed Elinor was because Elinor, who has become quite successful in the TV production business, has been bad mouthing Floyd. In the last two years, she has done a lot to hurt Floyd’s business reputation and has caused him to lose two of his biggest clients. Wolfe subsequently also convinced Cyrus to explain why he sent the bank checks all these years. It turns out Cyrus is a man with a very strong sense of personal responsibility. Floyd was actually Cyrus’ illegitimate son (Floyd never knew that). Back in 1944, Floyd has just started out in his PR business and was struggling. Cyrus, who knew Elinor to be a very competent assistant, sent her to help Floyd build his business but made sure Floyd did not know Cyrus was involved. What Cyrus could not anticipate was Floyd would get Elinor pregnant and the two would have a fallout. Cyrus felt he was responsible to Elinor’s situation and therefore sent her a check every month to help her. In classic Wolfe fashion, he demanded a very high fee and took advantage of Cyrus’ sense of responsibility to convince Cyrus he should be paying Wolfe’s fees instead of saddling it on his illegitimate granddaughter Amy.