Rating: 5/5

"Study me then, you who shall lovers be
At the next world, that is, at the next spring;
 For I am every dead thing,
 In whom Love wrought new alchemy.
 For his art did express
A quintessence even from nothingness,
From dull privations, and lean emptiness;
He ruin'd me, and I am re-begot
Of absence, darkness, death: things which are not."
-from A Nocturnal Upon St Lucy's Day

Go read 'The Flea' and 'The Cross' and 'Forbidden Mourning', and you'll want to go read this all.

Donne is definitely one of the all time greats of the English language - more focused than any of the romantics, more lyrical than the long-form essays of Pope and Milton, vastly more striking than any of the Victorian babblers. To me he represents a golden mean between the articulate analogies of the Shakespearean sonnets and the pure metaphysics of Paradise Lost; I highly recommend reading TS Eliot's book of lectures on Donne, "The Varieties of Metaphysical Poetry", which is a deep study on only really a couple metaphors and motif in Donne in an almost perfectly complete analysis. Really, I'm mostly going to eschew writing a proper review so as not to waste your time or mine in summarizing Eliot's arguments, as I already have in my review of that book . . . . I do suggest buying and reading a general anthology of the Jacoban Metaphysical Poetry before reading all of Donne for, as Eliot's book demonstrates, a great deal of explaining Donne's greatness comes from comparison with the failures on the same devices by his imitators and contemporaries. 

This signet collection, at least this old edition from the 70s, seems to be pretty much everything a complete works has, just sans much commentary, footnotes and the duller miscellany. The ~75 page collection of Love Songs, and to a lesser extent the ~30 pages of late religious verses, are most of what you'd want from Donne and find in any anthologized volume. His efforts at other genres of poesy hit far less often than miss, although perhaps worth reading for the scattered moments of Donnean imagination and some successes as a witty narrativist, such as the Elegies 'Jealousy' and 'Perfume'. Mostly you want a full anthology like this for his semi-trilogy of lengthy poems, the two Anniversaries and The Progress of the Soul; these incredibly dense and intricate poems, especially the latter of the three, seem to me to be a climactic moment bridging Elizabethan dreaming with the Jacobian era of metaphysical poetry to come, and are in my opinion as essential to any reader of English verse as are Paradise Lost or the works of Shakespeare.

I suppose the main topic of dispute about Donne is just how serious he is about the content of his poems, ie, when he does things like invoke transubstantiation as a metaphor for sex or when he denounces natural rights at the end of Progress of the Soul. TS Eliot is of the opinion that his works are purely imaginative and literary, judging by the inconsistency of metaphor across poems and the general atmosphere of skepticism towards Scholasticism within the late Renaissance. I can get behind this view, and don't have the St Aquinas chops to really say much more, but I also find that a great deal of Donne's power as a poet is the fully confident idiosyncracy coupled with the obvious personal investment: the depth of focus to imagine an atheistic future in which he and his lover become an heterosexual reiteration of the Christ (The Relic) is a type of nigh-psychotic sincerity to which neither the Romantics nor the Symbolists could ever aspire. Seeing such articulate expressions of such abstract emotions within one's life is something you should never discount, so take what he says seriously; the power to master philosophy coupled with a stridency of application is the very rare mark of a world-historically intelligent mind.

Another thing I don't see mentioned often in Donne is his prosody; he has neither the mastery of iambics of Milton nor the nuances of Shakespeare, and indeed his meter is often awkward with weird ellisions, seemingly unnatural stresses, and a pretty blasé attitude towards compact stanzas and line endings. Nevertheless, Donne seems fascinating to me metrically given that his dictum is neither that of a singerly prophet nor of a proper rhetorician . . . . rather, his tone reflects pretty genuinely who is he, as an overly erudite theologian prone to intense sectarian interests and amours. It's best to read his sounds with reference to French alexandrines - he often will substitute two anapests for three iambs, as has always been customary across the channel. It's hit or miss whether the effect translates well into English, but it helps free up language for a poetry that's pretty close to plainspoken free verse in a way, when you discard attempts to force his more dubious lines into iambics. Very often his poetry becomes pure thought, comparable strangely to Marianne Moore or even Ashbery in certain respects (although Donne's intricate sallies are intellectual as opposed to those modernists' sonority), which is totally appropriate for a poet whose singular focus is on metaphysical ideas and complex grammar. In that respect, he more perfectly than perhaps anyone fulfills the Eliotic ideal of poetry, a fixed monument of fully captured intellectual motion to which the reader can fully surrender themselves.