Rating: 4/5

This is an excellent supplemental book to Bob Spitz's Beatles biography. It shares a lot of the nitty gritty many casual Beatles fans are probably unaware of, mostly about John, coinciding with the end/his tragic murder.

Peter Brown was involved with the Beatles' personal lives and business from the beginning until the end and can be viewed as a rather credible primary source, though some views are conflicting with other biographies as well as details that are omitted from other works.

"John confessed how terribly self-conscious he was about his glasses." (10)

"Herberstrasse was like a sexual Disneyland." (44)

"The boys became a walking laboratory of venereal diseases." (44)

"The public health facilities in Hamburg were free and very accommodating, and the boys were cured, stricken, cured, and stricken at an alarming rate." (44)

Brian Epstein's obsession with John is more apparent. "Instead, John lay there, tentative and still, and Brian fulfilled the fantasies he was so sure would bring him contentment, only to awake the next morning as hollow as before." (94)

"The girls were screwed, blewed, and tattooed before Mal and Neil swept them out of the Beatles' suite at dawn." (154)

"For John, Elvis was a god who had achieved indescribable sanctity." (155) Lennon doesn't try and show up "The King" in this version of their meeting and the event is described significantly more cordially. (189)

I'm surprised the discovery of amplifier feedback in the studio isn't mentioned once.

"According to Alistair, Paul had the crabs and needed a pesticide to shampoo with...There was also a sense of urgency to this mission, lest Paul give the tiny parasites to Jane, who would certainly realize he had been unfaithful to her." (220)

There are more details about the Maharishi's sexual advances on female students during the long retreat and Magic Alex does not come across as much as a phony.

The art show where John meets Yoko is pitched to him as an "orgy." (227)

Yoko Ono had tons of abortions.

Lennon crafted long letters to both Cynthia and Yoko. "'I got so excited about her letters,' John said. 'There was nothin' in them that wives or mothers-in-law could've understood, and from India I started thinkin' of her as a woman, not just an intellectual woman.'" (286) He was also a physically abusive husband. "More than a few times John hauled off and gave Yoko a good walloping- just as he had done to Cynthia years before." (362)

The recording of the dying heartbeat of Yoko and John's "baby" being released as part of an album was really disturbing. This book has a lot more details on their dark heroin usage.

The other biography has very little on Linda's first daughter, Heather.

There is only a few paragraphs describing the final rooftop concert.

Paul was always the most keen and successful Beatle, but his drug smuggling with Linda often gets brushed under the rug.

For a band that sang so much about unconditional love, the fanaticism of attraction and dependency is baffling. John Lennon initially brushed off Yoko, but then was addicted to her for years and couldn't exist without her by his side. She effectively split the band up, crushed Cynthia, and then later pushed May Pang out.

Linda stalked Paul and had photos of him in her living quarters, but they were eventually married. Paul even argued to split half the Wings song rights with her despite her lack of musical abilities.

George Harrison also had an affair with Ringo Starr's wife.

Is love still a powerful emotion that can actually help heal past metaphysical wounds or simply a euphemism?