Rating: 3/5

I became interested in the character Travis while reading "For Bitter or Worse", then finding out that he's the H in the final book of the series and here I am.

The heroine was brought up in a selfish, spoiled way. She has never done a chore in her life and doesn't seem to care about other people's feelings - she doesn't seem to have any of her own to begin with, just a cold calculating woman. Her sole purpose in life is to become rich, have fun, fame and (male) attention.
At the same time, which I think somehow it doesn't really add up, she is someone who apparently never received much love and whose life is rather empty (so I can she be spoiled?…). 

When she’s fired from her job and finds herself penniless, without the support of family or friends and seemingly abandoned by everyone, LaRaine turns to the H for help, i.e. money). However, Travis would rather offer her a job as a live-in housekeeper which, despite her lack of will or experience, she has no choice but to accept.
Eventually, during the course of learning how to do the chores and other organizational skills, she really falls in love with Travis, the land and the house, which she sets on renovating and now thinks of as 'home'.
The H, fortunately, has pretty much remained unchanged during the course of the whole book - except that now he also fell in love with a changed h and learned how to trust her.

Or does he trust her?
This is where I think the story cracks a bit.
Near the end of the book, he finds LaRaine holding a Christmas card she found in the middle of his belongings and is understandably saddened and suspicious of her motives, in anger immediately assuming that she hasn't changed after all. He decides then and there to send her packing.
The final scene takes place when he comes in her room the evening before her departure to return some of her belongings and finds her crying her eyes out...

The final scene is long, and oh, utterly unsatisfying. I don't know about other people, but I think they needed to make love first and discuss the other issues later or vice-versa! 
You cannot go from confessing your love in your breath and trying to convince the other person of it, to rolling over and discuss the wedding arrangements and honeymoon, to rolling over again and discuss when to have children! That didn't make any sense to me.

To make things worse, they didn't clear out the huge misunderstanding and trust issue at hand!
Have her tears convinced him then that she had really changed after all, that she hadn't been snooping around? That she didn't want to marry him for lack of a better choice?...
Sadly, there was definitely something missing.

At this point, I personally couldn't yet feel sympathetic toward LaRaine, for it didn't really feel like her hardships throughout the book had been near enough to redeem her bad behavior. Not even close. It all happened too fast, and for all she was wrong for, she never once learned to say "I'm sorry" for anything. She didn't really prove her love for Travis more than shedding some tears.
It just seems too easy to place a bad character in a completely different and practically secluded environment, making them adapt to the place and then call them a changed person.
LaRaine needed to have lived there for much longer and needed more opportunities to prove that she had really changed and loved Travis - would she still choose him and the ranch even if she got other options in a city, perhaps an opportunity to become an actress again? If there was another wealthy man around interested in her?

I love this sort of theme, but guess I was left a bit unsatisfied and hence only 3*.