Rating: 4/5

The author makes a strong case for the proposition that the mass of gentile Germans (and Austrians) held very strongly hostile attitudes towards their Jewish fellow citizens and Jews in general. Drawing evidence from a wide array of sources, but especially from Police Battalions primarily made up from German males raised before the Nazi seizure of power, he demonstrates how gratuitously cruel and vicious ordinary people were towards what amounted to only a tiny minority of their population and how, even when SS head Himmler ordered the cessation of such mistreatment, many maintained the same levels of violence when the war was obviously lost and nothing objectively might be gained--nothing except, from their psychotic viewpoint, a further ridding of pestiferous vermin.

The book begins with some historical background, showing how widespread anti-Jewish beliefs were throughout Christendom. Believing them to be, on the basis of a reading of one gospel, the killers of Jesus, the traditional view was that Jews, in failing to repent by conversion to the new revelation in Christ, were an obstinate people at odds with God. More recently, however, the Nazis and other right-wing groups there and elsewhere, adapting Darwin to the 'science' of eugenics, recognized the Jews as a pernicious race, a native evil opposed to the instrinsically superior Aryans. Although often represented as inferior in all respects for propagandistic purposes, the real inferiority of the Jews was moral. In matters of business (especially banking), politics (witness the Bolsheviks), and a certain kind of cunning intelligence, Jews were worthy--and dangerous--opponents.

While an important work, one that future students of the racial policies and practices of Nazism must deal with, 'Hitler's Willing Executioners' is not without flaws. It reads like the worked-over dissertation it is, being dry and long-winded. There is a great deal of repetition. The focus on Germany and gentile Germans is so narrow as to encourage the, in my mind, mistaken belief that such evils are peculiar to them. One thinks, for instance, of contemporaneous events in Croatia. Going back a ways, one thinks of common 'American' beliefs as regards black Africans and the First Peoples of these continents.

Beyond mere scholarship, the point of such research should be to effectuate a raised consciousness in its students. Narrowly focusing on the Germans of a bygone era too easily lends itself to the continuation of the projection of evil unto others. The point should be to reveal the potential of evil within our own selves and how our governments, our schools and temples manipulate, if not instill, our prejudices.