Rating: 4/5

My third Paul Theroux book! Last year I first came across Theroux's non-fiction work The Happy Isles of Oceania: Paddling the Pacific (1992) which I thoroughly enjoyed. Then I read his fiction work The Mosquito Coast (1981). Theroux's voice sounds radically different in fiction compared to his non-fiction, which I think is a good thing. Now I've returned to another of his non-fiction work, namely “The Old Patagonian Express” (1979).

As the name suggests, Theroux traveled from his home in Boston all the way down to Esquel, Patagonia (Argentina). It took him around two months. At first, he traveled by train through the US, Mexico, Guatemala and El Salvador. This part of the journey went by smooth and he managed to cross the borders easily. However, from El Salvador he had to take a plane to Costa Rica. He skipped Nicaragua because a civil war was raging in the country and people advised him against travelling there (which he later regretted). And he didn't write about Honduras in this book, because he would later publish a fiction story along the Mosquito coast. In Costa Rica and Panama, he could only travel on train within the country because the railways don't cross the borders.

It is very difficult for me to find books set in Central America. This is one of the main reason why I picked up Theroux's "The Old Patagonian Express." Of course, I reminded myself that all of this was taking place in 1978 and that many things must have changed already. But it was nice to get a feel of the region there. Some people hate Theroux, feeling that he is cynical, arrogant and a pain in the a**. However, I think that Theroux is a very keen observer of the environment around him, he is informed about the places he visits and genuinely outraged by poverty and injustice. 

In the Central American portion of the book, Theroux met a variety of interesting characters. The American woman, who got swindled by her Mexican lover in Veracruz (asking Theroux for love advice). The young Salvadorean businessmen, who were playing hooky and taking Theroux to a crazy football game. The 70-year-old American tourist Mr. Thornberry, who just wanted to look at monkeys and parrots, but ended up becoming the unlikely hero for Theroux in Limon. The Americans, who worked in the Panama Canal Zone and were hesitant to leave after the "handover" in 1979. I was also surprised to learn that the Caribbean coast of Central America is interspersed with English-speaking black populations (e.g. Jamaican railway workers in Costa Rica, Bajans working in Panama...). The funny thing is that most of the railways in Central America do not exist anymore. They have been replaced by buses and planes that travel much faster and are not that expensive anymore. So, Theroux unconsciously wrote a historical document too.

In South America, it was more difficult for Theroux to continue his journey on train. He initially rode a train in Colombia, but approaching the Andes, the tracks derailed and he had to take the bus. He didn't manage to cross over to Ecuador by railway. In Ecuador, he exclusively traveled by plane because the trains were always fully booked. He flew over to Peru, where he also ended up flying from Lima to Cuzco and only then boarded the train to Machu Picchu. From Cuzco, he took a bus ride to Puno and then an overnight boat ride across Lake Titicaca. Finally in La Paz (Bolivia) did he manage to take the train across the border to Argentina, all the way to Buenos Aires. Later he rode the Old Patagonian Express to Esquel (Patagonia). His meeting with Jorge Luis Borges in Buenos Aires was very heart-warming. I think that was my favorite part of the book. Throughout the book, Theroux also shared what books he read along the trip, which I also enjoyed. All in all, I would recommend this book only to those who enjoy travel writings and who are really interested in learning about Latin America. 3.5* rounded up to 4*.

"The funny thing about being smug and egocentric and thinking about health and purity all the time, is that it can turn you into a fascist. My diet, my bowels, my self - it's the way right-wring people talk. The next thing you know you'll be raving about the purity of the race."

"I do not consider myself to be an animal-lover, but it is a long way from disliking them to maiming and torturing them. And I came to see a resemblance between the condition of domestic animals and the condition of the people who mistreated them. It was the same contempt, and the whipped dog and the woman carrying wood had the same fearful eyes. And it was these beaten people who beat their animals." 

"Politics is a hideous subject, but I will say this: people tell you that dictatorships are sometimes necessary to good order, and that this sort of highly-centralized government is stable and dependable. But this is seldom so. It is nearly always bureaucratic and crooked, unstable, fickle and barbarous; and it excites those same qualities in those it governs."

"Central America was haywire; [...] as if they had evolved into motiveless tyrannies and become forcing-houses of nationalism. It was no wonder that, seeing them as degenerate states, tycoons like Vanderbilt and imperial-minded companies like the United Fruit Company took them over and tried to run them."

"It was easy to understand how the Indians hereabouts had come to believe that their lands were inhabited by monster lords. Not only did the mountains have a monstrous aspect, the animal shapes and clumsy claws of giants and demons, but they growled and rumbled and trembled and hollered, and shook down the flimsy huts of the Indians; they burned the Indians alive and buried them in ashes and made their fish disappear and ate their children. And these oddities of landscape were still a source of fear."

"It was in Bogota, one grey afternoon that I read the following passage: 'Where a great proportion of the people are suffered to languish in helpless misery, that country must be ill-policed and wretchedly governed: a decent provision for the poor is the true test of civilization.' Gentlemen of education, he observed, were pretty much the same in all countries; the condition of the lower orders, the poor especially, was the true mark of national discrimination."

"The argument that five-star hotels benefit a country by producing employment is a silly and even subversive one - it turns nationals into waiters and scullery maids, and that is about all."