Rating: 4/5

La Guerre, Yes Sir was easily one of my favorite books so far this year, as well as probably my favorite book that I read for my seminar class. I described it after finishing it the first time as a French family reunion, and I think that comparison still holds. If nothing else, La Guerre, Yes Sir is one of the funniest novels I've ever read as well as utterly thought provoking. It's something that I think both French and English Canadians can relate to, and, perhaps, has a special place in the heart of those of us who straddle both sides of the linguistic divide. 

In terms of its plot La Guerre, Yes Sir concerns the effects the arrival of Corriveau, a dead soldier who's body is being returned to his parents, guarded by a group of English soldiers upon a small, utterly French Quebec community. War, the fear of desertion, the Catholic Church, and Anglo-Franco conflict dominates the piece as Carrier plays with all of these elements in a comedic, yet still serious, way. 

It's hard to write a review on this novel, most especially because A: we read, discussed, and analyzed this piece to death during our class and B: I actually did a seminar on La Guerre, Yes Sir and therefore know so much stuff about it it's leaking out of me in buckets. I'm going to try and put that stuff aside, mostly because it would make this review way too long, and focus on my initial ideas about the novel when I first read it. 

I should mention that I (and our class) actually read this novel in its translated form, and not in the original French it was written in. (Yes my ancestors are beating me over the head as we speak or rather as I write) I don't, unlike how I felt after reading The Three Musketeers, feel guilty in a weird sense because of how well the translation sticks to the original work (and includes some colorfully swearing) and in a way compliments the narrative and the thematic importance the Anglo-Franco conflict has. 

In terms of Carrier's humor, La Guerre, Yes Sir reminded me a lot of my own French family reunions mostly because of the topics and jokes made throughout the novel in relation to the body and, very often, sex. I guess that it goes without saying that most families act similarly, French or not, but it reminded me of my own heritage most likely because with the added swear words like tabarnaque etc...

The characters as well as the situations are equally as hilarious as the writing is, though they remain serious and well developed. I never felt like Carrier was making them ridiculous for the sake of being ridiculous, and I loved the balance between the moments of utter madness and hilarity and moments of sadness, especially with Corriveau's parents, that Carrier plays with. I guess what I'm trying to say is that while this novel was one of the funniest novels I've read, it also knew how to bring in elements of sadness and realism without overwhelming the piece. 

The plot is simple, yet in the context of what Carrier is saying thematically, is of great importance. I don't like to spoil things, but it's important to note the Anglo-Franco conflict, the corruption of the Catholic Church, and the effects of war that are intermingled within the various, and sometimes hilarious, on-goings of the community. 

All in all, La Guerre, Yes Sir walks the line between a serious and a hilarious piece, and, in many ways, is a book about two people as it is about two genres: The English and the French. For Canadians, I think, it is something that addresses both our heritage as a nation and our current situation in dealing with the after-affects of Quebec's Revolution, and our move as a country towards promoting bilingualism and biculturalism as the identity Canadians should achieve for. Its commentary is not one of critique, but of hope, and in the end Carrier pushes for a reconciliation instead of continued conflict that only breeds, as shown in the novel, more conflict. 

4-4.5/5