Rating: 4/5

James Carroll's novel mostly centers on the 1960s and touches on large themes: disillusionment in Vietnam and in the Catholic Church, the struggles of being a priest in a rapidly changing society, the conflict between morality and obedience in hierarchical institutions, and the life-altering pleasures and pains of love, friendship, and betrayal.

The book begins with 1st-person narration by Frank Durkin, a Catholic lay monk sequestered in Israel in the summer of 1982. Durkin exiled himself after his marriage fell apart around 1970 when Carolyn, his wife, and Father Michael Maguire, his best friend, engaged in an affair that blew Durkin's world apart. Now, Michael, who subsequently married Carolyn, has died and Durkin's daughter arrives in Israel to beg Durkin to return home to New York for Michael's funeral.

Durkin recedes into the background as the book becomes Michael's life story, tracking the charismatic, honorable Korean War hero as he becomes a Catholic priest and rising star in the Church. Michael's story is told in the third person by Durkin, putting the reader at some remove from Fr. Maguire but also reflecting the mystery of our main character, who is idolized to some extent by Durkin but struggles with his priestly vows of submission, obedience, and celibacy.

I expected a page-turner and perhaps some predictable melodrama among the Irish Catholic set but this book is better than that. Carroll delves most deeply into the trauma of Vietnam and Maguire must confront the war between his own ideals and the harsh reality that his Church superiors have no interest in challenging the prevailing military and political regimes. The author frames the Vietnam conflict as not only a Cold War struggle but an internal one between Catholics and Buddhists for political hegemony in the war-torn region. Maguire's aim to help the victims of war, particularly the children, is stymied by the propaganda interests of both the U.S. and South Vietnamese regimes. His church offers little help or moral support; the book indeed submits that Cardinal Spellman and the Catholic hierarchy fully backed U.S. war policy and blinded themselves to the suffering.

Carroll mostly maintains a sober tone, with Maguire eventually embarking on a lonely antiwar crusade that forces him to break with his Church and adopt a fugitive lifestyle after conviction for nonviolent resistance-related crimes. On a personal level, his personal despair drives him into the arms of Carolyn, shattering the marriage of Durkin and Carolyn and leaving grievous damage in its wake.

I found both the personal and broader stories involving and intelligently rendered. Maguire is the hero, but his personal struggles and flaws also are manifest. The wounded Durkin is sometimes a bitter narrator, but does his best to understand and forgive. After Michael's death, Durkin's emotional exile might cease and some reconciliation with Carolyn might be possible, the book's conclusion suggests.

Carroll mostly avoids the stereotypes associated with the Irish Catholic milieu and every character, including the villains of the piece, is fleshed out. Although there's not much humor, there are moments of wry acknowledgment by Durkin and Maguire of the gulfs between Catholics and WASPs, parochial schools and Ivy League, and more broadly, between Americans and the foreigners they seek to influence and control. Carroll vehemently criticizes the Church, but not the impulses that draw people to religion, the quests for faith, hope, and love.

A better and more thoughtful book than I expected....