Rating: 4/5

"In a very real sense not one of us is qualified, but it seems that God continually chooses the most unqualified to do his work, to bear his glory. If we are qualified, we tend to think that we have done the job ourselves. If we are forced to accept our evident lack of qualification, then there's no danger that we will confuse God's work with our own, or God's glory with our own."

"If our lives are truly 'hid with Christ in God,' the astounding thing is that this hiddenness is revealed in all that we do and say and write. What we are is going to be visible in our art, no matter how secular (on the surface) the subject may be." 

I realized recently that I am Presbyterian in my theology, Anglican in my devotions and liturgies ("my timekeeping," as I call it), and increasingly Catholic in my imagination. This book absolutely nurtured my Catholic imagination, while rankling my Presbyterian theology a bit and confirming my Anglican-style timekeeping. And in spite of my disagreements with some of L'Engle's theology (specifically, her clear distaste for the doctrine of predestination), she did have a true and lovely gift for articulating the incredible importance of art and creativity in the Christian life. 

She also shows, in her rambling yet enjoyable style, that truly Christian art--even if it isn't produced by believers in Jesus Christ--brings "cosmos out of chaos," order from disorder, meaning from pain, joy from the mundane. "All shall be well," she writes, quoting Lady Julian of Norwich, "and all shall be well and all manner of thing shall be well. No matter what. That, I think, is the affirmation behind all art which can be called Christian. That is what brings cosmos out of chaos."

I've definitely been encouraged and affirmed in my vocation, thanks to this book. I did have to read it slowly and with discernment, because it's quite possible to be so enchanted by L'Engle's beautiful turns of phrase, you don't realize she's being a bit unorthodox until you read that one paragraph or sentence a second time. That said, our Lord undoubtedly gifted her with a great deal of insight into the value and power of creativity. For that reason alone, Madeleine L'Engle remains an inspiration and encouragement to all the writers, painters, musicians, and craftsmen who seek to do their work for the glory of God and for the edification and delight of others.