Rating: 5/5

I loved this book. She kept talking about, 'the enlightened nineties', 'the conscious nineties', and as a teenager in the nineties, I get this. I deeply, internalized that whole argument about sustainability, natural fibers, paying for something worth the price to encourage the economy you can morally support. 

It was incredibly soothing to have those base values readdressed like they're still current. It was a fascinating review that I've lost track of in the recurring, "if you love your country, go shopping!' culture, where more, cheaper, faster, has taken place of the thoughtful, mindful, conscientious trend. 

Is it strange that things like consumerism and enlightenment are trends? I think that it had to do with the popularity of Yoga, and the fact that there's a fifties yoga class at the library that won't take immature thirty year olds. Was it twenty years ago that the nineties sprung into being, tired of the overexcess of the eighties, moving into more androgynous dressing, comfort and integrity of design and fiber being so important? I must be old. Anyway. 

It was also surprisingly current and helpful if you're into reading style books, which I am, because I find it fascinating why people wear things. It's rhetoric, theory, the only theory I ever really got into. 

My favorite bits: She divides the four body types into flowers, and I'm a lily. I like being a lily better than a rectangle or a banana, or whatever fruit or shape I am. I forget. 

I like the part about lines and value. It made me go through one of my more current style books, Bazaar Style, or something, and check out all the photos, and they're all similarly value dressed, or wearing one of the pleasing fibonacci proportions. I love fibonacci. It makes me feel Italian and French at the same time to have the slightest idea what fibonacci is. (who actually, but I can't give any more info or I'll lose that superior feeling of knowing something you don't know. You'll have to google it (unless you already know in which case, I'll have to feel superior for a different reason;))

I love that she admits to wearing leggings and t shirts every day because even though she's a style writer, she's mostly just a writer, and writers don't leave the house very often, so getting all fancy isn't particularly relevant. She was all about being relevant. 

Least favorite/most amusing bits, She goes on a color rant where she blasts anyone who thinks that orange, camel, or mustard looks good on them because THEY ARE WRONG. I look fantastic in all of those colors. Obviously we haven't met though or she would change her mind about her nazi anti-orange stance. I think it's because my coloring is rather deep warm, with dark brows and auburn hair, pale eyes, and I don't know what else. I need no excuses to look good in mustard and I'd rather look good in a summery yellow like everyone else, but unless I want to look like a corpse, mustard is IT for me in the yellow department. So there! 

Overall, an incredibly enjoyable and still mostly relevant romp through a fashion paradigm that I can relate to.