Rating: 5/5

This book belongs to that genre of literary novels which create an imagined life (based heavily on research) for an historical character, in this case, the great novelist, Henry James. (Because there are other James family members appearing throughout, in person and in recollection, I refer to Henry James as Henry rather than as the customary James.)
Although the eleven chapters focus on the events taking place during specified months, beginning with January 1894 and ending with October 1899, the narratives within often slide backwards in time, following Henry’s thoughts as present actions remind him of past events. His mind is not bound to the times specified by the chapter titles. Not having been that familiar with Henry’s life, as I read I would frequently take time out and explore biographical information about other characters (like Alice James, Constance Fenimore Woolson, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and Minny Temple) and stated events just to see how grounded this novel is in biography. What I discovered certainly matched up with how people and events are portrayed in the novel. Even though Tóibín has based the core of the novel on solid research (he credits Leon Edel’s five-volume biography with the place of honor in his acknowledgements), this book soars far beyond biography because of the author’s imaginative invention of Henry’s state of mind.

For me, the quiet and restrained tone of the novel speaks clearly about the personality of a man who has spent a lifetime approaching then running from people important to him and from his understanding of his own life. He lives in denial of his less than loving behavior towards his sister Alice, his cousin Minny Temple, and his dear friend Constance Fenimore Woolson. He invites them to visit him, to be a part of his life, then abandons them in fear of further responsibility or intimacy. Sometimes his retreats have devastating effects on those he loves. We see him bury his knowledge of his unloving actions, as he also buries his knowledge of his shortcomings, of his sexuality, of his feelings towards his family. An especially strong passage in the novel portrays the struggles between Henry and his older brother William. This part of the book crackles with reality, even though Tóibín has invented the conversations between these men. And there are other scenes like this one, which are too surprising and too satisfying to spoil by hinting at them here.

Tóibín portrays Henry’s interpretations of and imaginings about what is going on around him act as “sources” of literary works written during 1994-1999 (like What Daisy Knew and “The Turn of the Screw”) and also of those greatest novels written shortly after 1899 (The Ambassadors, The Wings of the Dove, and The Golden Bowl). Readers familiar with Henry’s writings will hear echoes of them throughout.

In its very quiet way this novel grip its readers and make us feel we are there. Even though I finished and returned this book to the library two weeks ago, I find myself thinking of it over and over. I may just have to go out and buy a copy so I can savor favorite passages and so I can eventually reread with a pencil in my hand.