Rating: 5/5

I was writing an article on Soldier of Fortune, the film Ernest K. Gann scripted after his own novel, and discovered through my research that Gann had spent some time in Hong Kong and had fallen into something of a dispute with a man named Gingles, after whom Gann modeled the disgraceful Tweedie in his novel. Only sixteen pages out of Gann's 504 page autobiography deals with his experience in Hong Kong. I had seen the citation for it. So I ordered this book. Alas, by the time I received it, not only had I already submitted the article but it had in fact been published.

So what to do with this somewhat oversized autobiography? Gann's writing is interesting. His biography seemed fascinating. I decided to go ahead and read A Hostage to Fortune. And I'm happy I did so. It's quite a stunning work. Gann reveals himself as an impulsive and childish man (not childlike but childish). That isn't meant to detract from his story. He makes it clear himself that his feckless ways and constant search for physical thrills caused him to be a bad husband and often a worse father. He admits to financial irresponsibility and an inability to plan his life for so much as a month ahead of time on every other page. For someone who is a landmark figure in worldwide aviation history and a successful novelist, and Hollywood screenwriter, he is self-deprecatory about his experiences and achievements. So quick is he to give credit to others for his success that it sometimes seems he is gushing in his praise for everyone around him. Gann lived a life of excitement and adventure. And in this book he feels guilty about it.

But the passages where he lays out his guilt are balanced by the chapters in which he details the sheer joy he took in flying, sailing, and writing. Writing? Well, not so much writing but in researching, where he would instantly lose himself for weeks if not months at a time. (I understand the feeling.) He combined his research with a wanderlust across the globe, never until late in life feeling comfortable or satisfied in the US. (I understand the feeling.) And looking back over his accomplishments, he always questioned their place in the world of art, literature, and history. (I understand the feeling--if on a much less grander scale.)

This work was written in 1977 and published in 1978. Gann would live another fourteen years. There isn't another autobiography or memoir to cover those years. Too bad. I would like to know what he thought of the 1980s as they gave way to the 1990s. For he had already expressed great doubts about America's future in the 1960s and 1970s, believing not only had the country lost its spirit but the vitality and ingenuity of the people who allowed it to rise to post World War II dominance.

A note about this edition. It is a shoddy failure. It's a first edition I have, and the layout is terrible. Small print on oversized pages with small margins caused my eyes to become blurry so often, I began to have trouble reading. I know it is over 500 pages, but I wish the publisher had added an extra 100 pages and increased the size of the font to improve the experience. Gann deserved better. Other faults include no photographs. None!!! Anyone reading this in 1978 wouldn't even know what Gann looked like. And there are no maps. No charts. No chapter headings. No table of contents!!! The physical experience of reading this magnificent autobiography is miserable.