Rating: 4/5

Will Reid
Ms. Minniear
English 9
10/11/10				Tappan’s Burro
	
	Tappan’s Burro is a very interesting book. Zane Grey has an amazing sense of what the life of an alone prospector in the old was like. In this book, a man named Tappan is out and about looking to strike riches in the prospecting trade. He is blessed with the gift of friendship from a burro, otherwise known as a mule. This burro is very intelligent and intellectual. It has a very good sense of companionship. Tappan calls his friend a “Beast of Burden.” 
	Tappan and his beast of burden treked all over the American Southwest Their journeys take place in mountains, valleys, and deserts. They have to battle the heat in the first section of the story. This takes place in Death Valley. Here, they have to deal with robbers that try to steal their bags of gold. Tappan tries to scare them away, but his giant stature doesn’t allow cunning for him. Tappan and his burro are resorted to battle the heat through Death Valley.
	Tappan cashes his gold in a western town and goes on a shopping spree. Later in his journey, he meets two lonely travelers. The pair is apparently brother and sister that owns a ranch that is willing to be sold to Tappan for a more than fair price. The three all decided to travel together and accompany each other on their journeys. Tappan bonds very strongly with the sister. Their bonds get stronger and the two fall in love. One day on an outing, the sister admits to Tappan that she was supposed to fall in love with Tappan and set him up to buy the ranch. She tells him that in doing so, she has actually fallen in love with him. They both decide to run off together one night without telling the brother who was the leader of a dangerous gang. 
	When Tappan and his love run off she grows scared for Tappan’s safety and ditches him. She is scared that the gang would find them two and kill them both. Tappan searches for a long while trying to find where his love had gone. He searches casinos, towns, and hotels. His heart soon grows weary for her. 
	I liked this book a lot. It was very interesting. The whole time that I was reading it, Zane Grey kept me on my toes waiting for something adventurous and action-packed to happen. I usually like to read old west books anyway. This one in particular sticks out to me due to all of the action that takes place in it.