Rating: 2/5

I really like cyberpunk, how networks change the interactions of humans who contend with two worlds, not just one. I picked up this book as a view into what was being thought about 20 years ago in terms of virtual worlds (here called Atrificial Reality).

The premise of this short book was interesting. Someone killed inside the game at the same time they are killed outside the game. (A locked room mystery) How to find the killer within a world where everything is supposed to go?

But everything is fuzzy. The real world is just hinted at. Some bits are prescient, like people being drones at office jobs and act more like gypsies. Or that the online world is so addictive the players will do anything to return. We see both today. But the world the characters inhabit doesn’t seem real. The author only describes just enough to anchor where they live, but not how or why. Usually the descriptions have to do with other places far away. 

The online world is more detailed, but still limited. It is a good attempt at describing an online world, centered around a game where anything goes. But how the online world is conveyed to the reader is stilted. Both of the main characters are interchangeable, in that they both are neophyte online users. Both despise it, so their shock to the experience and fumbling around are nearly the same. Both are looking for the same person. But I didn’t care about that. I ended up finishing it to learn if there was really an Old Japan and if the murder was every solved. The ending was rushed, as if a page limit was run up against.

I’m not discounting the age of the book, as I wanted to see how such books hold up 20 years hence. In the late 1990’s it wasn’t common to think you’d have super high bandwidth access to the internet at home. So the use of a video parlor. The archiver is similar to a tablet, though it needs to be connected to the phone to move information into the network. The pervasiveness of the network isn’t seen within the fabric of society, just the online game. But it is the fuzzy characters and world that made the book one that I wanted to skim through to learn the two items from above.