Rating: 3/5

While I agree with some of the other reviewers that this is not what would be considered gourmet cooking today, the idea that gourmet cooking has to involve complicated recipes with lots of fancy ingredients is exactly the mindset the author discouraged. A gourmet is simply a connoisseur of good food. He believed that didn't have to mean hours in the kitchen and lots of expensive ingredients.

In addition to the recipes, which of course are the raison d'être of any cookbook, there are a variety of hints and tips sprinked throughout the book (including tips on reducing the amount of time spent in the kitchen and how to prepare certain ingredients efficiently), and a short section each on kitchen equipment, cooking terms, ingredients, herbs and spices, and menu planning. He's even included a list of the recipes he covered on episodes 101 to 139 of his television show, along with the theme for the episode.

As is common to many of his books, some ingredients may be hard to find. Don't get your heart set on anything until you've checked the ingredient list and know everything can be obtained or substituted. For example, the very first recipe calls for bare rendering bones that you may find difficult to obtain if you don't have access to a decent butcher. Numerous recipes call for ingredients you will need to find at a Middle-Eastern or Oriental market. and some are just hard to find. Thankfully, Amazon can usually help.

The variety among the recipes is astonishing. Everything from basic brown soup stock, to Lebanese stuffed tomatoes, to Mushrooms à la Provençale. There are a few I won't be tempted to try (I can't seem to convince myself that the Carrot Ring is worth the 2 cups of shortening for 8-10 servings - yikes!). I'm particularly intrigued by the recipes from show 108, An Onion Celebration, and show 121, Garlic! Garlic! Garlic! I'm not sure I'll ever make the Russian garlic salad (it's essentially just marinated garlic cloves), but if I do it will be with the intention of chopping it up and adding it to a large bowl of fresh salad greens and veggies because I can't imagine trying to eat it straight.