Rating: 1/5

I have so much to say I don't even know where to start.

I enjoy reading children's literature. I can 'read down' to the level as necessary. But I find so many glaring errors and omissions in this series of books that I find myself frustrated about every five pages. Why did I keep reading, you ask? Because once a book is in my hands, for some reason I find it next to impossible to put down! But more importantly, my son recommended it -- and it's always good to see what your children are reading.

The sentence and paragraph construction is enjoyable. The story idea has merit. The development of characters, their interaction with each other, story development - horrendous. Errors abound, and at times the lack of continuity and contradictions within the storyline make me want to throw the book across the room. The characters are completely lacking in depth. There is absolutely no development of relationships between the characters - however, they suddenly become endeared to one another and know all about each other. The bard - excuse me - 'skald' in the story never sings songs or tells stories or says anything particularly poetic... however, 400 pages later, they all love him for these 'constant' qualities. The heroine does nothing intellectual, but is constantly praised for her cleverness. It goes on and on. I can accept it in the Magic Treehouse, when you only have 50 pages to include an entire story -- but not in a several hundred page book.

I couldn't figure out what the target audience for these books is supposed to be. The two characters at the beginning of the book are described as 'boy' and 'girl', later as 'children'. So I guessed 6-12 years old? But a short 150 pages or so later (I believe it's two years later in time), one is running the extensive family farm holdings and I believe one was in charge of a small castle or something. (I'm not going to spend the time to go back to be exactly accurate. You can read it for yourself if you're that bored.) They are old enough to fight with swords and be married. The story is extremely juvenile, but then the book is almost 500 pages long. Truly an enigma.

All in all, I must recommend against reading this book if you are over 10 years old, or if you are a child who pays any attention whatsoever to detail or storyline.