Rating: 5/5

I'm going to use this space primarily to survey the works contained herein and give readers a sense of what they might find here. That said, I can't fail to plug my review of Bermel's book on farce, which contains pretty much everything I have to say on the subject at this point. It's not nearly as learned as the Bermel book I'm ostensibly reviewed, but it is significantly shorter. Anyway, you should consider my other review as context, inasmuch as it contains the perspective through which I read and enjoy plays such as those contained in this volume.

Of all my recent reviews of farce anthologies, I'm saving my favorite author for last! I’ve now read eight Moliere works, of which I loved five, liked one (which I took turns reading aloud with my daughter), tolerated another, and hated the last. Six of these are included in the Penguin anthology I’m recommending here (as usual, readable translations, fine endnotes, excellent introductory material, but alas, minimal verse). Le malade imaginaire can be found in the Bermel anthology I’ve already cited and L’Avare you’ll want to find on your own, as I enjoyed it the most of all the plays I read. 

Okay, so here’s the general formula for Moliere’s monomania plays: in each one, lovers who wish to wed are kept apart by a father bedeviled by an obsession with ______________. The lovers are aided by one or more familial allies who try to talk sense to the rigid jerk, but remain frustrated until a clever ploy succeeds in separating reason from delusion. (And all live happily ever after.) I’ll take these in rank order, filling in the above synopsis with the appropriate blank, and sharing a pair of excerpts for your delectation and edification (personal note: of the plays listed below that form the basis of this anthology, those not in boldface are ones I wouldn't bother revisiting):

  The Miser (L’Avare)
 - money, of course. Lots of dodges here and wheels within wheels, right up until Harpagon’s final comeuppance. It’s hilarious (and credible) throughout.

  The Would-Be Gentleman (Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme)
 - social prestige. A minor departure from the usual formula in that Monsieur Jourdain’s idee fixe renders him jolly rather than nasty, and that it is his own affaire d’amour he seeks to establish (he’s already married, y’see). This is a good humoured turn all round as Monsieur Jourdain is a Falstaffian character who appreciates any sort of joke, even those played on himself.

  The Doctor Despite Himself
 - Not a monomania play. The comedic set-up here is that a brute of a lumberjack (Sganarelle) has been mistaken for a famous physician and -- an initial comeuppance -- beaten into service. However, since the patient he needs to cure is only feigning her illness, her not-so-miraculous recovery confirms his genius, and the “doctor” thereafter placebos his way to a higher standing and drives from town legitimate practitioners and hucksters alike. The biggest joke is that this turn of events proves best for all concerned, because unlike the interventions of other learned fools and frauds who ply their trade, Sganarelle’s prescriptions of small doses of cheese and exercise at least do no harm. Allow me some extensive quotation of this play’s rapid-fire patter and see if you don’t fall in love with Moliere yourself. (Excerpts taken from Scenes II and IV of Act Two, pp. 162-165 in the Penguin version)

The first bit opens with the concerned father of the “patient” Geronte greeting Sganarelle. Geronte’s the straight man, of course. Now imagine this reluctant “doctor” as played by Groucho Marx.GERONTE: Sir, I’m delighted to see you in my house. We’re in great need of your help.

SGANARELLE (in doctor’s gown and steeple hat): Hippocrates says… that we should both keep our hats on.

GERONTE: Hippocrates says that?

SGANARELLE: Yes.

GERONTE: In what chapter please?

SGANARELLE: In his chapter… er… on hats.

GERONTE: If Hippocrates says so, we must do it.

SGANARELLE: My dear doctor, having heard of the remarkable things --

GERONTE: May I ask whom you are talking to?

SGANARELLE: You.

GERONTE: But I’m not a doctor.

SGANARELLE: You aren’t a doctor?

GERONTE: No.

SGANARELLE (picks up a cudgel and beats him as he was beaten): Honestly?

GERONTE: Honestly. Ow! Ow! Ow!

SGANARELLE: You are now. That’s all the qualifications I ever had.This is followed by some further foolishness -- Sganarelle chases the skirts chest of a wet nurse -- until Geronte is given opportunity to introduce his “sick” child.SGANARELLE: Is this the patient?

GERONTE: Yes, she’s my only daughter. It would break my heart if she were to die.

SGANARELLE: She mustn’t do anything of the kind. She can’t die without a doctor’s prescription. All of which really goes to show that the Marx Brothers’ vaudevillian schtick has a long and distinguished ancestry.

  The Imaginary Invalid (Le malade imaginaire)
 - hypochondria. For more, see my discussion in my review of the Bermel anthology.
 

  The Misanthrope
 - hypocrisy (really, a big hissy fit about others’ affected manners). As in Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme, the formula is slightly altered such that the exasperated Celimene is the thwarted lover, the subject of whose affection is, ironically, a shameless frivol and flirt. He can’t help himself, except that he can, and exiles himself to the country to prove it. Celimene’s such a sourpuss that his attractiveness to the ladies fails to leap from the page. Suffice it to say that the play struggles to work if the audience has trouble swallowing the premise. This is also one of those works that reads tragically if Celimene is portrayed too sympathetically; the audience will join the hero in despairing for humanity. (For an expansion of my thoughts on this, read my opinions on the Janus-like relationship between farce and tragedy.)

  Tartuffe (The Hypocrite)
 - a con artist’s fake piety. This wicked play wastes two full acts hyping the eponymous villain before introducing him, but when he arrives, watch out! Tartuffe will leave you squirming. The play ends with an outrageous regis ex machina (which makes sense once you know that royal patronage proved to be the only way Moliere could get this particular work staged). Put finger quotes around the tacked on finale, and Tartuffe reads as straight-on tragedy about the cruel implications of confusing faith with credulity.

Such Foolish Affected Ladies - the tropes of soap opera romances. Only it’s not the father who is twisted, but his silly daughters. This is basically a one act with only enough material to sustain a skit, and is an early Moliere play in which the characters are close to cardboard cutouts.

Those Learned Ladies - women’s right to education, although the impediment here is the mother, not the go-along-to-get-along father. I think Moliere really intended to mock faux-intellectual pretension (and the emperor’s new clothiers who peddle it) and would have succeeded better had he hewed more closely to Patience than to Princess Ida or considered the way that Shakespeare spoofed academia; I enjoyed a production of Love’s Labour’s Lost in which matching trios of young men and women pretended to foreswear love to devote themselves to study... in closer proximity to one another, naturally. However, Moliere’s is just an ugly work of chauvinism that actually uses its female protagonist to advocate the cliche that women best be left barefoot, pregnant, and in the kitchen.

Considering French farce as a whole, I confess to being a big Moliere fan. From the 19th century, my favorites remain any libretti that Jacques Offenbach has set to music. From the 20th century -- well, the recent past has (fortunately!) not winnowed down all the various farcical offerings from stage, screen, and broadcast to allow any kind of thoroughgoing sample, but --

Oh, alright, I'll confess that in addition to the other works cited above, after Jean-Paul Sartre and Irish ex-pat Samuel Beckett my taste in turns primarily (entirely?) to farces by native English speakers (I also have a preference for satire, which is not to say that I see firewalls between genres). George Abbott. Woody Allen. Charlie Chaplin. Nora Ephron. William Goldsmith. Harold Ramis. Not a complete list by any means.

Still, if you’re looking to sample a variety of French farces by different authors, I think Albert Bermel's and Eric Bentley’s respective collections the best places to begin. I enjoyed half of Bermel’s and two-thirds of Bentley’s samples. In entering this review, and my respective reviews of Bentley, Bermel, three Feydeau anthologies, and probably Plautus and Terence (anthologies of whose works I am reading at the time of posting this), you can look for me to include brief synopses of (most of) the plots found within and at least one excerpt of representative dialogue.