Rating: 4/5

⭐️⭐️⭐️⭐️ four stars -

This Heyer is one that I have read many times since my first reading of it back in the early 1980s. It is not my favorite GH, nor does it reside in the top ten section of my own person Heyer List; it’s at the #11 spot currently. 

This book’s original publication date is 1955, which lands it somewhere in the middle of Heyer’s bibliography list of all her works. Some of my fellow Heyer fans classify this as one of her “later works”, and I can see why this could be classified as such, as the content definitely reflects her later style, at least to this avid Heyer fan anyway. I feel that a lot of her later works showcased a farcical romp, which is what takes place here.

“Bath Tangle” gives us a whole slew of characters, and it’s with great skill that the story is all weaved together in a satisfying fashion. This story has a more political slant and contains much social commentary on the depicted time of the plot, which is the Regency Era. The central romance is present, but as is often typical of Heyer, it’s not the most overwhelming part of the story.

This story is more centered around the heroine, Serena, and is more of a commentary about the social roles and accepted norms of women’s roles (or lack thereof) in Regency society and how one’s social class also affected the role you played. It’s with Heyer’s expertise at spinning a story together that this aspect of the arc is not too subtly woven into the overall plotline.

Serena and Ivo (our Hero) are not my most favorite people here or in any other GH novel truth be told, but it becomes increasingly clear throughout the story that these two deserve each other. They’re a strong political match, and shockingly for a Heyer novel, sexual attraction is hinted at with Serena’s attraction to Ivo being mentioned in the last scene. If nothing else, these two will have a good sex life lol.

If you’re new to Heyer, please don’t start with this novel. It’s definitely a must-read Heyer, in my opinion, but I would never recommend someone just discovering this modern day Austen (that’s how I describe GH to people) to begin with this one. Wait until you’ve picked up her style before you delve into this one. 
* side note for Heyer newbies: try starting with her “Sylvester”, “Frederica”, or even “Cotillion”

Personally, I enjoy the madcap farce that develops here. I enjoy the detail of all the side characters that are drawn with skill and care, I tolerate Ivo (lots of fellow Heyer buffs can’t stand him), I understand Serena (thanks to the absolute dexterity of Heyer’s writing we are given a thorough character backstory and development arc), and I just adored all the Heyer side character staples that are present here. 

I don’t reread “Bath Tangle” as often as I do Heyer’s titles that fall in my Top Ten on my personal GH list, but I do read this one often enough. I keep a permanent copy in my Heyer folder on my beloved Kindle so I can pick it up anytime the mood strikes for a farcical romance with political and social commentary, oh and a bit of “adult” romance, too. With the hinted at sexual attraction between our H and h, this novel has a nice tone of a more mature romance. Given the fact that the two mc’s here are a bit older than GH’s standard H and h, it’s a nice change of pace for this avid Heyer reader to read about more mature (aware) characters.

My rating for this non-typical Heyer is four solid stars. I enjoy the story here more than I do the actual H and h. Their romance is more practical here than romantic, and it’s definitely a volatile relationship that they share.

Would recommend for the seasoned Heyer reader. Newbies to GH, see recommendations above.