Rating: 5/5

This is a tough one to review. Parts of it are hard to read and there are nits for me to pick. These are the moments where I wanted to give it a three. 

At other times, it reads like a poignant masterpiece. These are the moments that led me to give it a five. 

  What’s it about ?

The prologue opens with a priest in early 19th century Paris visiting the apartment of an old, somewhat recluse of a man…a veteran of the napoleonic wars in Europe. The priest wants to coax the hermit out of his reclusiveness by having him write about his experiences. The old, reclusive, veteran objects and refuses. The priest leaves, disappointed, but promising to come back and continue lobbying him to write.

The veteran, alone his his room pulls out some sketch books filled with drawings and begins to reminisce…

The book then unfolds with a young man seeking adventure in the French army and through a series of odd turns finds himself in a band with 6 other soldiers. The story is their multi-year adventure fighting with/for Napoleon all over Europe. 

  What are the nits?

The single biggest problem I had was that this is a novel in the style of historical fiction which assumes I know the backstory and history of all the generals and battles, history and politics of the Napoleonic wars. The author is telling the story of these 7 soldiers, and doesn’t spare any time explaining the historical context. Which sometimes makes it a hard slog. 

  Why a 5?

Well, first and foremost it’s a dad pick. You know…your aging parents find themselves needing to downsize to a smaller house or assisted living and in groping through all their stuff (to help sort out what to keep) you come across a bookcase of 40-50 year old paperbacks. Books they read when they were 40. Often these are classics. I’m not sure we write them like this anymore. I think the bar to get a book published and that went on to became a paperback in 1973 (and still in print today) was a lot higher than it is today. Seven Men From Gascony is one such book.

Second, the characters are well developed and the ending and story arc are exceptionally good. If you can overlook my main nit, mentioned above, it’s a classic.