Rating: 5/5

Well this book has just taken the last free place on my top-ten-favourite-books-of-all-time shelf. If it wasn't for goodreads I would never have discovered this book as it's one of those well known in US and Canada but unknown here in England.

This was wonderful, from the first page we were hooked, the story so well told, the characters so real (in fact we know an Aunt Frances and a Elizabeth Ann - before her transformation) and the story had so much humour, and kept us guessing right up to the end as to what the outcome would be.

Elizabeth Ann, an orphan, lives with Great Aunt Harriet and Aunt Francis who are extreme worriers and fussers, they are timid and see danger everywhere and transfer all their worries to Elizabeth Ann. Elizabeth Ann lives up to all she is told, she is told she has a poor appetite so lives up to that, she is told she is scared of dogs so becomes so. One day her Great Aunt becomes ill so she is sent to live with those 'Horrid Putney cousins' who live on a farm and provide just the no-nonsense antidote Elizabeth Ann needs.

This book was a wonderful study of child rearing, it would have been so easy to write a book about some mean people looking after an orphan followed by some nice people, but the irony was that Great Aunt Harriet and Aunt Francis were so kind and loving but doing just as much damage as someone being unkind.

The school was wonderful, great common sense teaching, if only teachers were allowed to teach according to capability today. The school scenes were wonderful, this is exactly what I would want a school to be.

I was surprised how parts of this book were so hard to read aloud, the sad and the happy, very emotional, very hard to keep a steady voice. It would be interesting to know if this story was in any way autobiographical, it seemed too real to be complete fiction. I know it's easy to romanticize about living in the past and forget about the hard parts, the lack of antibiotics or medical assistance in childbirth but this time and place seems like the ideal place to be in my opinion.

Highly recommended, wonderful story.