Rating: 5/5

This novel was truly a joy to read. I loved the poetic style in which it was written, which allowed me to flow through this book so easily I did not want to put it down. I appreciated that the author wrote in a style that reflected how a teenage girl's mind works; in short, quick bursts. Along with the style, the author certainly included numerous events and themes in this novel that allow young adults to relate fully to this book. In "True Believer," these themes include a first crush, the struggle of change, the search for who you are as a person, and finding religion. This was another main contribution to my enjoyment of this novel, the relate-ability. LaVaughn endures an abundance of challenges through the duration of this book, struggles with her friends, her mom, and of course, Jody. I felt connected to LaVaughn because I too have encountered a crush on a boy who seemed to peek an interest in me back, but always ends up picking someone else. I could also relate to LaVaughn's heartbreak as she slowly got pushed farther and farther away from her friends, Myrtle and Annie. However, in my case it was flipped. My friends who were once the average middle school girls that I had grown up with since Elementary school were turning into the average high school girls that wanted to party and be boy crazy, while I went to church and hung out with my youth group friends. I felt LaVaughn's pain, her anxiety, her loneliness. Myrtle and Annie were two characters that were very curious to me. Their "Jesus" club, in the way that it constantly moved to different churches made me hope that LaVaughn would give in and go to one of the meetings. I wondered what really went on because Myrtle and Annie's actions seemed so backwards from the Christianity that I know. However, I believe that the evidence of God's truth was hidden amongst these two girls. Their pestering of LaVaughn to join them caused for curiosity and questioning of LaVaughn's other friends and mother that led her to want to pray, and that is a glimpse of God working on LaVaughn's heart. Overall, I enjoyed this story about a young girl in search of how to navigate her dreams and desires.