Rating: 5/5

If you know enough about the war to be curious about Grant's memoirs, then you might as well get the Library of America edition which features his report as Lieutenant General and his letters.

The memoirs are great. Early in the book he talks about supply trains and the tedious aspects of the military, but they allow you to full understand what's going on when he later gives his campaign descriptions. Reading about the war, I always had trouble figuring out exactly how and why things took place;a lot of information out there is dedicated mostly to the movements of battle. Grant explains fully and coherently the hows and whys of what he did. Since he was in so many engagements, his memoirs will help you fully understand the Union movements throughout much of the war. His thoughts on other Generals (union and confederacy) and his thoughts on secession are amazing. The book is written entirely from his point of view so it's all about how the Union armies were commanded. There are some parts of the book talking about front-line combat, but they are not the main focus. This is a must read if you want to fully understand the military history of the war. There is no better source for how and why Union armies did what they did. Of course Grant wasn't in every engagement, but he was in so many that this book is truly a great source of information.

The included report is a summary of his actions as Lieutenant General. It doesn't include anything left out of the memoirs, but it is still good.

The letters are written mostly to his wife, and show Grant the man, not the General. You will like them if Grant is one of your favorite Generals of the war. Some of them also include his thoughts that aren't mentioned in the memoirs, so they also provide additional substance. There are letters to his doctor he wrote while working on his memoirs; they add a new level of poignancy and make you love and respect Grant even more.

This is a first-hand account of a man who was not only in many of the war's important engagements, but who eventually led the Union to victory. There is no reason why any Civil War buff should ignore reading these.