Rating: 2/5

Another frustrating ending - the murderer was revealed in the last three very very short paragraphs of the book - and, BOOM, the story ended. There was, literally, no wrap-up! The book was also slow reading with a convoluted and plodding plot filled with confusing relationships among the characters and murder investigation.

In February a young woman named Sheila Broome is found along side the road near Devon strangled by her own scarf. Divisional Commander Brian Macalvie (introduced in the previous book) is in charge of the investigation.

In December another young woman is found strangled by her own scarf in London near a pub called I Am the Only Running Footman. Her name is Ivy Childress, and Scotland Yard's Richard Jury is summoned by Chief Superintendent Racer to the scene to investigate. Are the two cases related - is there a serial killer on the loose? Macalvie is convinced the two deaths are connected, but Jury has nothing to tie them together except the scarves.

The prime suspect in the second murder is Ivy's wealthy and shiftless boyfriend, David Marr. The plot gets a little confusing when Melrose Plant visits the St. Clair family to see what he can scope out about David Marr. Lucinda St. Clair, who is enamored by David Marr, introduces Plant to David and the Winslow family. Hugh and Marion Winslow had an 8 year old daughter named Phoebe who died when she ran into the road and was killed by a car. They soon separated after her death. Marion is David Marr's sister and provides an alibi for him (or does she?). Edward Winslow (who is sometimes called Ned which took me awhile to figure out that the two were the same person) is Phoebe's brother and he had a wife named Rose who ran away. Edward/Ned has written a book of poetry which figures into the plot. 
 
A kind of humorous subplot involves Plant staying at an Inn called Mortal Man and run by the awkward and bumbling Warboys family. The author seems to always have children involved in her stories and in this one there are two. One is the dead Phoebe and the other is William Warboys and his dog Osmond who likes to latch onto legs. William carries around a notebook where he is writing a mystery story and seeks advise from Plant.

Another subplot is about Kate and her sister Dolly Sands who is a weather girl on TV. She seems to be in trouble and wants to move back home with Kate. The murderer also has an interest in her because of something she may have seen.

Returning characters include hypochondriac Detective Sergeant Alfred Wiggins whom Macalvie has taken a liking to; Carole-anne Palutski, Jury's up-stairs neighbor, who adds more comic relief and whom Jury may have found a job for; and Mrs. Wassermann who has the basement flat in Jury's building and is beginning to venture outside due to Carole-anne. Susan Bredon-Hunt is Jury's lady friend whom Carole-anne leaves steaming when she pays a visit to Jury's apartment when Susan is there. 

The 1st two books in the series I gave four stars, the next five I gave three stars, and now this one I gave two stars (really two and a half). I hope this pattern shifts and begins climbing again. If nothing else, I would like to see more of Melrose Plant and Wiggins along with Macalvie in the future. There were a couple of red herrings, and this edition included a map of the pubs the author has written about in her books thus far. A so-so read.