Rating: 3/5

****warning*****
EXTREMELY boring book, but I'm bumping up a star for a truly honourable hero and the last scene.

===original review===
because Kiki loves torturing herself and thought it was a good idea to move away from Bear shifters!
Now this book is exactly what the title suggests. Makeshift marriage.
Two actually nice decent people got jilted by their respective partners, by letters and VMs, because the exes are cowards and they ran away together.
Classic case of BF running away with Bride's BFF.
Heroine is numb, Hero is seething.
Hero needs to be married to meet contract terms of his new job in a pacific island, heroine needs to get away from her small town and already was struggling to find a job.
MOC WITHOUT blackmail.
Two good people making best of a bad situation. That's it.
FLATTEST BOOK EVER. I didn't find any romance.
They didn't even have sex UNTIL they had confirmation that their exes tied the knots, and off they pounce on each other. How that is romance is beyond me.
One star, because hero is actually extremely honourable and respectful, so is the heroine. No bickering, slut shaming or going at each other's throats.
No rape, or even rape attempt.
The last scene, was closest to forced seduction it has come to, but the author and both MCs were very clear that the whole thing was absolutely consensual. Heroine goaded the hero as she has reached her limit, hero reacted because he had reached his. He has begged her to stop him, she didn't, if she did, he WOULD have stopped.
The additional star, the next morning, the hero had regrets, heroine firstly thought it was because he thought it was rape, so she cleared that up, USING words. Secondly she thought it was guilt because he used her as a substitute for his ex, but before she could voice that hero made it absolutely clear that he did NO such thing, in fact HE thinks SHE used HIM as a substitute for HER ex, it hurts, but he'll take whatever she'll pitifully throw at him at this point, BUT it was unforgivable that he had tried to get her pregnant WITHOUT her consent or knowledge. Which alone he feels is grounds for her wanting a divorce
THAT. THERE. that alone deserves probably 2 stars, but book was so damn flat! not even real life character gets that point, this hero pretty much nailed it!