Rating: 1/5

As far as I'm concerned, the H and h were both losers! Two self-centered, "my way or the highway" people, who more often than not put themselves and what they want first. The only time it was "we" rather than "me" was when they were giving each other orgasms, which was about the only thing they had in common.

It was obvious they both had resentments toward the opposite sex, the H because of mommy issues (and with his mother, that was understandable), and the h with her daddy issues (he walked out when she was a kid and has pretty much ignored her ever since). His mom cheated on his dad, her dad cheated on her mom, so it's not surprising neither has much faith in relationships.

But they have so much fun in bed they decide to elope in Vegas! After that, the fun stopped (big surprise). She likes London, he likes Yorkshire, he wants a house, she'd rather live in an apartment, he talks about lots of kids, she's not sure she wants even one. A recipe for a mess, yet we're supposed to believe they're soulmates???? OH, COME ON!!!

The h goes the typical runaway bride route, though at least she leaves him a note, lets him know where she is, and doesn't actually say it's over, but her note's not all that encouraging. Yet, she's disappointed when the H doesn't get in touch with her.

The book goes from present (when she shows up after two years, wanting a divorce), to past (flashbacks to how they met and their very short time together), back to the present (while they decide how to end their marriage, as well as deal with their current significant others).

Both of them are users when it comes to those others! In the h's case, she gets engaged to a man twice her age (while still married to the H) and convinces herself she wants a life with him. They don't go beyond kisses (and those don't thrill her all that much) and he's content to wait until they're married, even if her divorce won't go through for about two years! Doesn't sound like a man in love to me. But whatever he felt, he deserved better than to be used and cheated on, as a few minutes alone in her apartment with the H and they're at it like rabbits, and she LOVES IT and MISSED IT so much, and admits to herself it beats masturbating (yes, a h who toys with her lady bits!), but one thing she DOES NOT think about is the fiancé she just cheated on!! No remorse at all, just a few discomforting moments when she, her wronged fiancé, and the H have dinner together! 

The fact that they could sit at the dinner table and try to act nonchalant with the guy they disrespected a mere half hour ago was pretty CRUMMY, to say the least!! 

Even worse, the H later advises the h to go ahead with her plan to marry the OM! (A "WTF!!!" moment to be sure!)

The h has so many flip-flopping emotions! She had complained about the H wanting to control her life, declared how independent she was, then she was ready to center her life around the OM, no problem there! She says she prefers a quiet, placid relationship with the OM to the volatile one with the H and that sex isn't all that important to her, then she goes off like a thousand firecrackers when the H touches her! Then, she "suddenly" realizes that she only got engaged to the OM to give her an excuse to get in touch with the H about a divorce, hoping he'd try to stop her and say he wanted her back (and doesn't seem at all guilty about using the OM like that). She was so adamant about not liking Yorkshire, wanting to stay in London, having no interest in children and taking care of a home, then suddenly (yet again) she'll go anywhere, do anything, have dozens of babies, if only she and the H could resume their marriage, a marriage she tossed aside so easy! Again: "WTF!!!!"

The H was no prize, either! He never tried to get in touch with the h after she left, admitted he wanted to but had too much pride, and that came first, I guess. (What does that tell you???) He never talked seriously about anything with the h, just assumed things would work out (his way, of course), took it for granted she'd want a bunch of kids and would like to live in Yorkshire, could easily forget London and her life there, and could write freelance anywhere, so no big deal. (Not to him, anyway.) When he found out she had planned to interview him about his personal life when they first met and didn't let him know she was a writer, he SPANKED her!! She dared to contemplate writing an article about his life, so she deserves a good sound spanking???? I think NOT!!

He was also very nonchalant about the affairs he had during their two-year separation. While it's true they weren't in touch all that time and for all he knew she had lovers as well, when he found out she hadn't, it didn't seem to faze him, not even a "sorry about that." 

And when the h tells him she loves him, is sorry they didn't stay together and work things out, and wants another chance, he says he doesn't believe her, doesn't want to reconcile, and wants to keep things on a "sex only" basis. He later admits he said all that just to get back at her, real mature of 
him!! I'd accept that revenge attitude from a college age guy, but NOT a grown man!

He was also more of a user than she was! He made a deal with her, saying he'd agree to a quick divorce if she'd pretend that they were back together so he could get rid of his girlfriend (the OW, making a brief appearance), who had become too clingy, at least according to him. (I guess telling her from the start that he only wanted a casual thing was beyond him??? Or did he decide to lie so he could get her into bed?) The poor girl showed up at his place to cook him dinner and finds the h there, and they tell her they've reconciled, and she was really hurt! That was pretty crappy of both of them!

In fact, they were both crappy in one way or another and pretty much deserved each other. 

That whole melodrama on the island beach at the end was just DUMB!

For that matter, so was the whole book!