Rating: 4/5

“The hand that holds the money cracks the whip.”—Mildred Pierce

Imagine my disappointment in reading page after page of this novel, written by the author of such salacious noir thrillers as The Postman Always Rings Twice and Double Indemnity, and discovering no murders have been committed! Not a drop of blood! And Cain has a reputation for writing about women that some see as disrespectful or even misogynous: Babes, floozies, tramps, prostitutes, con artists. In this novel, that might be described as literary fiction, it’s almost as if he wanted to prove to the world that he could create a sympathetic portrait of a woman: “If you have to do it, you can do it.” And he does, and she does, though Mildred also makes bad decisions with respect to her choices in men, and her support for her daughter.

Mildred Pierce (the novel) is set in the forties, so it’s kind of a portrait of working class women that for a good portion of the book reminds me of Rosie the Riveter. Mildred divorces her philandering, unemployed husband and has to figure out how to raise her two girls alone. And she does. She becomes a waitress, uses this experience to develop her own restaurant, and so on. She’s “hardboiled,” tough, like a lot of noir women, but she’s also a good (though too indulgent) mother. She is flawed, though, in that she falls for bad men, and she can’t control her very wild, spoiled, arrogant daughter, Veda. I had an idea for awhile that there might be a murder of this girl, and I find at a glance at Goodreads reviews that many are disappointed she isn’t murdered, they hate her so much! 

Veda at an early age is beautiful, a talented singer, and her mother spoils her, buys her everything, and Ida is consistently ungrateful and manipulative. This is an inversion of the Mommie Dearest story of the hateful mother; Ida is the daughter we love to hate. But it’s complicated, too: “There was something unnatural, a little unhealthy, about the way she inhaled Veda's smell as she dedicated the rest of her life to this child who had been spared.” There’s also love triangle in this story involving Veda and Mildred, which calls attention to the mid twentieth century noir fascination with “deviant” psychology. Mildred is unreasonably supportive of Veda, but she is also seethingly jealous of her, and a little obsessed with her. And in a few moments, Oedipally? Mildred “tiptoed into the room she had hoped Veda would occupy, knelt beside the bed as she had knelt so many times in Glendale, took the lovely creature in her arms and kissed her, hard, on the mouth.” O-kay. . . there are a couple moments like this in the book. It’s a complicated mother-daughter book.

But this book is also from its most basic perspective about women and money, in a time in which women are largely disrespected by men. Is it still happening, the world over? Of course. Equal pay? The glass ceiling? Point made. But in this good and entertaining and a little melodramatic novel, Mildred’s a survivor, we laregely admire her for her strengths, and sympathize with her for her faults, which emerge from love. She generally figures out how to manage the system. Now to re-see the film version with Joan Crawford. And maybe the Kate Winslet mini-series.