Rating: 1/5

For more reviews and fun info go to www.library-lust.com

Keywords: Historical, Scottish Highlander, domestic violence, Amanda Scott, royalty, 
Sexy Level: 2 
Fire Extinguishers: Female is kidnapped and threatened with rape, female is beat, female is scared of abuse
 
I’m going to be honest, dear readers, I only finished this book for you. It was one of the most torturous books I have ever drug myself through. It was basically a non-sexy view into domestic violence. None of the beatings took place around arousing bits at all. I don’t know what the point was other than to break her down, embarrass her and treat her like a child. This is one of the only books I have read where the heroine was actually afraid of the man. I have read books where the couples first time was basically rape, where he spanked her before doing her and it was hot, as well as real S&amp;M books. I could see the appeal in them even if some of them weren’t really my taste. The sexy was there. This completely lacked all sexiness. I truly saw no appeal in it. Plus, he sucked as a highlander. He was a border dandy that lured me not at all.
	
In 16th century Scotland, Mary Queen of Scots is murdered by Queen Elizabeth and her son sits on her throne. During all these political intrigues Mary Kate MacPherson finds herself forced into marrying Sir Adam Douglas. A man she wants nothing to do with. A man from the borderlands who feels that women should succumb completely to their husbands. She submits to the marriage, but refuses to submit to much more. 

There is little plot to move the story along. And the misunderstandings are maddening. The only part that was bearable was at the end, we’re talking the last 5% of the book, where she actually gets a little gumption and does something spunky and funny. Other than that, she talks a lot about how she is so independent and strong willed, and worthy of her husbands confidence, but she does nothing! She doesn’t even want to work her own household because she doesn’t really like math and it’s all too much. What?!?!?!?

Sample dialogue:
 
“Come here to me,” he ordered inflexibly. “The sooner we begin, the sooner it will be done.”
She shook her head stubbornly, though she knew there was no way to avoid what was coming. He was her husband, and here in his own home there was no higher authority to whom she might appeal. Had her own father been present, he could not have stopped him. Not , she thought bitterly, that Duncan would have tried. Douglas was right about that. Her father would say she was merely coming by her just deserts if only in that she ought to have guarded her temper and not let it carry her behavior beyond what Douglas would tolerate.

I’m sorry, I just can’t promote this book. I was completely done with it when, after multiple spankings, he slaps her face in a fight and yells at her about how they should never have married, etc. She begins to cry and he recants, telling her he didn’t mean it and was just so mad. Then they do it and she sees how it was really her fault because she did the wrong thing. If that isn’t domestic violence, then I don’t know what is. Yuck.
 
You Might Also Like: (or much prefer since they’re actual highlanders)
 	
Karen Marie Moning’s Beyond the Highland Mist (Highlander series #1)
Julie Garwood’s The Bride (Lairds’ Fiancees, #1)