Rating: 5/5

Author Greg Dening, Australian History Professor of the Pacific, has artistically woven together a richly textured tapestry of a momentous era of 19th century naval history. Using the Mutiny on the Bounty as the staging event unfolding within a vastly larger theatrical canvas of the Pacific region and Island cultures, Dening deftly connects the projection of power metaphors of the British empire and its naval fleets, the subjugated sailors disciplined with brutal floggings that led to high desertion rates, and the conflicts arising from ignorance and arrogance regarding the mythic structures that prevailed among native islanders. There are complex, escalating dramas unfolding on board and on island, but there are also multiple layers interacting from the highest echelons of the British empire and the Admiralty setting rigid hierarchical "performance roles" down through Captains, seamen, and Islanders.

Forget everything you think you may have learned by watching any of the highly romanticized and overly simplified Hollywood movies -- a 1933 version starring Errol Flynn as Fletcher Christian, a 1935 version with Clark Gable (&amp; Charles Laughton as Captain Bligh), a 1962 horrible version with Marlon Brando (&amp; Trevor Howard as Bligh), and a 1984 disastrous version with Mel Gibson (&amp; Anthony Hopkins as Bligh). 

The 450pp book requires a patient reader, given how many facets Dening is pulling together before unravelling the action. But the reader will be rewarded with a series of gems, and by the end of the book will have fomented your imagination to such a degree you no doubt will be desiring more narratives and tales from this era of wooden sailing ships.

The Bounty's mission was to secure a supply of breadfruit. As National Geographic described on one of the anniversaries of the infamous mutiny (April 28, 1789), "Artocarpus altilis, is a member of the fig family, a tall, leathery-leaved tropical tree that bears prickly, yellow-green, football-sized fruits. Europeans first discovered it in 1769 when Captain Cook arrived in Tahiti. Along for the ride was botanist Joseph Banks, who zeroed in on breadfruit as a potential source of cheap and nutritious food for slaves on the sugar plantations of the British West Indies. Banks pitched the idea to King George III, who authorized Bligh to spearhead the breadfruit-gathering expedition."

Interestingly, Captain Bligh was not among the Captains most notorious for flogging their crews, in fact he issued the least amount of floggings. Roughly 20 percent of sailors suffered flogging, with Bligh ordering less than 10 percent of his crews to be flogged, while Captain George Vancouver flogged nearly 50 percent of his crew. One Vancouver sailor received 252 lashes over nine floggings!

In a tantalizing tidbit, Dening relates why Captain Cook went from being treated as a god-like figure by Hawaiian islanders to being hacked to death, which requires an understanding of the islanders' myths and rituals. Cook had chosen Bligh to serve as Master of the ship Resolution, and while beating a retreat in a boat to the ship, Bligh witnessed Cook's gruesome dismemberment. There is an arresting irony that Dening recounts at the outset of his book, of the great frustration and resentment Bligh felt towards the Admiralty for failing to sign off on his departure date, delaying the start for several weeks, and causing Bligh to miss a period of excellent winds. As a result they hit bad very bad weather, which required a prolonged stay on Tahiti. That lengthy stay may have served as the trigger point unleashing the mutiny, which may never have occurred if Bligh had been able to sail earlier and catch the good winds.