Rating: 4/5

This collection of three novels provides an extraordinary look at the individuals in the lower echelons of the British Imperial administration in the Balkan theatre during the first two years of WW II. It is a great read for those interested in this highly esoteric topic. I am afraid that most readers under the age of 70 years will be unable to appreciate its prime merits. I was able to enjoy the work because I am the right age and had earlier read "Cairo in the War 1939-45" by Artemis Cooper which describes the historical context as well as devoting great deal of space to Olivia Manning. 
The Balkan Trilogy which is highly autobiographical also tells the story of the marriage of Harriet Pringle (the literary alter ego of the author) and her husband Guy (based on Manning's husband Reggie Smith). While Harriet and Guy are two rather ghastly individuals their love story fascinates because of the authenticity of the detail.
Guy Pringle is a teacher employed by British Council a corporation founded by the Foreign Office which ran schools and performed propaganda services in foreign countries. He devotes a great deal of his energy to building and maintaining a group of revolting admirers. He is also a committed communist which puts him in a delicate situation as Russia is allied with Nazi Germany when the novel opens. The real-life alter ego of Guy, Reggie Smith, was also a communist spy which is something that Manning neglects to inform the reader of in the Balkan Trilogy. 
Like their real life counterparts, Harriet and Guy meet in July 1939 in England, marry in August and arrive in Bucharest on 3 September 1939, the day Britain declares war on Germany. Guy will work as a teacher until the Germans invade in October 1940. They will win then flee to Athens where they will stay until the spring of 1941.
The Pringles in other words live through some very exciting times. However, they and their friends appear to believe that nothing is happening during the first two novels.. Guy is sure that they will have many years together in Romania. The British have guaranteed the borders of Romania which is a commitment that all the British characters believe will be honoured. Guy, the good communist, argues that the Russians will intervene should Germany ever decide to invade Romania. The third novel takes place in Greece where everyone expects a German invasion. This time the characters delude themselves into thinking that the British or rather Australian troops will be able to repel the invaders.
Olivia is much happier in Greece than in Romania but the idyll quickly comes to an end. The Germans invade. The British/Australian resistance crumples. 
On 18 April 1941 Guy and Harriet Pringle (like Manning and Smith) depart for Greece on the last civilian ship to leave Piraeus (the port of Athens). Manning neglects to mention that on board are: George Seferis (the poet who won the Nobel Prize in 1963). Lawrence Durrell who like Guy worked for the British Council departed from Athens on a small private craft the same week. Manning's own life was probably seems to have been more interesting that of her fictional heroine. 
In the Balkan Trilogy, Manning paints a negative picture of everyone. The foreigners are two-faced. They tell the British that they love them as they prepare to jump to the Nazi side. Their personal hygiene leaves much to be desired and their attitudes towards women are primitive. Guy (the proxy for her husband) comes off as a louse. He does not give up his old mistress and prefers to spend his time with his sycophants rather than his more critical wife. Guy's colleagues at the British Council are intriguers and back-stabbers who never show any gratitude to him for all the things that he does for them.
While the communist Guy consistently misreads the political and military situation he displays a remarkable talent for theatre. While Germany is over-running France, he decides to put on a production of "Troilus and Cressida" a play by Shakespeare about the Trojan War in which all the characters seem highly confused by the events that they are participating in. Manning devotes most of the final quarter of the first novel in the trilogy to the rehearsals and performance. All of the major parts are played by friend of Guy who are type-cast playing characters that they resemble in real-life. Not too surprisingly they acquit themselves splendidly. Manning seems to re-iterating Shakespeare's point that all the world is a stage on we which we simply play parts assigned to us. The fact that we do not understand the events that we are living through need not prevent us from playing our roles energetically.
Of all the hangers-on that Guy surrounds himself with, Manning devotes the most space to Yakimov an Englishman with Russian émigré parents. Yakimov enjoys the high life. He takes a mistress who can support him in the manner that he enjoys. When the mistress dies, he falls into poverty. Guy decides to support him and to horror of Harriet invites him to live in their apartment. When they decide to hide a Jew in the loft they are forced to go to great lengths to hide his presence from Yakimov who they fear might denounce him to the police. Yakimov never denounces the Jew but accidentally tips off the police that Guy is a communist. Yakimov is a dominating presence in the trilogy. When he is finally killed, the reader is happy enough to see the end of him.
The Balkan Trilogy has many great moments. However, to enjoy it, the reader must know a great deal about the historical context before beginning.