Rating: 4/5

Antarctica, an American settlement the Wilkes Ice Station abandoned now, two U.S. scientists surface in an ice cave 3,000 feet below sea level, their last moments breathing. Other divers are sent and are never heard from again. The American Marines arrive amidst ludicrous rumors of an alien spaceship found, silly notion imagine such a thing occurring. Tough Lieutenant Shane Schofield Recon Unit Commander, (nickname Scarecrow) has one great attribute, he never gives up. Mr. Schofield will need all that determination to survive this unprecedented situation . Don't need to state the lethal conditions here, an ice vast desert which kills, bone chilling temperatures can freezes a man's soul the great blizzards, the relentless massive winds that will blind, and crevasses they might eventually doom... all.
 Any traveler ignorant enough to walk on its frigid surface unprepared . Technological supremacy is the big prize and no one has any friends anymore, no surprise, greed always prevails. With a dozen men and women, Shane has to defend the ICE STATION AGAINST ALL THE ATTACKERS, so called allies become deadly enemies, even his own men can't be trusted. The solar flares causing a communication blackout, Scarecrow will get no help from anyone, they will have to deal with all hoping their limited resources are enough to win . After the marines defeat "friendly nations" soldiers, Shane needs to get to the mysterious cave. Killer Whales or no Killer Whales swimming around, he has a job to do...Back in the U.S. Washington Post reporters get a tip from Andrew Trent, a U.S. Marine hiding in New Mexico, about a secret military group which unbelievably even kills its own people, in order to preserve American superiority in the world... On the South Pole, Scarecrow with the assistance of Wendy, an Antarctic seal (the kind with flippers) gets what's left of his friends to the cavern. However with the diving bell destroyed there is no way out, still not the immediate problem for now. Strange new sea creatures also are inhabiting that space under the sea, both kinds of animals can't live in the same area though, something has to give...Another difficulty well two, bombs are about to go off on top and a nuclear missile is racing in the air and getting closer and closer to the ice station, Scarecrow better think of something quick. This is like an action movie all credibility is thrown out the window in order to entertain the public, just relax and enjoy the trip... some clever happenings take place...