Rating: 4/5

There is both the sense of the familiar and something that is quite a departure from her other books in Mary Renault’s The Praise Singer. The style of writing is the same; Renault’s marvellous ability to create an immersive ancient Greek world that almost feels palpable, as if the author instinctively intuits the everyday concerns and wider outlook of her characters, espousing what we might today call alien views and illuminating strange customs as though there could be nothing more natural. Renault was one of those rare writers who has always been able to whisk me off to a distant, long-forgotten world, while somehow engaging the reader in comprehending that world. Certainly, in historical fiction I’ve found few authors who seem to truly understand their subject, and I’ve had to put down far too many books where the voice was simply too modern and did not ring true.

What is surprising and fresh about The Praise Singer is that the substance is different. I’ve read Renault’s Theseus duology, and Alexander trilogy, and am now making my way through her three standalone novels set in the fifth and fourth centuries; The Praise Singer is the first, chronologically, and notable in that far from being carried by a larger-than-life hero, Renault’s protagonist is a bard, Simonides, who writes about the deeds of such figures. Other reviewers have noted that this does give the novel the feel of a history textbook dressed up in a semi-fictional (for Simonides and many of the named characters were real people) story – sugar to make the medicine go down, perhaps? I can understand such criticism, although I don’t agree entirely with it. Unless you really like your Greek poets, a reader might feel frustrated at reading about events through the perspective of a less enthralling ‘side character’ rather than directly sitting on the shoulders of the tyrants and oligarchs. I must admit to being less gripped by this novel than Renault’s aforementioned series. But Simonides is not just a conveniently long-lived eyewitness. One gets the impression that there is something of Renault herself in the depiction, a fascination on her part for a fellow story-teller.

8 out of 10