Rating: 2/5

Krentz does an amazing job when it comes to worldbuilding in Sweet Starfire. The universe she creates here is well-established and exciting. Through very detailed descriptions of setting, which include all senses, one feels like they are right there with the heroine Cidra while reading. While this worldbuilding can be captivating and takes us into a different world, it can also feel overwhelming, as the action almost seems to disappear between the paragraphs of description. At some points, I almost felt bored reading through all the pages setting up the world, wishing for more action. 
	While her characters might seem interesting at first, meeting on terms of completely different societal and cultural backgrounds, they turn out to be flat, based on outdated stereotypes. Severance portrays the image of a strong, but wild man, adhering to the traits of toxic masculinity. Cidra on the other hand, is this pretty, but innocent girl, being seduced by the wolf Severance. The innocent woman finds herself in the position, where she either goes against what she has grown up with and gives in to the wild needs of the wolf, or tames his wildness and “fixes” him. While everything that happens between them might seem consensual, I still see their relationship as problematic. Cidra might be educated and an adult, but she is still significantly younger than Severance, and inexperienced. Therefore, she is not in a position where she feels comfortable to say no, while Severance uses this young girl who basically fell into his lap. Furthermore, the expectation of Cidra dimming this man’s wildness is not a good portrayal of a relationship, as she is dating a man and not an animal after all. It should not be expected of her to keep up with his wild needs. 
	This book is definitely not bad if you’re looking for escapism in your readings, trying to escape the known world in the comfort of your own couch. Krentz’ worldbuilding is fantastic and does a great job in capturing the reader. When it comes to characterization, it can be seen as problematic, portraying stereotypes and giving wrong ideas of relationships. If ones wants to live in the fantasy of taming a wild, muscular man, it is the perfect read though.