Rating: 5/5

The writing in this story is epic. Just after being wrung out by Faulkner, I picked up Beloved on a whim. Knowing nothing about it or the author. 

Can I say, “I liked the cover?"

Well, I think I can thank Billy Faulkner as he warmed me up for this one, as Morrison takes us back and forth in time, she includes a great deal of symbolism (a lot!), metaphors and even stream of consciousness writing. You know – the type where everything happens all at once, the now, yesterday and the distant past. Particularly the trauma.

Oh man, the trauma.

The main action takes place in 1873 just after the American Civil War, but we are thrown back into the period of slavery often. The stories here are challenging to read. We all know the horrors that took place – but this author’s writing is exquisitely visceral. It’s not that long ago when one thinks about it – no wonder our society is still recovering from this horrific period. Will our society ever recover.

I took to the writing here like a duck to water and couldn’t put the bloody book down, I will miss this book tonight like a friend. 

There’s also magical realism among the horrors.

The strength of the people subjected to slavery is like nothing else. But, also due to their treatment over a few centuries black people also committed acts devoid of humanity. How could they not be de-humanised?

Slavery broke individuals, families, and a people.

Morrison pulls no punches. Her writing also has some sort of hypnotic rhythm and despite the subject matter I just wanted to read more. I felt a need to be horrified, I also had to find out how the cast of characters fared. Sethe and Devon in particular. 

The magical realism was haunting. There was one section when I felt light, horrific pins and needles throughout my scalp and neck – it read like this 
  ”I made that song up” said Sethe. “I made it up and sang it to my children. Nobody knows that song but me and my children.” Beloved turned to Sethe. “I know it” she said
. Oh man, that was full throttle spooky.

Humanity is horrible. 

Morrison is a superstar and I will read more of her work that is for sure.

A masterpiece.

5 of the BIGGEST stars