Rating: 1/5

Reading this novel was like chewing through a wet sand sandwich. The premise was promising: The planet Prince Samual's World is in the process of being colonized, and it will be categorized on the basis of its level of technological achievement. Within the colonizing empire, those worlds which have attained space flight are accorded higher status, along with greater power and autonomy. An expedition of ostensible traders (actually a para-military detachment) hitch a ride on an imperial ship to the planet Makassar, once a more advanced world which has now fallen into barbarism, in order to plunder a library which may contain the technical information necessary to build a spacecraft. There is a lot of potential in this basic plot arc, but Pournelle squanders it profoundly.

More than half of this novel is devoted to painfully tedious, overly-detailed descriptions of a long sea voyage and the preparation and prosecution of various military campaigns. Here are a couple examples of the copious padding which bloat the text to no end: "...The jibs backwinded, pulling the bow around. 'Let go the jibsheets,' MacLean shouted. 'Now trim them in on the port side. Snap to it. Man the leeboards! Smartly men!' The port leeboard was pushed down, the tackles strained to raise the starboard one. MacLean stamped with impatience until the task was done, then turned to MacKinnie. 'She's lively enough. Bit slow, easy to get caught in the stays. If I end up out of action, remember that. Leave the jibs cleated until the bow's well around, or you'll be in irons.'..."

The above is an excerpt from a very long sequence which, had the author anything more substantive to fill his pages with, could have been summarized in something like the following manner: "The voyage presented many challenges, and they were just barely able to evade the pirates, but in the end, with a little luck and fortitude, they reached their destination with a minimum of losses." As it stands, the reader is expected to be an expert in sailing, and to know, for example, what a jibsheet is, what it means to trim one, what a leeboard is, and so on. (This same obsession with sailing jargon is evident in some of Pournelle's other early works as well.)

Later, we have the following, which is also representative: "MacKinnie sent a heavy detachment of shieldmen angling forward and to the left from the camp gate. A second group angled off to the right, while others marched out to form a line between them, its ends anchored with the hard marching groups of picked men. When the left-hand group had left a large enough opening inside the wedge, the knights were sent forward until they were just behind the shield wall, at the extreme left corner of the inverted wedge the army was forming. Then MacKinnie sent the Temple archers forward, a line down each leg of his triangular formation, leaving none in the center..."

Once again, page upon page upon page of detailed description of every nuance of the battle could have been summarized: "The battle was fierce, but MacKinnie's forces, now gaining confidence, were able to withstand the barbarian attack, and emerged triumphant." Only those deeply interested in medieval field combat could possibly find Pournelle's interminably detailed descriptions of combat (and the preparation for it) the least bit interesting.

In short, the central premise of this book -- a quest for technology -- is a MacGuffin which covers for a story about sea voyages and combat. What remains is muddled, at best, and the denouement, in which the knowledge sought is finally attained, is deeply disappointing and seems to leave things sufficiently open (i.e., unresolved) to warrant a sequel. This novel was later expanded as "King David's Spaceship," and formed a part of Pournelle's CoDominium series. But, really, who the hell gives a damn?

I have struggled with Pournelle. I started reading his work based on some of the collaborations he's been involved with, and I suppose that when he's working with another author his lesser impulses are effectively muted. On his own, he tries my patience in the extreme. I doubt I'll be returning to his work again.