Rating: 4/5

Ugh! Why do they keep having to say goodbye? The one thing I dislike about this series is how sad it is! I want Andrew, Catherine, Henri, Louise, Anne, Nicole, and all their loved ones to all live together and share life. No more living oceans and continents apart.

Nicole has left to travel to England. Charles wishes to make her his heir, so she has agreed to a two-year trial to see if she is suited to the life of British nobility. 

Meanwhile, back at home, Cyril comes down with the grippe during a particularly hard winter, and dies, just after seeing his newborn son, John. Anne becomes greatly depressed.

When Nicole and Charles hear of Cyril's passing, they extend an invitation to Anne to come and stay in England for a time. Cyril's mother lives in Wales and would then be able to meet her grandson. Anne decides to go, meaning Andrew and Catherine must say goodbye to their other daughter. (Have I mentioned that I'm tired of these emotional seaside farewell scenes?!)

England is good for Anne and having her "sister" and nephew at Harrow Hall is good for Nicole. She is doing her best, but society life is trying for her. She finds little fulfillment in her days and is still restless. Yet, she has a duty and she is fully prepared to do it. 

 "It has made me realize that all my life," Nicole said, "I've measured how well I was suited to a place by how happy it made me. Only now, as I learn my way through English society, have I come to see that, although happiness is a fine thing, it comes and it goes. So long as I base my happiness upon what I have or how life suits me, it will always remain fleeting. For as soon as something changes, as soon as a cold wind blows through my life, as soon as life takes an unpleasant turn, my happiness would be gone.... My studies have shown me that I need to find my happiness in God, and in Him alone. By placing my life in His hands and seeking to live as He wants me to, I now have a peace that's greater than whatever struggle I might face. My frustrations and my difficulties, all these will pass. But He remains always. And it's in His eternal promises that I must abide."

Such an apt description of why we need joy! Oke &amp; Bunn did a wonderful job here with wrestling with this subject in Nicole's head and heart.

Anne however, eases right in to life at Harrow Hall (once she is able to put mourning aside). It seems that she would be a better heiress, but that is out of the question. Or is it?

"What does the word 'duty' mean to you, Uncle?"
" Duty is what I'm obligated to do. I have a duty to my country, to my fellow man, and to my God. These are the givens of my life. I am called to walk uprightly and to live my neighbor as myself. And I am called to love God and serve Him with all that I am and all that I have. These are not mere invitations, to alter or ignore at my whim. These are duties. These are the constants upon which I must base my actions."

During all this, Charles is dealing with heart issues that grow more severe each day and he is making many enemies with his support of the American colonies' assertion of independence. 

If you are not careful, it is quite easy to get lost in this book. There are many plots all weaving together, plus the confusion of who is whose actual daughter and the like. 

Anne ends up falling in love with a young Englishman with whom she shares vision and mission. She stays at Harrow Hall to become Charles' heir; despite not being actually related, Charles decides to go ahead. They discover that Cyril's mother is actually Charles' cousin, so baby John is a blood heir! All's well that ends well :)

Charles gives Nicole his properties in America as an inheritance. We leave her as she prepares to travel back to North America (Oh look, another heart-wrenching goodbye. These books are testing my will power to NOT cry, because I hate crying, and I'm currently wearing eye makeup.) 

I like these books, I really do. They have great topics of faith that they explore, I love the setting, I just hate all the sadness and goodbyes. I'm not sure if I've said that yet ;)