Rating: 5/5

Henry Clay was not quite an American when he was born on April 12, 1776. The country would come as we know on July 4, of that year. In a sense he grew with the country and went west with it when
as a young man he left Virginia for Kentucky. 

Before leaving Virginia, Clay studied under the first great American law teacher George Wythe and in
Kentucky with some god given oratorical talents made his mark in the courts. Politics was a natural
next step and he got two interim appointments to the US Senate in the first decade of the 19th century.

He found his political home in the House of Representatives where over the course of the next 14 years
had a few terms as Speaker after being elected in 1810. Clay was one of a group labeled War Hawks, his later rival John C. Calhoun was another who were hot to trot for war with Great Britain. They got
one and didn't do so good in conquering Canada which was the objective. Clay also voted against
rechartering the First US National Bank, an issue he would revolve 180 degrees on.

Clay was also one of the peace delegation at Ghent to negotiate an end to the War of 1812. The land
military glory went to Andrew Jackson for winning the Battle of New Orleans in January 1815 a few
weeks after the peace was signed. 

A later military action of Jackson's which was criticized by Clay was his arbitrary invasion of Spanish Florida in 1819. Clay spoke against it on the floor of the House and earned Jackson's undying hate. Clay for that matter thought Jackson a military chieftain as he put it and not fit for
the presidency which both aspired to.

Clay ran 3 times for president and lost. That first time was 1824 as political parties were being 
realigned. Andrew Jackson got 99 electoral college votes, John Quincy Adams 84, William H. Crawford 42 and Henry Clay 37. The election went to the House of Representatives which by the
Constitution chooses among the top three. Clay swung his support to Adams.

When Adams made Clay his Secretary of State the Jackson supporters cried foul and "corrupt bargain". That charge would haunt Clay the rest of his life. Adams and Clay were not bosom buddies, Adams was also a peace delegate at Ghent and Clay's gambling and occasional womanizing
offended his Puritan soul. But during the 4 year Adams administration they did develop a working
relationship and a respect for each other's talents. Clay on the House floor championed the cause
of the new South American republics and as Secretary of State affected their recognition. Later on
though Clay thought a public refusal of the offer might have stood his chances for the presidency
better.

After Adams was roundly defeated by Jackson in 1828, Clay spent 2 years at his estate at Ashland in Lexington, Kentucky. In 1830 Kentucky sent him to the Senate where he became President Jackson's leading critic. 

By that time Jackson had made public his opposition to the 2nd National Bank headed by Nicholas
Biddle. In another colossal bad mistake Clay thought that a good issue to challenge Jackson's
re-election on in 1832. He lost badly. 

Come 1840 the opposition Whigs won the presidency, but not with Clay. William Henry Harrison
was elected and promptly died one month into his term. State's Right champion John Tyler became the first Vice President to succeed to the Presidency. Tyler did an about face on Whig
policies which enraged Clay and most northern Whigs. Clay resigned the Senate to devote the next 3 years to another try at the White House.

The issue of Texas loomed large for 1844. Clay thought as did former President Martin Van Buren 
that they could game the election and dampen the issue by agreeing not to talk of Texas admission.
Van Buren was favored to be the Democratic candidate. Clay got the Whig nomination, but after
that agreement with Clay became known Van Buren lost to James Knox Polk at the Democratic
convention. Polk went on to become president.

His White House ambitions thoroughly done. Clay went back to the Senate from Kentucky in 1849
this time however to lend his talents to preventing a Civil War. The possibility loomed large in those years with the newly acquired territory from Mexico as a result of the Mexican War as to
whether said territory would be open to slavery.

As Speaker of the House Clay was a prime mover in the passage of the Missouri Compromise in 1820
that prevented sectional war then. In 1850 in the Senate Clay was once again the prime mover of a
series of measures that were labeled the Compromise of 1850 that in effect postponed Civil War for
a decade.

The cracks were beginning when Clay died in 1852. Robert Remini who is a great Jackson and Jacksonian Era scholar writes here of the great anti-Jackson. Henry Clay was a man of charm, and
wit and great intelligence. Sadly by fate and by his own miscalculations we were denied a Clay
presidency. Might have been a good one.