Rating: 2/5

When I bought "Fanny" at a little book store in North Branch last year, I was sorely misled by the enticing synopsis on the back. I was under the impression that this novel followed a woman named Frances Trollope and her lover, the feminist Fanny Wright, which can be deduced when it says Trollope entered a "sensual adventure" to America with her flame-haired companion. Well, I was wrong. This isn't cool lesbian historical fiction, its just effing pretentious and void of any emotion or intrigue.

I just couldn't get into the story and there was so much history I wasn't familiar with. Mrs. Trollope is an aging mother living in England in the 1820's who has made some money as an author, but she is looking for her next topic. She meets Fanny Wright, a younger woman who is passionate about feminism (yeah, right- feminism didn't even exist as a term at that time, and Fanny Wright is NOT a feminist), abolition, and free love. I don't even know, she's a spoiled baby who attaches herself to older men and uses their money to fund her idealistic plans, then when they fall through she blames everyone but herself. She takes Trollope to America with Trollope's children and a homosexual French painter who, unbeknowst to the clueless Trollope, is boning her youngest son. In America, Fanny tries to start some sort of freed slave colony, which is an epic racist failure, and then Trollope has an affair with a black man named Jupiter, which is the only good, emotional part of the novel, and it ended so quickly.

The novel drags on forever, gets lost in its own pretentious "brilliant" witticisms, and focuses too much on the unimportant. The ending was crap and it should've ended when Trollope's children passed, but there was some shit with a seance and I was SO BORED. This book is lame and misleading. Unless you're really into the time period and the history (I don't even know what the history is, it is a weird blend of French and British religious and political theories along with 1800's New Orleans and Cincinnati culture), don't read this misleading book. It isn't a frolicking feminist lesbian romance, it is a total drag.