Rating: 5/5

Malcolm Boyd was an amazing man who passed away at the age of 91 earlier this year. His life was full of activism and working for social justice and I admire him deeply.

In 1977 Malcolm, who was an Episcopal (Anglican) priest, came out as gay. It was at that time he decided to live as who he really was and not as the person society expected him to be. This took great courage and was a risk to his ministry as a priest. I am so glad he found the courage to do that because in so doing he has passed on in his writings his own journey towards full humanity. Fully human and fully alive. 

In this book Malcolm provides a frank re-telling of his journey to reconcile his sexuality and his spirituality. His life was centred on God. He had a remarkable faith and an understanding of God that was rooted in reason, experience and belief. I think his faith gave him the strength to wrestle with who he truly was and determine to live fully who he really was.

In adulthood he explored his sexuality with both stable and fleeting relationships. These relationships and friendships formed part of his journey towards being himself. He is very frank about his sexuality and describes his sexual needs as being strong and demanding. He actually had some relationships that he desired would be established and long term but as a priest at a time when homosexuality was unaccepted this was impossible.

When I think about him I realise it is not just in his sexuality that he was strong. His writings depict a man who was strong and courageous and honest in himself. He found short term, fleeting affairs to be very dissatisfying but there was no way of having an established relationship of the same sex and marriage was not available. This to me speaks of the redemptive power of marriage for everyone and the stability and comfort it can bring. 

Why then should same sex couples be denied this comfort? 

Why should anyone be forced into a life of loneliness just because they are gay?

I think Malcolm Boyd must have been the kind of man that other people, both men and women, would have wanted to follow. He was the kind of man who could bear the burdens of others even though he had burdens of his own. He is very much the kind of man I would want as a priest, a dad or a husband because he had inner integrity, true love for others and deep strength. All of this rooted in a truthful spirituality, qualities not found everywhere.

Over the years Malcolm realised that so many of his clergy colleagues were gay. He actually had relationships with some of them and he recognises in his writings the way in which the church deceives itself. He describes this as 'massive deceptions and denials of selfhood.' 

And quite right too! 

This resonated with me. As a priest I find this dichotomy exists within my own church. I see it as deception and a church that is not truthful about who it really is before God and people. The Church of England tries to present a heterosexual face to the world and yet so many of our clergy are gay. Gay, godly, loving, hard working and loyal and sacrificial in their service. Yet the C of E doesn't acknowledge this and where it does it tries to control their behaviour. 

* In the Church of England gay clergy 
can enter civil partnerships but they must not be of a sexual nature.

*In the Church of England gay clergy are not allowed to enter into same sex marriage. 

*In the Church of England gay clergy are not allowed to have sex with someone of the same sex.

But my clergy colleagues are there serving faithfully and they all interpret these rules differently. Some do, some don't, and possibly some would if they could. As a divorced woman I look at all these rules with bemusement because if I were a Bishop I wouldn't want to go poking my fingers into the sexual ethics of my clergy. I would want them to live guided by their conscience, their faith and their love of God and people.

As Malcolm says 'I began to wonder how much double-standard ethics an institution can tolerate and still maintain it's integrity.' (page 92)

And as I say 'Preach it my brother'!!!

He hits the nail on the head. Some churches are deceiving themselves but we cannot deceive God who knows us in our innermost being. 

I think the only way to respond to this is to follow Revd Malcolm's example and live and speak the truth and be who we really are in our churches as gay, straight, black, white, old young and so on. God loves diversity and the church must find ways of respecting and embracing the reality of diversity. It isn't easy but it isn't impossible either.

I think churches in general have come a long way since the days when Malcolm Boyd was first ordained and to realise that he didn't even have the option to live openly as a gay man and priest makes his story all the more remarkable. 

But there is something else at the heart of his memoir and this is about the need for ALL of us to take off the masks. We don't have to be gay to live with a mask. For me I need to look at who I really am and how I live my own life. Who do people see and do they see who I really am? I hope they do because one thing I realise from Malcolm's writing is that it is truly exhausting and mentally and spiritually debilitating to live a false life. 

Beyond the masks Malcolm Boyd writes as a priest. His life was one of mission, serving God and serving people and I loved the way in which he made the Gospel come alive even though this didn't sit well with people. His outreach to black people didn't sit well with some of his white congregation members. His outreach to students didn't meet with the approval of his Bishop but Malcom says 'my job was in the world' (page 93) and he continued that job until the end.

Jesus came that we might have life and have it more abundantly. I pray that we may all live as Malcolm Boyd did and be able to courageously take off our own masks.