Rating: 4/5

“The small person did not say ‘Is Mama home?’ She said ‘Ist Mami da?’, and did not speak a word of English, and for a moment Anna felt shaken by her sudden emergence”.

Small Person is the third part of Judith Kerr’s partly autobiographical trilogy. The trilogy follows Anna from her childhood in Germany and escape from Hitler, life as a refugee in London and living through the Blitz. This story takes place in 1956 and in the context of a tumultuous history - Berlin is partitioned, Hungary is trying to resist Russian control and a situation is evolving in Suez. Anna is in London buying carpets for the home she shares with her husband when she receives an urgent telephone call advising her that her mother is seriously ill. Anna must fly back to Berlin, the city of her childhood, the place she fled and where she left so many memories alongside her beloved Pink Rabbit.

I am really surprised to read so many negative reviews for this. I loved it. Kerr has a wonderful engaging style and immediately draws you into the story. Although this is Anna’s story I guess we are all the more interested because it is Kerr’s too. After two volumes spent with Anna, the reader has a vested interest in her story and that of beloved family members -her brother Max, her Mother and her Father who sadly died shortly after the war. 

When Anna arrives in Berlin she discovers her Mother had attempted suicide. Her relationship with her Mother is complex and I think she captures this so well in her narrative. She really wants to be home with her husband and being back in Berlin brings back so many difficult memories of herself - ‘the small person.’ Her mother is overwhelmed by the war years which have demanded so much of her. Unbelievably she is only 56 and desperate to experience a joy that has been rather limited until now. Her children are married and she has discovered her partner having an affair. She sees little left to live for.. 

I was overjoyed to see Max again and to watch the tenderness between the siblings..how much have they gone through together! This story of a family is extraordinary because of its backdrop against some of the biggest historical events of the 20th Century. Having escaped Hitler, survived the Blitz, yet again their lives feel small and fragile in the face of new conflicts.

I think that this book is a vital addition to any collection of refugee literature. Anna's sense of identity and belonging feels particularly fragile and fragmented as she is pulled between her present and the past. 

Whilst Pink Rabbit is very much a children’s novel, this is an adult read and embraces some difficult topics. Although Anna’s story is unique, it embraces some universal themes: identity; family; looking after an elderly parent.