Rating: 4/5

I first read this for class in 6th grade, and I've held it in fond regard every since. I'd forgotten a lot of the details, but so many others came rushing back. The finding of the title object, Blue Boy the blue roan and their trip to the mountains, Cloyd's ancestry and information about the Ute people, Walter's way of understanding what this troubled boy needs and knowing when to draw him out and when to let him be, and more. I also realized, once I came to it, that this is where I learned the word "hobble," at least in the context of tying two of a horse's legs together so they can't run off.

Given all that, I'm surprised I didn't get all the way up to 5 stars in my revisiting, but the truth is I found some of the things Cloyd does too infuriating to enjoy*. The message of "patience and perseverance are important when working with kids who act out" is a good one, but I am in short supply of both and have no interest in changing that fact. 

*(deliberately killing the peach trees that Walter's late wife loved in an irrational fit of temper; almost killing the horse out of stupidity, leading to a fall that it survives uninjured only through sheer luck; and then somehow annoying me more when he refuses to rat out the bear poacher because ~revenge is bad~ or something, which is ridiculous because the peach tree destruction was Cloyd deciding all on his own that Walter had wronged him without bothering to mention the issue to Walter at all. On the other hand, the guy who killed an endangered grizzly bear DEFINITELY did wrong and should be incentivized against doing that again with fines and/or jail time)

I still think schools should go ahead and keep assigning this one, though. It's made of good stuff.

Side note: I'm revisiting it now because I ran across it on Libby while looking for an audiobook, and this format was wonderful -- narrated by George Guidall, whose voice is definitely more like the elderly Walter's than a boy's, it felt exactly like I was listening to my grandfather tell a story.