Rating: 3/5

Tim Winton is an excellent writer, and The Riders contains some wonderful prose. It's a hard book to rate, because on the one hand it's riveting, and on the other hand it made me incredibly uncomfortable. Everything about this book was unsettling. 

It begins with Scully, an Australian with the face of "an axe-murderer, a sniffer of bicycle seats", fixing up a cottage in the sticks in southern Ireland, waiting for his wife Jennifer and their 7-year old daughter Billie to join him. The cottage was bought on a whim, and sounds truly awful. That right there made me wonder. Who in their right mind would want to live in a primitive cottage with no electricity and an outhouse? How were they planning to make a living? The locals are as baffled as I. Since the story takes place in the eighties, Scully communicates with Jennifer through telegrams. She tells him their house in Australia has been sold, and that she and Billie will be arriving in three weeks time. When the plane lands, only Billie is on it, and she's not talking. 

Through some very hazy reasoning, Scully decides against contacting the authorities and instead drags his traumatized daughter on a wild goose chase across Europe. For some reason the family has been living in Greece, Paris and London, and Scully the bicycle-seat-sniffer traces their steps expecting to find Jennifer simply by grabbing uncomprehending Greeks by the collar and yelling "where is she?!". Now, this made me think that the adoring husband and father was perhaps an unhinged, unreliable narrator, and that Jennifer was probably sleeping with the fishes. But noo, that would be too conventional. 

From there on, the trip becomes a nightmarish odyssey through Europe. Scully makes one irrational decision after another, and the poor kid is mangled by a dog, accosted by a pedophile, pees herself in Paris, and is forced to save her deadbeat Dad from himself. Winton's Europe, by the way, consists of reeking alleyways, drunks and whores and malfunctioning toilets. With all the bowel action going on in this novel, this last part is extra painful to read about. At one Paris establishment, Billie finds a naked guy on the bathroom floor with a flower up his bum. Well done Billie, you don't find that in a Lonely Planet! And Amsterdam as we all know is the Sodom and Gomorra of the EU, so naturally Scully ends up dildo-whipped and jailed. 

The ending was fitting I suppose, but unsatisfying. I'm a big girl and I've been around the literary block a few times, so I knew not to expect answers and a neatly wrapped ending from a book like this. But after all that filth and misery and child abuse and sex toy violence I felt I deserved a bigger payoff. Still, Winton is a fine writer so don't let my prissiness put you off.