Rating: 5/5

“I believe in memory not as a place of arrival, but as point of departure – a catapult throwing you into present times, allowing you to imagine the future instead of accepting it. It would be absolutely impossible for me to have any connection with history if history were just a collection of dead people, dead names, dead facts. That’s why I wrote ‘Memory of Fire’ in the present tense, trying to keep alive everything that happened and allow it to happen again, as soon as the reader reads it.” 

We are not born into a void. We are standing on the shoulders of those who came before us and, hopefully, we would carry the weight of those who come after us into the future. Ignoring this continuity, denying this heritage, the good and the bad inter-weaved, will only lead to a disregard for the planet that sustains us and for the people who will have to deal with our wasteful ways.
Eduardo Galeano has chosen as his focus Latin America through the ages, but this is an exercise we should all be involved in, as the modern world has reduced the globe to the size of a village in which the actions of each and every one of us have repercussions. We don’t have time for more deadly mistakes to give us an experience that is painfully clear to those who have turned their eyes towards history.

 Through the centuries, Latin America has been despoiled of gold and silver, nitrates and rubber, copper and oil: its memory has also been usurped. From the outset it has been condemned to amnesia by those who have prevented it from being. 

This stubborn amnesia (I have just watched last week the movie “Don’t Look Up”) , this anti-intellectual and anti-science stance is on the rise, while the religious intransigence that gave us the conquistadores and the Inquisition tries to become once again the dominant political force on the planet. Personally, I consider Galeano to be required reading, regardless of the stated bias of his presentation. After all, if you want to combat any of his articles, you can go to alternative sources and sustain your point of view, just like you can do with Howard Zinn, another militant historian. But please, get your facts straight in the first place. Galeano certainly did his homework.

 I did not want to write an objective work – neither wanted to nor could. There is nothing neutral about this historical narration. Unable to distance myself, I take sides: I confess it and am not sorry. However, each fragment of this huge mosaic is based on a solid documentary foundation. What is told here has happened, although I tell it in my style and manner. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

“Genesis” is the first volume of the massive trilogy that covers Latin America from its oral history , through the invasion of the Europeans and up the year 1700. Given the amount of information available, the author has done a necessary work of pruning and condensing the reference material from his bibliography. He has also put a personal, literary, touch to the often short essays that serve more as a starting point for the journey than an exhaustive presentation.
What this means for me is that it is better to own all three of his history, and use them either as reference for further study, or as daily treats to myself as I open a page at random and read what it has to say.
Based on the first volume so far, I can attest that I didn’t find any of these pages to be trivial or unappealing.

 God was singing and clacking his maracas as he dreamed his dream in a cloud of tobacco smoke, feeling happy but shaken by doubt and mystery. 

The first chapters , before Columbus, were easily my favourites, as they tickled my interest in folklore and exotic cosmogonies. The later chapters were most of them painful, with few uplifting or cheerful stories, being an account of the wholesale destruction of countless cultures, religious book (and people) burning, deadly epidemics and large scale slavery. Few accounts of the indigenous culture have survived the fires of the zealots, which makes the occasional glimpse of poetry even more precious.

 Ballad of Cuzco 
 A llama wished
to have golden hair,
brilliant as the sun,
strong as love
and soft as the mist
that the dawn dissolves,
to weave a braid
on which to mark,
knot by knot,
the moons that pass,
the flowers that die. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

I couldn’t really start to comment on any of the historical developments (Potosi, Palmares, etc) over such a long period, without feeling that I have done a disservice to the work of the author and to his integrating vision. 
I can only mention some of the pages that I bookmarked, with the caveat that these are simply some of the things that caught my eye and not necessarily representative for the whole book:

 The Night Bird (Urutau)
 The Rabbit 
 Mate  ( The tea of the mate awakens sleepers, activates the lazy, and makes brothers and sisters of people who don’t know each other.)
1496: La Conception -  Sacrilege 
1514: Sinu River  The Summons 
1524: Quetzaltenango -  The Poet Will Tell Children the Story of This Battle 
1562: Mani -  The Fire Blunders 
1583: Tlatelolco -  Sahagun 
1625: Samayac -  Indian Dances Banned in Guatemala 
1637: Mystic Fort
1666: New Amsterdam -  New York 
1674: Yorktown -  The Olympian Steeds  ( I thank God, there are no free schools nor printing, and I hope we shall not have either for a hundred years; for learning has brought disobedience and heresy, and sects into the world, and printing has divulged them.  William Berkeley)
1695: Serra Dois Irmaos -  Zumbi 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

I look forward to continue my journey with the second volume.