Rating: 5/5

My introduction to the fiction of Charles Portis is True Grit, the 1968 novel that has long ranked at the top of my list of best opening sentences in any book. It's inspired two film adaptations, coming up short on lists of the best westerns for a lack of grandeur. But in literary form, Portis thrills with a strong point of view expressed through an unforgettable female protagonist, delights with frontier patois and satisfies the craving for a wonderfully spun yarn. It's a modestly ambitious story told on a humble scale , but one I shot through quickly and grinned at constantly, from page 1.

People do not give it credence that a fourteen-year-old girl could leave home and go off in the wintertime to avenge her father's blood but it did not seem so strange then, although I will say it did not happen every day. I was just fourteen years of age when a coward going by the name of Tom Chaney shot my father down in Fort Smith, Arkansas, and robbed him of his life and his horse and $150 in cash money plus two California gold pieces that he carried in his trouser band.

Mattie Ross continues her unlikely story, which begins on a cotton plantation on the south bank of the Arkansas River, near Dardanelle in Yell County. Her father departs for Fort Smith to buy some Texas cow ponies. Mattie doesn't think much of Texas or its horses, but her father sees a moneymaking scheme and takes off with one of his workers, a young man from Louisiana going by Tom Chaney who insists on tagging along. Chaney loses his wages in a card game (with some "riffraff" like himself) and when intercepted by his employer before he can exact revenge, shoots Frank Ross in the head and flees on his horse.

The young girl travels to Fort Smith to retrieve her father's body. She's accompanied by a family servant named Yarnell and upon arriving in town, takes it upon herself to put her father's affairs in order, selling back the ponies that he purchased and seeing that Tom Chaney is brought to justice. Speaking to the sheriff, Mattie learns that Chaney has linked up with a bandit named Lucky Ned Pepper and fled into the Indian Territory; this places the fugitive under the jurisdiction of the U.S. marshals. Mattie is not impressed with "Federal people" and insists on overseeing the matter herself, inquiring with the sheriff who the best marshal is.

The sheriff thought on it for a minute. He said, "I would have to weigh that proposition. There is near about two hundred of them. I reckon William Waters is the best tracker. He is a half-breed Comanche and it is something to see, watching him cut for sign. The meanest one is Rooster Cogburn. He is a pitiless man, double-tough, and fear don't enter into his thinking. He loves to pull a cork. Now L.T.. Quinn, he brings his prisoners in alive. He may let one get by now and then but he believes the worst of men is entitled to a fair shake. Also the court does not pay any fees for dead men. Quinn is a good peace officer and a lay preacher to boot. He will not plant evidence or abuse a prisoner. He is straight as a string. Yes, I will say Quinn is about the best they have."

I said, "Where can I find this Rooster?"

Mattie makes her way to the Federal Courthouse and watches as Rooster Cogburn, a surly one-eyed deputy marshal for the Western District of Arkansas, is grilled by the attorney of Odus Wharton, whose father and brother were both shot and killed by Cogburn during his arrest. Defense allegations that Cogburn is nothing more than an assassin do nothing to sway Mattie that he is the man she's looking for. Following Cogburn to the room he rents in back of a Chinese grocery, she offers to pay him a $50 reward for serving the fugitive warrant on Tom Chaney. He factors in Lucky Ned and doubles his price to $100. For that sum, Mattie insists on observing the manhunt.

The young girl's business is complicated by a sergeant in the Texas Rangers named LaBoeuf. He reveals to Mattie that Tom Chaney's real name is Theron Chelmsford and he's wanted for shooting and killing a state senator in Waco. LaBoeuf has been on Chaney's trail for four months. That duration does not impress Mattie and she notifies him that she's already hired a marshal to capture Chaney. This suits LaBoeuf, who anticipates that for an arrest in Indian Territory to stand up in court, he'll need a federal partner. Ditching the girl proves more difficult than either man considers and Mattie joins the manhunters on the road to the Indian Territory. Much banter ensues.

LaBoeuf was rubbing down his shaggy pony. He said, "You are lucky to be traveling in a place where a spring is so handy. In my country you can ride for days and see no ground water. I have lapped filthy water from a hoofprint and was glad to have it. You don't know what discomfort is until you have nearly perished for water."

Rooster said, "If I ever meet one of you Texas waddies that says he never drank from a horse track I think I will shake his hand and give him a Daniel Webster cigar."

"Then you don't believe it?" asked LaBoeuf.

"I believed it the first twenty-five times I heard it."

"Maybe he did drink from one," said I. "He is a Texas Ranger."

"Is that what he is?" said Rooster. "Well now, I can believe that."

LaBoeuf said, "You are getting ready to show your ignorance now, Cogburn. I don't mind a little personal chaffing, but I won't hear anything against the Ranger troop from a man like you."

"The Ranger troop!" said Rooster, with some contempt. "I tell you what you do. You go tell John Wesley Hardin about the Ranger troop. Don't tell me and sis."

"Anyhow, we know what we are about. That is more than I can say for you political marshals."

Rooster said, "How long have you boys been mounted on sheep down there?"

LaBoeuf stopped rubbing his shaggy pony. He said, "This horse will be galloping when that big American stud of yours is winded and collapsed. You cannot judge by looks. The most villainous-looking pony is o'ten your gamest performer. What would you guess this pony cost me?"

Rooster said, "If there is anything in what you say I would guess about a thousand dollars."

The outstanding quality of True Grit is the voice that Charles Portis prescribes to his narrator, Mattie Ross. While a long line of enlightened teenage sprites populate the novels and screenplays of men--Luc Besson's Leon, with Natalie Portman as a precocious girl who hires an immigrant hitman to avenge her brother's killing, is very reminiscent of this--Mattie's iron will, gift for figuring and refusal to back down is wish fulfillment on the highest order. Whether it's historically accurate is debatable, but having Mattie tell her story in her own voice and digressions is wonderful. Through her, Portis paints the bygone era of his story.

At the Federal Courthouse I learned that the head marshal had gone to Detroit, Michigan, to deliver prisoners to the "house of correction," as they called it. A deputy who worked in the office said they would get around to Tom Chaney in good time, but that he would have to wait his turn. He showed me a list of indicted outlaws that were then on the loose in the Indian Territory and it looked like the delinquent tax list that they run in the Arkansas Gazette every year in little type. I did not like the looks of that, nor did I care much for the "smarty" manner of the deputy. He was puffed up by his office. You can expect that out of Federal people and to make it worse this was a Republican gang that cared nothing for the opinion of the good people of Arkansas who are Democrats.

While I enjoyed the whiskey breathed bluster of Rooster Cogburn and the enigmatic qualities of LaBoeuf, the three characters don't gel together convincingly. Each seems to exist in their own novel and Portis doesn't offer enough reason why they would care anything for one another. It's not a major problem and one that one extra page of prose might have fixed. Chaney and Lucky Ned are tenacious bad guys but overall the novel is thrifty when it comes to menace or compelling action. This makes it difficult to summon much enthusiasm for the climax. The strengths of the story are in its narration and the color which Mattie uses to illustrate what she experiences on her journey.

True Grit has been filmed twice. A 1969 production adapted by Marguerite Roberts and directed by Henry Hathaway is notable as the movie John Wayne won his sole Academy Award for, playing Rooster Cogburn. Kim Darby played Mattie and Glen Campbell played LaBoeuf. In 2010, Joel and Ethan Coen adapted and directed a version that hewed closer to the novel by centering on Mattie (Hailee Steinfeld). Jeff Bridges starred as Rooster Cogburn and Matt Damon (a splitting image of young Glen Campbell) as LaBoeuf. It was a critical and commercial hit, but in my opinion, not offbeat enough for a Coen Brothers film and not thrilling enough for a western.