Rating: 3/5

Ha, so the first line in my personal book journal on this collection is, "At least I can understand them". High praise indeed!

I've read a few poetry collections recently after near-randomly selecting some from the library shelf to try to figure out what poets and poetry I like. I knew some Simon Armitage poems before but not well. This book was thankfully much less heavy on imagery than some of the other poetry books I'd picked up, which I appreciated as I've been finding the heavy use of imagery of things I don't have experience a block to connecting with the poems. This book aided my understanding even more by having a similar context (is that the right word?) as my own life experiences. So even if I didn't relate or connect, I still understood the poems.

I liked a few of the poems - It Ain't What You Do, It's What It Does To You*, Goalkeeper with a Cigarette (especially good example of imagery helping not hindering), and Meanwhile in the State of Colarado - but found most just too...bleak? to really connect with. A couple made me feel low and one made me feel nauseous: good poetry maybe but not enjoyable poetry. I have zero idea of poetry genres but called this 'urban life' poetry in my book journal. 

A previous borrower had underlined a selection of poems and on finishing my own read through I went back and read their selections: 8, 11, 40, 54, 58, 60, 69, 124. It was interesting to read these as a mini collection and made me appreciate the poems more now they were in close context to one another. I don't know if these were poems they had to study, poems they enjoyed the most, poems that shared a common something... it was interesting to wonder why and impossible not to see them as relating to each other. 

I think that the anonymous's person's mini collection actually made a huge difference in my overall feelings about the book. I was feeling disappointed that I, yet again, wasn't enjoying most of the poems and a bit low from the despondency in a lot of them. Then I read the anonymous person's collection and it made me put my critical hat on as I would have in an English Lit class and allowed me to get more from them. It changed my mindset reading them from 'will I enjoy this?' to 'how can I analyse this?', which made me approach them more openly and with a frame of mind I think I'm more comfortable using. Probably from only ever reading poetry in a learning context in the past! Perhaps something to think about as I read poetry in the future.

*Apologies for the capitalisation of the poems, I can't remember how it was written and feel like breaking the standard capitalisation laws in favour of being clear it's a title.