Rating: 2/5

I admit that the only reason I picked this up from the used book shelf was because of the cover (the hero's eyes. 'Nough said). Yet, as I plunged into the WTFery of this semi-old-school romance (published 1989, so sort of on the cusp), I found myself reluctantly giving the author credit for working out [SOME] issues in a believable manner. Yes, the heroine did start out as "Spoiled Hoyden of Historical Inaccuracy" (thank you, smartbitchestrashybooks.com), but eventually she began to grow on me, like mold on an aging cheese. While there were still some points at which I found myself wanting to smack myself on the forehead (she's good with animals! and knows all the herbs and cures! which she learned from an old Indian woman, who proclaimed her Speshul! and Latin and Greek and Portuguese! also she's beautiful! with VIOLET EYES), for the most part I was able to relax and enjoy it. The hero, on the other hand...well, he did get better as the book progressed, but by the time all of the reasons behind his seemingly contradictory actions were explained, I was too sick of his shenanigans to care. I'm sure that he worked/would work as a hero for some readers, but he just didn't click for me. I have to say that I am glad the author eventually explained the motivations behind his actions, else I probably WOULD have thrown this book at the wall, rather than having a "arrrrrghmeh" reaction to the hero.

I really liked the secondary romance that sprung up in the last hundred pages (a Surprise!Romance TM) much more than the progression of the main relationship of this book; in the secondary romance, the heroine has to overcome her socialization and tendencies to become bold and confident, while the hero believes he is not good enough for the heroine WITHOUT any accompanying badmouthing of the heroine, blaming her for being a hooor, excessive hot-and-cold behavior, and so on that normally accompanies that sort of attitude. It was drawn out to the right length (no excessive drama!llamas sneaking in to prolong the conflict), and resolved in a way that MADE THE SENSE. Yay!

I say this book was "okay" because, while I don't think I would go back and reread it, and while for me the primary antagonist was the hero, it did have enough redeeming qualities to keep me going through all 446 pages without actually needing to hit my head/make it hit the wall once. And in a book equipped with its cover art, that is an impressive feat, indeed.