Rating: 5/5

Arthur Johnson lives in the top-floor flat at 142, Trinity Road – the nicest flat. He’s the oldest resident, both in age and tenure, and considers himself rather above the various tenants of the flats beneath, with their untidy lives and irregular hours. For Mr Johnson is a very regular man, who never misses a day at work and keeps his flat as neat as a new pin, just the way his Auntie Gracie would have expected. He’s been alone since Auntie Gracie died, but that suits him fine. He never feels quite comfortable in the company of other people. Now a new tenant has moved in – a man named Anthony Johnson. Mr Johnson is annoyed at the coincidence of their names, since he foresees all kinds of confusion arising, over mail for instance. So he makes a big point of always referring to Anthony as the other Mr Johnson. The other Mr Johnson, it transpires, is a PhD candidate, researching his thesis on the subject of psychopaths. Which is another coincidence, since Mr Johnson – the first Mr Johnson, that is – just happens to be a psychopath…

The book starts with a wonderfully chilling prologue, pitch-black in tone and genuinely scary, and I don’t want to spoil it by revealing too much of the plot. Suffice to say, Arthur has found a unique way to deal with his murderous inclinations – a way that has worked for years and kept him on the right side of the law, to say nothing of morality. But the arrival of Anthony is more than a minor annoyance – it turns into a major problem when he unknowingly blocks Arthur from his safety-valve. Arthur still has the desire to sexually assault and strangle women, but now his method for controlling those impulses has been taken from him. He really doesn’t want to be a murderer – not because he cares about his potential victims, but because he doesn’t relish the idea of being caught. But without a release, his desires are becoming irresistible…

Winner of the CWA Gold Dagger in 1976, this was the first of many CWA accolades for Rendell over her long career, and it is well deserved. The book is darkly humorous, and despite our Mr Johnson being a psychopath, Rendell makes him so human and so pitiable that it’s hard to get up much anger at him. (I’m sure his victims, potential or otherwise, would disagree, but happily I’m just a reader, and anyway, he’s fictional.) His serious and previously successful attempts to control his impulses give him a kind of get-out clause – if circumstances hadn’t changed through the unwitting intervention of the other Mr Johnson he may never have found himself stalking the streets in search of prey. Really, it’s hardly his fault! Naturally this makes him somewhat resentful of Anthony, and he sets out to disrupt his life just as thoroughly. The confusion of letters addressed simply to Mr A. Johnson makes that reasonably easy to do. As Anthony’s already muddled love-life becomes ever messier, he has no idea that an outside source is deliberately meddling in his affairs.

As well as the excellent characterisation of the two Johnsons, there is a large cast of secondary characters, all rather quirky but believable. Bravo to Ms Rendell for having two ‘West Indian’ characters and, as early as 1976, showing them in a wholly positive light. I loved the picture she painted of that kind of bedsitter life – a big house divided up into various-sized rooms with communal bathrooms and sometimes kitchens. Having lived in a bedsit myself in my student days, I laughed in recognition at the hierarchy and snobbishness of room size – those with the big rooms with front-facing windows feeling very superior (and admittedly paying more rent) to those in the small rooms in the back or the attic – the servants’ quarters, so to speak. She also captures the two types of tenant – older people who, for various reasons, have come to see bedsitter life as permanent, and those who see it as purely transient, young people and students mainly, with the former caring far more about the property and setting rules, while the latter are more interested in partying. And she shows the strange kind of enforced intimacy that happens among a group of people with nothing much in common, but who share a front door and a bathroom. I wonder if bedsits like that still exist today, but she certainly catches that style of ’70s living exactly.

The plot gets progressively darker, but the humour stays in place, preventing it from becoming too bleak. I thought she did a great job of creating some moral ambiguity – despite myself, I couldn’t help liking or, more accurately, feeling sorry for Arthur and rather despising Anthony. I think it’s because Rendell makes Arthur a slave to desires he has done his best to control, while Anthony seems to feel that the world should order itself to suit his convenience. The ending is unexpected, and I thought the quirkiness of it tied in well with the overall tone of dark humour. I don’t always love Rendell, but I wholeheartedly loved this one, and am now enthused to read more!

www.fictionfanblog.wordpress.com