Rating: 3/5

Marie de France was an aristocratic twelfth-century poet, from whose name we conclude that she was apparently living somewhere other than France when she wrote her most famous works. Probably England: she writes in Anglo-Norman, which is an important language for anyone interested in the history of English because it's the source of so many borrowings. Marie was probably attached to the court of Henry II (who, I need scarcely remind you, was himself French and spoke no English), but apart from that we really know nothing about her except what can be gleaned from her poetry.

Now, I really like Old French and Anglo-Norman poetry, but some of the classics are so long that reading them seems pretty daunting. The big Arthurian cycles and the long poems of people like Wace or Chrétien de Troyes – I can only deal with them in small doses. That's why forms like lais and fabliaux are so appealing: short, narrative works, with lots of dirty jokes and direct explanations. These are poems about illegitimate births, exiled knights, chivalrous deeds and hidden love-affairs – and yet despite all these plot devices, they have very little in common with the kind of adventure romances that would develop later. Here everything is much more direct, and there is a charmingly ingenuous approach to sex and desire in general. This is compounded by the fact that Marie, being female, gives many details about the women involved that male poets so often didn't bother with.

My favourite lai is ‘Bisclavret’, one of the oldest werewolf stories out there. It starts with the sort of attention to linguistic detail that is always guaranteed to win me over:

Bisclavret ad nun en bretan,
Garwaf l'apelent li Norman.

‘Bisclavret’ is the Breton name,
The Normans call it ‘werewolf’.

The word she uses, garwaf, is the source of modern French garou, and in fact it's cognate with English "werewolf" although it doesn't look it at first glance. Anyway. I could go on and on about every piece of vocabulary in here, which is sometimes what I do when I read stuff like this. But beside the strong linguistic interest I have for this period, there is also heaps of literary charm and atmosphere.

Garvalf, ceo est beste salvage;
Tant cum il est en cele rage,
Hummes devure, grant mal fait,
Es granz forest converse e vait...

The werewolf is a savage beast;
When that rage comes over him,
He devours men, does great evil,
Roaming and prowling through the mighty forests....

This is one of the few werewolf tales to be told from the point of view of the werewolf, and it's weirdly intriguing to compare it to Norse versions, or indeed to modern treatments like An American Werewolf in London, Angela Carter, Season 3 of Buffy, or whatever you're thinking of. The poetic techniques are of a very high quality and can be analysed and probed to your heart's content, if you like that sort of thing.

This particular edition has modern French prose on facing pages, but there are lots of English translations out there too including a good-looking one from the ever-reliable Penguin Classics. Well worth your time if you're in the mood to get your medieval on.