Rating: 4/5

“Women and Doctors” is a wonderful book that appears genuine in its honest attempt to assist women in developing healthy relationships with their doctors. 
John M. Smith, M.D. is brutally honest in his assessment of his specialty, OB/GYN, and in confronting his fellow gynecologists for their abuse of the women entrusted in their care.

The book is dated, having been published in 1992, and there is little written within its pages that most people aren’t already aware of today. However, ‘Women and Doctors” is still a brave and valiant effort to provide honest information and aid to the public, and after reading this book, I have a great respect for Dr Smith.

It’s also terrifying to know some of these things that Smith has to share. As an example, 
Smith sites a 1991 statistic that 600,000 hysterectomies were performed that year in America. Meanwhile, the hysterectomy it is one of the top three surgeries done unnecessarily. As in, most women really don’t need to have their uterus removed. 

“Why are so many hysterectomies preformed if they are unnecessary?” You ask. 

On page 47 Smith states that, “Hysterectomies are deliberately sold to women by doctors who use the operation as their major source of income.”
On page 44 he writes, ‘Many gynecologists feel that the uterus is a disposable organ, one that bleeds, cramps, carries babies, and gets cancer.’

I don’t know about anyone else, but I wouldn’t want a doctor who felt that way about any of my organs. Your job is to help me stay healthy, not to line your pockets with money you made cutting up parts of me that you think are “useless.” 

 If it’s true that some doctors are really so unethical as to profit at such an extreme expense of another person, it is best that woman learn to protect themselves. 

The abuse Dr Smith describes does not stop at unnecessary surgery, but it includes sexual abuse. Doctors who sexually assault their patient do exist. Smith also talks of sexism and how women are treated differently by the medical system then men are—what with various diagnostic tests created for men, and many drugs created for and tested on men, with woman only treated as an afterthought. Often medical procedures developed for men are performed on women, and the procedures do not work correctly as men and women are not the same, and do not have the same physiological responses.

 The part of the book I got the most excited over was when Smith spoke of midwives. Mind, I’ve always wanted to be a midwife. Not a nurse-midwife either, but a lay midwife. 

Unlike most doctors, Smith is pro midwife! He states that OBGYNs could easily relinquish their control over the birth of normal labor, and allow midwives to deliver low risk women. Smith says the OBGYNs just don’t want to give up all the cash they make off each delivery. 

He also mentions the need for midwives to come and thwart the rise of unnecessary cesarean sections that have come to be common in America because it is more convenient to cut a baby out of a womb then it is for an OBGYN to wait around for a woman to give birth.
Further, the more interventions made by an OBGYN--what with the fetal heart monitors, the inducement of labor, and the administration of unnecessary drugs--the more likely there will be complications at a birth. 

What kind of a doctor would admit these things, you ask? The answer is a GREAT one! Dr Smith is a great doctor. 

The book has even more awesome revelations. Many of the most interesting parts of “Women and Doctors” can be found in the detailed retelling of the stories of individual women who suffered at the hands of their doctors. Some of the stories told are truly chilling. They are also instructive though, as they illustrate possibilities of what could potentially transpire when any woman goes to see a doctor. 

At the end of the book, Smith goes on to detail various health problems a woman may experience and the types of treatments for each issue that would be most appropriate.

This is a wonderful book. It is also terrifying to know how dangerous going to an unscrupulous doctor can be to your health. It’s imperative that all women educate themselves in matters of health and wellness. I think reading ‘Woman and Doctors” is a good start in the right direction when it comes to being an educated female consumer.