Rating: 5/5

This is the first book that Eleanor read to me. Well, maybe not... but it's the first book that she read that we're reviewing. (I think...) It's definitely the longest book she's read thus far. It had words like, "suddenly" and "important" and "patient." Those are some tough words for someone who isn't yet in second grade, and she nailed them. 

Eleanor suggested that since she read the book to me, she should ask the questions, and I should give the responses. ...I'm game. I'll still be the typist. Go ahead Eleanor, ask away:

Eleanor: How many stars would you like to give the book?

Dad: Hmmmmm... 4. Four stars, what do you think?

Eleanor: I think that's ok.

Gwennie (in the background): I wanted 5 stars.

Eleanor: Me too. Daddy, me and Gwennie disagree completely, but you can put 4 stars down since this is your review.

Dad: I was going back and forth between 3, 4, and 5 to tell you the truth.

Eleanor: Oh.

Dad: Should I bump it up to 5?

Eleanor: Sure, do whatever you want.

Dad: Ok. It's got 5 stars now.

Eleanor: Ok. What was your favorite part of the book?

Gwen: I thought you said it was going to have 4 stars...

Dad: Gwen, you need to pay attention, I said I'm changing the review based on your recommendation. You guys said it deserved 5 stars, so I'm giving it 5 stars.

El: What was your favorite part of the book?

Dad: I liked the karmic justice.

El: That's cool. I would like something more kiddish, but you can put that in.

Dad: I also liked the crazy straw. And I liked when D.W. pretended to get chicken-pox.

El: How come? Hey dad, you and me sort of share a favorite part.

Dad: Oh yeah, what's that?

El: I like it when Arthur has all the fun - like when he had the crazy straw. It's fun to listen to when kids get to have all the fun. And when D.W. was naughty - that stuff makes books interesting. The worse kids are, the more interesting.

Dad: Yeah, I thought the part with D.W. was really funny. Although, I don't think Arthur got to have ALL the fun, since he had chicken pox. That's just what D.W. thought too. And let me tell you, chicken pox aren't really fun at all.

El: Yeah, D.W. thought it was fun: he got to drink out of a crazy straw, he got to get a back rub, he got to watch TV all day and take a soothing bath.

Dad: I guess D.W. learned in the end that chicken pox aren't that much fun after all, huh?

Gwennie: Is this review over?

Dad: Well, that depends on Eleanor. She can ask as many questions as she wants.

Eleanor: I don't think there are any more questions to ask, Dad.

Dad: You could ask if I'd recommend this book to anybody. ...If I think other people would like to read the book. I always try to end your reviews that way.

El: OH! Would you recommend this book to anybody?

Gwen is in the background screaming out the song, "Do Your Ears Hang Low" into Eleanor's recorder. She wanted to record this momentous interview. ...She records almost everything... you have to be on your guard in this house...

El: Stop shouting, Gwennie. Please, stop shouting.

Gwennie proceeds to sing much more quietly... And El is now singing along quietly as well. 

Dad: Yeah. I think I would. I like all the Arthur stuff. Although, usually I see him more on TV... the book was nice.

Gwen has moved on to songs from Rogers and Hammerstein's "Cinderella." She's singing, "Impossible."

El: I liked it even more than the TV shows, because I could really know what was happening. Daddy, thank you for doing this interview. May we read the review now?