Rating: 4/5

Reading this was similar to watching an Alfred Hitchcock film, because we, the readers, know how awfully everything will turn out, but the participants don't. Therefore, every sledge accident or pony death seems to contribute one more little thing to Scott's ultimate demise (and it is especially depressing knowing how close they came to succeeding in spite of all this).

Just getting to Antarctica sounded horrible as they were nearly swamped in a gale; then had to wend their way through a labyrinth of ice bergs, which frequently trapped the boat. That journey seemed to take a couple of months from New Zealand. What I did not realize was that Scott and his party spent almost a year camped on the northern part of Antarctica, just waiting around for the weather to be warm enough to start for the Pole (and they had begun laying out supplies along the route in advance, so they would not have to carry it all at once). 

However, once their base camp was established conditions seemed fairly tolerable as they had heat, plenty of food, lectures, Aurora Borealis light shows, and even champagne on special occasions. [During this time a rival Norwegian plotted to beat them to the pole.] As fascinating as a lot of this stuff is, the narrative here gets a little bogged down in scientific weather observations, and snow conditions. Fortunately, the Sir Richard Attenborough series Frozen Planet is running on BBC, which I started binge watching to help visualize a lot of this stuff (talk about another happy show).

There were times when some of the party had to march for 60 miles in temperatures of -79 F. After that, -12 seemed balmy. Despite all the incredible hardship, things seemed to be going well...until they didn't. And when it went wrong, it went wrong fast. 

It's worth reading about the aftermath and the impact of this tragedy on Britain. The national outpouring of grief was likened to that of Lady Diana. And of course the book became a classic in the trenches of World War I. Perhaps not the book to read when the world is on the verge of a global pandemic. I think I may need to read about the Monkees or the Beatles now.