Rating: 4/5

This book is second in a series about Theseus - one of the divine heroes of ancient Greece. The first book, The King Must Die, describes Theseus' childhood and young adulthood in the Cretan Labyrinth. Its sequel moves onto Theseus' subsequent life, as a great leader of the Attic people, and as lover/consort of both Hippolyta and Phaedra.

It is written as a historical novel, but the protagonist is someone who was (almost certainly) a myth. Mary Renault provides semi-realist explanations of events that are non-realist or supernatural in mythology, such as the Minotaur. You could say her real talent lies in bringing to life a sense of how those wild and wonderful ancient stories might have played out. With human beings who were both recognisably human and also not quite exactly like us.

As in other Renault novels, the main character of Theseus is a study of masculinity as much as anything. Perhaps not masculinity exactly as we know it today, but certainly an older form of it. Male leaders are honourable, strong, courageous, and, perhaps most importantly, bound to their gods and their destiny. Women are part of their lives but mostly keep to their own activities in the patriarchy - sex, motherhood, and so on. Theseus is a bit of a ladies man, but halfway through the book, he meets his match when he comes across and falls instantly in love with Hippolyta, leader of the Amazons. This part of the book grabbed me the most.

Without spoiling the plot, the descriptions of Hippolyta and her Maidens of the Moon (Amazon women who worship the goddess Artemis) are quite magical. These women are different from the run-of-the-mill consorts and slave-girls we see earlier. They are strong and powerful in themselves; they have their own society, rituals and abilities as warriors. I have no idea if Renault saw herself as a feminist, but her vision of the Amazons has much to recommend a feminist reading. Through the eyes of a man (Theseus), we see how much more interesting, active and self-actualised the Amazons are, than the roles usually assigned to their gender. Theseus is understandably bewitched.

Renault was a lesbian writer known for writing about gay male relationships in the ancient world (see The Alexander Trilogy among others). In this book, her characterisation of the all-female Amazon matriarchy and Hippolyta is joyfully sapphic. She doesn't get lost in modern comment on this, however. She is careful to keep the actions and thoughts of her characters in the time in which they lived. For example, alongside his love of women, Theseus has a very close, almost romantic friendship with his best buddy, Pirithoos. People in the ancient world simply did not view sexuality or identity in the way we do now.

I recommend this book as heartily as I recommend all Renault's ancient world novels. They take you out of yourself and into a world that is full of heightened sense and emotion.