Rating: 3/5

This is not top-shelf Tiptree, though there are some occasional felicities. There are three stories in this collection—each set in the Starry Rift, a section of the galaxy where there is an absence of stars—all framed as library materials given to aliens seeking knowledge of humans. This conceit—that aliens would learn about humans from reading—implied there may have been perceptual/sensory difficulties with an image-based medium, such as movies. Additionally, it suggested and never overtly denied the possibility that humans had become extinct. The aliens mention how the reading evoked emotion and conjured images, which is a pretty marvelous coincidence... (that their brains could process, as humans mysteriously do, this same aspect of language, using arbitrary symbols that compose arbitrary words so that in combination they make the brain connect those symbols with ragtag bits of random memory to create a new, almost-lived, cognitive experience). 

The first and best story initially had me thinking the whole collection was following a Young Adult agenda, but the young protagonist simply mirrors the other young principal, an alien entity that exists as a benign brain parasite. This was an intriguing premise and the quixotically altruistic relation between parasite and host was the story’s highlight. 

The second story involved a self-isolating former astronaut whose many time-delaying FTL flights have removed him from his natal contemporaries by almost a century, though he remains only 30 years old. In his occupation as remote mobile refuel jockey, he encounters his first love, a galactically famous star of visual and holographic fictions who’s maintained her youthful appearance through numerous surgeries, though she is over a century old. The daughter of one of her clones becomes involved, and the fuel jockey is torn between preserved first love or youthful clone of first love. He ends up opting for neither, making plans instead to rebuild/scavenge lost space ships.

The final, longest story entails a first-contact mission that might explode into a galactic war if the intentions of the humans are not properly perceived as benign. There is some good interesting atmospherics in this story, but it ends up being a creaky bit of machinery for generating a “phew, that was a close call” ending. (After the sophistication of alien encounter depicted by Stanislaw Lem in Fiasco, it’s difficult to approach any sort of space opera without champing down on the skepticism.)

This is not Tiptree’s best work, and it would be a shame if a reader had only read this and not delved into her earlier, more challenging and more unsettling work. Something was lost in Tiptree’s writing, and she never recovered from the unmasking of her identity as a woman. For nearly a decade, she’d been writing as a reclusive man and garnering attention and critical hosannas for fiction that exhibited a subliminal otherness, a frisson generated by a subterfuge that enabled her to keep in flux/in potentia her own awareness of identity.