Rating: 5/5

This was one of my grandmothers favorite books. I didn’t know this until after she passed away and I ended up with the book. It was well read and more marked up than any book I’ve seen. It was clear that she loved it. The first edition was written in 1928. So my grandma grew up with the book (though not this particular copy) and read it several times. It took half the book before I realized why she loved it and I have to admit the only reason I kept reading was to see why she loved it. Once the book caught momentum I felt all the feels a mother feels as she comes to meet the second half of her life. The second half explains the main character’s thoughts and has so many years to look back on and so many thoughts in her heart. I know this introspection resonated with my grandma. I k ow the depth of the character as well as her sacrifice for her children was part of what my grandma loved. I wish I could talk to her about this book! I wish she had shared it with me while she was still alive, but maybe she thought I would have been too busy to read it or that I wouldn’t understand it. But I did. It left an ache in my heart and a tear in my eye. This was a beautiful book about one woman’s life that I feel is also about my life too. And my grandmas. And so many other women- with their own details attached. And I have to admit I felt my relationship with my grandma was an echo of Abbie and Laura’s relationship. I miss my grandma, the love she had for me and her family and the thoughts she took the time to share with me. I feel like through this books her thoughts live on, in a way. I hope to read this book again.

“How swiftly the clock hands had gone around! Abbie could not speak. She must shed no tears on her little girl’s wedding day. So, she only patted her and kissed her, smiling at her through a thousand mushed tears. And you, who have seen your mother smile when you left her, -or have smiled at your daughters leaving, – know it is the most courageous smile of all.”

She says to her daughter, "You know, Grace, it's queer but I don't feel narrow. I feel broad. How can I explain it to you, so you would understand? I've seen everything...and I've hardly been away from this yard....
I've been part of the beginning and part of the growth. I've married...and borne children and looked into the face of death. Is childbirth narrow, Grace? Or marriage? Or death? When you've experienced all those things, Grace, the spirit has traveled although the body has been confined. I think travel is a rare privilege and I'm glad you can have it. But not every one who stays at home is narrow and not every one who travels is broad. I think if you can understand humanity...can sympathize with every creature...can put yourself into the personality of every one...you're not narrow...you're broad."

To her granddaughter she said, "Your life is like a field-glass, Laura. When you look into the one end, the landscape is dwarfed and far away, - when you looking the other, it looms large as though it were near at hand. Things that happened seventy years ago seem like yesterday. But, when I was a girl, eighty years seemed too remote to contemplate. And now, it has passed. The story is written."

When Laura asked how it felt to be old, she said, "IT doesn't feel at all. People don't understand about old age. I am an old woman... but I haven't changed. I'm still Abbie Deal. They think we're different...we old ones. The real Abbie Deal still has many of the old visions and longing. There was a time when I thought I never could be but some way we get adjusted. I've never grown tired of life as some old people do. I'm only tired of the aches and the pains of the inability to make my body do what I want it to do. I would like to live a long time yet... to see what can still be invented to read the new things that will be written to hear the new songs that will be sung to see the babies grown into mean and women. But there comes and end..."

Her happiest memories were not of the big celebrations that happened. But were of simple everyday things like having the table set for the whole family knowing they would all be there for dinner. She said, "It hurts a mother, Laura, when the plates begin to be taken away one by one. First there are seven and then six and then five and on down to a single plate. So I like to think of the table set for the whole family at supper time." Me too. 

“ Children of her children, she loved them as she had loved their parents. Did a woman never get over loving? Deep love brought relatively deep heartaches. Why could not a woman of her age, whose family was raised, relinquish the hold upon her emotions? Why could she not have a peaceful old age, wherein there entered neither great affection nor its comrade, great sorrow? She had seen old women who seemed not to care as she was caring, whose emotions seem to have died with their youth. Could she not be one of them?”

“Where had the time gone? Blown by the wind she could not stop, – ticked off by the clock hand she could not stay.”

"There's no shortcut to anything. The Master demands full time of us before we are paid."

"Abbie Deal sat looking out at her family... Eighty years of living were behind her, - most of them spent in fighting, - fighting the droughts, the snows, the hot winds, the prairie fires, the blizzards, - fighting for the children's physical and mental and spiritual development, fighting to make a civilization on the raw prairie. Bending her back to the toil, hiding her heart's disappointments, giving her all in service, she was like an old mother partridge who had plucked all the feathers from her breast for the nest of her young."