Rating: 3/5

I have read some pieces by Jessamyn West, so the first page of this book struck me speechless with its crudity. But, they were the thoughts of the evil Jud Clasby, so it makes sense for her to write this book in this way. It’s not about gentle and lovely Quakers. It’s about murder, justice, and the death penalty.

The Massacre at Fall Creek is based on a true event in 1824 America where a group of settlers in Indiana killed a group of peaceful Seneca Indians who were making maple sugar. Four women, three children, and two men were killed. This atrocity outraged the local Indians as well as their Indian agent, Colonel John Johnston who advocated for the white men to be tried for the murder of the Indians. The men were tried, found guilty, and executed. This was the first time white men were legally punished for killing Indians. 

West fictionalized the story, she explains in her valedictory statement that the facts about the case were scanty. In almost every way, she did a superb job of writing. Nothing was really simple, she recognized the complexities behind the relationships between settlers and Indians. The things I loved about her story were the characters of the local preacher, Caleb Cale and Judge McGowan, truly Christian men, the way she slowly told the story of the massacre, the trial itself, Judge McGowan’s speech at the end of the trial- a masterpiece, and the way she described the feelings of different characters. The major problem I had with the book was the romance subplot of Hannah Cape. It didn’t add to the story, and all the pages devoted to the subplot took away from the more interesting parts of the book. I am quite sure this book would have warranted a higher rating from me if the Hannah Cape romance was not present. I liked Hannah, I just didn’t care about her love life. There were more important things happening.

West in her valedictory message stated that she did not wish to merely fictionalize a historic event. She had something larger in mind. Besides the obvious theme of people of different races living in harmony together, she makes the reader examine his or her beliefs about capital punishment, whether it is humane and just. Being a Quaker, West undoubtedly was against the death penalty- but she is gracious enough to allow her readers to make up their own minds about the subject. 

Recommended for people who enjoy courtroom dramas or people who enjoy reading historical fiction that is not shiny and glossy.