Rating: 5/5

I Am David by Anne Holm is a fast paced page turning adventure. The Main character is David. He is thirteen years old or so he thinks. As far as he knows he has spent his life in the camp that was made by the Nazis. In just sixty pages he escaped from a camp, he ran for days and nights, he stowed away on a ship, and he ended up in Italy. In Italy he tried to learn about the ways people live in Italy. He then overheard some citizens talking about him and saying they were going to ask some questions. That scared David so he ran.

This book so far has been very surprising and exciting for me to read. This book makes me wonder who his parents are and what religion or race he is.

On the road from the town in Italy,David meets two Americans broken down on the side of the road. David offers to help them but they don't trust him. He offers to get them some gas from the service station ahead. The people don't trust him, but in the end they do trust him. They slip a lot of money into his bundle, enough to get bread and other supplies for a long time. After this David finds a mirror and sees himself for the first time, starts talking to God the way he had learned from Johannes, and he learns to hitchhike. 

David gets a ride from a nice man named Angelo, wanders up to a house playing beautiful music and gets beaten up by a boy named Andrea. David saves a girl named Maria from a burning shed. The sister of Andrea is Maria. David learns about all of the wonderful things that life has to offer from the family of Andrea and Maria. He goes to stay with them because he saved their daughter and they want to thank him by having him stay at their fine house.

This book so far has been exciting because he has done a lot of brave things that most people would not have done. I still wonder what pushed him to saving Maria from the burning shed or if it was just instincts. 

In this last portion of the book David has gotten his picture taken, trapped by a farmer, made a new friend that is a dog, escaped soldiers, and has found his mom. David got his picture painted by a woman named Signora. She offered him to come to her house, while there David looked at her photo album and sees a picture of a woman. In this picture the woman's eyes seemed to have caught David's eye, he asks Signora about the photo and she says that it was a woman named Edith, Fengel. Signora said that her son David had died but she still lives in Denmark. David takes off to Denmark to find this woman and gets caught in a blizzard. A farmer finds him and puts him in the barn as his slave. David is in the barn for a whole winter. He meets a dog in the barn and later towards the end of the winter he escapes the barn by cutting through the wall and sneaking out without the farmer seeing him. On the way down the road from the farmer's house, he sees a figure coming down the road. Sure enough it was the dog. The dog came with him to the point were they were both stuck. By that point he had named the dog KING. They were both stuck at a Nazi road block. King David is scared because if they see him then they will shoot him. He is hoping that they will shoot strait so he doesn't have to suffer by being shot in the arm or leg. King senses David's fear and runs to the guards and gets shot while David runs past them. David later on reaches Denmark and gets a ride from a truck driver ad uses a phone booth to find his mom's address in the phone book. He finds the mom's address in the book and heads to the house. By the time he reaches the house he is feeling sick. He rings the doorbell and the woman opens the door and David says "Ma'am I am DAVID." The woman says "David, MY son!" That is how the book ended and to me, I think that this book is great for people that would like to read adventure stories that will keep you turning the pages.