Rating: 5/5

A young dynamic king, in his late twenties very ambitious wants and needs to become ruler of two significant nations, the King , Henry v , of England, by a dubious claim has come to conqueror France in the name of peace... he destroys. His father, Henry IV, an usurper murdered his own first cousin to gain the throne, a traitor for sure, however winners write the history books an are accepted as heroes, it will always be this. Nevertheless dies from a horrible disease soon after, justice maybe... But a conspiracy develops to assassinate the English sovereign before even leaving Southampton on his quest. The determined son must overcome; not a good looking man, (or as noble as he is portrayed here) in fact, no charmer... still a great military leader, the royal women aren't quite, let us be frank... pun intended... 
attracted to, doesn't write poetry or dance well...requires respect some other way, but has a passion for greatness and by slaughter... 
 This can be achieved, only many will perish , as the past and unforeseen days to come relentlessly shows a few men's, dark dreams demolish the numerous other ones. The huge foreign army from across the nearby stormy channel, marches on victorious and unstoppable, relentlessly, bloodily, yet a little uncomfortable, what are they doing here...? One man's desire...the seemingly endless hundred years war continues ...forever. Charles v1, the mad, a very capable monarch of France, when not insane doesn't appear a lot in Shakespeare's play Henry V, not in best of shape in 1415. A great , famous , though brutal battle to determine the future of these two mighty nations is fast approaching, Agincourt, Henry's family gives him loyal support, brothers and uncles, cousins take a major role, he trusts them...with his life. The French are fatally overconfident, chiefly the Dauphin ( historically inaccurate ) and future ruler of his country , he believes, not technically in command of French forces, the Constable of France is , still very influential with a more numerous, powerful army on their own land, the people hate the invaders, how can they lose? And all because William the Conqueror of Normandy, a foreigner from ironically France, in 1066, stole the English crown from the rightful, native king. Soldiers not law, make everything possible... Or the beautiful daughter of King Charles, Catherine could marry Henry and settle the conflict... And Joan of Arc, "The Maid of Orleans," won't arrive on the scene for almost 15 years...The Bard of Avon , William Shakespeare's the magnificent, the peerless...better plays, written over 400 years ago, imagine ...What is moral ...the perennial question asked and probably the answer never entirely satisfies everyone, remember...people wear different shades of clothes...