Rating: 5/5

WHAT A READ. 
Once again, I'm marveling in the bittersweet aftermath of such an exquisite, fairy-tale like novel. 

There was a hundred and one things I loved about this book, so much love that I can't even begin to think of anything I disliked (apart from Gillian's dad. Oh boy did I hate him!). 

I really appreciate when an author goes above and beyond to create a wonderful story. This is my first novel by Lynn Kurland and will certainly not be the last. She had me spellbound by the charm, cleverness and beauty of her words and thoughts. What a dream to read. 

I devoured this book...or maybe it devoured me?

Either way, I am more than content. I'm pretty DAMN DELIGHTED! And as a thank you, here's a (hopefully) above and beyond review :)

1. Plot
2. Characters and Arcs
3. Cast
4. Extra Notes
5. Romance

Let's begin...

1. Plot

One of my favourite things about this book? The air of magic and sheer wonder. This book begins with witches. Yes you read correctly. Three wizened old crones who stole my heart. And like all witches (I confess I only know a handful) they were a meddling bunch, in the best way. They have a hand in the proceedings of this novel. 

Gillian of Warewick- a soft, tender soul who has been abused at the hands of her disgusting brute of a father, has learned the horrifying news. Her father plans on marrying her off to none other than the notorious B.I.G. Christopher "The Dragon" of Blackmour. His reputation proceeds him and strikes terror into the hearts of all England, Gillian included. However, their marriage offers her something she never dreamed of. Hope, freedom, friendship and love. But her Dragon's heart is not so easily tamed for he harbors his own secrets...

2. Characters and Arcs

Arguably the best part of a novel, the characters often make the book. Lynn Kurland did not disappoint. Her characters were alluring, delightful and fun. And further, they were flawed. Nothing pulls me in like a flawed character. 
To me, a flawed character is like a meadow at night, bursting with colour, spilling over with vibrancy and life, yet shrouded in a darkness so deep, only the whispers of moonlight alert us to the true complexity hidden. 
Both Gillian and Christopher were flawed in their own perfect ways.

Gillian

Gillian was such a pleasure to read and is one of those characters who makes you frustrated at their fiction. I wish she was real. She was treated terribly by her father and yet he never broke her spirit. She was so very sweet, clever and innocent as well, and I loved her journey into self-acceptance and love. She learnt so much from Christopher and vice versa. 

She was faithful and above all, incredibly strong and courageous- something she never realised she possessed. Kurland chose to make Gillian a heroine who wasn't drop-dead gorgeous but instead rather plain. Yet she had a wealth of beauty within her. And that, I believe, is how she was perceived as beautiful. There is, as one of the characters noted, a light that shines in her eyes. The kind, I think, that only the true pure of heart possess. Gillian was an absolute joy to read about. 

At the beginning, she was terrified of Christopher. The stories told about him were all she saw when she looked at him, but slowly she began to see the man beneath the tough, gruff exterior. And when she did, she offered her heart and soul so completely.
She began as a timid, quiet and shy little "mouse" and bloomed into a wonderful, spirited "dragoness" fit for her dragon. 

Christopher

Christopher was absolutely delicious. 

Ughh he was strong, arrogant and dominant whilst also being incredibly tender and gentle with Gillian. He was just the right sort of hero. Not overly alpha and might I just add, he was certainly a tormented hero. We learn fairly early on that Christopher is blind (I have to add that Gillian managed to figure out very quickly and I was so impressed. What a smartie. Further, she never saw that as a hindrance :') Also, Kurland never dragged it out or set a dreary tone.) 

Christopher was so strong and managed to hide his blindness and cope with it. For a warrior to lose something so key and necessary in a fight, he found other ways to do overcome this. Further, he was even braver for having his heart broken once before and learning to love again. I loved the emphasis on character rather than beauty. The woman Chris once "loved" was actually an evil, greedy woman who also happened to be breathtakingly, heartstoppingly beautiful. He learnt, after losing his sight, that true sight comes from the soul. What he lost, he finds in a woman with enough heart to take on the world. Despite trying to hold his love back, it swept over them both like waves on the shore. 

Minor Characters

I couldn't write a review without mentioning the awesome Lord Artane and his sons who stole my heart with their antics. So thankful for Lord Artane raising Christopher like his own son because he grew to be an incredible man - a "whole" man.

Also, Christopher was very fortunate to have the most adorable squire and some truly brilliant friends who made me laugh out loud. The characterisation in this book was epic, everything and everyone's involvement wove together magically. And speaking of magically...

I have to mention the three witches (who seem more like wiccans) again. They were absolutely hilarious and oh so wise. Almost like guardian angels. I liked how Gillian kept visiting them for advice and herbs for beauty and courage - when in fact the herbs were just placebos! I suppose their involvement makes this seem even more fairytale like. 

3. Cast
Gillian

Christopher

4. Extra Notes

One thing that stuck out to me was when Gill first saw the ocean. She fell in love on sight and it was one of the major reasons she stayed at Blackmour when she had just arrived, terrified. 

I liked the idea that she fell in love with the ocean - this wild, raw piece of nature. A pulsing, breathing entity capable of both destruction and beauty. And it reminded me of Christopher. A force of nature himself, he was danger but he was also a work of art. Gillian sought comfort in the ocean, this wild thing that calls to each of us, to the wildness in our hearts. And I think this was a precursor, preparing her to allow the untameable, chaos of Christopher and his love into her heart. 

Just a thought :) 

5. Romance

Let's end this with a bang me thinks. Where this wasn't a particularly steamy read, the romance was rich and heartwarming. It was a sweet read and a gem for romantics. I reveled in every moment- each caress, soft word, tease ahhh all of it was wonderful. 
This is one of those reads that you have to see for yourself what all the fuss is about. I just adored it and would happily go back and re-read. It has a very Julie Garwood feel to it, and I'm in no way complaining. There was tears and triumphs and the most melty happy lil feeling in your heart after reading this. 
In short, this is what romance is about.

And as I mentioned before, this was like a fairytale. And in true fairytale fashion, it had it's own share of morals and lessons.

What I learnt:
Beauty is in far more than appearance. It is in your capacity to love and be loved. 

Courage is in far more than battling nightmare foes. It is facing each day with a strong and determined heart, taking on whatever the dawn brings. 

And finally, sometimes when one thing is lost, it opens up another world of possibilities. All we need to open our eyes, is a little faith- in ourselves, in what is and all that will be. 

We are more able than we know, stronger than we think and more beautiful than we may feel. 

Thank you for these lessons, Lynn Kurland. This was truly a one-of-a-kind read. Now onto something else, no doubt unable to top this. The bar has been set precariously high...but then where would I be without my books?
Very lost indeed.