Rating: 4/5

Agatha Christie the Queen of Blood as I have humorously tried to christen the lady, a title well earned the name suits her because of the numerous killings in 73 novels you may have read , call her incorrectly this she despised carnage in real and fictional life. Still it was essential a little red appears in a few pages you can guess why...dough obviously , poisons she became an expert in while working in a British hospital during ww1...odd...a strange hobby to be sure. The book raised Mrs. Christie to heights never reached by rivals even though 95 years have expired she will remain as the ultimate in murder mysteries, the surprise ending is no longer that the impact today greatly lessened, "borrowing" is a common practice now and too much time has transpired , the numerous other writers soon had the exact idea, authors are like this. Enough background when a strange man arrives in the small village in England, things begin to roll downhill quickly not for the good as people vanish a little foreigner with a heavy accent French the suspicious local inhabitants believe... no make that Belgian, he seems quiet, calm person the kind country folks like , trust, no trouble maker he seems a nonthreatening little human rather to be honest, unattractive chap one of many from his devastated nation who escaped the enormous butchering in his pounded
wounded nation, retired he says...Still the conflict is nearly a decade ago facts are known so why is he here? They discover things these curious people, this man is a famous detective except here..in King's Abbot the world outside seems a distant, vague notion. Come to think about it there has been a few deaths unexplained lately tongues wag in villages were everyone knows all, boredom thrives and excitement lacking presence . The death of Roger Ackroyd the richest person in the neighborhood shocks the locals quiet atmosphere being a murder, stabbed in the back imagine in this place. As usual the bumbling police are ineffective and the reluctant Hercules Poirot steps on a few shoes in order to solve the crime, the dance continues but for some the music stops when the jolting conclusion occurs the deduction will not be the best or the worst that is you to judge. In my not very humble opinion I liked the material to a certain degree, writers like to fool the readers however in doing so lose sight of the consequences of their actions.