Rating: 3/5

Let me begin with the authors' conclusion: 

"...We conclude that the total evidence...is most consistent with the view that anatomically modern humans have coexisted with other 'primates' for tens of millions of years." Location 18480 (Kindle Edition...iPad)

And they spent a long,long time examining the evidence and inserting themselves within the substantial anomalous data and giving this a 'good' bit of deconstruction. They are a bit cagey about their approach when the affirm: 

"...There exists in the scientific community a knowledge filter that screens out unwelcome evidence." (Location 550) 

But they do not attempt to disguise their own perspective and openly acknowledge that they "...are members of the Bhaktivedanta Institute." (Location 672) Translated this means they are Hare Krishnas...this organization has had the epithet 'cult' thrown at them and for good reason. However, their reading of the data is interesting and valid (to a point)....and they had me until they began to examine cryptozoological organisms. 

Still, their readings of the paleoarcheological and paleoanthropological records and how scientists whom don't tow the 'party' line are treated is, for the most part, valid if not convincing. 

My problem, and it is a personal one, is that I do not have the academic background to argue with them. That said, the arguments do seem strained and cherry-picked at times...and that comes from an outsider.

My biggest problem with this book was the deadening repetition of data and biographies that repeat themselves over and over and over again: though told of different scientists and their travails with mainstream science. 

Then there was the fact that this book was just a setup for their sequel: Human Devolution. Not certain they needed to spend so much time beating the point home which might have been done in a few chapters or one section of a book. 

I understand why so few people, of my acquaintance, have never finished this tome...the same story, more or less, gets repeated and repeated and repeated with the same conclusions or implied conclusions. Of course, the authors would argue this is for thoroughness. This would be necessary because so many scientists and academics would be hostile to their thesis. This would be acceptable if this had been a peer reviewed and vetted text which was then published by an academic press but it was not...this was produced by Torchlight Publishing Inc. ~ no academic press I've ever heard of. 

Still, it was interesting if deadening. If you really are into alternative science and archaeology then you may find this interesting...if you are looking for a diverting excursion into the world of fringe science and gnostic dementia then this may not be what you are looking for. 

I hope Human Devolution is better than this one. 

The three stars I gave it were generous...perhaps it deserves only one but I did have moments of amusement while reading it. 

Only for those truly obsessed with alternative science/history/reality all others will be bored to tears.