Rating: 4/5

4 ⭐
***SPOILERS AHEAD***

  

  Alia Abomination – Dune FanArt by Strega.Azure

A 500-page Spice Trip! 
 
At best, you'll come away with an adult beefswelling in [your] loins pleading for, "More Herbie! For the love of Shai-Hulud, give me more!" 
At worst, you'll feel as though you've just emerged from a private rendezvous in the Baron's chambers and wish for nothing more than your flesh to be enveloped in sandtrout membrane so you never have to experience anything like it again. 

 This is not just my personal opinion, it’s been proven. Proven by the broad range of community ratings and reviews; proven, in practice, to me through the wildly varying results of my buddy-read with the always lovely Sister Adina and Nastya-Hulud. A DNF 1-star, a 4 star and another yet to be seen.
 If you’re to have a good time with this entry, it seems to me you’ll have to approach it with a healthy reserve of good grace for ol’ Herb, likely accrued from the first book! Luckily, I still had an abundance of this, even after the slightly sketchy ‘Messiah’ left me with a few concerning scruples.
 
 Fact is, 
  there are big areas of this that don't check out
. Puzzling character motives, inconsistent personal morals/characteristics and seemingly important character arcs/story elements that never eventuate to anything largely due to the dominating nature of Leto2’s path. The characters are, across the board, unrelatable. In some cases, intellectually superior to the point that they are hardly human and, in others, no longer human at all and with a level of prescience that our puny minds could never fathom. It can also be difficult to correlate the Galactic-scale implications of the decisions being made by these now God-like characters with the rather small setting in which it all plays out; The Dune Universe (our Universe) never quite feels as big as we are told it is. 

  Despite all that
, in almost all cases, somehow, I was able to unabashedly, and unapologetically put on my critical blindfold, hold my white cane out in faux ignorance and conjure up some meagre but plausible reason why this non-sensical thing occurred or why this person made such an uncharacteristic decision… Almost.Every.Time!! It was as though I, myself, had become abomination and the inner voice of Frank Herbert had conquered, possessed, and convinced me that this was the greatest thing ever! Hell, it just occurred to me that I might not even be the author of this review!

  It wasn’t all just about turning a blind eye though! I loved most of this.
 For one thing, it is weird, man! Herbs is not afraid to let his freak flag fly and my enjoyment may partly be attributed to this freak show factor. Be it Alia the abomination with a sublimely grotesque selection of inner-voice in the Baron Harkonnen; Leto2’s transformation from Ancient boy-man to Sand trout (controlled-state Abomination) Demi-God; the still unshakeable eeriness of Ghola Idaho… The list of bizarro elements goes on and on and, frankly, I could not get enough of the slightly sinister and off-putting wrongness of it all.

I loved everything related to the pre-borns: The totality of genetic memory and the battle against these inner voices; the threat of abomination. Leto2’s arc to the ‘Golden Path’ and how his trajectory crossed that of his father, “the Preacher”! And how about that crystal-clear depiction of his forced Spice trance. The manageable but progressively more elusive blend of Metaphysics, philosophy, theology, and ecology that it all entailed, staggering! Character dialogue: the way Herbert consistently creates tension between characters through both their internal processes and the perpetual suspicion that one or more characters, at any time, are being subliminally maneuvered, sublime!

If I didn’t have other priorities, I’d open up the next one right away but, regardless, I’ll be back to finish off the final 3 at some point!
Many thanks to Nastya and Adina of the Buddy-Gesserit for joining me and consolidating some of my own thoughts while offering some welcome alternatives along the way.

  

  Leto II Evolution – Artwork by ErikShoemaker at Deviant Art