Rating: 4/5

An intriguing tale of historical fiction! The almost too well-known steps leading to the execution of President Lincoln are recounted from the perspective of John H. Surratt (recruited friend and ultimate foe of John Wilkes Booth) courtesy of his diary. The story is written in a way that endears one to the young Surratt as he struggles with some of the universal concerns of youth in trying to please the beloved Booth at times contrary to his family ties and the opposite sex as well complicated by a Catholic upbringing and a religious mother in near proximity to the drama of his life. A reluctant follower/accomplice (?) of Booth who has taken his magnificent generosity to self and family as a wannabe friend/ family member instead of the intention-ed manipulator of heart and soul to get him to assist him in his ulitmate goal of escaping Washington City after the Deed unbeknownst to Surratt. 

 A good portrait of the lovableness of Booth by one and all based on his fame, fortune and universally-acclaimed good looks despite not even falling anywhere near his father's reputation 
 as an actor and celebrity status to his dismay. His generosity to the old and young alike witnessed by many is, in many ways, a finer performance than what comes out onstage which is not unnoticed by Surratt. The writer interspersed many time lines ie Surratt made feeble by cough and age yet strong enough in principle to be true to himself and most importantly the reputations of those loved ones who have gone before him when presented with an opportunity to tell all and provide glorify the newly produced The Birth of the Nation against the proceedings of his 1867 trial and yet the joy/challenges of working as a photographer's assistant and meet the demands of Wilkes as he refers to him in developing an alternate route for his friend's final ride into the Virginian countryside. The linkage of "Wilkes" with Mary Surratt was an unexpected twist especially given her personality and Victorian times in which they lived. I would have liked a better life outcome for Surratt but still a very worthwhile read from someone partial to historical fiction especially during the time of Lincoln.