Rating: 4/5

There have been an awful lot of books lately about school. Not just "we are kids and we're in school" types but "here we are getting ready for school". The actual event of going to school, especially for the first time IS the major plot event. And kudos to that! It IS a big event! It IS a big deal! It IS a great event on its own. Simple yet important and a big milestone. And it isn't easy and it takes a lot. This book takes that even further. It addresses the teacher. Usually the teacher is just a nice lady waiting to hug you every day and give you A's and F's and break up your fights. But here, you not only see how much effort it takes for the kids to get ready but a major focus is on the teacher and just how much it takes for a kindergarten teacher to prepare for a classroom full of kids. And even moreso the impact, with cuts being made yearly on teacher's salaries and recently the removal of tax credits and deductions for teachers even supplying the needed supplies FOR the classroom...this is a very important book. Miss bindergarten's work is never done. It even starts before the book begins. We are treated to seeing Miss Bindergarten starting her day, getting herself ready, then beginning to organize everything she needs in the pages leading up the first page in the book. The artwork is really charming and the main character, we see how hard she works and how much she cares, even as we see the milestone of the 26 kids in her class. And this book utilizes the alphabet with each child's name as well. Now the poetry of seeing each kid and that story is a little bit overdone, not that exciting but it is nice to see how each different child has something to do as they get ready for school...but this is truly the teacher's story...and the classroom's story. It isn't magic. It takes a lot of elbow grease to be a teacher. And this book was not even published recently but in 1996. The struggle has always been. And always will be. And this book rightfully raises the queen of the classroom on her pedestal. My only complaint is naimg her Bindergarten to get the obvious rhyme when there is never anyone named that. Just saying Miss Barten or something would have been fine and less eyegouging.