Rating: 5/5

"Sing a song of sixpence, a pocket full of rye,
 Four and twenty blackbirds baked in a pie.
 When the pie was opened the birds began to sing,
 Wasn't that a dainty dish to set before the king.

 The king was in his counting house, counting out his money,
 The queen was in the parlour eating bread and honey.
 The maid was in the garden hanging out the clothes,
 When there came a litte dickey bird and nipped off her nose."

When Rex Fortescue suddenly falls ill after drinking his regular cup of tea at his office and dies shortly after, the police suspect foul play. Inspector Neele visits Yewtree Lodge, Mr. Fortecue's home, to interview the family and staff. Between a younger second wife, an son with which Mr. Fortescue was currenlty at odds with, a daughter who wished to marry but the fiance was not aproved by dad and a whole slew of characters with the staff, inspector Neele has no shortage of suspects and an abundance of motives. As the investigation progresses, Miss Marple inserts herself into the case and soon links the murder to a rhyme. Uncovering a complex plot, Miss Marple unmasks the culprit.

The seventh book in the Miss Marple series, 'A Pocket full of Rye' was originally published in 1953. Rex Fortescue is a ruthless business man with questionable practices. Accustomed to having a cup of tea at work, he falls ill quite suddenly and dies. A handful of rye is found in his pocket and soon his death is a confirmed case of poisoning through taxine. Inspector Neele is assigned to the case which leads him to Yewtree Lodge, the home of the the Fortecues. The house is surrounded by the plant needed to get taxine and now inspector Neele has a household full of suspects. Miss Marple reads about the murder in the papers and after another twist in the case, gets involved. As per usual with Christie, there were plenty of red herrings and misdirections. I greatly enjoyed the way in which the plot unravelled and found the characters intriguing and entertaning (especially Miss Ramsbottom, the sister of Mr. Fortecue's first wife). I love how the rhyme was incorporated into the narrative and how the culprit came to be revealed. This book is yet another favorite by Miss Christie and I absolutely love it. This book is a crime by rhyme and it was done masterfully. Highly recommended!