Rating: 1/5

I read this a long time ago, more than a decade, and I remember being supremely frustrated by it. I just revisited it recently out of nostalgia and stumbled on its companion (book #1 of the series - Into the Fire) and I left a lengthy review there. Like its brother, this book deserves less than zero. 

I struggle to understand who the audience is for this, but seeing as I missed the gigantic red flags as a young adult, I imagine it is for young impressionable readers with no sense of reality or understanding of relationships. It is a tragedy already that the prequel was published (in which the hero and heroine have a most cringy drunken sexual encounter which should have soured any logically thinking woman). Somehow, the prequel makes this one look better but only in comparison. It's still a dumpster fire.

The hero is an angry upper-class stuck-up fire marshal who treats the police detective heroine that is desperately in love with him like scum (for no reason) while desperate to own her. He hates that he is attracted to her and, while he never formulates this, she is clearly underneath him socially and professionally. You don't really understand what he's about other than being a bitter playboy who 'falls in love' with an intelligent so-called assertive, tomboyish cool woman that is not one of his usual lineup of airheaded hyperfeminine socialites (I guess the heroine shares these women's lack of judgement). And he doesn't fail to remind her of this! He really just doesn't even like her. Gosh. He is just so insufferable.
Of course, he is also incredibly possessive and menacing towards her, but since she's in love with him and he her, it's ok right? Listen, go see my extensive review of the first book which should be enough warning to avoid this deranged universe. 

There is a steamy dubious-consent sex scene on a motorcycle that is unbelievable but only because you wonder why you're still there reading this. It's not worth the ink but it is certainly inventive.

The hero is also a mama's boy whose mama in question is a horrible human who is obsessed with appearances and class. The hero never addresses the power difference between him and the Cajun heroine (personally and professionally), or really his mother's treatment of her. The mother has seemingly learned zilch after the first book. So has he, apparently. But it's okay, you know, because his dad is so chill and accepting! The same dad who is inexplicably in love with a demon that this the hero's mom. Maybe the hero takes after him? The author want you to believe so, apparently, despite no evidence of this.

Anyway, tl.dr:
If you want to read about a hero that doesn't like and arguably hates his lover, a heroine that is written as a bad-ass but that has such very low self-esteem as to be invisible, all complemented boring/one-note/hateful side characters and under-developed plot lines with uncompelling mysteries, this is for you.