Rating: 5/5

"It was night in the jungles of Africa. The sound of drums thumped through the darkness. The rhythm of the drums was wild. Throbbing. Dangerous."

So begins Ace Venture 2: When Nature Calls: The Novel: Too Many Colons, a 122-page roller coaster ride you can't put down. Mark Cerasini adapts (or, should I say, is merely the imperfect vessel through which this great work flows) this epic of thrills and laughs, bucking the trend where a movie must first begin as a book. Rather than subscribe to this dogmatic approach to great literature, Cerasini understands that this is no mere book, this tome of paper and ink provides the medium through which Ace Venture further battles the injustices of the animal kingdom with style, pizazz, and zinging one-liners that will have you reaching for that bookmark as to not lose your place in the ensuing giggle-storm. Though the book does employ certain "meta" techniques that have gripped the field of literature and arts as of recent, Cerasini does so masterfully and with true artistic grace, avoiding simply jumping on the bandwagon. The book itself acts as a commentary on the social and economical plight of third-world nations and their peoples (just as the plot does), with an obviously intentional slapdash printing job that often makes the print slant and meander across the page. Though distracting at first, the sooner the reader garners the adapter's true intentions the better, as only then can true enjoyment of this literary masterpiece begin.

Don't let the biopic's large, child- and elderly-friendly font fool you, this is a dense work of literary genius. Indeed, newcomers to the legacy of Ace Ventura may first want to watch the moving picture version of this tale, as without a previous viewing experience to serve as a guide or navigator one may easily be lost in the twists and turns of metaphors and beautifully crafted prose the volume employs. 

Those acquainted with the heroism (and shenanigans) of Mr. Ventura may be best served to treat this book as the textual equivalent of a DVD extras section. While true, it does contain the rank and file story of Ace's adventures and escapades in the dark continent, it also goes so much further. Just when you begin to think that you can no longer take the anticipation brought on by the slow-building suspense of the first half, WHAM, 60-odd pages in there is a brief respite. Like an oasis in the middle of the Sahara desert, the mid-section of the book features eight (count them!) pages of production stills, detailing various characters (including Mr. Ventura and his stylish wardrobe) and plot evens. If need be or one is pressed for time, certain color photos also reveal the ending of novel, a spoiler that wrenches your heart from your chest halfway through one of the greatest experiences you will ever have in your life. Fear not these spoilers, for they have only given away the destination, but the true experience is in the journey and the savoring thereof! 

Though many may take the 5-star rating as a declaration of perfection, this is not the case. In fact, this work's greatest accomplishment stems from its flaws, which make it gritty and realistic. Just like life, this book and its characters are all flawed; they all have pasts to hide from, presents to enjoy, and futures to plan. Drawing on this, their errors, histories, and motivations make them personable if not likable, and in the end much more believable as resolution is not always achieved in a neat 90-minute time as some would have you believe.

Friends, if I may leave you with but three words to mark this serendipitous occasion, please do your best to head them when considering this book and its true greatness: "All Rightee then!"