Rating: 5/5

This book, (together with The Midnight Raymond Chandler) was my initial introduction to the brilliant writing of Raymond Chandler, back around 1990 or so. Up to that point I hadn’t really been interested in crime or mystery fiction, but I was very much into outsider, countercultural writer Robert Anton Wilson, who raved about Chandler’s writing in a couple of his books. So when I saw this book and its companion volume in a used bookstore, I grabbed them up. 

And Wow! was I impressed! Chandler’s plots were ridiculous and convoluted when they were there at all. His characters were straight out of the genre stock closet. The stories all had too many bodies and too pat wrap-ups to seem realistic. But none of that mattered. Chandler took stock characters and made them fascinating and memorable. His hard boiled dialogue mesmerized. His power to create atmosphere and paint distinctive word portraits was unparalleled. His ability to effectively create mood was almost eldritch in its uncanniness. What I discovered in these genre crime stories was a literary giant — a 20th century noir Shakespeare, whose work was all the more impressive because he was constrained within the conventions of the genre. 

The Raymond Chandler Omnibus includes Chandler’s first four, short novels of Philip Marlowe, private eye. As I’ve reviewed these books individually elsewhere on Goodreads, here I’ve just included a few quote from each to give a taste. Read these books here, or read them individually, but either way, do yourself a favor and read them. 

The Big Sleep

”Dead men are heavier than broken hearts.”

”Neither of the two people in the room payed any attention to the way I came in, although only one of them was dead.”

Farewell, My Lovely

”It was a blonde. A blonde to make a bishop kick a hole in a stained glass window.”

”I needed a drink, I needed a lot of life insurance, I needed a vacation, I needed a home in the country. What I had was a coat, a hat, and a gun.”

”He looked about as inconspicuous as a tarantula on a slice of angel food.”

The High Window

”From thirty feet away she looked like a lot of class. From ten feet away she looked like something made up to be seen from thirty feet away.”

”She had a lot of face and chin. She had pewter-colored hair set in a ruthless permanent, a hard beak, and moist eyes with the sympathetic expression of wet stones.”

The Lady in the Lake

”The self operating elevator had an elderly perfume in it like three widows drinking tea.”

”The minutes went by on tiptoe, with their fingers to their lips.”

”Everything was quiet and sunny and calm. No cause for excitement whatsoever. It’s only Marlowe finding another body. He does it rather well by now. Murder-a-day Marlowe they call him. They have the meat wagon following him around to follow up on the business he finds.”