Rating: 3/5

For the first 264 pages I was ready to give this book 5 enthusiastic stars. Wolf intertwines her personal experiences with careful research into the state of the maternal health care in the U.S. I really related to the personal experiences she relates: a traumatic c-section, mild PPD, the strange mixture of confusion and bliss that accompany the arrival of a new baby. I especially "enjoyed" her analysis of our hospital system that offers very few choices to laboring women, and that commonly ignores what is best for mothers and babies in the name of convenience and profit. I also appreciated her honest assessment of the wide range of emotions that come along with new motherhood, and her passionate advocacy for society to treat mothering as a profession and better accommodate the needs of mothers and children. I agree with her: New mothers need more support, less isolation, and lots more understanding.

Then came the chapter on breastfeeding, which dropped my overall rating down to 3 stars (and if I could rate it on a chapter-by-chapter basis, I'd give this particular chapter 0 stars). I was so incredibly disappointed with her very brief treatment of breastfeeding where she basically says "eh, breastfeeding's good and all, but do whatever you want." The rest of the book is such a vehement defense of everyday women who have to grapple with profit-driven hospitals and litigation-paranoid doctors in order to have their ideal birth experiences...I would have expected her to take up the cause and defend breastfeeding as a feminist issue, too. Instead, she refers to La Leche League as "lactation fascists" and in one fell swoop, undermines the work that ordinary women are doing to promote breastfeeding as the healthiest beginning for babies (a fact that is literally undisputed in scientific data). Where is the mention of the multi-billion dollar formula industry that lobbies and sends free samples and does everything in their power to make breastfeeding seem too difficult, too time-consuming, too socially-uncomfortable? But no, in Wolf's opinion, the women who speak loudly trying to create a viable voice in opposition to this profit-driven industry (and who dedicate themselves wholeheartedly to helping women learn to breastfeed when challenges arise) are "fascists." Give me a break. Wolf loves Ina May Gaskin but doesn't like lactivists? How is this possible?? Anyway, she gives literally one paragraph to addressing the proven health benefits of breastfeeding for babies, doesn't even mention the myriad health benefits for mothers, and sails on to say that it is "unrealistic" to expect many American mothers to breastfeed.

As you can tell, I ended the book with negative feelings. The breastfeeding "chapter" (really just a few pages) was toward the end of the book, and she never got me back after that. Which is too bad; I vaguely remember now that I really enjoyed the majority of the book. I would recommend this book up to about page 264!