Rating: 2/5

The Saddle Club books are mostly written to be stand-alone books, but it helps to read the first four in order. Those books set up the rest of the series. This book is significant in that introduces Kate Devine, the fourth member of the Saddle Club. However, she would only appear every now and then in the series. Three of the first four books are currently available at The Open Library. The entire series used to be available, but most have been removed recently.

This is the weakest book in the first four. A good series needs a good villain or some sort of major problem to overcome. Veronica, the horse-killing rich bitch, plays a minor role here. The most she does is cheat at a gymkhana game. 

There is an A and B plot, like in most Saddle Club books. The A plot is meeting champion rider Kate ... and then finding out that she's quit riding. The B plot is Lisa's first date, with Stevie's brother Chad. Lisa is 13, which I think is old enough for a first date, but what do I know? There is a funny bit where Lisa is genuinely mystified why her mother is upset about her being alone with Chad in a dark movie theater.

Reading between the lines, I think we just found out what Lisa's Mom liked to do with her dates in darkened cinemas.

This is the first book that was more about people than horses. There were still some nice parts about riding and competitions, but not much about the horses. Bryant didn't even bother to describe any of the ponies this time around. The only horse given much of any description is Samson, who is about a month old. The horses age in this series, but not the people.

The About the Author feature at the end was different than in the first two books. Unlike most of the series, the first four books (at least) were written by series creator Bonnie Bryant. Kids today will wonder how the heck Bryant rode in New York City, but until recently, there used to be a riding school in the city near Central Park. This rather crappy stable featured in a few young adult horse series, such as The Galloping Detective and Thoroughbred.