The Lily was the emblem of France and the Lion the emblem of England. 
Enguerrand Fitzmarc overheard a plot against King Henry V of England and his tale told to the king gave Rand a promise of land and a wife. Rand was disappointed to be given a French wife when he had planned on marrying his lifelong friend, Justine. His best friend told him that Justine was not for him because she was no challenge to Rand. She became a nun as Rand left home. 
Belliana chose to challenge the king and her uncle, the Duke of Burgundy, and marry before Enguerrand arrived. She found out that the marriage wasn't going to work as she expected. Her husband, Lazare Mondragon, told her that he would never sleep with her so that his son by his first wife would inherit her lands. 
Enguerrand arrived on land to find that the town near where he landed had been ravaged by Frenchmen. He helped the people of town and they grew to respect and like him for the aid he gave them. He met Lianna when he was out one day and they both used abbreviated names so they didn't know who each other really was. Rand told Lianna that he thought he was in love with her after meeting her. He had thought he was in love with Justine but found he haddn't know the meaning of true love until he Lianna. 
Lianna's husband left and they continued to meet in secret. They were strongly drawn to each other and Bonne, Lianna's maid and friend, figured out that she was meeting someone. She suggested that Lianna get pregnant and claim the child was Lazare's so that she would get her heir and a child to love. Lianna convinced Rand to make love to her, convincing herself that she was doing it to get an heir. She wouldn't admit to falling in love with Rand while Rand told Lianna that he was in love with her. 
The Duke of Burgundy was unhappy about the marriage and told Rand that he would arrange for the marriage to be annulled. Lazare was found dead in a river soon after that. Lianna accused the duke of arranging his murder. This left the path clear for Enguerrand to marry Lianna. The duke arranged for Rand to sneak into Lianna's home and kidnap her. He did this in the dark and not realizing that he was kidnapping Lianna until he arrived at the duke's home. This was about a month after Rand and Lianna first met each other and she was already pregnant. 
They were married. While Rand was happy, Lianna was furious. She told Rand that she would never forgive him. 
Rand had to go to her home, Bois-Long, and take the property back from Lazare's son. He won the cooperation of the people when it was proven that the Frenchmen she was harboring in her home were the same ones who had been raiding her lands surrounding her home. 
Once home, Lianna tried to hide the pregnancy and it was weeks later that she was sick and fainted. It was then that Rand found out. Lianna told Rand that she would never cooperate in their marriage although her body gave away the fact that she wanted him. They got along peaceably for the next few months. 
Liliana went into labor and it was difficult. Rand came home and supported her through the labor until their son, Aimery, was born. They were happy but the threat of war between France and England was still there. Henry declared war and came to France. 
Henry wanted to cross into France by crossing Lianna's land. She was ordered to blow up the crossing with the threat of her son being killed. The wife of Lazare's son had kidnapped their son and Lianna went to get him. This resulted in Rand nearly being captured but he got away. He caught up with Lianna and they went to England with their son. They left him in England with Justine at the nunnery. 
Lazare's son convinced Lianna to blow up the path for the English to cross into France and she did it. Lianna tricked Rand into meeting him away from Bois-Long and his men came and knocked him out to get him to not go after her. Her land was once again being held by Lazare's son. Gervais had too many men for Rand to fight. 
Gervais found a set of clothing worn by Rand and put it on. He also had found a medal given to Rand by the king. He delivered these items to the king and told him that Rand had turned to help the French by blowing up the bridge and that he was now assisting the French. Rand was determined to be a traitor. Rather than give up, Rand and his men followed behind the French army and fought them on the backside when they attacked the English. All this time Rand was using his anger at his wife for aiding the French to fuel his fighting. 
Lianna had gone to speak to the king on Rand's behalf after she realized what was happening and because she found out that Gervais didn't know where her son really was. She chose love for her husband over her love for France due to the treatment of Gervais and his men. She felt really guilty for the part she had played in helping Gervais. 
The king had her tied up and she saw the French army defeated by the English. The king still had no proof that Rand was innocent and he was scheduled to be hung at noon the next day. Lianna was given help to escape and went home to get Gervais. He had stolen some items from the king and he had been wounded by Lianna's guard. They had to get Rand's clothing and the stolen items to prove Rand's innocence. 
Lianna got home by riding through the night. She hated water because she had seen her mother drown. Her love directed her to cross the moat to get to her castle. She found Rand's men there and they helped her to capture Gervais and get the kings belongings as well as Rand's clothes. They rode back to the king and presented the evidence to him before Rand was killed. Rand was declared innocent and freed. 
Gervais was trying to get away when his wife showed up. She set fire to the barrels of gunfire and the resulting explosion killed both her and Gervais. She didn't know the damage that she was putting in motion. The explosion was much more than she expected. 
Rand and Lianna were going to go get their son when the duke of Burgundy arrived with Justine and their son. They went home. Rand forgave Lianna and she finally told him that she loved him. 
France and England both had one ruler, King Henry V. He ruled for 9 years.