Rating: 4/5

Nov 18, 1145am ~~ I don't know about anybody else, but whenever I read the word homesteading, I think of pioneer days, as in back in the 1800's. Even though I know it is possible to homestead even in 2022, I still create a mental picture of Long Ago for any such thing to be happening.

That is what happened with me when I began this book. The original publication date was 1914. I assumed that the letters making up the book would be from long before that. But they were letters written from April 1909 to November 1913. Once I adjusted my little pea brain to that fact I was much less confused. lol

Elinore Pruitt Stewart was a widow living in Denver with her young daughter when she decided she needed to change her life. The book is made of letters written to her friend Mrs. Coney after EPS arrived in Wyoming. We don't actually learn the exact details of how she got there until letter number 23, dated June 1913. That is where she tells her friend 'how it happened'. 

In the first couple of letters I didn't really think much of Elinore. She seemed to be one of those people with a smart-alecky approach to life, a little too hyper and forward for me to take to right away. But it wasn't very long before I was able to appreciate her personality, and I also think she settled a bit, maybe quit trying so hard to be funny and likeable and just let her real Self show up.

She was not as completely alone as other women homesteaders I have read about. She had been hired as a ranch housekeeper and decided to take her land claim on property bordering her boss's lands. She married the boss fairly quickly, but she insisted on running her homestead lands with her own money and doing as much of the work on it herself as she could. 

I enjoyed her letters, and even though the person who wrote the forward to the book wished for more words about Stewart's life and less about the lives of the people around her such as 'Zebbie', I thought the stories she told about her neighbors were charming. 

What is still hard to get into the little pea brain is how much work this woman did. She was quite capable of doing ranch work, house work, garden work, barn chores, and raising the children that came along to keep first daughter Jerrine company. I wonder how many of us these days would be able to do what Elinore did?! 

I ended the book liking Elinore very much and I am looking forward to going on an elk hunt with her in the next collection of letters, which was published in 1915 and describe a time from July to October of 1914. And now that I have made friends, I think I will see if there are any other titles around by this homesteading woman!