Rating: 4/5

I liked the book quite a lot. It's beautifully-written. But that is despite the misogynistic viewpoint that was probably true in the life of the village and the people in the countryside of Sudan. I disliked how that was amped up with racism when it came to the 'Northern' women. I don't want books to be written from a pc point of view but when half the world's worth is judged by looks, sexuality and their usefulness to men it doesn't enhance my enjoyment of it. Do African Americans like reading about the slaves in Gone with the Wind?

I want to say two things, the first is to quote a GR author, Emer Martin: “I asked them why when they persecute men, for religion or colour it was seen by the world as oppression and when they persecute women, it was dismissed as tradition.”

Secondly, if the book had been written from any other point of view, it would have been dishonest. And this honest point of view didn't make me dislike the characters or the book or the author, but gave me more insight into where the Rotherham and other grooming gangs came from and why their communities didn't give them up. 

We all share this tribal, wanting to protect our own, feeling, but hopefully we have moved on enough to out those whose who are criminally evil. That's my point of view. Perhaps another culture would give a different weight to that, or think of it in a different way. Books like this help me try and understand that, but I don't really understand it, not at all.

There are a lot of good reviews of this book. I only mentioned one aspect. Don't let it put you off just because the world view is one that I find difficult to pass over when reading. It's a very good read that made me think.

On advice I have had to rewrite a considerable part of this review so I remain pc and don't give offence to anyone who might misinterpret what I mean, so I did. I'm not really happy about this. I don't see why some cultures should get a free pass, and especially so when they are brought into and maintained in a country that does not support them. But I have to have some friends left to buy me drinks!

Update 26 June 2026 I have just received a notification of a comment I made being deleted by Goodreads admin and warned not to make such comments again. So I shall have to refrain from all comments that might upset any group. This might be hard given I have strong opinions, but ok, I don't want to upset anyone, even if the comment is justifiable. 

Since this is an old review, I do wonder who came across it and reported me though.