Rating: 4/5

The Year of the Jubilo is one of three novels by Howard Bahr that I’ve been reading and I finished this one a few weeks ago. I seem to be stuck in the Civil War. I have three more novels about The Civil War ahead of me after I finish The Judas Field, and I hope I enjoy these as much as I do the writing by Bahr.

Perhaps I enjoy his writing because he expresses universal thoughts, such as in these passages:

“In June for leaves, did not curl or rattle; the wind made a soft sound among them, and they’re green, was like the first green, as if these were the first leaves ever thought of.”

“Of course, he owned memory, too, and one day this might prove to be his heaviest baggage. But not now. He had learned in these three years that sometimes it was all right to walk in the moment, only, and that memory was merciful in this, at least: that now and then it gave way to music or just sunlight, or to a little space when a man might walk along with nothing bad happening to him.”

The novel takes place after the war has ended. The book’s protagonist, Gawain (our returning knight), is among those going home. 

“At their backs lay the old world they had known, remote, now, as the valleys of the moon, to which they could never return, no matter how much the old people spoke of it. Perhaps they wouldn’t even if they could, for they had seen that old world doomed by its own essence; it had thrust them into the dark adventure, had been consumed, and left them with little, but the taste of ashes for their trials. And now the dark adventure was itself finished, more or less; quieter at least, no longer so immediate, though they would never be done with it all together. Nor understand it, either, for if their purpose was clear to them once, too much it happened for it ever to be clear. Yet they would come to understand this much, long hence: that the adventure was a destination of its own, perhaps the only one they’d been born to, and wherever they traveled afterward, would be less search than wandering.”

Bahr gets into the head of Gawain and in the process, gets into the reader’s mind, so the reader becomes Gawain. 

“He could put off grieving for a little while. Let the summer rain grieve for now, and the sighing trees, and the earth over which they’d all passed there a little while. He was alive, and he would live to claim the long days left him. Whether he deserved them or not, he could not say. He only knew that they were his, and he would do his best by them.”

As in the paragraph above and below, the passage of time is an ever present theme in the novel.

“Time had won out anyway, as he always seem to do, and he would carry them all down paths of his own choosing, and it was folly to deny it.”

What would it be like to walk home from the bloody war? How do you go back? What do you feel as you are, at last, about to knock on a familiar door? Bahr puts us right there.

“For a moment longer, he stood watching, suddenly aware that he was balanced on the thin edge of time between one moment and another, between one life and another. The thought hung in his mind and left him immobile. He wondered how long he could sustain these last seconds of the war; he found in his tired heart, just for an instance, the smallest glimmer of regret that it was over, and something else about to begin. What it was, he couldn’t imagine, wasn’t even supposed to imagine now; he only knew that every breath brought him closer. He swallowed hard, and took off his hat, and lifted his hand to knock.”

This book follows Bahr’s first in the trilogy, The Black Flower. I recommend that you read them in order.