Rating: 5/5

Jeremy Poldark was very similar to the seaside town of Cornwall where it takes place: turbulent, complex infrastructures, and it was breathtaking. Considering the first half of the novel presides over a court case, I was surprisingly intrigued by the whole ordeal. I thought I would have been bored, but a small town filled with my favorite Poldark characters holds plenty of charm for me. Everyone was scattered around the village and it could have been a party despite the dire circumstances.

There was a surprising scene that featured Francis Poldark and Dr. Dwight that I was not expecting, but it certainly heightened the drama and emotion of the story. Speaking of Dr. Dwight, we encountered Caroline Peneven for the first time. I knew she was involved because she's on the sixth cover. I thought she was spoiled at first because she called the physician for her dumb dog, but her character was gradually revealed to be a compassionate little miss. Her encounters with Dwight were so sweet and I would have paired them together had I not already known the outcome. Come on, how romantic is it that she orders cases of oranges for the whole village in order to prevent scurvy? Doctors + romantic disease prevention= melted heart.

Demelza Poldark is a champion and that's all I have to say. She needs to work on her communication with her husband and being too cheeky, but she's otherwise a darling. I'm sorry her husband is such a grump but that's what you should expect when you marry a handsome brooding hero.

Verity Poldark is still a doll baby and I will defend her forever. I just want to her to be happy and I need her on a book cover ASAP.

Ross Poldark is a smoldering scarred hero but, like his wife, needs to work on communication. He's a fiery Poldark, but you don't need to brood at every opportunity. You're a babe, but lighten up. Please continue to thrash your wheat shirtless...His speech in the courtroom and his final altercation with George Warleggan were divine. I just live for English drama like this.

Finally:
Jud Paynter is a gift to this series. That's all

I'm so happy that I discovered this show on a whim with a spectacular source material to match. I have to buy Warleggan (ironic) but I don't think I want the BBC tie in. I don't want his weasel face staring at others while I read. Until my next visit to Cornwall...