Rating: 5/5

Stephen E. Whitfield and Gene Roddenberry's 1968 The Making of Star Trek is an entertaining then-current account of the creation of the famed 1960s television series, the backstage nitty-gritty workings from writing to costuming and filing and editing, and the struggle to be renewed for a third season.

Now, first, though, perhaps I should comment that I am perplexed as to why Roddenberry has a byline here when Whitfield actually wrote the text. Yes, each chapter does contain big quotes from Roddenberry--in somewhat annoying and perhaps pompous-seeming FULL CAPITALS rather than italics or even underlining or such--but they are quotes brought in by the author of the actual book, not chapters or even parts of chapters written by a second author. In fact, come to think of it, Whitfield specifically tells us that aside from these "[q]uotes from Gene Roddenberry," "[a]ll other statements, opinions, or recountings of events are the words of S.E.W., unless otherwise identified" (1974 Ballantine paperback, page 21; italics original). So... Odd indeed, at best.

Regardless, although, yes, the book is rather adulatory regarding Roddenberry's genius in creating the concept for the series, his writing and editing abilities, his dogged hard work, and perhaps even his near-omniscience, this is somewhat understandable when we consider the author and the time of writing. After all, longtime science fiction fan Whitfield, who at the time "was employed by an advertising agency," was brought aboard Star Trek in late 1966, "working closely with Desilu Studios and NBC-TV" to "generate publicity" for model-kit-manufacturer AMT, which was producing an "Enterprise model kit" (page 11). Growing so closely engaged with Roddenberry's efforts, he of course also fell in love with the show and its staff. Moreover, 1968 was a time when Star Trek had just won a reprieve by being renewed for an unexpected third season...and yet at a switch from a Monday-night time slot to Fridays at 10:00pm, which "[m]any...gloomily predicted" would keep it from moving past the initial 16-episode order to continuation of "a mid-season pickup" (page 400). It is difficult to imagine Whitfield showing anything less than great enthusiasm for the endangered show.

Still, while the writing comes off a little starry-eyed at times, the book indeed is interesting. Mind you, it definitely is not "THE BOOK ON HOW TO WRITE FOR TV!," as shouted in full-capital red on the cover of my copy, but in addition to telling the tale of the show and also giving sketches of its primary off- and onstage participants, it indeed delves into the technicalities and steps of the business of moving from initial premise of a new series to finalized episode ready for broadcast. The technological aspects, once cutting-edge, obviously are dated, but the overall outline of having an idea, pitching it, understanding camera angles, and whatnot likely still holds true.

The 414-page text is broken into five "Parts": "Birth Pangs," "An Official Biography of a Ship and Its Crew," "From Then Until Now," "Star Trek Production--A Closer Look," and "Whither Star Trek?" Each Part then is comprised of a varying number of chapters, from 3 for the second and the last to 8 or 9 for the rest. In addition to its front- and back-cover color reproductions from the show, the interior contains quite a fair bit of black-and-whites: 62 pages of photos, along with 6 pages of design sketches and 10 pages of schematics. Moreover, the appendix gives a list of all shows of the first two seasons, with each season's regularly appearing actors, and then for each episode, script credit, guest stars, and original air date, information which in decades prior to the internet otherwise would have been difficult to access.

The initial outline used to pitch the series (page 22-30) is particularly interesting, as is the original script for the first pilot, "The Cage" (pages 47-65), which later, after a second pilot with different characters and actors sold the show, was repurposed as the two-part "The Menagerie." I actually had just read Harlan Ellison's 2009 The City on the Edge of Forever, so I was a little surprised how much less detailed this script was than even the earliest drafts of Ellison's famed episode. And, of course, regarding Ellison's book...well, if a reader wants to look beyond Whitfield's adulation to a view of Roddenberry publicly lying about and belittling, consistently and purposefully, the genesis of that most popular episode, then that is the one to read next.

In any event, despite occasional quaintness and iffy perspective, Stephen E. Whitfield's The Making of Star Trek remains an entertaining and enlightening read of 4.5 or 5 stars.