Rating: 4/5

The Master of Rain: A Suspense Thriller is my first attempt at reading anything by Tom Bradby and I quite enjoyed. It's got a bit of everything, noir, foreign mystery, historical fiction, intrigue and enough action to keep you satisfied.

The book is set in Shanghai, China in 1926. Richard Field has newly arrived from England and finished training with the Shanghai police force, working with the Intelligence branch. A Russian prostitute has been viciously murdered and Richard is assigned to work with the criminal division, specifically American cop Caprisi and is partner, Chinese cop, Chen. The whole dynamic of the city and interactions between the international community and the locals makes for a fascinating setting.

Richard must wend his way through competing factions; the heads of both Intelligence, Irishman Granger, and of Criminal, Scotsman MacLeod, both want to take over as head of the Police department when the Chief retires. Their staff don't trust each other, although there develops an excellent relationship between Field and Caprisi. The international community itself is very intersting, with its own hierarchy. Field's uncle is a member of the city council and another, Lewis, is the Taipan of the biggest company in Shanghai. You also have the locals, criminal Lu Huang controls the strongest gang in the city and is very influential in all of the city's activities, including prostitution. He is the first main suspect in the murder as the victim lived in his building.

Richard is attracted to another Russian woman who was the murder victim's neighbour. Let's see, what else? Let's just say that there is a lot going on and things move along at a very nice pace. The team investigate the murder and possible other related murders and also an international drug trafficking ring, putting their own lives in danger. It's all very fascinating and a unique story. I liked the characters, the setting, the historical perspective (an time and era that I know little about) and just the whole mystery. Excellent! (4 stars)