Rating: 2/5

A Soviet lad dreams about becoming a cosmonaut and enrols a military space programme – a fairly unpretentious premise that will not be further expanded. I never expected a major scientific investigation or a detailed history of the pioneers of space travel from a satire, a genre bound to be easily accessible and comprehendible in order to convey a critical and analytical point. So the dark side of the Moon brings the magic, and the Soviet construct brings the myth. 

So many observations about the grand madness and mad grandeur of the all-consuming, all-communist Soviet magnificence, the mirage of worldly and outer-worldly victory in the name of humankind and collective ideal, the Potemkin villages on top of Potemkin villages are achingly sharp and apt. A fortress built on the quicksand of myth. Equally perplexing, but not surprising, are the brief, casual scenes of utter dehumanisation and loss of persona, along with all its values. Ivan the Huntsman. I fell apart over Ivan the Huntsman. And I, too, own all those Pink Floyd albums. All those components are bizarre to say the least. And more bizarre still because they are quite conceivable. 

Addressing the phantasms of Soviet everyday life, my mind instantaneously switches to Good Bye Lenin!. Sure, there is no space travel and this is East Berlin. The film is no masterpiece, but it shows a warm, comic and humane poignancy that “Omon Ra” lacks entirely. In spite of his sharp eye for black absurdity, the author seems to be struggling with – words! And structure, and pace, and motivation. For a social and political satire, this novel failed to make me even remotely chuckle. Again for a satire, a rather direct form in its need to be foolproof, it too often lands in surrealistic detours. And as a short form focusing on one single main character and narrator, it fails to provide a palpable image of the character or a sympathetic connection of any sort. 

“Omon Ra” is a small volume, physically small: 137 pages total in the edition I read. There are just too many unmotivated events and actions, too many loose motifs, too much incoherence and a puzzlingly long part tossed into the narration without apparent purpose or connection. How is it possible to create something that short with so much redundancy on it? 

So you add piercing perception, but subtract all eloquence. A thread to follow, but no focus. A deep clash between the individual and the system he is born into, an even deeper clash between their ideals. And then you make it blatant and blunt. I am so sad that a vigilant debunking of a system’s cogwheels got lost in being a tongue-tied melodrama, a satire, a somnambular account.