Rating: 3/5

Reading this novel confirmed my feeling about Andrew Miller’s strengths and weaknesses as a novelist. Strengths: chooses wonderful subjects; writes extraordinarily well at the level of word, phrase, sentence, paragraph. Weaknesses: has no idea to do with his wonderful subjects once he has found them; can’t do plot; can’t do endings. 

I was tempted to mitigate this judgment after reading Miller’s first novel, Ingenious Pain, which I very much liked (previously I had read Oxygen and Pure). It was precisely the fact that I enjoyed Ingenious Pain that made me keen to search through a bit more of Miller’s early oeuvre, but Casanova just confirmed my previous, largely negative, view. 

As ever, Miller chooses a good subject for Casanova, his second novel. The basic plot premise is taken from Casanova’s memoirs, though Miller uses this only as a basis for improvisation. Casanova did spend a period in London, and his unhappy infatuation with Marie Charpillon is factual, although the outcome Miller gives it is not. What excites Miller, I think, is the conjunction of two exciting worlds, eighteenth-century Venice and eighteenth-century London, both containing ferments of the present alongside the alien exotica of the terminally past—the thinking historical fiction writer’s nirvana.

I was captivated initially by this set-up, as I suspect I will always probably be captivated by the first 50 or 100 pages of Miller’s novels. He is very good at setting things up. Casanova has a fine voice; the research has been done and seamlessly incorporated; appealing minor characters turn up at the right rhythm and frequency. And the writing is just wonderful, sumptuous and nuanced–there are sentences one could happily pore over if one wasn’t still under the pleasant illusion of actually being taken somewhere.

And then, what? The plot just disintegrates about half way through and the whole novel never pulls itself back together. I found this a test-case for how little good writing can survive alone, without at least a minimum of plot backbone to hold it up. In fact, my impression reading this was that good writing can just become jarring when it’s in the service of nothing—its intrinsic stylistic quality does nothing to save it at all.

My conclusion: please, Andrew Miller, try some short stories! You are a wonderful writer, but you are not a novelist. If you want to continue writing novels, become a fully fledged post-modernist; then you will have more to hide behind. Currently your novels are too traditional to be judged by different standards, but by traditional standards, they fail.