Rating: 5/5

There is no specific main character in The Ten Trusts but I would like to point out the different animals and the different emotions which Jane and Mark bring to the reader's attention. 
The Gombe Chimpanzees feeling embarrassment is one of my favorite emotions shown in the book. When a younger male attempts to show off in front of his primate "hero" and as he shakes the twigs in the top of the tree, the small limb he was on snapped and he fell to the ground in front of his hero. Jane does a great job describing the scene, "He was not hurt, but as his head emerged from the long grass he was looking toward Figan. Had his hero noticed?"
Before I read this book i had no sense of animals having emotions such as love, sadness, and grief. Another great example of chimpanzee emotions is the matriarch, Flo, and her son, Flint. Three days after Flo died Flint climbed a tree, close to where Flo died. He slowly climbed the tree and looked down on the empty nest which he once shared with his mother. He slowly climbed to the ground and laid bellow the tree with the nest in it. He quit eating and did not seem interested in socializing. He fell sick shortly after and died near the place where his mother died.
This book continually takes my breath away. I don't know whether to cry or jump with joy for this new knowledge of creature emotions. 

November 10th assignment:

For anyone who is passionate about nature and wildlife, The Ten Trusts is full of internal conflict. I am a little bit past half way done with the book and with every section I find myself becoming upset and angry with the vast majority of modern day humanity. The best example is the section titled, Poisoning Earth (page 100). In this chapter Goodall relates dumping chemicals and foreign toxicities into out water systems to the effect on livestock, cattle in particular, and in turn the negative effects on human health when we consume products made from or with the infected livestock, milk being one of the biggest issues. What is really upsetting is the companies we often relate with dumping toxins are foreign companies or oil companies, but it hits much closer to home when Goodall mensions companies such as General Motors, Reynolds Metal, and ALCOA. As you begin reading this section it makes sense but some may be skeptic. In the second paragraph on page 101 Goodall provides some statistics for proof. The St. Lawrence river has been so contaminated that inuit women were told not to breast feed their babies due to the toxins in their breast milk and the fish from the river which they widely depend on is labeled toxic and unedible. In 2002 a female orca was tested for PCB's and the levels were four times higher than any other mammal ever tested. This chemical was used by the United States and Canada until it was baned in the 1970's, over 30 years before the orcas were tested off the coast of Washinton State and British Columbia. Without taking into account the various other issues Goodall brings to the mind, every section contains some kind of conflict for the reader.