Rating: 3/5

That's my impression of the MC's, and the heroine's awful mother, in this novel. This story was set in Colorado and it's a second chance romance for an estranged married couple who had gotten married a few years ago when the heroine, Lainie, had been 19 yrs old. Lainie had been a spoilt rotten only child of parents who belonged to the old moneyed class. Her mother was an inveterate snob who hadn't wanted the heroine to marry Rad ( the nouveau riche industrialist H ). Snotty mommy thought that her beautiful genteel princess daughter deserved to be wed to a scion of their uppity country club pals so she did everything in her power to belittle the H and to put a spoke in her daughter's newlywed bliss. Lainie had been the beautiful young debutante with lots of male admirers and Rad ( in his early 30's ) felt she would be the ideal trophy wife. These 2 got married in their big society wedding but didn't live happily ever after.

Both MC's were equally culpable when it came to the breakdown of their marriage. There was no adultery but the heroine had been jealous of the H's vile and possessive PA Sondra. The PA had obviously wanted the H for herself and she played upon the insecurities of his young wife. In addition to this, the heroine was also a very petulant social butterfly type of wife who often argued with Rad when he had to devote a lot of time to his business and was unable to worship at her dainty feet or escort her to all the social functions to which she'd been invited. The H grew impatient with Lainie because of her childish demands for attention and because he felt that she prioritized her friends too much:

  "I've had a rough day. That damned party isn't all that important." 

"No, it's my friends who are giving it, so naturally it isn't important to you," Lainie had retorted sarcastically. 

"Your constant bitching is getting on my nerves." Rad's jaw had been tightly clenched and Lainie had blanched in spite of her air of defiance. 

"I am not going to that party tonight, and that's final!" 

"Well, I am!" 

"I'd think about it if I were you," Rad had said coldly as Lainie had turned to leave the room.

Their marriage finally broke down after Lainie threw yet another tantrum and Rad refused to give in to her demands. In fact he hurt her immensely by telling her that he should've made her his mistress instead of his wife since she didn't know the first thing about being a wife. When Lainie threatened to leave him, he coldly responded that he didn't care what she did anymore:

The petulant, mommy's girl heroine packed up her stuff and ran off back to her parents in a huff. Lainie did aggravate me immensely but I felt that Rad was too arrogant and cold. He also failed to see that her concerns about his PA Sondra were warranted. He seemed to think that as long as he wasn't interested in his PA, then his wife had no cause for complaint. He made the biggest mistake of disrespecting his wife's feelings; Sondra was obviously just out to cause trouble and the H should've fired her or reassigned her to another department in his corporation. PA's are not indispensable and this simple act of goodwill would've saved the marriage. Lainie also needed to stop heeding all the crap her snobbish mother pushed down her throat and she should've put her husband before her friends. I think it was the age difference between the MC's that made their issues so insurmountable; the heroine was a young party animal and the H was a sober businessman who didn't have time to engage in such entertainments on a frequent basis. 

At the start of the novel, Lainie's financial and social circumstances have deteriorated. Her late father had made a series of bad investments and lost all his money. His mother is also suffering from cancer and is bedridden. The formerly spoilt party girl heroine has been forced to face up to the reality of life and she's become a lot more likable and mature. She has only a few friends now because ( as is often the case ) the fair weather pals dumped her after her father lost all his money. She meet the H again, after all these years, at the opera and his attitude to her is disgusting:

  "The years haven't treated you kindly," he sneered, his gaze picking out the shadows under her haunted eyes and the pallor in her cheeks. "What a pity to be robbed of your beauty so early." 

Her face flamed immediately with anger and rage. "You haven't changed, Rad. You're still a ruthless, cold-blooded male swine!"

He doesn't even stop to wonder why she's looking so tired; she's been spending all her nights looking after her invalid mother and her financial worries haven't helped either. His comment is uncalled for and low because he obviously knows that the one weak spot with women is their physical appearance. It's the kind of comment I would expect from another woman, rather than from a man. Their reunion encounter is one of the nastiest I've ever encountered in a second chance story and Rad was utterly malignant and hateful at this point:

They eventually reconcile because she needs money to pay for her mother to be hospitalized and snobby mommy wants a luxury private room. Rad gave Lainie an ultimatum: he would pay all her mother's hospital bills if she returned to him. Their reconciliation is very bittersweet because they're both filled with pride and reluctant to show any weakness for each other. Rad was also jealous of a wannabe other man who was in love with the heroine. Lainie hadn't dated anyone during the years she'd been estranged from Rad but she had been willing to start dating this OM, so the H's obsessive jealousy was at a peak. The author didn't clarify whether Rad had been celibate during these years apart but there had been no relationship with the PA Sondra. The MC's started sleeping together again because they couldn't keep their hands off each other but the H treated Lainie more as a mistress than a wife. I swear, it's like pulling teeth to try and get these old school alpha male H's show a tiny ounce of human feeling and affection for their heroines. Lol.

The MC's relationship continued to spiral downwards in the last part of the story because the mindless sex they were having made each realize just how empty an loveless marriage can be. There was a great deal of angst, bitterness, jealousy, frustration, resentment, false pride and a total breakdown in verbal communication. It eventually became too much for the heroine so she once again left him and that's the catalyst that put him in touch with his inner feelings. The heroine returned to the apartment in the final scene and was shocked to see him holding her wedding ring and crying !

  The rugged features were contorted with pain as he stared back at her, his eyes red and haunted. There were tears winding their way down his face. Suddenly he was bristling with anger. 

"What are you doing here?" he shouted. But the savagery in his voice couldn't hide the pain behind every word. Rad seemed to realize it and sagged onto the couch, turning his head away from her as if it were torture to look at her. 

"What difference does it make?" The defeated tone of his voice brought a different ache into Lainie's heart. "After all the hell I've put you through, I guess you should have some victory." Rad was talking like a man broken in two. A bitter laugh came from somewhere deep inside him and it was filled with self-contempt. "And to think that for five years, I've tried to make sure you never knew I loved you. I even went to humiliating pains to make sure you believed I never did." Rad turned his tortured eyes on her, drinking in the bewildered expression on her face as if he were dying from thirst. "Oh, Lainie, I love you so much. Forgive me for forcing you… for blackmailing you into being my wife again," he begged in a hoarse whisper. 

"Rad!" His name was an exultant bubble that burst gladly from Lainie. 

"Don't pity me!" he shouted, rising to his feet as he changed from the beggar to the dominator. "I couldn't stand that!"

This salvaged the story for me because these two had been driving me up the wall with their pride and forced impasse. I was rather shocked to see an old school alpha male H actually cry and then unburden himself like this. It was the one thing that made me believe that these 2 would finally have a happy ending, with the 2 sons and 1 daughter the heroine wants to have.