Rating: 5/5

The "Cold Mountain Master Poetry Collection" - here in an excellent translation by Sinologue / Japanologue Burton Watson - is a corpus of over three hundred poems attributed to a legendary Tang era (618–907) recluse who took the nickname Hanshan (Cold Mountain) from the isolated hill on which he lived in the Tiantai Mountains. The collection contains a preface by a government official, Lüqiu Yin, who claims to have personally met Hanshan. The story he tells about Hanshan and his sidekick Shide is very beautiful, but unfortunately it is all fiction.

Lüqiu Yin claims to have met Hanshan and Shide at the kitchen of Guoqing Temple. When he greeted them, they gave a big laugh and fled. Later, he tried to give them clothing and even a dwelling, but they fled deeper into the mountains and finally went into a cave which closed itself. Their tracks disappeared. This led Lüqiu Yin, who was the local governor, to collect Hanshan's writings, which were written on rocks and cliffs. The Preface also identifies Hanshan as an incarnation of the Bodhisattva of wisdom, Mañjuśrjī, and Shide as Mañjuśrī’s companion Samantabhadra, two figures from the Buddhist pantheon who were especially venerated on Mt Tiantai.

But if this is all legend, what is then the truth? The most reasonable conclusion is that the Hanshan collection was composed by several - possibly a great many - anonymous poets over the course of the Tang dynasty (from the 7th to the 9th c.). All writers must have been Buddhist monks connected with the Tiantai temple complex. And then gradually a myth evolved around the collection attributing it to an iconoclastic, reclusive monk named Hanshan - this happened at a time when such types of monks had become highly popular in late Tang Chan literature. Poems were possibly later added to the collection which had been deliberately composed in the voice of such a monk.

The collection contains over 300 poems, which often share the same phrases and images. When we look at the themes, these are in the first place of radical reclusion (one fifth of the total, and probably the most famous part); poems stressing the impermanence of the world and a carpe diem theme; poems satirizing worldliness, the wealthy, the ignorant; and explicitly religious poems (mostly Buddhist, but also Daoist). Because of this Buddhist flavor, in the past in China the collection was not regarded as literature. 

The Hanshan collection became very popular in Chan Buddhist circles in the Song dynasty (960-1279). With the Chan movement it spread later to countries as Japan and Korea, where it became even more popular - the major Rinzai Zen priest Hakuin (1686–1768) wrote an extended commentary on the collection. Its popularity extended even to the West: Beat poet Gary Snyder made selected translations from Hanshan in the 1950s; and Snyder’s enthusiasm was in turn fictionalized in Jack Kerouac’s novel, The Dharma Bums (1958). There are now four full English translations of the Hanshan poems (notably by Paul Rouzer), plus many partial ones, as by Arthur Waley and Burton Watson.

I particularly like this translation by Burton Watson, which pairs sound scholarship with an excellent sense of poetry. Watson's translations all concise, he never use a word too much; but they are also rhythmic and concretely visual. Watson and Hanshan are an ideal combination.