Rating: 4/5

Not everyone appreciates the banjolele.

 

Sadly for Bertie Wooster, Jeeves is among those who are quite fed up with his newest hobby. After getting hit with a noise complaint from his neighbors and being deserted by his butler, Bertie heads out to the country to continue to strum his instrument.
Of course, everything happens to make that utterly impossible as he gets caught up in one hysterical mishap after another.

 

This is one of the funnier Jeeves titles and definitely worth reading if you're a fan of Wodehouse, or even just looking for a humorous book.
BUT.
I do feel that you should be warned that there's a fair bit of really cringy shit in this one that kind of puts the brakes on the funny for a good bit while you try to recover from the shock of the causal racism. I mean, if you read a lot of older novels, you'll be pretty well used to quite a lot of it.
You don't have to like it to admit that it just pops up everywhere.

But between the N-word, the whole escape plan hinging on blackface, and the maids screaming &amp; fainting when they saw Bertie? And just the simple idea people were so stupid to think that some English dude who has shoe polish or whatever on their face could actually pass for someone of a different ethnicity?
It was so insulting. And it just went on forever.

Now, maybe the author was trying to use this as a way to show how ridiculous people could act over something as simple as skin color. Bertie was the same person underneath it all, but he garnered very different reactions when he pulled his little switcheroo. 
Unfortunately, Wodehouse is dead, so it's not like we can ask him. 
And as much as I hate to admit it, this is still a hilarious story...

This would actually be a 5 star book without all the weird racism, but it seriously put a damper on my enjoyment, so I gotta knock off a star even if Wodehouse didn't realize what he was doing.

Recommended for Wodehouse fans and Bertie &amp; Jeeves addicts.

Jonathan Cecil - Narrator