Rating: 4/5

“God had created woman for the sole purpose of tempting and testing man. One must not approach her without defensive precautions and fear of possible snares. She was, indeed, just like a snare, with her lips open and her arms stretched out to man.”  Guy de Maupassant, Clair de Lune.

I wonder who the real tragic protagonist in Hardy’s tale of doomed love and transcendental disillusion is. What seems evident according to the incriminating behavior of the female characters in the story is that women are not to be trusted for their either manipulative or gullible nature. Many might easily consider Sue Bridehead, Jude’s alma mater, the major villain of this wretched story. A perverse seductress full of inessential stratagems and provocative pouts, whose tribulations ruin the lives of two good-hearted men, tantalizing them with sharp mind and incorporeal beauty.
One can throw stones at this treacherous creature based on false social embodiments of love and despise her impetuous rebellion or choose to dig deeper and endure acute spiritual turmoil in an inner battle of wills between abstract ideology and constrained reality.
One can focus on Sue’s ellusive actions and self-centered individualism or see her as a token of the transition between the new and the old mental frame of the semi-liberated female in Victorian society, whose entanglement in centuries of sexual enslavement and intellectual repression brings her to continuous inner conflict.
One can choose to condemn those who attempt to struggle against centuries of subjection or be forgiving for the inconsistencies that define humankind and its perplexing contradictions. Because when human nature is tamed by oppressive convention or shackled by fundamentalist morality, abrupt and almost unpardonable reactions can unchain from the most emancipated and spiritually untainted individuals.

 “There is something external to us which says, “You shan’t” First it said, “You shan’t learn!”, Then it said, “You shan’t labour!”, Now it says, “You shan’t love!” (357) 

In the end, Sue’s gravest betrayal is to turn against her own convictions when her willpower fails under the pressure of social stigma and the corrosive guilt that comes from horrific calamity.
Call me biased but I choose not to condemn Sue Bridehead. I choose to embrace her obscure mystery and all the ambiguity of her complex psyche instead.

If Sue evokes the torn nature of humanity trapped between turbulently opposed tides, Jude’s genteel and innocent morality arises as the soothing balm for the restless soul in the still pool of rationality.
Jude’s rootless origins are as inert as Marygreen, the place where he grows up as part of the emerging tradesmen class. His uncommon sensitiveness and his sense of ideal justice nurture this dreamy laborer’s aspirations to attend College in Christminster, the alluring cultural town next to Marygreen, to become a learned scholar and a man of wisdom. But the the law of nature can’t be fooled indefinitely and lofty ideals need to be confronted with animal instinct when the allure of the flesh surpasses the call of the mind. Arabella, the merciless huntress and the archetype of Victorian female in search of economic security through marriage, lures Jude into a permanent contract based  “on a temporary feeling which has no necessary connection with affinities” and a marital life of shared misery leads the couple to walk their separate ways.
Free from his conjugal ties, Jude starts treading the path of his dreams and moves to Christminster, where he finds work as a stonemason refurbishing the phantasmagorical walls of the same elitist Colleges that turn him down because of his humble origins. When the stagnant medievalism of Christminster’s cultural hollowness becomes evident, Jude finds in ethereal Sue the perfect substitute for his idealistic aspirations, clinging blindly to a body-and-mind consuming passion that can’t be fully reciprocated by a woman who identifies physical sexuality with submission to social convention.  “We ought to have lived in mental communion, and no more”. (372) 

Who commits the greater sin? The sightless or the guileless? The one who clings to ghostly reflection of the idealized mirage or the one who fumbles with faltering candlelight amidst the engulfing darkness of moral hypocrisy? The devotedly religious or the unredeemed pagan? The ethical collectivist or the self-destructive individualist?
The law of men might seem crueler than the  law of nature but Hardy’s equally haunting and lyrical prose oozing with symbolic realism shows otherwise. Nature is as astonishing a miracle as it is an inescapable curse. Two pure doves are liberated only to be hunted down again to have their hearts ripped out to produce a fake love potion by a perfidious quack, a rabbit caught in a gin bellows in agony bleeding to a slow and agonizing death, a compassionate man dies alone with a feeble blessing on his cracked lips, a heedless woman punishes herself masochistically with a long lasting self-debasement and spiritual corruption. Only the pig is spared an excruciating suffering with a fast kill in the hands of clement Jude, whose fate won’t grant him the same luxury. Nature is the bleak mirror of doomed existence and certain obliteration. A mirror that Hardy turns around to us proving we are all characters of his dire novel and that the world is a too much obscure place for those visionaries whose ephemeral light glows ahead of their time, regardless of hollow social constraints and racking tragedy. The rawness of nature will eventually find all the characters in this novel called life and their only choice will be whether to face her with bitter damnation or with a forgiving blessing on their lips. I choose not to condemn. I choose to embrace. I choose to absolve. I choose to be merciful. What will your choice be?

 “But no one came. Because no one ever does.”(45)