Rating: 5/5

Look alive
See these bones
What you are now
We were once
And just like we are
You'll be dust...
—Nada Surf, "See These Bones," from the album Lucky (2008)
I must've first read The Falling Woman shortly after it came out, more than thirty years ago—but I'm afraid I didn't remember much about it when I picked up this handsome trade paperback reissue from Open Road. That's entirely my fault; upon this rereading, I found myself thoroughly amazed by Pat Murphy's Nebula Award-winning novel, and how adroitly she managed to upend genre conventions while weaving such a coherent and compelling story.

To begin with, there's Murphy's protagonist. Elizabeth Butler calls herself "old"—though these days she doesn't seem so old to me; she's only fifty-one.My hands tell more of my history than my face. They are tanned and wrinkled and I can trace the paths of veins along their backs. The nails are short and hard, like the claws of some digging animal, and the wrists are marked with vertical white scars, a permanent record of my attempt to escape my former husband and the world in the most drastic way possible.
—p.9Butler is, it seems to me, the sort of protagonist we need more of in SF—she's worldly and wise, talented and experienced and strong, but she's by no means flawless, and she got where she is by going through a lot of pain, not by finding any "magic plot token."

Even so, there's plenty of magic afoot in The Falling Woman. Elizabeth is a skilled archaeologist, but she also has an edge when it comes to knowing where to dig: she sees the bygone people whose buried traces she's seeking, and (if her contemporaries will just keep quiet!) she can hear them, too. She has to be very careful about sharing the information she gets from this extraordinary channel, of course, but no one can argue with her success in the field.

As The Falling Woman commences, Elizabeth is on a dig in the Yucatán, working alongside colleagues and students from the University of New Mexico and a crew of laborers led by the experienced local worker Salvador, unearthing part of the ancient Mayan city of Dzibilchaltún. It is sweaty, dusty field work, just the kind she loves—and when the crew get done for the day, they can swim in the nearby cenote called Xlacah, the deep stone well from which the Mayans drew their water.

Elizabeth is surrounded by her customary visions of living history...The sun was setting. The hollow wailing of conch shell trumpets blown by Mayan priests rose over the trilling of the crickets and echoed across the plaza. I alone listened to the sweet mournful sound—neither Tony nor Salvador could hear the echoes of the past.
—p.11But something is different about this expedition. Elizabeth's shadows seem more insistent in Dzibilchaltún, more immediate... more aware of her.
I wondered, in the lily-scented night, if the rules were changing.
—p.18

So much of this book isn't SF at all, though.I was an only child. My father was a dour straight-backed man who earned his living as a plumber and believed in a dour straight-backed Christian God. He did not believe that women needed a college education. He disapproved of my passion for collecting Indian arrowheads, stone tools, and fragments of pots. My mother, like the female birds of many species, had developed a drab protective coloration that let her blend into the background, invisible as long as she remained silent.
—p.69Elizabeth Butler was, and is, unable to be drab.

Pat Murphy isn't drab, either. While the prose in The Falling Woman is always clear and never overly flowery, it's also full of poetry and sly humor, sometimes in unexpected places—amid a discussion of the Mayan calendar, for example:
Somewhere across the square a guitarist played a ballad, doubtlessly for lovers who would rather have been left in peace.
—p.151Or when talking about the city of (fallen? falling?) angels...
I dreamed of Los Angeles, the tacky battered crackerbox of a city that I left so long ago.
—p.158

Murphy's novel felt fresh and timeless to me—looking back over millennia, the gap between the 1980s and today doesn't seem quite so vast. A few details in The Falling Woman do seem dated, though—one of Elizabeth's favorite tools is a portable typewriter, which can be heard clacking through the night from her tent—and the novel is definitely culturally bound to a Norteamericano's perspective. These archaeologists (and archaeologists-to-be) are very much outsiders, swooping in to dig up someone else's past—and this is even more apparent when they take a break, venturing into the city of Mérida for hot showers, shopping and possible companionship, playing typical tourists rather than scientists on a mission.

On the other hand, the way The Falling Woman focuses on and centers women was enormously refreshing (and a reminder of how much hasn't changed). Elizabeth Butler is Murphy's protagonist, so of course we see things through her eyes—but Butler's daughter Diane and her colleague Barbara are also centered in this narrative. The guys are around, of course, like Elizabeth's old friend Tony, and Salvador, and Marcos and Emilio in Mérida, but they come across as distinctly secondary.

I can see this book being made into a great movie, actually—it's not all potsherds and trowels; there's also sex and violence (well, historical human sacrifice, anyway) and tons of dramatic tension, spiraling up to an intense climax—but I think any good film version would have to preserve this essential female perspective.

Unearthing this one (well, picking it off the shelf) felt as if I'd made an amazing archaeological find myself. The Falling Woman is a brilliant and underrated work that well deserves its new showcase.