Rating: 4/5

Oh, a lovely book! Very well written, no doubt about that. In fact, it's unbelievable that this was her debut novel! She captured that atmosphere of regency romance so accurately that it was a joy reading each and every sentences. And most of her characters are not overly dramatized - except the Delacourt family - that made me relieved. And as for the villain, I'm quite conflicted. I was desperately hoping that the villain is not that obvious, and was relieved to find my wish fulfilled, but the alternative was equally unsatisfying, probably because I was secretely rooting for him. The murder subplot was interesting but it ran parallel to the main plot. While this was refreshing(there are too many stories with heroines involved in the intrigue, and they usually stretch it too far in effort to include them.. ) 

 And characters. I said they are quite normal people, and that also is reason for my discontent with the book (hence the four stars). Just like us, they have flaws, and I can't really like that the author tried to justify with by turning their opponents into monsters. First Sir Egbert - I hated how everyone, even the Nobody herself, disparaged him. Even I don't like to be around such a person, but that doesn't mean you can ridicule someone just because he's boring (well, I get that being garrulous and lacking wit is almost a sin in regency society, maybe it still is today, but that doesn't make it right to look down on someone). 

 And then there's Lady Elizabeth. That woman is so easy to dislike. She's such a snob, and her entire family is nasty. But that shouldn't be used to justify how Kilvern and Caitlin treated her. They do have some flashes of repentence, but that doens't change fact Elizabeth and Kilvern were engaged, and Caitlin and Kilvern had no business making out under the moonlight. And Kilvern even had the effrontery to demand Elizabeth to jilt him! I have to quote her; "It is you who desires a release from your promise, not I! How dare you come to me, mewling and sniveling about ‘smoothing my way’? Pretending to consider my feelings!" when we all perfectly know the reason is because he's infatuated with someone else that he's willing to ruin her future! I'm really disappointed that the author turned Elizabeth into such a monster that the way Kilvern had treated Elizabeth didn't seem such an inconsiderate, selfish disregard.But I guess that's how people usually are, when we are born selfish and blinded by love. 

 Anyway, even though I don't like Caitlin and Kilvern all that much, and dislike how the author manuevered us to support them, The Nobody is surprisingly well written book and I'm so happy to find such a talented author.