Rating: 5/5

This is a great book detailing the results of a 25-year long study on the effects of divorce, formatted in a way that compares children of divorce to children from intact families. Lewis approaches topics surrounding divorce with empathy and understanding, broaching topics of abuse, neglect, and child development. The book works to dispel common myths about divorce and its effects on the parties involved, giving a voice to children of divorce as well as a look into the psyche of the parents in these broken family structures.
The stories of the children and parents portrayed in the book are eye-opening and validating for children of divorce. They help to dispel the cloud of denial and confusion that often lingers over the head of children raised in these homes. Lewis manages to do so without villainizing all of the parents or glossing over the harms endured in these situations. She also tells the stories of people raised in intact but abusive homes, creating nuance in the discussion of whether divorce is always the wrong thing or not.
I love the distinction she makes throughout the book about the differences between parent and child agendas and the falsehood that is "if the parents are happy, the children will follow suit." There is truly a deficit of knowledge surrounding the effects of divorce, even in our modern day where divorce is increasingly commonplace. It speaks to the damage done that adult children of divorce do not feel that they have a voice in modern day society. Around a quarter of the population, and yet most remain in denial or recovery without their stories being told. This book helps to demystify and give a voice to those who have long been unheard in their suffering.
This all being said about the remarkable insight that this book provides, I do wonder about some the content surrounding gender roles and the nuclear family that this book focuses on. Lewis draws lines between the sexes and analyzes data from this point of view. She discusses the impact of gender on the treatment of children of divorce and the common consequences. As gender roles change and the attraction to the nuclear family structure diminishes, I expect that these lines have become somewhat blurred and will continue to do so. As someone reading in 2025 or later, the reader should take into account the massive amount of change in our society regarding these sentiments, as well as the influence of technology and social media that was not present for the participants in the study.