Rating: 3/5

Matthew Bourne works for a minor human rights organization whose current project is to save a deposed African leader, Jarawa, from the execution of the title. He lives with his artist partner Marianne, to whom he is unfaithful, and their small daughter Jessica. Despite his own infidelities, when he discovers that Marianne has taken a lover his life and his mind begin to unravel until he finds himself committing an impulsive act of murder. But will he ever have to face the consequences?

None of the characters in this book are very admirable, least of all Matthew himself, our first-person narrator, whose narcissism amounts to a nigh-pathological condition. Marianne is almost equally self-indulgent, playing the artsy card at every turn and trying to induce Matthew finally to marry her even at the same time as continuing her infidelity. The three-year-old Jessica is a self-centered brat, as three-year-olds tend to be, but it never seems to occur to either Marianne or Matthew that their behavior is so very similar to hers.

It doesn't stop there. The condemned politician, Jarawa, was apparently ruthless when in power and a wife-beater to boot. Matthew's boss Jamie is less interested in human rights than in the success of the agency.

I'm not averse to unsympathetic characters, so for me all of this didn't detract from what I found was a very finely atmospheric piece, one that blessedly wasn't padded out to twice the length, as so many psychological thrillers tend to be today.

What did detract were the stylistic tweenesses of the writing. It is not clever to run on passages of dialogue into long, dense paragraphs that readers have to pore grimly through, counting the quotation marks in case they lose track of who's talking; it's just pretentious, an affectation adopted in hopes of seeming Literary. (It also looks bloody silly when, as on at least one occasion, the author forgets to put a close-quote mark in.) It's not clever occasionally to slip from past into present tense for no apparent reason, and then back again; it's just cutesy. (Yes, I know French novelists do it all the time, but this is not a French novel.) And it's not clever sometimes to use quotation marks for direct speech, sometimes not; it's just silly.

All of these self-indulgent quirks are made doubly irritating by the fact that Wilcken is at core an excellent writer. The text is fairly compelling despite them. How much more compelling it might have been had Wilcken chosen to write "in clear" is anyone's guess.