Rating: 5/5

One of the best war history books I've ever read. Absolutely fascinating. 

After assignment as a Coast Guard cadet to a Coast Guard cutter that did the Bering Sea Patrol, I first read this book in 1988 while at the Coast Guard Academy. Now, as a retired Coast Guard officer decades later, I decided to read it again, and I think that the years in service, some of which included a tour aboard a Coast Guard icebreaker that operated in that region, along with many years as a aviator, gave me more perspective of the difficulties and challengers of the military campaign during World War 2 in Bering Sea, Aleutians, and Alaska. 

With the Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, America was caught completely by surprise --- and, likely, no part of American territory was as poorly defended as the Alaska Territory. Fortunately, for Alaska and for America, the War Department in a rare moment of sense assigned the year before Pearl Harbor, Maj. Gen. Simon Bolivar Buckner, as commander of Army forces in Alaska. This man would play a decisive role in the defense of Alaska in the years ahead. 

As incredible as it may seem, America had better charts and maps of the South Pacific islands and Japan than it did of Alaska at the opening of the War. Indeed, in 1941, US military commanders in Alaska were reduced to using old Russian whaling maps from the 1860s for many of the Aleutian islands --- the Japanese through their pre-war fishing fleet that plied Alaskan waters actually in many cases had better maps of the Aleutian island chain.

There was no highway connecting the continental US via Canada to Alaska. The only ground forces -- some garrison troops in old forts constructed during the 19th Century for the Alaskan Gold Rush. The only naval assets protecting Alaska were a few older Coast Guard cutters and a few antiquate Navy patrol boats and tugs. The only air assets --- some antiquated B-18s and old patrol aircraft, no match for Japan's air might. In short, had they wanted to do so, it's highly likely that Japan could've captured as much of Alaska as it wanted with greater ease than it took the Philippines. And, from there, it could have used Alaskan air fields to attack Allied factories in the Pacific Northwest in Vancouver, Seattle, and Bremerton.

Gen. Buckner immediately set to work creating a native Alaskan defense force, modernizing air bases, getting the Al-Can Highway built, and obtaining more Army and Army Air Force assets to the region. 

Nevertheless, the Japanese did manage, after attacking Dutch Harbor, to seize the Aleutian islands, Attu and Kiska. What ultimately ensued from the War's beginning to this point to the end of the Aleutians campaign was an epic conflict between two combatants in one of the worst climates in the world. With both Japan and America pushed to the limits of their resources elsewhere during the Pacific War, neither had much remaining resources with which to sufficiently support their forces there. The result: a war fought in deprivation on a shoe string between sides determined to annihilate the other in a climate where fog, low visibility, cold, heavy rains, icing, snow storms, blizzards, and hurricane force winds easily killed as many men, brought down as many airplanes, and damaged as many ships as combat. 

Such conditions turned the conventional wisdom from other theaters of the war on its head. Fortunately, for the air war, the Americans had an unconventional tactician, Col William O. Eareckson was assigned to the Eleventh Air Force. Air Force doctrine taught high altitude day light precision bombing --- in Alaska, it could go months with no clear target to hit --- Eareckson developed low level bombing well below the gloom --- or using dead reckoning to bomb the Japanese targets in Attu and Kiska. Doctrine said that fighters should escort bombers. In Alaska, the limited navigation capabilities of fighers made it difficult for them to find attack locations --- Eareckson had radar equipped B-17s with trained navigators escort the fighters. Doctrine held that if visibility dropped ---climbed above the clouds. In Alaska, that was a death wish --- your wings would ice up, and your aircraft would fall from the sky --- instead, pilots would drop low --- even to wave top level above the seas to get below cloud layers. 

As the history in this book progresses, it covers the campaigns to recapture Attu and Kiska. The Battle of Attu is an amazing story --- casualties for size of forces involved as high as those in the island hopping campaigns of the South Pacific.

Also, gripping is the naval battle prior to that, the Battle of the Kommandorski Islands --- the last naval battle between exclusively naval surface combatants in modern times. It's a battle that the US won by the skin of its teeth, and is one of the most compelling parts I've read in a long time.

I guess I could go on and on, but I won't since I don't think my review can do enough justice to express the quality of this book. 

Many Americans are unaware that in American territory on the North American continent, great battles were fought during World War 2 --- the story of the Alaskan Campaign eclipsed by its remoteness and by the greater publicity of other theaters of the War. This is a story of bravery, courage, and mental toughness of all the combatants involved. The author does a fantastic job of bringing to life the major figures involved and challenges each faced during the Campaign. I enjoyed it very much! Definitely of interest to any military history fan!

Finally, one last thing --- if I was Alaskan, if they're not doing it already, I would want at least a few streets, landmarks, or schools named in honor of Gen. Simon Boliver Buckner and Col William Eareckson. Many are the heroes of the Alaskan Campaign, but these two especially played vital roles in the defense of Alaska and recapture of American territory!