Rating: 4/5

In this collection, Nadine Gordimer has her sights set squarely on South Africa, her home and her goldmine for stories, set in the last days of Apartheid and in the first days of the new regime when positions are confused, politics nascent and insurrectionary, and when human inequality continues unabated.

These are internal stories, often taking place in the minds of the narrators, many of whom do not have names, for names are not needed, their voices are more important, and Gordimer captures the voices of her country with dexterity and darkness: the white housewife living in her enclave unaware of the changing politics of the land, unaware of the stranger she invites into her home and into her bed; the white hunter sent to an island off the coast of South Africa to kill feral cats, a job he is well prepared for, having killed big game and humans at home; the black village child fleeing persecution from her own people; poor kids from the township exposed to the opulence of a white person’s house; a black village wife’s attempt to visit her jailed activist husband on Robben Island; the coloured hitch hiker exaggerating his stories to achieve his selfish ends with gullible whites and tourists.

The angle of entry into each story is oblique; a phrase here, a word there conveys a world of meaning: “Linnaues, his countryman” tells us a character is Swedish; the horror of what is going to happen to a white mother imprisoned by the secret police of the post-Apartheid regime is shown in the anxious behaviour of her daughter, who is free; the degree of integration and inseparability between black and white, despite their historical apartness or Apartheid, is revealed only in the last line of the story “The Moment the Gun Went Off.”

The stories do not recommend solutions to the country’s ills for there can be no solutions to an inhuman legacy from a system that lasted for over two generations; only the evolution over another two generations can provide some hope that the worm will turn. The stories are therefore inconclusive snapshots of situations taking place across a spectrum of South African society over the recent past. In “Spoils,” the typical goings-on in a hedonistic private game reserve are revealed; the relationship that the black guide shares with the lion is not understood by the white guests - i.e. “share, don’t kill.” In “What Were You Dreaming,” we are introduced to the fact that young black girls (and boys) have their front teeth extracted so that they can “service” their male clients better. In “Keeping Fit,” a white jogger strays across the road into a black township and enters a barbaric world that has always existed on his doorstep. The stories “Father Leaves Home” and “Once Upon a Time” are autobiographical; the former told in fragmentary memory, the latter is like a children’s bed-time story, horrific though it is.

I have always preferred Gordimer’s short stories to her novels. Her acuity, brevity, and cold-blooded delivery are evident in the short story. Having visited post-Apartheid South Africa, these stories had particular resonance to me. I highly recommend this book.