Rating: 2/5

THE "LEFT BEHIND" AUTHOR DEFENDS THE PRE-TRIBULATION RAPTURE POSITION 

Timothy F. "Tim" LaHaye (1926-2016) is a minister and (with wife Beverly) conservative activist, who founded Christian Heritage College (now San Diego Christian College), and helped establish the Institute for Creation Research; but he is best known these days for being the coauthor (and "idea man," if not the one who actually pens the books) of the 'Left Behind' Series, as well as other books such as 'The End Times Controversy,' 'Charting the End Times Prophecy Study Guide,' 'The Beginning of the End,' 'Spirit-Controlled Temperament,' etc.

He wrote in the Introduction to this 1992 book, "This book was ignited by a letter I received from an old friend that contained a vicious and frenzied attack on the pre-Trib Rapture theory. Obviously, my friend had changed his views! We had corresponded at some length over my concern that he was working too closely with [Christian] Reconstructionists who refused to accept the plain teachings of the Bible on the nature of the kingdom of God... Some weeks later a pastor friend wanted to make sure that when I held an upcoming family seminar in his church I wouldn't inject any of my prophetical views. The reason was, he no longer believed the church would be raptured before the Tribulation. Apparently he was looking forward to going through it... while jogging one morning I was listening to a cassette tape by a minister friend ... only to find he had moved to a mid-Tribulation view... A short time later, a nationally known TV evangelist friend sent me his new book on the kingdom, in which he teaches the post-Tribulation position. That started me on the greatest research project of my life. Now... I can honestly say I am more convinced than ever of the pre-Tribulation Rapture position."

He states, "I expect the Rapture to be electrifyingly sudden but not secret, for when Christ calls His living saints to be with Him, millions of people will suddenly vanish from the earth. An unsaved person who happens to be in the company of a believer will know immediately that his friend has vanished. There will certainly be worldwide recognition of the fact, for if over two hundred million people suddenly depart this earth, leaving their earthly belongings behind, pandemonium and confusion will certainly reign for a time." (Pg. 34)

In a section entitled "POSSIBLE REASONS FOR THE ATTACKS" [on the Pre-Trib position], he suggests, "Personal vendetta cannot be ruled out in many instances... Dave MacPherson [Incredible Cover Up] was incensed by the way his father was treated by his church after he changed his position, and by the way he himself was dismissed from Biola College for attempting to pass out post-Trib literature. I can feel compassion for such crises in the life of a young man, but his conclusion that a church should keep a pastor even when he changes his position and that a pre-Trib school does not have the right to oust students when they refuse to stop proselytizing and spreading another view is not defensible." (Pg. 180)

He argues, "Doesn't it seem strange that although the Bible advises Christians how to face ordinary, everyday troubles, it submits absolutely no instructions related to the worst time the world will ever face, a period filled with frightening events that have never even come close to being fulfilled? Pre-Tribs have a simple answer. We won't be here!" (Pg. 224)

This book will be of interest to students of biblical prophecy---but particularly those holding a Pre-Tribulation position.