Rating: 3/5

I came into this book with only an exposure to (and love of) "No Man Is an Island" with the hopes of finding more of the same. Instead, I found a mixed bag where even the best poems did not live up to my expectations. In fact, most of these poems -despite often having an enjoyable and sometimes unexpected rhythm when read aloud- are self-indulgent, vain and whiny. The first section of "Songs and Sonnets" is almost entirely about sex, love, women, grief and his relationships; they feel like they were never intended to be more than personal, dramatic, emotional expressions (in fact, Hayward alludes to this in the introduction). Many of these were written in the lust of his youth and do not carry the metaphysical significance of some of his later poems. Even his famous "The Flea" feels rather simplistic and vapid when one is subjected to the tiring onslaught of his youthfully romantic poems. In "The Triple Foole" he, at least, acknowledges this. 

"I am two fools, I know, 
For loving, and for saying so,
In whining poetry;
But where's that wiseman, that would not be I,
...."

Divine Poems" is this little book's saving grace. These poems are much more tolerable -even enjoyable and meaningful at times. Donne was a different person with age and his writing reflects that fact. There are, however, times when it feels he simply switched the subject of his poems from women to God ("lust of flesh" to "lust of spirit"). Still, his writing improved with age. He developed a lot more depth and seemed to put a lot more intentionality and effort into his poems. 

After digging and digging, one occasionally uncovers a dazzling line of brilliance in his writing. But it is never easy. All of Donne's work is just that: work. It is more rewarding the more time you spend reading and rereading it. If you are going to read it, read it twice.

-

I do not possess the adequate understanding of poetry's history to be able to appreciate Donne's influence on other, later poets. Perhaps this would help me to find respect and admiration for more of his work. Also, it is hard not to judge what feels extremely cheesy, clichéd or overdone when I don't understand the context from which he was writing and what may have been fresh or novel at the time. If I do come into a more extensive and detailed framework of poetry's past perhaps I will be able to come back to Donne's work with more serious dedication and arrive at a different conclusion. Until then, I'm somewhat ambivalent. 

* It should be noted that I skipped Verse Letters, Anniversaries and a couple other sections of non-poetry. I did skim them a little but could not bring myself to fully commit. The antiquated language can act as a severe barrier at times. There is no easy read here. If you are truly serious about poetry and enjoy rigorous exercise then this book may be for you.