See John P's review.

I started this book because there wasn't anything to read that I had not read and I was in the middle of a snowstorm. 600 pp later and several days, I felt I understood war a little better; I felt their joys and their tears, and the characters seemed real. (Never mind Stuart nor anyone ever caught a cold or virus or got sick.) Gosh, I would have liked to meet Lieutenant William McGowen Stuart, Moser, Coles, MacIntyre (well, maybe!), even Hunter, Billy and the rest of the guys. It did not matter that this was about Vietnam, or that some of the officers or enlisted men were black, (which I forgot!) or oriental, or even green. The Vietnamese were all nameless, faceless 'gooks' but this WAS a time when it was about Us against Them. There were just the beginnings of murmurs against this war at the time. 
Note: There were no women in the service, in this book.

Some quotes: Billy Coles "Non morituri to salutamus" -- ". . . let the other guy do it"

"One of the monk's arms rose from his lap and seemed to gesture. Stuart watched with increasong horror as the arm broke off at the shoulder. Still the monk sat and still he burned. The head, blackened and seemingly stripped of flesh, lolled forward, and with a soft, barely audible pop, the skull exploded. Stuart trued to shut his eyes against the sight, but he could not. The smell and taste of gasoline and burning flesh reached his nose and mouth. Finally the body toppled over on its side, and the flames subsided. Stuart shut his eyes tightly and trued to hold his breath. He felt himself dizzy, swaying, his knees rubbery. Strong hands grasped him and swung him around. He opened his eyes and saw the frightened face of the waiter who was speaking to him loudly in a language he could not understand. The waiter pushed hm into a dim interior of the restaurant. Stuart found himself in a small, brightly lit bathroom. He fell to his knees in from of the French-style toilet and closed his eyes again as all the contents of his stomach rushed out of his mouth. He braced his hands on the floor and heaved until he was empty."

Hooper: . . . "The First General Order?"
Stuart: . . . "Accomplish the mission."
Hooper; "And the second?"
Stuart: "Take care of the men."

It's not, 'my country, right or wrong, it's 
Professor Kraft: "My country, may she ever be right. But right or wrong, my country." Patriotism is not required to be without doubt. . . We in the armed forces or the United States protect your right to question, to doubt."
"But as a soldier, you're not free to doubt."
"On the battlefield . . . doubt is the precursor of disaster."

A highly readable, timeless book, for men (a little lightweight?) or women, to learn more about what we have to do to protect our freedoms.