Rating: 1/5

Why I chose to read this book:
1. when I found this copy for 25 cents in a thrift shop years ago, I was reminded of the TV series back in the 1970s, only they cast two sons and one daughter instead of four sons like in the book. I vaguely remember enjoying the show as a kid; and,
2. February 2023 is my "Books for Young and Old Alike" Month.

WARNING!
This review is chockful of spoilers! If you wish to read this book, you may want to stop here. Otherwise, I would appreciate your continued interest.

Praises:
Did people, including children really speak/think so formally in the early 1800s? I found it rather amusing at times; however, I could understand the frequent mentioning of "thankfulness to God", considering author Johann David Wyss was a pastor.

Niggles (Where do I begin?):
1. this story is scientifically inaccurate in so many ways. Where the heck did they land up? In a zoo? Based on some references, I think it was close to Malaysia, but I'm not too sure. From all the different types of flora (e.g. sugar cane, bananas, cotton, pineapple "trees", flax) and fauna (e.g. tigers, elephants, lions, kangaroos, bison, even the great squirrel of Canada???) living on this island that come from every continent, to rocks that harden when exposed to sunlight, my eyes were rolling constantly!
2. it was 
  amazing
 how everything that was needed for survival was readily available, if not from the shipwreck itself, but also from the island! If they needed to construct anything, it worked perfectly the first time they used it! 
  Nothing
 ever went wrong, simply because "Father" was so well-read and therefore, extremely knowledgeable! If they did have any issues, it was resolved within the same paragraph;
3. the writing style was quite laughable. Written as a journal, very little emotion was portrayed except that they were so cheerful and thankful ALL THE TIME! Sometimes, it was written in a screenplay format, but often it came across like an instruction manual. And if the reader ever questioned where this family got a certain object, the author conveniently covered his ass by using the words "etc., etc., etc." whenever they were removing materials from the shipwreck, or that "Mother" had an "enchanted bag" that mysteriously held a large stash of items that came in handy at a moment's notice;
4. why didn't they ever send distress signals? Never once was it mentioned that they made large bonfires or shot fireworks (Yep! They had those too!) to attract possible nearby ships;
5. except for some bee stings, no one EVER got sick or injured during the whole 10 years that they were on this island; and,
6. what bothered me the most was that for a family so worried about running out of gunpowder, they sure were trigger-happy, shooting at 
  everything
 in sight, sometimes for food, but oftentimes just to check out the species to put in their "museum"! And if they didn't kill an animal, they would capture it for various purposes.

Overall Thoughts:
Thank goodness I read an abridged version, because if I had read the full-length story, I would have stuck needles in my eyes! I never had a 
  clue
 as to how farfetched and ridiculous this story was! While reading it, I went from being amused to annoyed to downright angry, and that was just within the first hundred pages! I only finished it because I wanted to know if, when, and/or how they ever left the island.

Recommendation?
Extremely disappointing for the classic adventure/survival story it was meant to be! I 
  rarely
 rate a book with only 1 star, but this story was definitely not an "okay" read for me.
You may enjoy this story if you can imagine it to be a "fantasy", but if killing and/or capturing of animals willy-nilly troubles you deeply, then you better pass up on this book!