Rating: 3/5

One of the genius things about crime novels is that because they’re all the same, there are limitless possibilities of what you can do with them. Yes, there’s the basic structure that the reader expects, but beyond that the author can use his or hers ‘hunt the murderer’ yarn to tackle anything they damn well like.

Take this interesting, if very flawed, Albert Campian novel. The basic set-up is that there’s a ruthless and expert killer on the loose in London; he is one of the most dangerous men in Britain, and Campian and Scotland Yard have to track him down before any more victims fall. And yet the murder plot is almost the least fascinated element of this book. Written in 1952 and set post-war, Allingham portrays a dark fog forever hanging over the city. Such is the depth and darkness of this fog/smog, that it becomes almost existential in nature. The characters in this book are literally unable to see what is in front of them and where they are going; they’re always fighting against the gloom and lost in this world of blackness. Without a doubt there’s a sense of post-war malaise in this fog, Britain was a country on the winning side of the war, but they don’t feel like victors in this gloomy London – instead they seem to have lost their sunshine and their joy. And perhaps even more than that, a dark and heavy fog is by its nature hugely oppressive, and this oppression is felt right across society itself. If you read the adventures of the aristocratic detective Campian which were written before the war, then there is a sense of a very ordered society. Everybody knows their place. In The Tiger in the Smoke  on the other hand, that society is pushed down and crumbling. People who used to have money don’t any more, respectable persons are letting themselves down, things aren’t what they were promised to be and all is too vulnerable to the forces of disorder.

Jack Havoc – the tiger of the title – is an incredibly interesting post-war British character: a man who has tasted violence during the war, and is now unable to stop his worst impulses. He represents society’s underbelly, the poor boy who was offered charity by those better and richer than him, but still grew up to be a bad one. That war against Hitler allowed him to pick up all kind of new and violent tricks, which he can employ to get what he wants while the forces of law and order stagger along helplessly behind him. It is quite striking how often he exposes the limitations of the agents of authority, showing them up as foolish and flat-footed. And more so than say Brighton Rock’s Pinkie (a pre-war character of similar ilk), Jack Havoc is a force of incredible nature – remorseless, unrelenting and for the most part unstoppable. Certainly he is one of the most noir characters I have ever read in English fiction. There are American characters like him in the novels of Jim Thompson, or played on the screen by Robert Mitchum, but few in English fiction. He is wild and uncontrollable, a destructive force which threatens society itself.

As I said though, this is a distinctly flawed novel. Allingham would clearly rather be writing about Havoc than anyone else, so it does often feel as if the police and even Albert Campian himself have been inserted in from a different novel. It’s also a quite poorly paced story, with vaguely sketched minor characters, and plot development and twists which are casually and almost carelessly unspooled. However it is a really terrifying and evocative portrayal of London, and a must for anyone interested in the state of Britain after the war.