Rating: 5/5

I finished Moonfall today, the second book which I have read by Tamara Thorne (the first was Haunted and it was the best haunted house story I ever read). Haunted was so good, I moved on to Moonfall immediately after. It was delightfully a little darker (Haunted had a bit more humor entwined within the pages than Moonfall did). It’s basically a story about an evil convent of nuns and the rituals which they have practiced in the town of Moonfall. Most legitimate nuns “don’t get nun” (which I in my juvenile thinking always thought was the reason they were called “nuns”). These nuns are of a different ilk. The story starts with a tragedy experienced by a young boy and his friends 24 years ago. They can’t seem to remember the details. The young boy has grown up and is the sheriff of Moonfall with a young son of his own, and as events begin to repeat themselves he has to confront and overcome his past to fight the events of present. It was extremely well written and thought out, and a complete page turner. It had a totally creepy vibe around St. Gertrude’s, which is the name of the school/convent/freakshow where the nuns educate the orphans, if educate is the right word. These nuns and their live-in doctor, Dr. Dashwood, really pissed me off. The characters were very well developed, and I felt anxious when reading it about what was going on. One thing I’ve noticed about Ms. Thorne’s work is that she is a master of the end game. She has a great talent for endings, which are often surprising, but when you think back on them, you realize that “yeah, that was the only way that should have ended.” I was 90% finished this book when I reached my car today after a subway ride, and for the first time in a very long time, I sat in my car and read to the end because I just had to know what was going to happen and to hell with what time I got home. I highly recommend this book to anyone, not just horror fans, as it has elements (relationships, parental love, avoidance, guilt, and so many other manner of emotions) that capture your imagination so vividly that I found myself looking forward to every time I could pick the book back up again and continue the adventure. Read this. You will love it.