Rating: 3/5

This book may be of interest to persons who've read Dan Brown's books or the book he primarily worked from, The Holy Blood &amp; the Holy Grail. It is harder going, however.

Like the latter text, this book doesn't prove that Jesus--or something related and almost as important--is buried at such and such a place in southern France. What it does more and less convincingly demonstrate is that a lot of people over a long time have believed that something important is, and should remain, hidden in the area. Thus we have claims, some stronger than ever, about particular clergy and aristocratic families in the area, about certain Church figures, about some Templars, about the Priory of Sion, about some Rosicrucians and, most importantly, about some early modern artists who, according to the authors, appear to have both revealed and concealed the supposed secret.

A great portion of this book is about decoding the art works and a few texts which the authors claim have bearing on the mystery. This leads into an intriguing overview of the past religious significance of geometry, the kind of thing attributed to the near-legendary Pythagoras and his successors, and to some jokes about similar arguments concerning the geometries of some of the Egyptian pyramids. The authors seem to be careful and they don't seem to be utterly crazy, but the proofs they offer require painstaking review--an effort I frankly gave up on after the first few chapters.

There is also, towards the end of the book, a broad overview of the relevant history, an overview which could have benefitted by being vetted by a church historian because it is filled with common errors and overstatements. 

Overall, I'd say approach this book with caution--especially if obtaining it would cost a lot of money. Much of it is neither an easy nor a pleasant read. Real intellectual work will be required to be able to follow its arguments critically. Further, don't expect much. The "mystery" remains a mystery unless and until a mountain is dug up.