Rating: 4/5

I stopped in at the VA Medical Center a couple days ago to update my prescriptions and looked over the collection of pocketbooks on the swap table in the waiting room while waiting to be processed, and I found a bunch of paperback books by Louis L’Amour. They were old pocketbooks, which is only natural, because I have been reading Louis L’Amour’s novels since I was a teenager. I grabbed one that I did not recognize as having read before, with a reason for taking it mostly being because of the picture on the cover, and I soon found myself immersed in the book with just as much excitement as in the old days. Some of my friends have recently been talking about a television show they saw about the men who made America; the men they are talking about were the tyrannical businessmen who built fortunes on the backs of the downtrodden laborers, but I would much rather wish I could’ve been someone like Jubal Sackett, who clearly is a representative of the people who really made America.

Jubal Sackett at the start of this book was a very young man, perhaps even a late teenager. His father, Barnabas Sackett, an English yeoman who came here on one of the very early colony ships and then went back to fetch his wife, has sent Jubal off on his life’s journey with the charge to find new lands of the family to the west — not the wild West of most westerns but the unclaimed wilderness of Tennessee in the late 15th century. Jubal starts off by discovering that there is an Indian hunting him; after a brief skirmish he convinces the Indian, a Kickapoo named Keokotah, into accompanying him on his journey. They subsequently come across a small band of Natchez Indians, whose leader asks Jubal to look for a another party of their tribe — more specifically to look for the Sun princess who is leading that group on an exploratory search for new lands further to the west and to tell her that the Sun chief is dying, which means that she must cut short her search and come back to replace that chief. Jubal agrees to do this, but the way becomes very difficult, as he has to do battle with a jealous lover of the princes, with more parties of other Indian tribes, and with all the inherent dangers of the untamed wilderness. He goes through horrendous experiences, not the least of which is being attacked by a starving mountain lion just after he has broken a leg, not to mention the rigors of having to spend the winter in a frozen mountain valley while facing three separate groups of enemies — and while taking on the responsibility of providing for the Natchez band and its beautiful princess.

As it happens, this is only one of several novels about different numbers of the Sackett family, and I do not recall having read any of the others. The particulars benefit of having read this one is the insight it gives into what it was like to live in those times and what it was like for the white settlers interacting with the different Indian tribes. I cannot know without doing further research whether the portrayal of Indian personality that L’Amour gives here is accurate, but I am willing to take it at face value until I know otherwise. Given that, it is almost a wonder that the early settlers were able to survive! For those reasons alone I give the novel four stars, which is one above my general ranking of fiction novels. Louis L’Amour wrote 105 novels during his lifetime, and I have to say that I have thoroughly enjoyed every one of them that I have read so far. His language may seem slightly stilted nowadays, but I have to think that is because he was portraying the way people talked and thought at the end of the 15th century. His heroes usually are larger-than-life, but they are true heroes for all their faults, and he provides marvelous descriptions of a world and a way of life that no longer exists.