Rating: 5/5

Laurel Mellin changed my life. More accurately, she taught me to change my own life. Not in the large scale ways like a better house/more money/even losing weight. By using her method I changed my life in the small ways that affect each moment. I no longer live with anxiety. I now listen to people talk about their fears and I remember how much I was frozen by mine. I was afraid of people, afraid of life. Like so many people, I can tell you the story of my early abandonment and how that froze me in time emotionally. I was a child on the inside. I was so immature. I did not know how to take care of myself. Through using her method I've become the person people look to for advice and leadership. I just had a friend tell me, someone I admire, that when she's unsure of her take on a situation she checks in with me to see if her thinking is straight. That, to me, is a huge compliment. I've tried to tell her the story of how my life has changed, but I don't know if someone who came from a nurturing home can understand what life is like for someone who spent the first 25 years of her life trying desperately to please someone so they would finally make her feel OK. I'm sad I had that experience, but as a different friend recently told me, after I told him the story of how I completely forgave my mom, maybe I learned compassion from that. I do know I gained gifts from my difficult beginning. But I gained them by what I learned using Laurel Mellin's method. I think her technique is the best kept secret around. I'm so grateful because it fast forwarded my personal growth exponentially. Without it, I'm sure I'd still be repeating the same narcissistic patterns I learned early in life.

Wired for Joy is not my favorite of Laurel Mellin's books. I prefer The Solution and The Pathway, but these books aren't the method. They're only introductions to the method. If, like I was, you had a very difficult beginning and want to heal big early hurts her program, Emotional Brain Training, will make all the difference.