Rating: 3/5

Revised content rating: Adult only.

Until I finished the book (with my rating plummeting towards one star) I thought I was reading a not very likable piece of historical fiction set in Britain during the time between the wars. Then I belatedly discovered the publication date of 1925 and realized that the book’s timeline was all weird. The story starts at the end of WW1 around 1919 or 1920 and projects forward into the future with a final chapter that seems to be set in London sometime in the early 1940s. So what the heck was I reading? As best I can figure out it was a kind of social commentary, utopian/dystopian, near-future allegory that was so spookily on target that I had to upgrade it to three stars with lots of caveats. 

My biggest caveat is that the two protagonists have an idealized flatness, rather like the icons of Byzantine saints that I’ve been reading about in another context. My second caveat is the intensely negative view of women. My third caveat is that by the end I was hoping everyone would die in the Blitz.

On the surface this is simply the story of a man of ‘gentle birth’ (and ridiculous pretensions) who served as an officer in World War I and was recently discharged. Captain Stephen Sorrell, gentleman, has one great love—his nine year old son Christopher for whom he would sacrifice anything. Christopher’s mother abandoned her son and husband and married again for money. And speaking of money—there is nothing; Sorrell is utterly destitute, completely without skills and growing desperate. 

Sorrell’s early struggles and suffering and his seeming rescue by a sort of gentleman-entrepreneur bent on creating the best inn in England (no traveling salesmen or local drinking riff-raff allowed) were moving and quite engrossing. There were plenty of plot twists and turns and we see this unfolding imaginary world from both Captain Sorrell and Christopher’s point of view.

The love between fathers and sons is ostensibly the main theme and readers who can focus on just that might enjoy the story; unfortunately, there is a great deal more. 

Over the course of the twenty year future-story, Deeping sends a clear and conservative message that hard work and clean living will lead to success, but he also airs (mostly in nervous, cryptic dialog) an extraordinary range of opinions that were once considered radical but that eventually became commonplace in upper class circles. The issues discussed—in no particular order: negative consequences of British classism (for all classes); the evolution of socialism and the Labour movement; the perils of progressive taxation; end of life care; classism vs.character; men and women living together without benefit of clergy; the role of higher education; bullying; global overpopulation and Malthusianism; birth control; STDs; women novelists; education reform; women who want careers and not children; health service reform; the arrogance of surgeons and other medical elite; the downgrading of women in the medical profession; physician-assisted suicide; sexual repression; the rights of non-married women; ‘progressive’ ideas about ethnicity, ageism and eugenics; the rights of women to have a career; parents living life through their children; midwifery and nursing; ideas of marriage—and not to be forgotten—why cabbage-growing is a sort of metaphor for stuff like Communism.

I think I might have left something out.

Perhaps the most interesting but disturbing aspect of the novel for modern readers is its treatment of women and sexuality. All of the women in the story are painted in a heavy-handed allegorical style and most of the portraits are really ugly. Women are portrayed, at best, as distractions and at worst, destroyers. Relationships with women are depicted as dangerous, leading to disease, vile bodily and spiritual corruption and death—and the horror—a third class pass at Cambridge. But same-sex pairings are also (I think) referred to in deep code as negative. There are a few invisible female servant types. We do meet one somewhat positive female figure who is self-sacrificing, apparently lower class, but alluring; it is implied that she is Jewish and that she might be a tad unbalanced or even suicidal. But most of the female characters are just appalling and that’s the view that predominates for about 95% of the book. 

Cold shower celibacy seems the only option--along with lots of hard work. Meanwhile, Germans lurk on park benches, but seem, for the moment, innocuous. In the novel’s last chapters a New Woman appears and converts her man (and his father) to the notion of marriage as an equal partnership, but by this time non-scholarly modern readers who venture here might be forgiven for having decamped to less trying novels. 

Those deeply interested in the evolution of British male views on women should, without a doubt, read this book. Students of Britain's social history in the 20s and 30s will find it utterly fascinating. 

Content rating: Adult only. I thought about this a lot before revising my rating. The very negative portrayal of women is so inescapable that I would hesitate to give it to young readers of either sex. The book is also filled with anxious, veiled references to sex (or the lack thereof); it's such a constant theme that it becomes disquieting. There is also one morally questionable final scene that was intensely disturbing involving physician-assisted murder/suicide. It is particularly troubling since it's the son who kills his father with an overdose of morphine. I understand that men did this for each other on the battlefields in WWI and that may be the sort of thing that the author is thinking of here, I also understand both sides of the physician-assisted suicide debate, but this is not something I would want a child or young person to read.