Rating: 3/5

I am still in shock. One reason was the totally abrupt ending!!! I had to look twice to make sure I wasn't missing pages. It totally didn't make sense to me. Just like an old Twilight Zone, it made me question everything I knew about HP Reality. It was really like the fifth dimension of imagination for sure. What a strange odd book. I can't believe I have never read it before yet it was in my computer library from years ago. Okay now that I got my stupefaction out of the way. 

Strange book. It starts out with a little boy being kidnapped from in front of a store, where his idiot mother left him, and then she is taken to police headquarters. She won't tell them her husbands name and honestly I didn't really like her much. He finds out and gets to the police station even though she doesn't want him there. I understood his anger but I thought there was something wrong with her. She was always so weird. He takes her home to his home. He is rich of course. She fights him and acts like a total moron, in my opinion. He is obsessed with her I admit, a little stalkers and of course the little boy is found and then his family comes and she dresses up and almost acts like an adult and then bam, she is screaming she wants him and the end. Seriously. The End. I was drinking water at the time and I was like WHAT and it came out of my nose. What just happened? Is this the dimension between light and sound?. Is this the Twilight Zone for reals? I am still sitting here in a shock-like trance. I just keep mumbling, 'tell me later, tell me later', and I mean tell me what the heck that ending was? I gotta go find me some more of her books. They are better than Colorado Gummies! 

From last page of Book!

"'I want you!' she almost shouted, then jumped as the sound ran round the room in a sort of echo.
Gabriel started to laugh in a husky, delighted amusement. 'At last!' he grinned, lifting her up into his arms and moving with her towards the bed.
'That doesn't mean...' she began as he laid her on the bed and joined her, his breath begin¬ning to come fast and thick.
'Tell me later,' said Gabriel, his black head swooping. Against her yielding mouth he whis¬pered, 'Much later.'"

"It is the middle ground between light and shadow, between science and superstition, and it lies between the pit of man's fears and the summit of his knowledge... It is an area which we call The Twilight Zone."