Rating: 5/5

“It might do you some good to remember that at the end of the day, no matter how smart that brain of yours is up there, it’s your heart that needs looking after.”

Subjectivity and personal preference aside, readers share a common goal, finding those rare books that manage to leave their mark. Or, as in this case, an entire series so monumental, the inspired feelings linger long after. The emotionality, dark themes, and vulnerability put on full display in Grant County have made it a place I deem worthy of revisiting.

It was back in college that I stumbled across Karin Slaughter’s work, at a time when only Blindsighted and Kisscut had met the world. Her ballsy approach and my ensuing love for the multi-faceted beings presented on the page, inspired a full read-through every summer in anticipation of her fall release. Now, even over a decade later, I still find myself enamored with Slaughter’s devious plotting. And, as I might’ve mentioned a time or two in previous reviews, a particular second-chance duo.

The countless times I’ve stepped foot in Grant County makes the fact that I remembered absolutely nothing going into A Faint Cold Fear this time around pretty surprising. No plotlines, character arcs, relationship details, nada. Leaving me to ponder what provoked the onset of temporary amnesia. My best guess, this hippocampus of mine only retaining so many plotlines before a data dump is imminent. The proof is in the pudding. Not only was my level of engagement on par with a first encounter, but  A Faint Cold Fear substantiated itself as my favorite in the series thus far. So bloody good there’s no way I’m letting this third installment slip into oblivion again. 

 In typical Slaughter fashion, she opens with a jarring bloodbath. Working through the semantics of what appears to be a suicide, Jeffrey, the chief of police, and Sara, the medical examiner, find that something is amiss. The discovery of an additional crime scene in the same vicinity calls into question not only the suicide label but changes the trajectory of Sara’s family. The scene is gut-wrenchingly graphic, yet works in some twisted way to solidify feelings. As the bodies continue to pile up, Jeffrey and Sara work together to determine if one Grant Tech suicide is inspiring the next or if something far darker is happening around campus.

In Kisscut, the previous book, readers watched as Sara put forth her best effort to make Jeffrey whole. This time around, A Faint Cold Fear, finds Jeffrey laying it all on the line. Steadfast in his resolve to prove he’s the man Sara needs him to be—this time. Theirs is a second-chance love like no other.

For me, Lena has always been—and I assume always will be—the character I love to hate. Naturally, everything she’s faced lends her character sympathy. Although, my patience with her antics dwindles quite quickly. In all fairness, some of my gut-churning disdain likely stems from knowing where her storyline is ultimately heading. A complete and utter mess, A Faint Cold Fear finds Lena on a boozy spiral of bad choices. Refusing to partake in mandated therapy, left her with little choice but to trade in her police badge for a Grant Tech campus security uniform. Yeah, that’s right, she no longer works for Jeffrey. That doesn’t stop her from landing in the thick of it though. 

The unnerving suicides, gory scenes, family ties, tumultuous relationships and unwavering intensity throughout, make for a flawless third edition to the Grant County series. All punctuated with a stellar ending that showcases the queen of crime’s skillful plotting.