Rating: 3/5

Listed below are my reviews for the specific novels presented in this collection.

Living
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Loving
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Party Going
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Reading three of Henry Green’s most notable works was a great way to become accustomed to this modernist’s style of writing. While I found this experience enlightening, I wouldn’t say it was enjoyable.

For as talented and capable of a writer that Henry Green was, I’ve come to the realization that he is not the writer for me. His dialog heavy narratives are unique and boundary breaking for their time but not the kind of thing I look for in writing. Personally, I’m more drawn to scene descriptions and grander concepts than what is presented here. While I can appreciate the social commentary on display in these novels they feel rather surface level from a modern perspective. Green was a talented writer with some great prose but overall it wasn’t enough to carry my interest in these novels while reading them.

Of the three I probably enjoyed reading Loving the most. I found the juxtaposition of the upper and working class on the estate to be the most engaging. Some of this might have been that this was the first novel I read and so the style was fresher to my mind rather than tired by the time I read Party Going. 

I also believe that enjoyment of Henry Green novels hinges on your interest and knowledge in British history and culture. At times these novels felt harder to comprehend than many translated works I’ve read from cultures more foreign to me. These novels are from a time period I never lived in and from a culture I have only witnessed from afar. This certainly was the most British writing I’ve read. 

I can appreciate what Green did for English literature and his influence certainly has left its mark on writing for generations to follow. In the US I would say that Green is a rather obscure writer and one that does deserve to be read. There were elements about all of these novels that I enjoyed but overall I was left underwhelmed with my reading experience.