Rating: 4/5

It's always tricky assessing Victorian youth fiction in the light of our current postcolonial period, and all of the necessary revaluations that has entailed. The Coral Island: A Tale of the Pacific does have some horrendously condescending views upon the age-old moral dichotomy of 'savagery v. civility'. However, R.M. Ballantyne is a relatively unusual author for his period. Edinburgh-born Ballantyne clearly had a strongly evangelical Protestant morality, but this was also tempered with a clear-sighted and scientifically rational-observational mindset. Rather than glory in the military might and commercial prowess of empire, attempting to paint a thin veneer of moral purpose over Britain's overseas ventures, Ballantyne instead chooses to render the exotic, faraway islands of the South Pacific in minute detail, seemingly for the purpose of promoting the Christian Missionary cause, as well as telling a damned good tale of derring-do.

The novel is narrated by the mature figure of Ralph Rover, who reflects back on his early adventures as a young man marooned upon a coral island in the Pacific Ocean. Two other young men, Peterkin Gay and Jack Martin, manage to survive the wreck of the trading ship, which Rover was set to sea aboard. These three boys on the cusp of manhood, bring different skills and abilities to their island prison/paradise. Jack is the oldest and strongest of the boys. He has a keen sense of bravery and proves adept at mechanical design and manipulation. Peterkin is the youngest and smallest of the boys. Unlike, Jack and Ralph he seems to lack a certain quality of upbringing and education. However his speed and agility make him an excellent hunter. Peterkin is also the clown of the group, frequently entertaining the other two and keeping the trio's spirits buoyant. Ralph, meanwhile, is the most obviously religious of the group, as well as the most cerebral. Many times throughout the novel he claims to be observing, or contemplating, something that he has come across, as if he can only conceive of the entirety of something through reflecting upon it. As Ralph is the narrator we have to take him at his word, yet there is the distinct possibility that his present age - when narrating - has allowed him to place certain, more obviously academic and spiritual, concerns upon the events of his youth. 

What Ballantyne's novel successfully presents is an adventure story, very much of the ripping yarn variety, that is both exciting and relatively plausible. The immense detail that is poured into precise descriptions of coral constructions, sea-life, plants and vegetation, maritime equipment and the conditions of 'native' peoples, gives the novel the veracity of a travelogue. Ballantyne was a great believer in writing about what one has seen with ones own eyes and in The Coral Reef, this is an oft-repeated mantra of Ralph's.

The book falters a little in the final third when the boys come across a Missionary outpost. At this point Ballantyne's prose seems to slip into a sermonising, or eulogising, mode of discourse, that wishes to convince not just the boys, but the readers also, of the merits of the Christian Mission. Until this part of the novel Ballantyne managed to marshal his narrative with expert pacing and a keen eye for wondrous detail, which although weakened in these closing sections, still manages to maintain reader interest. 

It is easy to imagine what kind of impact this book would have had on young imaginations back in the 1850's and must be seen as the inspiration for a fair few maritime careers in the latter half of the 19th century. Ballantyne's fellow Edinburgh native Robert Louis Stevenson clearly utilises many of the mechanical elements of Ballantyne's plot for his own high-seas masterpiece Treasure Island. Despite being a novel aimed at youngsters, and crammed full of all the various forms of Victorian moral improvement, The Coral Reef also manages to inject moments of startling brutality into many scenes, that even by today's jaded standards would seem horrific. That said, perhaps the novel's most admirable quality is the way in which its central characters find a means to co-operate effectively with one another for the betterment of all. 

At his very best Ballantyne manages to meld together progressivist scientific rationalism, the core civil decencies of Christianity and an exceptional ability for narrative pacing that makes books like this a joy to read, and not just a historic curio. Hidden away in the depths of Ralph Rover's reminisces there are profound and beautiful passages such as this from the closing chapter of the novel:-

"To part is the lot of all mankind. The world is a scene of constant leave-taking, and the hands that grasp in cordial greeting to-day are doomed ere long to unite for the last time, when the quivering lips pronounce the word --"Farewell"... if we realised more fully the shortness of the fleeting intercourse that we have in this world with many of our fellow-men, we would try more earnestly to do them good, to give them a friendly smile, as it were, in passing (for the longest intercourse on earth is little more than a passing word and glance), and show that we have sympathy with them in the short, quick struggle of life, by our kindly words and looks and actions."

More than anything it is this strength of fellow-feeling, that is depicted with such genuine charm, dignity and grace, that will continue to commend The Coral Reef as a literary adventure worth undertaking.