Rating: 2/5

I have sort of mixed feeling about this book. It was interesting &amp; engrossing enough that I read it all the way through in one sitting, yet I doubt i'd ever want to read it again. Plus I realized afterwards, I didn't really like the characters. It wasn't exactly poorly written, though most of the story was slightly slow. Then at the end there's a very fast string of coincidences before an abrupt, anti-climactic conclusion. Occasionally there were little jumps as if a scene or conversation was left out, which was disconcerting. Finally, I felt it lacking in description so I never felt like a complete picture was drawn.

But what bothered me the most was the main character, Charlotte. While I could understand her actions, it doesn't mean I liked her. The author made her a spy but seemed to still want her to be virtuous &amp; innocent, so she ends up mainly being a victim with no idea what she is doing or saying. Things just "happen" to her. I'm paraphrasing but there were several times you read "she saw to glass thrown against the wall &amp; was surprised to realize she threw it" or "she heard a yell and was surprised after that it was her voice." After 4-5 of these she almost seems mentally ill, she's so detached. Again, one could almost argue that's a common reaction to trauma &amp; war. And again, that doesn't mean I have to like her &amp; what she does.

She also spends most of the book lying to just about everyone about everything, yet she gets very offended &amp; angry when someone considers her a liar or untrustworthy. She also manipulates the emotions of certain people with almost no guilt for what she is doing. When she does feel guilt, well - nothing she does is her fault. She was forced to do everything. She's eternally a victim of circumstance.

Ben, the hero, is slightly better. He has a few more morals &amp; more backbone. Although much of what he does for Charlotte makes him seem stupid &amp; unprofessional as a soldier. But it's supposed to be ok because the reader knows they're supposed to be together. So who cares? Of course there are the usual out-of-character &amp; not accurate for the time sex scenes.

Lastly, there are some very obvious "secrets", one bigger that the rest, that were tedious to read about. Literally at the moment the author mentions someone has a secret, you know what it is. Yet you know there are pages &amp; pages of "hints" to get through before it's comes out. I suppose the author figured on a shocking reveal or twist but instead they're sort of laughable.

Again, it's strange because the book was entertaining enough for a quick read, definitely better than a lot of other books. But it leaves a bad after taste.