Rating: 1/5

I did not enjoy reading this book. I forced myself to finish it. Why did I not dump it? Two reasons. There are some descriptive lines that create an atmosphere that drew me in. Secondly, the tale is episodic; I was hoping that episodes in the latter half would turn my view around. The descriptive lines proved to be too few and only one episode, about half-way through, satisfied me. 

If one were to ask me to answer quickly how I reacted to this book, my response would be I did not like it. That is why I give it one star. This method, to respond quickly to the posed question, is the method I use to rate books. 

Now I will explain why I disliked it. 

Lots of others like the book. Published in 1969, it is considered a modern classic. It is the first of a long series about the captain of a sailing ship, Captain Jack Aubrey, and the boat’s doctor, Stephen Maturin. Their friendship is said to grow deeper and deeper as the books proceed. Their close relationship is why I thought I might like the books, despite the fact that the series is primarily a plot-oriented naval adventure tale, which happens to be set during the Napoleonic Wars. This, the first, begins in 1800; Jack Aubrey has just become the newly appointed Master and Commander of the sloop Sophie. It is he that appoints Stephen Maturin to his post as naval surgeon. Maturin is a Catalan physician, a naturalist dedicated to the study of flora and fauna and a musician, an avid lover of music.

The series consist of books of historical fiction closely based on the real-life exploits of Admiral Thomas Cochrane (1775-1860).

You must be aware of the following if you are considering this book:

*This book is the first in a long series of books. The relationship between Jack and Stephen develops slowly.
*It is plot oriented and episodic in format.
*It is intended to be an exciting, adventure tale.
*Women, homosexuals and Blacks are drawn in a discriminatory fashion.
*It is filled with nautical jargon. 

I will discuss the last point first. If, before picking up the book, you are not an expert of sailing terms, you will most probably not fully comprehend every sentence. The author does give enough side comments so even the uninitiated can figure out what is going on. The good side is that the atmosphere drawn feels authentic. 

The way in which women, homosexuals and Blacks are depicted felt to me categorical and without nuance. Sex too. I presume the author’s intention was to draw the norms of the 1800s accurately, but I was repulsed. Drinking and debauchery and sex is drawn in such a manner as to titillate and excite. There is a section about a male and a female mantis. What is said may be scientifically accurate, but how it is formulated is by no means clinical. The intention of the sequence is to titillate. This is merely one example. 

There is one episode about half-way through that demonstrates what I was looking for, but which the book rarely delivers. I prefer books that focus more upon character analysis than plot. In the episode I am referring to, Sophie and another ship are racing against each other to do battle. A man on the Sophie falls overboard. I observed with keen interest to see what Captain Aubrey would prioritize, saving the life of the man that fell overboard or the race with the enemy ship. I would have preferred more episodes such as this, episodes that speak about the personality of characters. Secondary characters remain flat. Do not read this book for character portrayal.

What is delivered in abundance are naval battles, battles drawn to excite. This totally bored me. I didn’t care in the least who won. To me, these battles draw adult men acting as children given guns and swords. I found this infantile, ludicrous, boring.

I have another complaint. The transition from one scene to the next is often abrupt. There is not adequate information clarifying that the scene has changed.

The audiobook is read by Ric Jerrom. I have given his performance three stars. He dramatizes, but not too much. He uses varied intonations for different characters. He captures those lines describing a storm, or a calm sea, or a sunset well. Yeah, the narration is good, so it gets three stars!

If you are looking for a series, adventure tales where plot is the focus, you will most probably enjoy Patrick O’Brian’s books more than I do.