Rating: 2/5

my best friend in college, pam, wanted me to read this. I think this was her seminal 60s text the way the electric kool aid acid test was mine. I read it either on or before our weeks long trip to california where we hitchhiked and met people to get around, including my friend john d. who I am still in touch with. the book itself is less memorable to me than electric kool aid acid test. we spent some time in big sur on that trip (that's where we met john d.) and that in turn inspired me to read kerouac's big sur, which is my favorite of his books I've read.

ok, that was my retrospective initial review. here is my review after rereading it, as I was instructed to do by the universe (I dreamed I was reading it and then the next day I found it in a little free library I was passing). initially I had given this book four stars, which I just knocked down to two. I'm not quite sure why the universe wanted me to reread it but I was a very different experience. 

god, james michener. I didn't remember much about the book, other than hippie youth go to marrakech. I have had a copy sitting on my shelf all these years, even when I took the copy from the little free library. 

I assume pam loved it for the hippie travelers. however, the elements of youth traveling was heavily buried under michener's blowhardiness. first of all, you know he likes to research and his books are like when someone's mother purees up vegetables and sneaks them into your food. you think you're reading a novel, but there are a lot of nonfiction elements. 

the book isn't just youth traveling. they are followed/guided from spain to portugal to italy to mozambique to marrakech by a middle aged man who serves as the narrator and a semi-creepy uncle figure to them. he also drags in another middle aged man. with them in the picture, it becomes more about one generation trying to make sense of the next, seeing how they are different and how they are the same, and concluding that despite sexual liberation, marijuana and draft dodging, they all have the same tasks as his generation - figuring out who they are and what their contribution to society will be. 

michener has a couple of big axes to grind - black/white race relations (in the US and africa), and drug use. on race relations you can tell he's trying to be progressive but he is paternalistic and has a lot of unexamined racism. there are a lot of different discussions - african nations coming out from european colonial rule, cities in the US, south africa, muslim counties in africa and their contribution to the slave trade, etc. if you boil it all down, michener seems to think that black people (in 1971, this was) have to really develop themselves - get a work ethic, get educated - in order to escape oppression and be on equal footing. characters who say incredibly racist things are still fondly regarded. 

the drug use - well, it often seems to involve convulsions and catatonia, whether it's lsd or heroin. one hash cookie knocks a woman unconscious to the floor a few minutes after she eats it, and she doesn't wake up for 18 hours. it doesn't seem like michener has much first or even direct second hand experience with drugs. he has kind of the same attitude as the movie forrest gump has towards drugs. 

the women he writes....michener doesn't want to be so crude as to talk about t&amp;a, so there is a lot of "finely proportioned" and architectural description of figures. almost all his women are "unusually attractive" and I can tell you he is partial to blondes and big white teeth. it was very tiresome to read all that. also there is a lot of crap about manliness, including a couple of multiparticipant fist fights, running with the bulls in pamplona, being soldiers, etc. etc. also very tiresome to read. 

and as I said, he's about nonfiction, really. he only wrote novels to trick people into reading all his historical background and philosophical musings, it seems like. (despite this, the book did move fairly quickly. yes, it took me a good three weeks to read it, but it is 750 pages long). and this shows in that some of his scenes are absolute pulp novel crap. just completely unbelievable. the group on safari watches as five large crocodiles slip into the river - although one remains camouflaged on the bank. one of the girls - "euphoric" from having witnessed this, gets out of the car - apparently no one tries to stop her - and runs toward the riverbank. the remaining crocodile knocks her over with his tail and two others lunge out of the water towards her but she is saved by the men of the group. no one admonishes her. or, the most beautiful woman in the book - the vast proportion of men who see her fall in love with her immediately - who is 18 and has escaped from arctic norway, suddenly decides she is in love with an over 40 year old manly man who is a complete curmudgeon and kind of obsessed with humphrey bogart movies. ok, if that isn't unbelieveable enough, she insists on the narrator's creepy uncle presence while she visits him in a hospital room - he has been gored by a bull in pamplona while saving the black character, despite his racism, because men save people - and proposes to him. as the guy is like, um, why is this super hot super young chick begging me to marry her, this seems weird, she returns, again with the narrator, a few days later, takes off all her clothes, gets in be with the guy, and tells him she is going to heal the wound in his soul. then they wave the narrator away. 

does any part of those stories ring true? just as absurd as john irving having a woman parachute naked into a pigpen, but pretending not to be absurd. 

so yes. I wouldn't read this if I were you. not unless the universe directs you to.