Rating: 5/5

I didn't love this one when I first read it but a second read revealed its five star awesomeness. The English h works as a receptionist for the cranky doctor H (RBD/RDD) and for years he doesn't notice her. Then his mother taps her to be a companion to their Dutch grandmother, who is dying. During the long nights of the grandmother's illness, the H notices her and against his inclination, falls in love. This is not stated outright but it's there between the lines. All that midnight hour piano playing and H-on-h hair braiding clearly gets an RDD worked up.

This leads to the second act. Because the H asks her to stay in Holland for granny's funeral, the h is late getting back to her job in England and is fired. The H doesn't know where she has gone, and runs around England tearing the place up looking for her. He finally finds her in the country, working as a housemaid, coincidentally at the home of his godmother. The h took the job because she was allowed to bring her pet cat Charles. I love Charles. La Neels very frequently bestows pet cats or dogs on her heroines, sometimes with much pathos attached (see The Promise of Happiness or Always and Forever). Charles stars in a particularly heartbreaking scene later on. 💔 

The H begins visiting very frequently. If his love wasn't obvious before, it sure is now. He tells his mother:
‘... I can assure you that I have tried to discover a means whereby she gets more suitable employment without discovering that I am the source. If she knew that, she would refuse immediately.’ He added bitterly, ‘At least I know where she is.’

Meanwhile, our h becomes faint while serving at table. She tells the butler it's the scent of the food she's dishing out making her woozy, but no. It's love. (In this scene, the H is cutting a slice of the cheese she's holding out. Cutting the cheese. The smell making her faint. Was Betty making a vulgar little joke? Discuss.)

Then Charles escapes in a panic during a thunderstorm. He is lost for days, and gets caught in a rabbit snare. The rescue scene had me in tears. (No cats are harmed! I have cats myself and I don't think I could ever read Betty again if Charles wasn't okay.) This episode serves to bring H and h together. 

Roses Have Thorns is full of delightful side characters that make this book a joy to read. The H is one of the last very cranky heroes as Betty shifted more to the paternalistic and may I say bland (if still often very hot). The h is an Araminta from head to toe, but like many Aramintas, she's sensible and no pushover. RHT was written in 1990 during the time when Betty was shifting towards a different type of unskilled heroine. The book also has Betty's oft-seen theme of class differences in British society. The h is working first as a receptionist and then as a housemaid, but everyone can see she's a lady and all make sure to tell each other so. The distinction is lost on the H, who first of all never saw her at all and when he did, only saw her as the one he loved. Aww.