Rating: 4/5

Overall, an easy-to-read manual about Bill Capodagli's parsing of the Disney training philosophy: Dream, Believe, Dare, Do. 

The best part of the book is its applicability and ground in real-world tried-and-true concepts, from storyboarding to plussing. Most readers familiar with Disney will have already heard of all the anecdotes from Walt Disney's own studio, from Mintz stealing Oswald the Rabbit to meticulously distancing Disneyland trash cans and building Cinderella Castle as the weenie, i.e. attention-drawing monument (much like a wiener attracted Walt's dog, Lady). Even the Eisner year stories, like Frank Wells' helicopter crash aftermath, or the Pixar acquisition, aren't exactly original, but Capodagli weaves them into his narrative about establishing a solid collaborative creative culture.

The weak points:

1.) This isn't an official Disney (Hyperion) publication, but it does reek of Pollyannaism. Despite trumpeting the necessity of engaging frontline cast members for their feedback and improvements, there aren't interviews of any frontline staffers from the past, and certainly no insight into how *they* viewed the training program. I don't expect full-on tabloid journalism, but the book tells all the positives and virtually none of the negatives, which casts doubt on how his teams handle struggle and day-to-day tension and conflict. At the very least, it's unrealistic, and Capodagli needed to engage some of the challenges faced on the frontlines.

2.) Too optimized for the boardroom. His techniques wrongly assume that all readers are middle managers or executives at big corporations with a clear divergence and delineation between lower-level individual contributors and upper management. He cautions repeatedly ad nauseum against retreats, then suggestions Brain Trust boardroom meetings of 15-20 leaders. News flash: Many of your readers don't even have 15 *people* on a lean product team, let alone 15-20 *leaders*! His calls against performance reviews fall on deaf ears, but he uses the book to preach to the choir: we readers who want to build our own world don't care about those bureaucratic procedures! We already know they're bad. Capodagli should save his preaching for his actual consulting, rather than writing them into a book whose readers already know the corporate traps and are building something entirely different. To that end, the book should focus more on building the culture from scratch -- the early days, a team in a garage or basement, small scrappy bootstrapped startups -- or even project teams at school! -- rather than assuming we're all mindless company suits in some C-suite at some conglomerate like Four Seasons hotel chain or Johnson &amp; Johnson.

3) Not really Disney. Sure, he references a lot of Walt Disney's procedures! Those are great. But he mixes in non-Disney companies, many of which relate only tangentially. I don't care about lines of beauty products whose only relation to the Disney Way are its owner spewing some tagline about valuing customers and maintaining quality. Everyone can say that. It's better to show, not tell! Then, Capodagli really doesn't share any kind of closed-door insight about his own time, or trainers who had to learn and then teach Disney's way from within. He's no Van Arsdale France! ...and that's okay, provided he interviews people who were in the company, and shares those key insights in the book!

4.) Resorts to criticism where technique would have served. Too much grumbling! Capodagli too often cites his consulting experiences at companies that bring him in as a last resort, after internal culture has crumbled. Leaders don't do this, don't do that. Of course! But instilling a culture involves selling to people, and eliciting buy-in. So tell us some exact conversational techniques and give examples of actual implementation that elicited that buy-in! Capodagli hovers too often at the policy level, discussing storyboarding categories and dot colors in painstaking detail, but then glosses over the struggle in the human aspect outside those meetings: struggle in bringing people together who respond to different stimuli, struggle in instilling culture in people who may lack or lose motivation, struggle in hiring people who will thrive in the culture, struggle in having honest conversations when power dynamics introduce conflicting incentives. Capodagli should address these through clear-cut examples, with actual people that had to resolve conflict, even the day-to-day silent ones where two creatives don't agree about a direction forward or a deliverable deadline.

The book still reads fine. You'll find takeaways that help you establish a culture, and read some Disney anecdotes along the way. But helpful information aside, it often feels needlessly preachy and Pollyanna, not to mention targeted to executives at big companies.