Rating: 4/5

Overall Rating: 3.85 // Action: 3.75 / Emotion: 4 / Romance: 4.5 / Sensuous: 2 / Intrigue: 3 / Medieval Flavor: 5 / Humor: 8 / Tears: 0

  Spring's Fury
, Denise Domning's third book in her five-book series, The Graistan Chronicles, is another adventure in true medieval-flavored reading. Although the book can easily be read as a stand-alone book, 
  Spring's Fury
 features a hero and heroine that were introduced in book one of the series, 
  Winter's Heat
. Would recommend reading at least the first book of the series before reading this third book to get a better feel for the events and emotions occurring herein.

Gilliam FitzHenry, the fourth son of Henry of Graistan, has been handed his life's dream -- a keep of his own. Gilliam is having to rebuild Ashby because it had been partially burned down during a siege (that occurred in 
  Winter's Heat
). Gilliam wants to marry the wild, unruly, daughter of the previous ruler of Ashby, Nicola, because {1} the people of Ashby love her, and {2) she knows how to manage Ashby into prosperity.

Nicola, however, has no desire whatsoever to marry any man, much less the man she saw kill her father (during said siege). Nicola has been spoiled by her father, John of Ashby, who allowed her to train with his men. In true youthful visions of grandeur, Nicola believes she is capable of ruling and protecting Ashby on her own -- if only her overlord, Rannulf of Graistan, would see the light.

Rannulf, however, is more than willing to marry off Nicola to get the willful, trouble-making, escape-attempting ward off his hands. 
  Spring's Fury
 is an exciting account of how Nicola tries to escape her marriage and Gilliam's efforts to catch and subdue his new bride. The book is full of adventures, romance, and the day-to-day intricacies of medieval life.

The book is also filled with two well-developed, intriguing secondary characters who add depth to the story; namely, {1} Tilda (Nicola's "more sister than servant" best friend) and {2} Jocelyn (Gilliam's weakling-minded squire). A plethora of other villagers also add realism and insightfulness to the tale.

A more detailed, spoiler-ridden synopsis/review of Spring's Fury appears at Wolf Bear Does Books