Rating: 2/5

This book reminds me of Wasp Factory and Exquisite Corpse in that the synopsis of the book gears you up for a book entirely different than what you get—it promised something dark and thrilling, but ended up being quite literary and slow, with next to plot. Events happen and Jesse as the MC does things, but it's all very loosely associated and lacks any sort of rising action or sense of dread/consequences. The opening chapters of this book also set me up for something much closer to the synopsis than I got. It's like the skipped year of time is the glue between two entirely different novels. It feels different, it reads a little different, and definitely anything remotely interesting only happens in that first section.

Jesse as a character could possibly be a psychopath, I'm not sure. The book reads so cold and analytical despite being in first person that Jesse comes across as quite the jerk and I couldn't really understand him as a character. Through the entire thing I never really learned what he wanted or what motivated him, and even if his being a drifter was on purpose, he never changes from that character type. Despite all the awful things he does and are done to him, he finishes the book exactly the same as he started it, character wise. There is no arc. And because Jesse is the narrator, the way other characters come across is similarly cold and detached. Several of them literally give their backstories to Jesse and I still came away not knowing who they were as characters. Everyone felt like chess pieces in the world's slowest, most boring chess game. That crime of his that Jesse is supposed to be investigating? Takes forever to surface, and only shows itself periodically. It felt rather besides the point of the novel, though I couldn't tell you what was the point. 

Then there's also the issue of the book opening with Jesse constantly thinking fucking queer and other derogatory things, only for he himself to end up 'homosexual'. The why behind it kind of makes sense, if you make it to the end of the book (and believe that people's sexual orientations can be manipulated), but the thing that bothered me is he becomes gay with no fanfare at all. It just sort of happens and he even says at one point, in more words, 'guess I'm gay, oh well'. With no explanation as to the drastic change of desires/opinion. 

And of course the murder of a trans person is problematic. Language aside (transvestite is used by Jesse for the most part, while other characters later in the book use transsexual), given when the book was published, the way transitioning is presented in the book is like men would only want to become women if they were psychologically screwed up or manipulated or tortured into it. There is a brief and small correction near the end of the book where a character mentions that the murder victim had probably felt like a woman their entire life and just had to hide it because of where they lived/who they were around (i.e. was transgender), rather than it being some fetish or other thing, but throughout the entire book this person is referred to as he/him. Whether or not they were truly trans or actually manipulated into it is left a bit grey even by the end, but it leans heavily into being really trans for me, and to not once in the entire book use she/her pronouns or call the victim anything other than 'man' really irritated me as a trans person who has struggled to be recognized as the gender I am. Frankly it gave the entire book a kind of predatory anti-trans vibe, and I honestly can't tell if that was intentional or by accident. 

And finally, the twist ending, if you can even call it that. The possibility was on my radar from very early on in the book, and the longer the book went without Jesse facing any consequences for what he'd done, I figured something from his past was going to be revealed that was supposed to be shocking, and maybe make you feel for him. It wasn't, and I didn't. Maybe it worked in 1994 but that twist is so cliche now, and also kind of offensive in that it presents Jesse as being gay solely because of heterosexual trauma. It could be a factor, sure, but orientation can't genuinely be altered like that.

TLDR; a boring and awful guy does some horrible things that take the entire book to come to any conclusion, basically no plot, and lots of problematic queer presentations throughout.