Rating: 2/5

This is the second time I've tried to read this book after having bought it at like 13, but alas, it was not to be as I've decided to drop this book again at 50% completion.

Firstly, I found the overtly Christian undertones really off-putting. Davies basically copies stories straight from the Bible and substitutes in wolf characters, including a wolf Jesus, a wolf God, a wolf Adam and Eve and a even Wolf Satan. Now, I understand writers hope to give their readers a message in their works, but I like my subliminal messages to be a little more subtle than having literal direct-quotes force fed to me, and I like them to include a hearty dose of Atheism. 
The frequent Sunday-school-esque scenes where the children asked questions about the God and Jesus wolf and discussed "free will"were pure agony and felt patronising to me, hence why I think this book was aimed at a younger, more influenceable target audience. 

With that in mind, there is a frightening glamorisation of suicidal thoughts, and sexist and classist implications. I think Davies used the fact that his characters were wolves to pretend they, and therefore his writing, were outside human morals and rules. Like, of course he gets physical with her and constantly snaps to put her in her place, he's the Alpha.

The plot progression occurred one of two ways.
1) The characters' completely needless stupidity.
For example, when crossing a river covered in very thin ice, after having been explicitly warned to look out for the "fifth element" ice(?) 
 
"Safety," whispered Palla. "Safety at last."
But as Fell brought up the rear, and the wolves grew more confident, he found himself looking up into the night sky again. His attention began to wander as he gazed at the stars. The Wolf Trail, the pathway between heaven and earth, he kept thinking, and as he did so, he started to drift away to the right.

You have to pay attention for all of five minutes to NOT DIE!

2) Overhearing strangers that show up out of no-where.
In the 223 pages I read, they learned what to do next this way four, different, times.
Four times! He clearly kept hitting dead ends since he went and killed off all the decision making characters with their own idiocy to generate some drama!
Also, lets not forget, this is a book about wild animals, yet somehow our heroes hide within earshot of wolves,  with noses and somehow go undetected every time?

I think the final straw for me was when he used a cop-out 'technique' I find more infuriating than any other, which is when no proper explanation is given when a character asks "Why didn't you say something before?"
A prime example of this is in Breaking Dawn when  Edward says that Jacob being a 'shape shifter', not a werewolf all along NEVER CAME UP!?!?!?

Basically, it goes a little something like this:

  "Then why didn't he talk to me before?" asked Larka, suddenly feeling bitterness again for all that had happened to her. "if he'd helped us before perhaps Kar--"
"Don't be ungrateful," Snapped Skart. "I saved your life, didn't I? Before you were far too young, Larka. Your eye wasn't open yet and I didn't want to frighten you away. Though if I'd realized quite how much you know already, perhaps I might have come even sooner. But anyway, I needed to wait."
"Wait for what?" said Larka sullenly.
"Wait for you to ask for help, of course." 

Oh, of course. I watched you struggle all along  as everyone around you died and never let you know I was even here, but of course all you had to do was ask.