Rating: 3/5

Absaroka Ambush is the 3rd instalment of the First Mountain Man series, a collection of quick-paced &amp; witty stories about a mountain man called Preacher. 

In the 1830s mountain men were already becoming a rare breed. Having abandoned the beaver fur trade, some opened stores in the East, while others stayed in the West to pave the way for pioneers. Preacher, hired by the government to lead a wagon train through the wilderness westward, was one of the latter. Together with his horse and his friends (whom he tricked into joining, the sneaky bastard he is) he sets out for an adventure that turns out to be filled with betrayal, bloodshed, grief, sacrifice, stomach-twisting violence and, yes, personal growth.

This is not for those with a weak stomach. The Old West, or the Big Lonesome as Preacher likes to call it, is rough and hard on those who try to travel it. There are ample descriptions of the cruelty of both the Native Americans and Preacher’s enemies, and even of himself and his friends whenever he thinks it useful. 

Preacher is not a saint, we all know that after reading the first 2 instalments. But the ‘white man’ isn’t any better, so he thinks. While the Easterners are disgusted by the customs and rituals of the Old West, the hatred is mutual. Mountain men and Native Americans are much more alike than mountain men and the people from what is often called ‘civilization’; and politics and greed sicken Preacher more than anything. So having adopted a solitary lifestyle and a symbiosis with nature, Preacher feels best when he’s surrounded by sand, rocks and no other living being than his horses.

But his way of living is under threat and so is the Native Americans’. As we follow Preacher and his friends throughout the story we get a grasp of what it’s like to live in the Old West and see its charms and its beauty. There is little focus on detail, there are no long descriptions of the scenery whatsoever, and yet the western vibes are plentiful. The storytelling shows that the author did his research and knows what he’s talking about; the ease with which he writes about Preacher, and sprinkles historical facts here and there, is appealing and addictive. 

The storylines themselves tend to be a bit repetitive; wagon train here, vengeance manhunt there. Reading all 28 books back-to-back isn’t recommendable for they get monotonous after a few books. Yet, they’re easy and quick (and hilarious!! Preacher, you gotta stop *giggles*) to throw in when completing the GR challenge or just when feeling a little mentally tired.