Rating: 4/5

“Everything went on just the same in Oxford from year to year. It was only the people who might be different.”

In her first novel, left unpublished until after her death, Barbara Pym gives us an enchanting romantic farce that is pure delight.

Miss Jessie Morrow is companion to the elderly Miss Doggett, and we see the story primarily through her view. Every year Miss Doggett hosts new Oxford students (who she believes can benefit from her wisdom) to tea in her North Oxford home called Leamington Lodge. This year they are also having the new unmarried curate Stephen Latimer stay with them.

I loved what Pym did with the character of Jessie Morrow. She takes a woman who is taken advantage of by her employer, written off by most of her society as a spinster, and pretty much walked all over by everyone, and gives her a clear dignity, seen through her self-deprecating humor and flashes of insight. We may be set up to pity her, but she ends up being the one character we admire.

As fall turns to winter and then spring, we explore different romantic entanglements. The curate thinks Jessie might be someone he could settle for. Miss Doggett’s nephew Francis, a married Oxford Don, is tempted by a young female student. Francis’ daughter, the pretty Anthea, assumes her beau Simon will be the one that lasts forever. 

As all this goes on and each of the characters makes one misstep after another, we are treated to Jessie’s wisdom.

Like
“Perhaps she had now given up hope of getting anything, if there was anything. But was there? And if there was anything, wasn’t it often much less than people expected? Wasn’t it moments, single hours and days, rather than months and years?”

And perhaps my favorite
“… the sort of love that lingers on through many years, dying sometimes and then coming back like a twinge of rheumatism in the winter, so that you feel it in your knee when you are nearing the top of a long flight of stairs.”

While this had many funny moments, I found it even more touching than funny. Satisfying from beginning to end.