Rating: 5/5

A gift from my stepdaughter Katie a bunch of years ago, in response to my love of all things piratical and especially my incessant touting of Talk Like a Pirate Day (September 19th, mark your calendars!); only recently got around to reading it, as is my habit.
 This book proved to be somewhat of a surprise for me. When one thinks of seafaring women, it usually involves Anne Bonney and Mary Read, who were the lovers and consorts of the notorious pirate Jack Rackham during the Golden Age of Piracy (late 17th - early 18th century). While they were ferocious fighters and knowledgeable seafarers, they remained loyally under the control of Rackham. 
 This is an unfortunate stereotype, and leaves out or at least minimizes, the contributions of women in leadership roles; after all, the subtitle of the book is “Heroines and Hellions of the Sea.” Ms. Druett takes pains to explain that the term “Hero” is typically descriptive of men, when its origin is Hero, a mythological priestess who cast herself into the sea after her lover drowned swimming to her. Literally the first half of the book is devoted to women who not only captained ships, but also commanded fleets of them, from ancient historical times (a Chinese courtesan who became one of the most feared maritime raiders; a woman who refused to marry the Persian monarch in 529 BC, and when he attacked her forces, she soundly defeated and killed him). 
 The book traces the history of such brave, ruthless women throughout virtually every era through the Age of Sail, with plenty of examples given. Probably the most well-known is Grace “Grania” O’Malley, daughter of a warrior chieftain and owner of a fleet of fishing vessels in the mid-1500’s. She was forced into a political marriage at age 15, but when her husband was killed, she vowed revenge and, commanding her father’s fleet, wreaked havoc on the seas around Ireland. There are other similarities throughout history, in which a wife learned the ways of piracy, pillage and murder from their families and/or husbands and carried on the bloody traditions.
 But that’s only part of the story. What is typically left out is that the majority of seafaring women were in more conventional maritime occupations such as shipping. Thus, they learned the ways of the sea and of business, such that when their husbands died or became infirm, they were able to immediately step in and take over the captaincy of the ships (many times having to deal with merchants and others who felt that a woman was not capable of such complex functions). Despite these biases, many thrived and made good lives for themselves and their families.
 And indeed, the story doesn’t end there. In addition to the construction of said ships per se, there are many other vital products and services for ships to be functional. Such provisions include sail making and repair, logging for masts and spars, barrel makers, coppersmiths, candle makers for the ship’s lanterns, and rope makers, not to mention the providers of cargo for the holds of the ships, notably tea, spices, housewares and all manner of foodstuffs. As some merchantmen were armed, cannons and their ammunition, as well as firearms, were necessary. Women were intimately involved in these functions, some co-leading their companies and/or taking over upon their husbands’ deaths, or inheriting the business from their families. They had to be shrewd and knowledgeable to survive in such businesses, and many did so.
 I found this book to be quite readable and informative, as well as entertaining. There are many illustrations, drawings and pictures throughout the text, adding further information and documentation. Ms. Druett has obviously done her homework, as there is an extensive bibliography and an Index, which I used a lot. Five stars, recommended for just about any reader, and with many thanks to Katie.