Rating: 5/5

NOT AT ALL WHAT I EXPECTED. Whenever I have encountered him in books about the Civil War, General Sherman has always seemed to me to be a man of few words. Biting, straight words, to be sure, but few. Taciturn. A man of still waters that run deep. I was wrong.
 
First of all, this thing is long and filled with detail. Detail about what happened on days that occurred thirty to forty years before the writing. For example, who was in a boat when it capsized, and what side of the river they ended up on. The reputation of a borrower at a San Francisco bank and what happened to him. The last conversation Sherman had with General McPherson before he was killed. Things like this.
 
So, he has a sharp memory (like Grant’s for maps and terrain), but he is not about unimportant details.
 
No. William Tecumseh Sherman keeps hold of the main story throughout, and does not waste time on (what he considers) unnecessary detail. For example, he does not say what he or anyone else is wearing or what they have for dinner, or who said what about whom. But he does tell us what he thought about a bad credit risk at the bank, and what he did about it. He does tell us exactly and in detail what plans he made with others to put down a band of vigilantes who had taken over the San Francisco city government. He does tell us how he felt when his son died of typhoid. He does tell us exactly what he said at that dinner party of Louisiana well-to-dos held after the election of Lincoln, when they asked him what he thought of slavery. He does tell us in detail about the maneuvers in Chickasaw Bayou, and every other battle. (Of course, not everyone will think that the to-and-fro of a battle in a swamp, or whose column marched on which flank, are necessary details, but they sure do paint a vivid picture of what the war was like.) These are the important things to him. And he holds them in his mind like they were etched in stone.
 
I can see why General Grant trusted him at his word without hesitation. 
 
Early on, he describes an event that occurred while he was managing a bank in San Francisco 5 years before the Civil War broke out. A group of vigilante citizens have taken over the city government and its justice system, and the California governor asks for Sherman’s help as a former officer of the U.S. Army to regain civil control of the city. Sherman makes arrangements with the local U.S. Army commander to open the U.S. armory and distribute guns to deputized citizens in order to oust the vigilantes. But at the last minute, the weak local US Army commander reneges on his promise to Sherman, and the vigilantes continue to rule san Francisco while the State Governor looks on, helpless. Several people are executed by the vigilantes before they disband several months later, after a judge they arrest escapes. This all happens in 1856, and, although he never says so, I think this episode leaves a deep impression on Sherman. (It sure as hell left an impression on me.)
 
Later, while he is setting up a military school in Louisiana, South Carolina succeeds from the United States and Sherman feels compelled by duty to go to Washington to meet with the War Department, and is eventually assigned to the Army of Tennessee. He is instinctively strategic, allows his subordinates leeway to use their own judgement, cares first about the welfare of his men, and is extremely determined. No wonder he commanded such loyalty.
 
At his core, Sherman does not like people who are just out for themselves (and he sure as hell could spot them), and people who do not take the welfare and best interests of the country and its people into consideration in their conduct. And he hates people who do not follow the established rules.
 
I have only ever run across one or two quotes from him, but this may be because he tends to be verbose and explanatory, rather than pithy.
 
I will leave you with just two samples of his writing. 
 
First, in a letter to General Hallack, analyzing groups of Southerners, which we can also recognize as spread throughout today’s America:
 
First, the large planters, owning lands, slaves and all kinds of personal property. These are, on the whole, the ruling class. … Argument [with them] is exhausted, and words have lost their usual meaning. Nothing but the logic of events touches their understanding. … Their friendship and assistance to reconstruct order out of the present ruin cannot be depended on. They watch the operations of our armies, and hope still for a Southern Confederacy that will restore to them the slaves and privileges which they feel are otherwise lost forever. … [These are the wealthy supporters of Trump and Republican low-tax policies]
 
Second. The smaller farmers, mechanics, merchants and laborers. This class … have, in fact, no real interest in the establishment of a Southern Confederacy, and have been led or driven into war on the false theory that they were to be benefited somehow—they knew not how. .. They swerve to and fro according to events which they do not comprehend or attempt to shape. … The Southern politicians, who understand this class, use them as the French do their masses—seemingly consult their prejudices, while they make their orders and enforce them. … [These are the low information voters who voted for Trump in the last election, on instinct]
 
[Third were the few Union supporters living in the South]
 
Fourth. The young bloods of the South: sons of planters, lawyers about town, good billiard players and sportsmen, men who never did work and never will. War suits them, and the rascals are brave, fine riders, bold to rashness, and dangerous subjects in every sense. … This is a larger class than most men suppose, and they are the most dangerous set of men that this war has turned loose upon the world. … They have no property or future, and therefore cannot be influenced by anything, except personal considerations…. [And these are the Proud Boys, the fight club dudes, the neo-Nazis, the Incels, etc., etc.]
 
And last: a series of letter exchanges between Sherman and General J.B. Hood, and the leadership of Atlanta, which was alone worth the price of the book. A sample:
 
After capturing Atlanta, Sherman ordered all the civilians to leave the city. General J.B. Hood, of the Confederacy, wrote Sherman, protesting,  “in the name of God and humanity” that he was expelling from their homes the wives and children “of a brave people.” 
 
To which Sherman replied at length, and concluded:
In the name of common sense, I ask you not to appeal to a just God in such a sacrilegious manner. You who, in the midst of peace and prosperity, have plunged a nation into war—dark and cruel war—who dared and badgered us to battle, insulted our flag, seized our arsenals and forts that were left in the honorable custody of peaceful ordnance sergeants … turned loose your privateers to plunder unarmed ships; expelled Union families by the thousands, burned their houses, and declared, by an act of your Congress, the confiscation of all debts due Northern men for goods already received! … If we must be enemies, let us be men, and fight it out as we propose to do, and not deal in arch hypocritical appeals to God and humanity. God will judge us in due time, and he will pronounce whether it be more humane to fight with a town full of women and families of a brave people at our back or to remove them in time to places of safety among their friends and people. I am, very respectfully, your obedient servant,
 
In the letter exchange with Sherman after General Hood abandoned Atlanta, Hood also objected to the shelling of Atlanta conducted by Sherman’s Army when it had laid siege to the city. Sherman pithily replied to his fellow West Point graduate: I was not bound by the laws of war to give notice of the shelling of Atlanta, a fortified town, with magazines, arsenals, foundries and public stores; you were bound to take notice. See the books.

Did I mention that in addition to being a bank manager, General Sherman was also a lawyer? 
 
Sherman then got a letter from the Atlanta City Council, explaining the hardship of forcing the civilians to leave. To which Sherman replied again at length, including: You cannot qualify war in harsher terms than I will. War is cruelty, and you cannot refine it; and those who brought war into our country deserve all the curses and maledictions a people can pour out. … If the United States submits to a division now, it will not stop, but will go on until we reap the fate of Mexico, which is eternal war. The United States does and must assert its authority, wherever it once had power; for, if it relaxes one bit to pressure, it is gone. … The only way the people of Atlanta can hope once more to live in peace and quiet at home is to stop the war, which can only be done by admitting that it began in error and is perpetuated in pride.
 
You have heretofore read public sentiment in your newspapers that live by falsehood and excitement; and the quicker you seek for truth in other quarters, the better. … I myself have seen in Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee and Mississippi, hundreds and thousands of women and children fleeing your armies and desperadoes … Now that the war comes to you, you feel very different. You deprecate its horrors, but did not feel them when you sent car-loads of soldiers and ammunition, and molded shells and shot to carry war into Kentucky and Tennessee. …
 
We don’t want your Negros, or your horses, or your houses, or your lands, or anything you have, but we do want and will have a just obedience to the laws of the United States. That we will have, and, if it involves the destruction of your improvements, we cannot help it.
 
[SNAP!]
 
I have now started reading a General Lee biography.