Rating: 4/5

This is a long review because I have commented on each of the short stories in the collection. At the end of the many words I dip into my lurking fear that Katherine Anne Porter is going to become, for me, one of those religious southern writers. I am not a fan of religion so my bad attitude muddies my anticipation in spite of my initial delight with some of the stories written by this author. Feel free to skip towards the end if you would rather not hear about the stories one by one!

Maria Concepcion is said to be Porter's first published story, written in 1922 when she was 32 and dividing her time between NYC and Mexico. Can anyone talk about her politics and role as a feminist? She evidently preferred to avoid that label but she was one, right? Say more about Juan, GR friends. Are we supposed to take his character seriously? Isn't he just a foil for Maria? The humor pointed at the American archeologist is also interesting.

I have now read the second story, Virgin Violeta, and it does make me want to know more about the life of the author. Here we have the youthful but awakening sexuality of the younger sister that leaves her terrified by the Lothario-like older cousin. Reading Porter is such a delight. (Or is that simply because she is immediately following Faulkner?) Are all her male supporting actors rakish?

The Martyr is a romp to a gorging buffoon and it is mercifully short, a mere five pages. It is another view of unrequited love bringing ruination. Katherine Anne Porter’s indirect commentary about the color of good fortune being green and orange is inscrutable. I am reminded why I am so fond of many stories that are so brief: it can be a positive jolt, a ponderous thought or a sine qua non of a happy life. It can also be a total flop – but it does not really matter since you can be on to the next story with hardly a pause or struggle.
 
Magic is barely three pages and barely comprehensible. Can someone tell me what is the meaning here and what is the point of this story? It is a strangely told story of a conflict between a madam and a girl who worked in the house and was “well-liked by all the men who called.” There is a hex and “after that she lived there quietly.” I am sure as I read that there will be more said about this later but I am unsettled as I await some clarification as yet unoffered. But I set it aside and read on.

Rope is a loose loop of domestic life not quite neatly tied or carelessly bunched up as far as I can tell. The surprise is not that it has a happy ending or that some of the issues will certainly arise again with a new morning. Two pounds of coffee will carry them a stretch. There is a humor here that is common to social relationships in enclosed spaces. “She simply slowed down everything and made double work on the place with her insane habit of changing things around and hiding them.“ 

This is another short story with a very short title: He. We are in a different era from Porter’s early 20th century for dealing with people who are “differently abled”. But the personal issues for a poor family with a “special child” may not have changed that much. How we deal with people with disabilities is filled with controversy and trial and error and embarrassment. We have passed major laws in our lifetime to ease the lives of people like the family in the story. From what we know about her struggles with early life, Katherine Anne Porter must have been keenly sensitive about being different. This story reminds us that we have come a long way but still have a long way to go.
 
I wonder if the short story That Tree represents some kind of an actual goal that Porter imagined for herself as a successful writer? Living the life of ease as an artist resting under a tree in Mexico as the poet in this story daydreams. Writing bad poetry, it should be noted. “He never got to that tree he meant to lie down under. If he had, somebody would certainly have come around and collected rent for it, anyhow.” Although she had some success as a writer, she did not have real financial security until she sold the film rights to her book Ship of Fools in the 1960s.
 
The Jilting of Granny Weatherall is stream of consciousness writing at its very best and most appropriate for end-of-life mortal meanderings. It is about reviewing people from your life and mixing the past thoroughly with the present. My experiences with death have been very limited, mostly with people at an age that you expect to die, not too many too young. In spite of her age, I didn’t expect my mother to die and she sort of snuck out of the world on me. As I left her finally peacefully dead in the hospital bed, the obligatory minister reminded me that this would be the last time I would see her. She must have meant the last time I would see her body. I wonder if the eventual death of my father will likewise surprise me although at his going-on-ninety-four years our talk is filled with the verbal acknowledgement that he is approaching the close of life – even though it may be still several years away. So the passing of Granny seems real to me and a good reminder of a full life. I combined this short story with the viewing of a YouTube video interview with Katherine Anne Porter when she was eighty years old, the same age as Granny.
 
Flowering Judas is a short story of Mexico and revolution, a place and event both dear to Porter. It is about unrequited love and unrealized love. Laura is an American immersed in both types of love as well as the revolution. As an observer of the Mexican revolution, KAP soaked up the details. Although she did not consider herself a snoop or prying, her apparently casual intake of people and places always informed her writing. She was not prolific by any means but she could pack a lot of detail into a short story. I always wonder how one title is selected for the front cover of a collection of short stories. Did KAP have a special relationship with this particular story – or was the book title choice made by the publisher? “Judas Tree is a common name for a flowering tree, Cercis siliquastrum, from which Judas Iscariot is reputed to have hanged himself.” (Wikipedia) An entire book edited by Virginia Spencer Carr, part of the “Women Writers: Text and Context” series, titled Flowering Judas is likely as complete a source for this story as you will find. 
 
The final two stories in this book are considerably longer than the others, what KAP might have called “long stories”. The Cracked Looking-Glass is about a May-December marriage, something with which I have personal experience. If you are Irish you might especially like this story. Given Porter’s evidently constant search for love and companionship, I wonder how much here is autobiographical.
 
Hacienda  revolves around the filming of a movie about change and the Mexican revolution. We are taken into the mindset of “being three quite superior persons of the intellectual caste of the ruling race at large” in a country of inferiors. We have a foreshadowing of the superiority of the ugly Americans of the later decades courtesy of Katherine Anne Porter. The combination of Hollywood and revolution and traditional Mexican sensibilities about the image of their country make for fascinating dynamics and an undercurrent of humor that has something of an approach to slapstick. The rustic setting of the ancient native cultural making of pulque, Mexican beer, at the hacienda is the backdrop with graft, a shooting death involving one of the actors and infidelity being some of the spice of the story.
 
This book has made me want to get to know more about Katherine Anne Porter. One way that I have already tried is with the casebook Flowering Judas mentioned earlier in this review. Another book that is still on tap for me is the KAP biography  Katherine Anne Porter: A Life . This book has gotten mixed reviews but the best thing to be said about it may be that it deals with the author honestly. KAP seems, at first glance, to be a hard author to pin down with facts. To put it too bluntly, she was a liar. She made up stories about herself. She stretched the truth. Now, I may have to modify some of this bluntness as I learn more about Porter, but she does seem like a bit of a chameleon. Did she have a screw loose? I wonder. The GR intro to the biography says, in part:
 My life has been incredible, Katherine Anne Porter used to say, "I don't believe a word of it." Author of the best-selling novel, Ship of Fools, winner of the Pulitzer Prize and the National Book Award for her short stories, Porter was both the first lady of American letters and a woman whose indomitable will forged a life that, as biographer Joan Givner makes clear, was not only incredible but may have been her most creative fiction of all.
Generally, I am not a fan of writers who lean on religion. I am afraid that Katherine Anne Porter has a pretty thick substratum of religiosity. I mostly enjoyed the short stories in this book at a relatively superficial level. As I dug deeper into some of her longer stories I was not particularly enamored about what I found. In “Flowering Judas” you do not have to dig at all to see the hallmarks of Christianity. I have her book  The Collected Stories  so expect to experience more of her “longer” stories as I delve into her life and work. I am giving this book of short stories, her first, 3.5 stars and rounding it up to four because her religiosity has not beaten me over the head. Yet. But I have my hardhat ready.