Rating: 4/5

Dark Hunger by Christine Feehan - 4
Juliette saves Riordan from a laboratory. He recognizes her as his lifemate and flees with her through the forest, not realizing she's a jaguar shifter. Her and her kind have been hunted by jaguar males, raped and tortured. A lot of hot sex scenes with the usual Carpathian conversion. Nice read, great introduction to the jaguar shifters and seeing strong powerful woman.

Awaiting Moonrise by Maggie Shayne - 4
Jenny is a Professor searching for an undiscovered animal, but finds a werewolf. She wants to study, and provide proof of her findings. Samuel's family has been cursed but his attraction to Jenny and her accidental discovery of what he was means he has to put his faith in her not to ruin his life. With all of that someone is destroying the evidence she has gathered and she has a creepy, snoopy Professor on her team. Okay read, I think I would have liked more development, but that's not always easy to do with a short story.

The Night Owl by Emma Holly - 4
Some small editing issues. She's a pastry chef, he's an upyr. He and his friend purchased the inn next to Mariann's bakery. He's been attracted to her for a long time but is portrayed as shy and unsure of approaching her. That portrayal of Bastien didn't really fit, when later he's described as being a candidate to lead and run a pack, and his ruthless behavior in trying to save his friend. I did like this couple, and their chemistry was very steamy.

Seduction's Gift by Angela Knight - 4
A different take on Arthur, his knights and Merlin. Merlin and Nemue are aliens/fae who came to earth, selecting Arhur and his nights to drink from Merlin's Cup to change them. Either the original or descendants of those who've drank from Merlin's cup, changing men into vampire Champions of the earth and women into Majae. Those descendants who are deemed worthy of the gift, have their powers unleashed through sex. Grace has turned her back on them all not wanting the Gift after they refused her mother. She's now a police officer in the realworld Earth plane. Lancelot is a seducer and assassin, sent to awaken Grace's gift. She's had a crush on Lancelot since she first met him as a young girl. Those descendants not chosen are often neglected, however when necessary they are placed in a Sanctuary to protect and care for them. There's a ton of information and world building/explanation packed into this short, while still delivering Lancelot and Grace's story. Grace is needed to fight the upcoming evil, Lancelot must not fail or her grandmother might order her gang raped to trigger her gift. Their heat ensures it's going to happen, a fun reading, but ending was a bit too quick wrapped.