Rating: 4/5

I had a few false starts with this book but once I got going it developed for me and became a really good read. It was very surprising, intimate, intriguing, meaty and rewarding.

There are a few layers to the book. It poses an immediate question, why did the relationship that developed from mentor - mentee, to fellow writer - friendship dissolve? The book is about a 35 year relationship that suddenly turned bad but it is also about the writing process, a biography of the lives of two men, their illnesses, struggles, successes and relationships. What are the privileges of being a writer?

Theroux meets Naipaul in Uganda whilst teaching and they go on road trips around Africa which Theroux loves but Naipaul hates. Naipaul is 9 years his senior when they meet in Africa and is already a success whereas Theroux is just starting out on his writing journey. Naipaul is blind to Africa, and in one notable scene awards a special prize in an African literary contest.

Naipaul is at once racist, shocking, and thoughtful. Naipaul makes embittered sometimes funny cutting remarks. Everyone other than Naipaul seems to be an infie or (infidel), he never pays for dinner. Although the book is cutting at times Theroux’s portrait is also full of admiration and ardour for Naipaul's writing and guidance. Lest we forget what a difficult, malevolent, unforgiving, changeable, cruel, selfish, misogynist Naipaul is who hates music strangely enough. For example Theroux always pays the bills at restaurants Naipaul despite earning more never offers as if he is pulling rank on Theroux. Theroux also seeks to explain this behaviour. Naipaul is an exile, isolated, insecure and this is what manifests his defensive personality. Theroux values Naipaul's encouragement and guidance alas the apprentice who surpasses the master must be put in his place.

There is a lunch with Antonia Fraser and other writers, an African adventure, a portrait of Naipaul’s long suffering wife Pat, a sweet, kind, forgiving lady who suffers daily emotional abuse whilst Naipaul conducts affairs not so much behind her back. Paul omits the reasons for the falling apart of his own marriage and Naipaul characteristically ignores his pain during the separation. Theroux's criticism of Naipaul’s brother's writing sounds a bit like jealousy, not of his work but relationship with Naipaul.

There is so much in this book. It helped that I am a fan of Paul’s travel writing and aspects of his character but it is also a book about what it means to be a writer and the writing life.