Rating: 3/5

This took a while to read. It's a hard read morally, and I was wary to enjoy it too much. (If you did not finish this book for moral reasons I find that commendable - something I usually don't for a book.) I think in the end, Updike was playing with us a bit. He turns the table on "you, dear reader" in this novel, especially in the last chapter. He tricks us to think we are observing, only finding out later we are participating. By taking advantage of our propensity for the salacious, he gives us time to realize we aren't much better than the flawed main character. This reveal also takes a turn as the redemption, the unveiling of who he is and who we are in our basest and most selfish desires and doubts. You don't like the character, but you are interested in where his course will take him.

The book is overty sexual. Overbearingly so in many cases. Details of sexual encounters, down to sometimes obscure sensory details, are graphic. I think Updike saw value in doing so. The occurances often come off as juvenile, revealing the sex addicted stunted nature of his main character. And he is indeed a sex addict. He slums boredom and apathy when not on some sexual hunt (or trapped in the confinment of the treatment center), but finds himself full of life in his illicit sexual exploits and pursuits.

Tom Marshfield, a doubting Thomas if ever there was one, also gives sermons throughout his stay at the reform vacaction he is put under. These are full of both cynicism and bright insight. He's aware of his shortcomings, but takes the arrogant tone of one who seemingly doesn't care. There's almost a forcefulness for us to accept it, but no repentance or sorrow on what is occuring. The hypocricy in his doubts and how they are the result, not the cause, of his sexaul dysfunction doesn't hit him. How his adoration of the sexual is a perversion of what should rightfull be adored. Although the author hints maybe he is aware. The narrator can't untangle the two, it's a complex mess, but that is demonstrating the larger issue Updike may have been paying homage to: we ourselves have corrupted adoration of God in exchanged for sex. Like the character, our loss of moral clarity has left us lost; it's hard to find the way out. Updike did a remarkable job capturing the character and dilemma, but like the adoration issue, it's hard to untangle the insightful from the salacious, so hence the 3 stars.