Rating: 5/5

The gods of fate smiled down on them, proud of their labor. They knew that nothing good came from hasty labor. Perfection took time. Patient and diligently, they had built this link between two souls, molding it and shaping it, forging it with trials and tribulations, tempering it with pain and anguish, until it was a link so strong and powerful that nothing in heaven, hell-or anything in between-could ever break it.

 I am not crying. Your crying. Okay, Whoo. That was a bit of a wild ride. 

 I do know one thing: a hundred times over, this book can’t be compared to  Gone With The Wind. It is all by itself. 

 Desiree, is a female herione that would make Scarlett O’Hara scream in frustration. I found her so fierce and loyal. She is hardworking and passionate. I cannot tell you how much I love her. 

 Jason Montgomery would make Rhett Butler not even want to say “Frankly my dear, I don’t give a damn.” He is strong and brave. His pride and grace is what makes him a man in the eyes of Desiree. He is a true hero. 

 Remember Scarlett O’Hara hated the Yankee’s and nursing the wounded men? Desiree doesn’t. She nurses both Union and Confederate soldiers. She even rides through enemy battle lines just to bring her wounded husband home. 
 Suddenly Desiree was ash end of herself. She had come to nurse the Confederate wounded, not once giving a though to the Union wounded. Now, looking over the scene before her, she realized that the wounded and dying wore no uniforms. They were simply human beings in pain. No, in this room another battle was being fought, one even more ancient than war: the age-old battle of man to prevail over suffering and death. And she wanted to be apart of it.

 Desiree finds it hard to love Jason: he is a Yankee. She doesn’t even know if he loves her. I was so glad to watch them work out their relationship together-unlike Scarlett and Rhett. 

 The war takes place in the South in New Orleans. Desiree lives there after she has no place to turn to, and she comes to marry Jason after she is forced to become a mans mistress due to violating a law. 

 The cast of characters is really diverse and amazing. You feel like you also know them as well. 

 Eventually, the war comes to a close. Jason and Desiree fall in love all over again. And we come to see a epilogue, where they are still together, even in old age.

 This is a very good book. I won’t forget it.