Rating: 1/5

Read for Summer Reading Challenge 2018 - July Reads Sand Between My Toes: Read a book that takes place in or around a beach/ocean.

I've been having trouble with these books ever since the kids grew up to make loads of bad decisions. I literally catch myself cringing as I read. I mean, Demelza and Ross would periodically annoy me with their romantic soap-opera nonsense but nothing compares to Jeremy and Clowance's romance partners. Reading it sometimes makes my skin crawl. Why must we reduce me to the proverbial tween screaming at the heroine in a horror movie to run out the front door instead of darting up the stairs?

I mean, did the author genuinely expect me to rejoice at Clowance's capitulation? In their case it seems to me to be a purely lust based relationship, especially when she's turning a blind eye to all of his misdeeds (and even going so far as to claim she doesn't want to know what's in his past---um, I'm pretty sure you ought to want to know considering the lies he's told you). 

I cannot stand Stephen Carrington. He turns my stomach. Every time he's on the page I just want to put the book down and never pick it up again. 

As for Jeremy's creepy obsession coupled with the way he baits Cuby when he's hurt and angry... plus his impulsive descent into highway robbery when jilted... Yeesh. Admittedly my feelings towards Jeremy are likely influenced by the true-crime books I read and forensic programs I watch which (hopefully) will have no bearing on this period Napoleonic soap opera. 

While I am generally ambivalent towards Valentine, I did quite like the thrust of the knife at the end--both with his marriage and then his being upfront with his wife about his future intentions. Goes to show one shouldn't be so dismissive of a gambling wastrel with expensive tastes. I think it's interesting that both George Warleggan and the former Mrs Selina Pope made that same mistake. While I suppose it may be unfair to compare her to George as I am unsure what Selina's true intentions were, if she just wanted a young, merry husband to make up for the old jealous one or if she thought that this was a young man, presumably besotted with her that she could control (and who was bound to inherit the Warleggan fortune). Nice one, Valentine. Guess we'll find out just how like Joshua Poldark he will prove to be.

 Otherwise I enjoy the history of the time and I'm still waiting to see what will happen to Geoffrey Charles. 

Sigh. On to the next one...