Rating: 5/5

I got turned on to this because John Adams said it was really influential for him. It's a really entertaining read- it's fresh and unpredictable. Cage is nothing if not consistent: he writes experimentally, weird typesetting, chance operations, and all. I came out of reading this being interested in listening to chance music.

In my opinion, Cage's whole "deal" pretty much boils down to Zen. Cage himself is a little timid about saying this, because he recognizes that Zen is a product of a culture he doesn't belong to, and going around saying that he's mastered Zen isn't the kind of thing he would do. But you can tell he knows that not saying "Zen" is just dancing around what he's trying to say.

Musically, he works with sound and chance. He is interested in making music with a wider variety of sounds. This means "non-musical" noises and silence, too. In particular, he wants to interrogate the habit of judging sounds as pleasant or unpleasant, and investigate the possibility of simply being mindful of the present sound.

It's possible to use a wider gamut of noises in compositions without using chance. But to be truly "experimental", Cage insists that the composer give up on the illusion of total control over the performance, and directly incorporate chance. I think this is crucial to Cage's "deal". The point of an experimental piece would not be to show off one's mastery of a technique; the point would be to find out what it would be like to hear new sounds.

I have to bring in Italo Calvino here. Cage does mention his experimental literary group  by name. Here is Calvino in The Uses of Literature, talking about Ernst Gombrich's theory of combinatorial play in art:

"At a certain moment things click into place, and one of the combinations obtained—through the combinatorial mechanism itself, independently of any search for meaning or effect on any other level—becomes charged with an unexpected meaning or unforeseen effect which the conscious mind would not have arrived at deliberately..."

Just as Oulipian constraints are designed to create unanticipated structures and patterns in literature, Cage's works do the same for music. But this doesn't get us all the way to chance music: why can't we just use chance during the composition process, then use the written result to produce a deterministic (if random-sounding) performance?
- A stage manager once told me it was a known principle of theater that the eye is immediately drawn to whatever onstage doesn't appear to be controlled by the cast and crew. Think about this the next time you're at the theater and there's a dog, or a baby, or an audience member onstage.
- My old violin professor used to ask us if live performances were preferable to sufficiently high-fidelity recordings, and if so why. She never gave us her answer; she just genuinely wanted to know what we would say. I remember saying something along the lines of "because they could mess up".
- There's a moment in the musical "The Drowsy Chaperone" where an unexpected onstage noise renders a pivotal piece of dialogue inaudible and therefore ambiguous between two different meanings: "live while you can" or "love while you can". It's basically an argument for live theater.

There's a few other possible ways to explain why chance in performance is so important to Cage. 
-You listen more mindfully to things that you know have not been predetermined (think how different a Cage piece would feel if you thought it was deterministic)
-It's the only way to capture that feeling of newness with every performance; the work would be a different work without that feeling
-It ensures you keep exploring further into the space of possible new sounds

I think it's probably important to address whether or not Cage is "pretentious". I would say no. He's pretty clear that thinking of music in the way he does ought to democratize it in some sense:

"QUESTION: But seriously, if this is what music is, I could write it as well as you.
ANSWER: Have I said anything that would lead you to think I thought you were stupid?"

Anyone can produce sounds, and those sounds join a soundscape that enters into our stream of consciousness. It doesn't take a genius to make sounds people can enjoy; it's for everyone. Cage actually uses the word "anarchy" a couple of times to describe the future of music. Maybe alongside Cage and Calvino we could put Feyerabend as their counterpart in science (cf. "there is only one principle that can be defended under all circumstances and in all stages of human development. It is the principle: anything goes" from Against Method).

Another charge I think might get leveled at Cage is that he is some kind of rigid ideologue who wants to ban Bach and Beethoven. He does make some provocative statements about how the greats are "useless" now. But really they're just unhelpful to his project, and his project is not everything.

"This also need not arouse alarm, for the coming into being of something new does not by that fact deprive what was of its proper place. Each thing has its own place, never takes the place of something else; and the more things there are, as is said, the merrier."

This also might go some part of the way to answering another question I had about Cage: if he wants to "democratize" or make "anarchic" music, then why should we fund a Center for Experimental Music for him to have a sinecure? Perhaps it's because there is some scholarship involved in making new things that juxtapose usefully or interestingly with what is already known.

Cage also definitely does not want to ban other music. He's having fun, and all he can do is point you in the direction he's facing. It's so crucial to underscore just how much what he's doing is about enjoying life, having fun, or having a sense of humor.

"If you don't like it you may choose to avoid it. But if you avoid it that's a pity, because it resembles life very closely, and life and it are essentially a cause for joy."

If it isn't clear, I think there's something very deep going on here involving a connection between the embrace of randomness and the good life.