Rating: 4/5

Yes, this was a cute, funny, sexy romantic comedy set in the regency era and it's filled with the most witty and engaging dialogue between the main characters. There was no great angst and all of the OTT drama was just a laugh out loud riot of good times ! The story is based on the old marriage of convenience that's caused by an ill timed and rather silly compromising situation. The MC's managed to bungle the situation so badly that they had no choice but to get married. They met each other for the first time after the heroine Jennie got her dress caught up in an animal trap. The H Christopher ( hereafter referred to as Kit ) is the new Earl of Bourne and he's a charming, rascally type of sexy H. Kit is unaware that Jennie is the daughter of his neighbour, Sir Maitland and ( like all rascally sexy rogues tend to do ) he gives the heroine her first passionate kiss during this encounter. Later, when he meets her at her father's manor for dinner, he bungles the situation by exclaiming:

  “You!” loudly exclaimed the earl, fairly goggling at the girl as the very air between them suddenly began to crackle.

Kasey Michaels. The Beleaguered Lord Bourne (Kindle Locations 246-247). Harlequin. Kindle Edition. 

The silly but cute and fiery tempered heroine makes the situation even worse and compromises them further by opening her mouth and responding in such a way as to leave the bystanders with little doubt that these two have already met. Later on, after Sir Maitland has a temper tantrum and threatens the H to do the right thing and propose to Jennie, the H behaves like a sullen little boy himself:

  “You may as well have gone traipsing over the countryside ringing a bell, calling: ‘Kit Wilde kissed me in the Home Wood; Kit Wilde kissed me in—’”

Kasey Michaels. The Beleaguered Lord Bourne (Kindle Locations 269-270). Harlequin. Kindle Edition. 

I read this novel in just a few hours because it was that entertaining. The H is only 28 yrs old and a former soldier who suffers from mild PTSD nightmares. However, Kit's not the broody and ill tempered type of grunty hero. He's a happy go lucky type of guy who had been looking forward to his days as a rich titled bachelor during the London season; in fact he had already been planning on all the liaisons he'd be having with all the opera singers, actresses and ladies of the demimonde. It was so funny how sad he was when he realized that all his carefree and randy bachelor plans will have to end because of his marriage to the heroine. But, what I liked about Kit the most was the way he rolled with the punches; instead of whining like a brat, he always looked at the upside. In this situation, the upside was that his new young bride ( who hadn't yet had her debut season in London ) was beautiful and turned him on more than any other woman he'd ever met before. 

Jennie was a splendid and brave young heroine. She had a big witty mouth and didn't let anything faze her. Her companion Miss Bundy and her clumsy, useless maid Goldie were also fabulous additional characters. The MC's are a bit young and don't know how to go about acting like a proper Earl and Countess but Kit is chivalrous and tells Jennie that he wouldn't expect her to share his bed until they get to know each other better. This was really hard for Kit to do because he's always horny around his new wife:

There's a lot of funny misunderstandings that provide even greater avenues for laughter in this story. One of these is the fact that Jennie sees Kit with a couple of courtesans on 2 occasions. First of all, I must state ( for prospective readers ) that Kit does not cheat on Jennie with these women. In fact, he is always bemoaning the fact that he is unable to feel any sexual desire when he is around these other women. The only reason Kit ends up around these courtesans is because he spends too much time with his rakish bachelor friends and those 2 guys are usually in the company of such women. On the second occasion, at the opera, Jennie walks into Kit's friend's opera box and boldly confronts the courtesan called Yvette La Fontaine. Poor silly Kit isn't even enjoying himself and is bored with the way Yvette is hanging all over his arm:

  While Kit sat mute in his seat, variously wishing it were Jennie who sat by his side and wondering if it might still be possible to rejoin his regiment and die a heroic death in action,

Kasey Michaels. The Beleaguered Lord Bourne (Kindle Locations 1645-1646). Harlequin. Kindle Edition. 

Jennie doesn't know he's miserable and wishing that he was with her, instead of with his stupid friends and their whores. She's mad because she thinks he's cheating on her and so she decides to go and have a little talk with the whore Yvette; the courtesan/actress isn't even French and can't even speak that language. There's a fabulous and comic scene that follows when Jennie speaks to the woman in French and realizes this; the heroine takes advantage of the situation to insult the courtesan in French:

  Jennie clapped her hands in seeming delight. 

“Quite right, mademoiselle!” she thrilled. Then leaning down more closely to the seated woman, Jennie delivered the coup de grace. 

“Mademoiselle,” she said almost gently, “savez-vous que vous aver le nez d’un cochon?”

Kasey Michaels. The Beleaguered Lord Bourne (Kindle Locations 1695-1697). Harlequin. Kindle Edition. 

I cheered for the heroine as the scene continued:

  It did not help Ozzy’s sensibilities overmuch either when La Fontaine, totally uncomprehending that Lady Bourne had just remarked that the actress had the nose of a pig, only smiled vacantly and said, “Merci, madame,” before sitting back complacently to push at the curls in her elaborate coiffure. 

“Minx,” Kit whispered in his wife’s ear as he decided the farce had gone on long enough and it was more than time someone with some sense took charge of the situation.

Kasey Michaels. The Beleaguered Lord Bourne (Kindle Locations 1700-1703). Harlequin. Kindle Edition. 

All of the sex that occurs in this novel happens in fade to black scenes but that didn't spoil anything for me because there was a lot of more wonderful developments to read about. There's a crazy cast of misfit minor characters who happen to be the new servants that Jennie decides to hire. The heroine has a soft heart for needy folks and so she hires 3 former thieves, twin 40 something yr old out of work actresses, a pregnant unemployed teenaged maid, a moody chef called Montague and 2 former circus employees ( a 7 foot tall black guy and a dwarf ). This cast of misfits provide much zany entertainment because of all the stuff they get up to. Kit was a great H and a husband because he allowed Jennie to keep these unsuitable employees and that showed just how much of an adoring and kind husband he was becoming. The misfit employees end up helping the H when it's time to save Jennie after she's been kidnapped by an evil former friend Kit's. The entire rescue scene was a barrel of laughs for this reader and the villains definitely got more than adequate punishment. I enjoyed the lighthearted atmosphere of this story. It's fun to read a novel that keeps a smile on my face at all times - even the 2 scenes where Jennie spies Kit talking to the courtesans ! The author is able to take scenes that would otherwise be filled with pain and angst and turn them into great screwball comedy and I loved it ! I especially enjoyed all the scenes with the misfit employees because it was so humorous to read the way the author wrote their Cockney dialogue. The epilogue is filled with happiness and family time as the MC's are visiting Jennie's dad and the latter is ecstatic to have his little grandson Christopher to cuddle and spoil:

  SIR CEDRIC MAITLAND was in his glory, dandlying his grandson Christopher on his knee while his proud parents looked on fondly. 

“Do you like that, Christopher?” the man asked the toothless, smiling infant. “One day soon I’ll take you riding to hounds with me.” 

“What?” Kit asked, feigning shock. “With your disky heart?” 

“What disky heart?” his father-in-law blustered before ducking his head sheepishly. “Oh, that. I was only funning with you, son, didn’t you know?” 

“I knew,” Kit answered softly, lifting his wife’s hand to his lips. Sir Cedric relaxed and decided to take credit for his daughter’s happy marriage. 

“You’d have gotten around to marrying my baby girl sooner or later. I just helped things along a bit.”

Kasey Michaels. The Beleaguered Lord Bourne (Kindle Locations 2507-2513). Harlequin. Kindle Edition. 

This is definitely a novel that will be on my read again list because it made me laugh and it's got all the best things that one expects in a romantic comedy. I also look forward to reading the novel with Jennie's hoyden cousin Lucy and her boorish, snobby hero in The Toplofty Lord Thorpe.