Rating: 1/5

This story reads a bit like a modern day Beauty and the Beast. Layne is a beautiful and confident 26 year old journalist. She has wonderful, loving adopted parents but has always wanted to know where she came from. Her 8 year search for her birth mother takes her to a ranch in rural Nebraska. Layne finds Mattie and without letting her know her true identity, takes a job as a ranch hand despite having no experience. Brusque and distant Creed Dawson is the co-owner of the ranch who Mattie falls hard for. Now in a complete change to our usual handsome leading men Creed is described many times as 'homely',in fact Layne physically recoils from him on their first meeting. He apparently has a good body though. This could have been a wonderful heartwarming story except for one thing. Our leading man is not a beast hiding a kind and gentle personality. He is quite simply a jerk, in fact I don t think I have actively disliked a leading man as much as him. There is an incident where Layne is harassed by a couple of youths in town one night. When Layne goes to Creeds table in the diner so he can offer her some protection he throws her under the bus by claiming he doesn t know her. I mean what a pig, I was so furious reading this that I nearly didn t finish the book. For the life of me I cannot understand what Layne sees in him. He has no redeeming qualities at all and he has a massive chip on his shoulder. I really liked Layne as a character,
she treats everyone with respect and has a good attitude and strong work ethic. Despite having no previous experience working on a ranch, she works hard and never complains. I did wander how someone who had no experience horse riding could pick it up so quickly .I found some bits a little unrealistic. Farming is physically very hard work and yet after the first week Layne seemed to have mastered it without a hitch. Another thing that annoyed me is that neither Mattie or Creed ever praise Layne on the good job she is doing or the fact she picked it up so quickly. The other 2 farm hands Hoyt and Stoney, are the only people to treat Layne with any kindness at all. I realize this book was published in the early 1980s,so it is terribly dated in parts. For example despite the fact Layne is employed as a farm hand same as the other 2 men, it is expected that she be the one to help Mattie clear up after the meal and do the dishes, sexist much? and the smoking, so much smoking even at the table yuck. I must admit I don t miss that in todays books. When Mattie finds out that Layne has been hiding her true identity from her she lets rip in one of the vitriol attacks I have ever heard. I understand it must have been a shock finding out she was Laynes biological mother but she says the cruelest things to poor Layne, she even states she wishes she never had her. I mean what the hell? She then gives the poor girl an hour to leave her house. I felt so sorry for Layne but in her typically warm hearted way she forgives both Mattie and Creed. This awful pair don t deserve her. Matties apology is wishy washy at best, also Laynes beautiful adopted Mum contacts her with makes me wonder if Mattie would have come after her if she hadn t. Layne accepts Creeds unromantic proposal before he barely gets the words out. I just wish Layne had made both Creed and Mattie suffer more before she forgave them. This book sends out an awful message. Its demeaning to women and seems to think as in Creeds case, it is ok to treat people like crap just because you have your own hang ups and insecurities. This book got 1 star for me just because of poor Layne. A tough read.