Rating: 4/5

Here's another book that screws with the grading curve. If you look at other 4-star reads—Frankenstein, for example—there's no way poor VC Andrews can measure up. Yet my verdict stands...four shiny stars, the sign of a book I plan to keep around, &amp; I'm not ashamed to admit it. (Don't look, Mary Shelley.)

The first section deals with Heaven's life as “hillbilly scum” in the West Virginia mountains. Abandoned by their stepmother &amp; ignored by their asshole father Luke, teenage Heaven &amp; her brother Tom struggle to provide for their younger siblings &amp; near-crippled grandfather. I enjoyed this portion quite a bit—a sort of Special Victims Unit meets Boxcar Children mashup of melodrama that climaxes when their worthless father decides to sell his kids for $500 each. Blinded by rage &amp; ignorance, Heaven chooses to escape with a yuppie couple—&amp; so begins the second section featuring Heaven, Kitty, &amp; Cal.

Kitty is another hillbilly refugee, &amp; she plans to train Heaven as a revenge trophy against Luke, who knocked her up when she was Heaven's age. Kitty is an abusive, shrill cougar; she's also more than a little OCD, demanding fresh linens every day, color-coded towels, etc. All this wouldn't be so bad except she delights in abusing Heaven at every opportunity, whether verbally, physically, or mentally. But for all her flaws, Kitty is somewhat sympathetic. She really doesn't know how to love someone properly; she really does think she's doing Heaven a service by dragging her from the mountainside &amp; plopping her into daughterly servitude. In Kitty's eyes, anything is better than being a hill-scum whore.

It's a twisted, if understandable, point of view—as opposed to Cal, her sad sack o’ beta husband (a type all too common in the VC Universe). Of course it's not long before this transparent milksop turns his attention to Kitty's adopted daughter. Heaven, for her part, knows sex with Cal must be wrong...but she's so desperate for fatherly love that she allows him to seduce her with his wishy-washy ways. Cal's seduction is probably the most sinister aspect of the book; it's creepy &amp; sad that Heaven is so inexperienced &amp; desperate for love that she allows that kind of affection. It's abuse that's veiled by the abuser &amp; victim both, which is equal parts disturbing &amp; fascinating. 

…In short, it’s classic VCA at her finest: OTT family melodrama + light gothic touches + OMGWTF moments sprinkled throughout. It’s also one of VCA’s best books, period; if you’re looking to dip your toe into this breed of classic soapy schlock, HEAVEN is a good place to begin. (Yeah, I know FLOWERS is generally considered the original VCA masterwork, but the Casteel saga is a much better story overall. So there. 😶)