Why I chose to read this book:
1. this was one of the first books that I added to my WTR list since I love learning about various microhistories; and,
2. June 2023 is my "Nonfiction Month"!

Praises:
1. I thought that author Mark Kurlansky included several interesting facts about salt, the only edible rock, especially about how nations thrived from the use of salt, and how salt taxes sometimes brought about revolutions;
2. informative maps, photos and illustrations were interspersed throughout the book; and,
3. I enjoyed the mention of the folktale Dear as Salt. A lovely retelling is written by Rafe Martin.

Niggles:
1. the writing was very repetitive and, at times, confusing! Seems like every culture and/or country that needed salt processed it the same way, with a few technological tweaks here and there. It often digressed and felt disorganized. Sometimes, chapters were left hanging;
2. portions of this book were devoted to cod fishing and/or the Basques, often not even mentioning salt! When I realized that this author also wrote books titled Cod: A Biography of the Fish that Changed the World and The Basque History of the World: The Story of a Nation, I got the feeling that Kurlansky borrowed information from them to pad up this book;
3. I wasn't expecting so many recipes! Although some were interesting in a historical way, others barely mention salt as a vital ingredient; and,
4. I was; however, expecting to read about cultural superstitions involving salt. Explanations about why it's bad luck to spill salt and the reasoning behind throwing salt over one's left shoulder would have been compelling to read about, even a nod towards da Vinci's painting "The Last Supper" alluding to the symbolism behind the overturned salt cellar near Judas Iscariot's elbow. This should have made an honorable mention.

Overall Thoughts:
I hate to abandon a book, especially since I was so invested to read it! But when I began to dread picking it up and found myself nodding off after reading a couple of paragraphs, I had to admit to myself that life is too short, and that I had to move on. Very disappointed that it just wasn't for me. 
DNF at 65%.