Rating: 3/5

Monica Dickens's book suffers from being neither fish nor fowl, neither ‘a novel’ nor ‘a memoir’. In fact it is difficult to understand quite what it is and, hence, why she wrote it. Certainly, writing the book and recalling her days as a junior reporter on a small provincial newspaper will have given her a great deal of pleasure, and I’m sure she enjoyed doing so. But that doesn’t necessarily mean we, the reader, gain just as much pleasure.

If Dickens intended it to be a novel, My Turn To Make The Tea is - this might sound harsh, but it has to be said - far, far too amorphous: where’s ‘the story’, what is ‘the plot’, what are ‘its themes’? The book meanders far too much here and there, and for a novel there would be far, far too much of what simply has no place in it.

So was Dickens writing a memoir? In that case, much of the detail is justified and often entertaining, but as a memoir it is simply far too long as well as too disjointed. Almost any part of her account as memoir could be taken and presented as a 1,000 feature - it might even make a series, highlighting different aspects of the job and her working life. But in such a book a great deal of it - that which constitutes the ‘novel’ elements would again simply have no place. And if she did intend to writer a memoir, why fictionalise most of it, even though I’m sure here characters are straightforward portrayals of people she encountered?

On the plus side Dickens has an easy style and can certainly write well and clearly, and she often has a neat turn of phrase, but overall that simply cannot compensate for what I regard as its, almost fatal, weakness, its lack of a definite identity. Possibly, given that it was first published in 1951, one should take into account that the world and reading public of almost 70 years ago simply wanted a different kind of book. Who knows?

I, too worked on small papers like Dickens, although almost 25 years after she did (so by then we did have typewriters) and the division of labour was different. We reporters didn't have to read proofs and or news and feature copy was subbed by a sub-editor and the editor.

Yet a great deal of Dickens’ account rings true: the parish council meetings, making sure you did not miss the last bus to get back in from the sticks, reporting the results of garden festivals, writing up accounts of weddings whose details were supplied on forms, golden weddings (‘what’s the secret of a happy marriage?’, ‘give and take’ - if I had a pound for every time I was told that and used the quote in a story), attending annual dinners, court reporting, council reporting, the fact that because we were working on a weekly paper most, if not all of, our work was often mundane to the nth degree - but then that was what the readers wanted, as the book’s editor says: they don’t want change, they want the cosily familiar.

 I did move on - to an evening, then a morning paper, and I spent the last 28 years of my 'career' working on what were once known as 'Fleet Street' newspapers, though none has been based in Fleet Street for many years, and for the past decade the internet (which allows me to write and have published globally my views of the book) is killing off newspapers in double-click time - circulations are plummeting.

Ordinarily I would give Dickens’s book two stars, but she gets three because she does have a gift for writing and her lively, often a little satirical style does entertain. But the book does suffer: what is it, a novel or a memoir. In fact, it is neither.