Rating: 4/5

Many of us are walking around with “toxic” shame, which is baggage that we’re carrying from our childhood. This book is about getting rid of that baggage so that you can develop fully as a human. A fully developed human acts with humility, aka “healthy” shame. A fully functional adult has enough self-esteem to maintain the boundaries that are necessary to have a healthy intimate relationship with another person.
 
A functional adult feels and can express healthy shame. When a functional adult acts imperfectly, the person feels vulnerable, embarrassed and humble. The have a sense of humility. The person thinks: Well, no one’s perfect. I’m human. I forgive myself, and I still love myself. They have faith in themselves. If they are religious, they might try to let the grace of God be with them, to accept a higher power or tell themselves: God doesn’t make mistakes, this is how they were meant to be. Functional adults in some way seek the serenity to accept the things they cannot change, the courage to change the things they can change and the wisdom to know the difference.
 
The dysfunctional adult does not feel and express healthy shame, but rather tends to act in the extreme as a result of “toxic” shame. They wobble back and forth between thinking that they are either (1) worthless (less than human) or (2) grandiose (better than human), between feeling (1) too vulnerable or (2) invulnerable (aka narcissistic, entitled, exploitative, arrogant). They (1) feel bad about themselves to the point of self-detestation or, (2) through the delusion of perfectionism, believe they can always be “good,” can always do what they “should” do. They may be (1) too dependent on others, or (2) not able to recognize or admit that they have any needs at all. They may (1) spew out thoughts and emotions or (2) be walled in and unable to express their intimate thoughts. They may be (1) childish and immature or (2) overly mature, rigid and controlling. As explained below, this is because they were (1) a wounded child until about age 5, and then they became (2) an adapted wounded child after age 5, and they continue as adults to be guided by their “inner child.”
 
Healthy, authentic children display the following attributes: (1) vulnerability, (2) nascent reason—seeking to understand reality with intelligence, honesty and curiosity, (3) dependence, (4) age-appropriate immaturity and (5) exuberant energy. Adults are often dysfunctional because these attributes were squelched when they were children. This may happen because the child was disempowered or falsely empowered. Disempowerment can result from overt or covert shame. An example of overt shame is a parent who always gives his children from a very early age a message something like: “What’s wrong with you? Stop crying, be quiet, take care of yourself, why can’t you just grow up and behave?” Covert shame is a parent who doesn’t explicitly say any of these things, but subtly nudges a child toward believing these kinds of things through “positive” reinforcement when a child does what the child “should” be doing. False empowerment can come from a parent who is too dependent on a child, and the parent and child become enmeshed is a co-dependent relationship; or a child who needs to rebel and get in trouble in order to get attention from the parents.
 
Dysfunctional adults don’t know how to feel and express all their emotions, so feelings of sadness, fear, guilt and shame, may just come out as anger or contempt. The dysfunctional couple constantly bickers, but the things they are bickering about are not the true source of their feelings. These fights get triggered by one partner doing something that makes the other partner feel the toxic shame that the other partner felt as a child. It triggers the feelings that the other felt as a child because as a child the other partner was not able to be a healthy, authentic child. Intimacy is going to trigger feelings of toxic shame.
 
A dysfunctional adult does not have proper boundaries in relationships with other people.
 
A person with talking boundaries is able to express what they think and feel in a healthy way. They are able to state objective facts. They can express how they feel. Examples: “I am angry at you because . . ., I am afraid that . . ., I feel lonely, I want to tell you how grateful I am that you . . ., I am excited about . . ., I love you, I am embarrassed that I . . ., I regret that . . .”
 
A person without talking boundaries acts angrily (which is different from saying “I am angry at you because . . .”), and they express sarcasm, judgment, blame and contempt. They try to manipulate instead of stating directly what they want. They don’t take responsibility for their own feelings, but rather begin sentences with the phrase, “You’re making me feel . . .” Rather than expressing how they feel, they might say “You just don’t understand me” (which implies that the person can never understand them). Note that people should have values, and it is appropriate to be “judgmental” towards a person who is clearly doing something immoral; however, people who act judgmental all the time have a value system that is “too big.” They may think they have “good values,” but what they really have is no close family members or friends.
 
A person with listening boundaries can hear criticism and evaluate whether the criticism is true, false or questionable. If true, the person may immediately express sincere embarrassment or contrition and ask for forgiveness. If questionable, the person will try to understand the criticism to understand if there really is something true about that criticism. The listener is focused on trying to understand what is true about what the talker is saying—if nothing else, why the talker feels the way the talker feels. The listener might feel shame, but it is healthy shame, the feeling of being human; and the listener is still okay with being the human being that they are, even if they have done something that is a reason for being criticized.
 
A person without listening boundaries does not react with a healthy sense of shame. Instead, they act less than human or more than human. The less than human reaction is to “feel like shit,” to feel completely worthless, to feel like any criticism is an attack on the entirety of your being, to feel completely over-exposed. The more than human reaction is to put up a wall and act defensively, to refuse to consider the possibility that the criticism has any merit whatsoever and to try to deflect the criticism back on the talker.
 
When you have inherited from childhood feelings of toxic shame, you need to give it back to your parents rather than continuing to carry their shame. When we experience our own shame, we believe that someone has seen us as we really are—human and imperfect. When you can feel your own shame, you know that you are not a god. It keeps you from being judgmental toward your partner and helps you speak with humility. It keeps you the size you really are. Humility is recognizing both our weaknesses and our strengths. It is not about denying our values.
 
On the other hand, a person needs to feel perfectly imperfect. This means that even though you act imperfectly, you have faith that you still are perfect just the way you are. Some people just have faith in themselves, while others would say that they believe in God and that they are the way God made them. To believe that you are perfectly imperfect is to have self-esteem. If we believe we are worthless, nobody is going to be able to convince us that we are lovable and have inherent worth, because what another would tell us is in too great conflict with the bad stuff we believe about ourselves. But if we have self-esteem, we can have healthy, intimate relationships in which both partners are able to express love and feel loved.