Rating: 3/5

Considering this was in the 1001 Books to Read Before You Die list, I was not struck with its uniqueness. Telling a story entirely in documents and letters is not groundbreaking now, although in 1930 it may have been. Having just read a book of letters, these come across as far too verbose and writerly, and the statements filled with asides and inner thoughts just seem unlikely. 

However, Sayers has the gift of subtlety and quiet humour that infuse her characters with definite qualities - likeable or unlikeable - and allow us to get really stuck into the story. The awful Miss Milsom, the unpleasant Mr Harrison and his equally prejudiced son, the cheeky and opinionated Mr Munting, all these characters are beautifully drawn and the kind of characters of whom definite opinions can be formed; this is a blessed relief in a world where character is being sacrificed for plot ever more frequently and ambivalence about characters has become the norm. 

Mrs Harrison presents a problem - Sayers as a woman writer in the 20s and 30s must have come across rampant sexism on a daily basis, in newspapers and in publishing and in simple everyday conversation. It is problematic to me that she wrote this book from an all-male perspective, as I can't tell where the quietly comic digging at the male ego ends and the internalised women-as-subordinate attitude begins. The catalyst for the crime is never clearly pronounced - did the faithless wife plant the seed of malice in her lover's heart? Or was she too passive and reflective? Considering Sayers' unsympathetic portrayal of the husband, was she justifying the affair? Or condemning the faithlessness of women? Perhaps the perspective indicates her impression of the overall perspective of men - that women may be the cause of all woe in their lives, but aren't important enough to have clearly resolved motives or stories.

All in all, I would much rather read a Harriet Vane-centric story; now there was a female voice worth reading!