Rating: 3/5

Plato's Symposium consists of seven dialogues/speeches on the theme of "love". The seven who make the speeches are Phaedrus, Pausanias, Eryximachus, Aristophanes, Agathon, Socrates, and Alcibiades. While the first five speakers eulogize love, Socrates gives a more analytical and deeper meaning to it. 

From the speeches of Phaedrus, Pausanias, Eryximachus, and Aristophanes, we can conclude that love, according to them, was an ultimate state of happiness and goodness. Socrates, however, takes a different view. According to him, love is the "physical and mental procreation in an attractive medium". His explanation of physical and mental procreation sheds light on the way of life of Athenian upper-class society. And we see that both homoeroticism and heteroeroticism have been approved and accepted in "proper context" by the early Greeks. Physical procreation is the heterosexual part, where immortality is achieved through the medium of love by the birth of a child. Mental procreation is where homosexuality plays its role. Socrates describes this as a means of achieving virtue and becoming a philosopher (the ultimate human object according to Plato). Socrates doesn't mean sensual, physical pleasures, rather the cultivation of the mental faculties by directing the mind of the lover to achieve virtue which is true immortality. Alcibiades brings up the rear by providing an explicit explanation on homoeroticism (alluding to his relationship with Socrates) which conforms with Socrates's idea of mental procreation. 

When taken out of the philosophical context, Symposium also has its importance as a work of literature. It is one of the early works of western literature on sensual erotic love. Although not explicit, sensuality and eroticism run like undercurrents throughout the text. 

The text promised to be light and fun, but I had far from fun. I didn't feel it particularly light. The subject matter was too deep, and I had to work my brain to exhaustion to understand most of it. However, I was entertained by the dramatic effect of the symposium. It considerably entertained me.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/