Rating: 3/5

Just when I think I’ve visited England’s most famous fictional barrister for the last time without repeating books, I stumble on another one I haven’t read. This one is delightfully short and a grand read by any measure.

Poor Horace Rumpole has essentially been forced into retirement. His son is teaching in the U.S. in Florida, a grandchild is months away from birth, and She Who Must Be Obeyed, (Rumpole’s wife for those of you who have never read the series), is adamant that what the old lawyer most needs is a life filled with sunshine and ease. That’s especially true when you consider that Rumpole has lost most of his last several cases. But sunshine and ease are the last thing the curmudgeonly Rumpole needs.

A casual letter nonchalantly sent by a colleague back home stirs Rumpole back to life and to a decision to return to England. His colleague casually mentioned a murder and had a simple question about blood. Rumpole knew he had to go back home, especially after a bizarre encounter with a member of a sunshine cult left him mildly disturbed. Better yet, he reasons, he can go home without She Who Must Be Obeyed and perhaps start a peaceful life where no one nags him or makes unreasonable demands on his time.

So back he goes to find his office filled with a new attorney. No problem; Rumpole simply moves back in anyway, essentially crowding the young new guy out. This is easy-to-read legal fiction that will take you through the streets of Florida into the compound of a cult and bring you up against a smut publisher.

Only days after his peaceful return home, Rumpole’s wife shows up with all their luggage and the determination that it is her duty to be wherever he is. I think secretly, despite his bluster, he’s glad she’s back, but you don’t ever get that explicitly in the book, so I could be wrong.

This is a super-quick read; I started it before breakfast and had it all but finished when I stepped out of my car at my office door. Literally a few minutes of a lunch hour put the final touches on this, and I was satisfied that Britain was once again in good hands legally. I’ll miss the irascible old fellow, cause now I think I really have read everything out there.

If the book has a down side, it is that it feels a bit contrived. That Rumpole would have a chance meeting with the representative of a cult that would play a major role in the solution of his case back home seems like a rather large stretch. But it’s a small price to pay for the privilege of spending time with a guy you’d definitely want on your side should you ever get into a legal scrape in merry old England.