Rating: 4/5

“The bird that would soar above the level plain of tradition and prejudice must have strong wings.”
― Kate Chopin, The Awakening

One thing I try with all my soul not to do is judge others for their reading tastes. It's been done to me and I hate it.

that being said I was unprepared for the hate from so many for this shining jewel of a book. I understand everyone's tastes are unique. But -- and perhaps I should change my wording -- I guess I was not prepared for the hate for the protagonist.

I liked her. I felt I understood her. I pitied her, deeply. I sort of ached for her.

Now here is the problem. I cannot do a review without spoilers. It's impossible to discuss this story without talking of the ending.

So if you have not read and do not want spoilers -- stop reading mt review now. I will however recommend this beauty of a book.

SPOILERS:

Why was everybody so angry at her?

Those were different times back then. Divorce was not an option. Anti-depressents were not an option because they did not exist. Women could not work. I felt she made an awful choice but I was not angry. I was a bit heartbroken.

This book reminded me of Virginia Wolfe, of The Hours, also of Ethan Frome (in the search for life's meaning and the burning love) and also of other stories. I also did want to shake her at times. But in no way did I dislike her.

She loved her children. But until someone experiences the lows of depression I do not think they can really grasp how empty it can make one feel. I felt this was a good woman who wanted to live in a way she was not allowed to. Perhaps she was born in the wrong time period.

When she spoke of giving her life for her kids but not herself, I think she was speaking about her very being -- her soul. She felt stifled and she could not and would not be held captive.

that doesn't mean she didn't make an idiotic choice! Suicide is always a poor choice.

I was also struck by the fact that very few reviews say much about the object of her affection -- Robert. I could not STAND him. Him I felt fury at. Not because he left her. He has that right. But the utterly cowardly route he took chilled me. 

WHO does that to someone they say they love? He did not love her because he never really knew her. I found Robert very controlling in his way and infuriating.

The way he labels her cruel for merely asking about his feelings! The way he tries to get her not to go to her friend's or to go with her.

And then to leave at night like a thief. This is not a man who had any sense of what she wanted or needed but then again we cannot pick whom we fall for. If only we could.

The awakening itself was gloriusly described. The feminist messages in this book touched me and I 
consider this to be one of the best reads so far of 2023.