Rating: 5/5

Joseph Frazier Wall's monumental biography of one of the nineteenth century's wealthiest and most impactful U.S. industrialists is a prime example of top notch nonfiction writing. 

The book begins with a look at Andrew Carnegie’s childhood in Dunfermline, Scotland. Both his maternal (the Morrisons) and paternal sides of the family were active in the country’s weaving industry, and from a young age Andrew was imbued with the Chartist principles being bandied about. He was raised with a healthy dislike of the British monarchy that he would carry with him throughout his lifetime. 

He did not, however, adopt the heavily Calvinist worldview of predeterminism in which he was raised. Carnegie would remain skeptical in adulthood of the dour, judgmental elements of overt religiosity in any form. 

Watching his father struggle had an impact on his own approach toward success in life. In the words of author Joseph Frazier Wall, Andrew’s dad Will was a “tired and defeated man” by his early forties, a mindset brought on by technological advancements which had made his handloom practices not only unprofitable but borderline obsolete. 

Andrew’s mother Margaret was made out to be the more hard charging parent and eventually the driving force behind their 1848 move to Pittsburgh, where her two sisters lived, when Andrew was thirteen. The fact that the Carnegies made the transatlantic journey with such uncertain prospects and financial distress made the ultimate outcome for Andrew Carnegie quite unlikely. 

The first seventy pages of the book are devoted to discussions of Andrew pre-America time in Scotland, with analyses of Brits like William Cobden and Robert Peel filling in the gaps of Andrew’s preteen years of experience. 

The portion discussing their ultimate arrival in Pittsburgh from Scotland were written with the flourish that made Wall’s book such a tour de force. Since there were no direct route from where they docked in New York City, the Carnegies were forced to take a weeks-long journey. This included a trip up the Hudson River, ten days on the Erie Canal between Albany and Buffalo, a trip down the Ohio and Erie Canal to Cleveland and Akron, before finally traveling east again to Beaver, Pennsylvania and via steamer to Pittsburgh.

The book notes that the Carnegies were essentially penniless when they settled into the already smog-choked industrial city on the Monongahela River. Their desperate state caused a brief questioning of whether the move to America was even the correct one, and Andrew quickly takes up employment at a textile mill alongside his father Will. 

Andrew found his first work for $1.20/week as a bobbin boy. His first two jobs in this craft were provided by a Mr. Blackstock and then a John Hay (for $2.00 a week), two diaspora Scotchmen manufacturers in the Allegheny area.

It was through his connections to Mr. Hay that a fourteen-year-old Andrew was hooked up with the manager of a Pittsburgh telegraph office. David Brooks was looking for a messenger boy, and Andrew’s name was passed along. It would be through this employment that the book shows Andrew making business acquaintances in the area and being granted more and more front office administrative work as managers saw competence and ability. 

His growth as a persistent and tireless worker took off during his time working for the O’Reilly Telegraph Office in the early 1850s.

Andrew Carnegie, which is well over 1,000 pages in length, is a masterpiece in biography. It is abundantly clear that Wall spent ample time researching his subject and the era in which he lived, and he grants so much insight into Carnegie’s business, social, and political views. There is little likelihood readers will close its final chapter without having learned a lot of new information from the book's observation's and anecdotes.

An exchange of letters in the 1850s with his nephew Dod at the behest of his Uncle Lauder, both of whom were still in Scotland, provided a look at Andrew’s views of his newly adopted country. In these, Andrew extolled the economic system of America and commented at length on the issues with monarchy and his problems with slavery in the pre-Civil War years. (He was an unabashed supporter of the Union, supporter of the Republican Party, and opponent of chattel slavery.) 

While he was always proud of being from the country of Wallace, Bruce, and Burns, he viewed the United States as a land wide open when it came to freedom of entrepreneurial opportunity.

It is with railroads that Carnegie breaks through big time, and Wall spends a lot of time discussing his relationship with the Pennsylvania Railroad Company. Executive Thomas A. Scott became a crucial benefactor of the young Andrew, and the two of them would enjoy decades of connection during Andrew’s time as a business magnate. By 1859, the twenty-four-year-old Carnegie was Superintendent of the Pennsylvania's Western Division. This allowed Andrew and his mom, who into his forties seemed to dominate his social life, to move from sooty Pittsburg to the cleaner air of Altoona.

He also became involved with Piper and Shiffler, a company which created iron bridges. This tied into the expertise he was gaining in the country’s new railroads.

Edwin’s Drake’s experience with oil in western Pennsylvania during the late 1850s set off a speculative craze that Carnegie-with the exception of involvement with the Columbia Oil Company-remained aloof from. 

But this craze for oil did end up becoming a boon for his railroad investments.

With the outbreak of the Civil War, Carnegie worked overtime when it came to the company’s railroads and telegraph lines. He ended up working for a time in Washington’s War Department Building, where Scott had been promoted to Assistant Secretary of War. 

Andrew would suffer a bad gash while repairing telegraph lines cut by Confederates as well as a sunstroke while working in Virginia repairing a railroad bridge. He later paid a substitute to take his place when, somewhat to his surprise, his number came up in the draft lottery.

He eventually asked for, and got, permission from Scott to move back to Pittsburgh and continue valuable work from the Pennsylvania Railroad’s offices there.

Carnegie would base a lot of his operations in the Pittsburgh and Braddock areas. The Edgar Thomson Steel Works and their blast furnaces would be an early powerhouse powering his rapid accumulation of wealth. 

Wall holds the steel baron up as a man who was willing to try new things and pursue potential dead ends that had enough payoff. (He only became more conservative, according to the book’s telling, in later years.) 

For example, Carnegie would become an early American backer of Britain’s Bessemer method of steel production at his works. English chemist Sidney Gilchrist-Thomas Thomas’s basic process was a technological advancement in steel production in the 1880s which Carnegie also jumped all over, as it allowed Bessemer steel to be made without as much concern over the initial ore’s phosphorus content.

Carnegie's obsession with labor costs is also analyzed. While he liked to boast about paying the highest wages of any company in the steel industry, the book frequently notes how he pressed managers to squeeze labor costs and to emphasize keeping these low so as to better weather inevitable down times in the demand for the company’s product. He also was not a fan of paying dividends or high salaries for underlings, instead pushing to plow this back into technological innovation that would ensure cost savings and remaining on the cutting edge of competition. 

The author recounts a trip back to Scotland which Carnegie took during the war. Much to his surprise, many of his family and compatriots back in Scotland-some of them working men who he felt would be sympathetic to the Republican Party’s causes-showed sympathy for the Confederacy. This angered Carnegie, who was an outspoken supporter of the Union’s cause from start to finish.

Carnegie’s combination with coke producer Henry Clay Frick ended up with Carnegie bringing together his disparate industrial interests under the umbrella of the Carnegie Steel Company, Limited in the early 1890s. This blended Carnegie Brothers &amp; Company and Carnegie, Phipps, and Company into one corporation whose combined capitalization would be $25,000,000 (Carnegie held 53% of this from the get-go).

The book covers Carnegie’s ill-fated 1880s attempt to break into the British penny press as an investor in anti-monarchical newspapers. He had criticized the British political system in his travel work Round the World, but then, armed with a massive amount of wealth, he began to buy papers in Britain. Carnegie purchased papers like the Midland Counties Guardian, the Hampshire telegraph, and the London Echo (among fourteen others) and used them to back Reform efforts against the Conservative government. 

Unfortunately for the Reformers back in his native country, Carnegie got out of this business fairly quickly when it proved unprofitable and seemed to, in his mind, only be preaching to the choir.

Vertical integration of company organization was just becoming a thing in the late nineteenth century. Wall does great work demonstrating how Carnegie sought to do this by dipping his toe into a venture he had initially resisted: buying iron ore mines so as to integrate this portion of the steel production process into his company. There had been excitement over iron ore deposits found in the Michigan peninsula as well as across Minnesota, and Carnegie and Frick saw to it that the company brought the Gogebic Range’s Norrie mines as well as the Pioneer mines onto the company’s balance sheet. 

With his eye for detail, Wall delves into the financial machinations with Harry Oliver’s Oliver Company and even John D. Rockefeller while acquiring these mines.

The book also includes a lot of his letters back and forth with John Morley, an acquaintance from back in Britain and a member of the British government who also spent time as Secretary to India. Once he began to attain wealth, Carnie loved to travel and the book holds him up to be a man who eschewed a lot of the provincial and closed-minded views of his day. He was a major correspondent with Herbert Spencer, a proponent of the new theory of evolutionary biology. He also was a frequent critic of imposing on other cultures, criticizing movements ranging from attempts to force Christianity into China via meddling missionaries as well as policy toward restricting Filipino independence and trying to enforce changes at bayonet point.

The 1892 Homestead Strike did a lot to damage Carnegie’s reputation both in the U.S. and around the world. The July 6th, 1892, clash between striking workers at the Homestead steel works and the Pinkerton guards which had been called in to guard the property occurred while Carnegie was away on a trip to the Highlands of Scotland. 

Henry Clay Frick had been left in charge of handling union negotiations, and it was Following the expiration of a three-year contract without a new one in place, a strike was called by the Amalgamated Association over issues with Carnegie’s company over outstanding labor issues. Wall retells this tragic story with a super eye for detail, and he seems like more of the blame in Frick’s lap for how the deadly situation was ultimately (mis)handled.

But Carnegie, who had been sensitive to his public image as a humanitarian man of great wealth, was lambasted following the clash between striking union members and Pinkerton guards. The Dunfermline Journal noted that his workers had “a perfect right to refuse to submit to a reduction” in their pay. 

Also in his native Great Britain, the St. James’s Gazette did not let slide the preaching attitude Carnegie had adopted toward the social and political system on their side of the pond as opposed to the capitalistic Garden of Eden he had held up the United States as. The paper said in their editorial: “...A strike is one thing, and we know what a strike is; but armed private mercenaries are another, and they are a thing which in this effete old country we emphatically would not tolerate…”

U.S. media did not go much lighter on the steel mogul. The St. Louis Dispatch editorialized: “...Three months ago Andrew Carnegie was a man to be envied. Today he is an object of mingled pity and contempt. In the estimation of nine-tenths of the thinking people on both sides of the ocean he had not only given the lie to all his antecedents, but confessed himself a moral coward…(Carnegie) runs off to Scotland out of harm’s way to await the issue of the battle he was too pusillanimous to share. A single word from him might have saved bloodshed-but the word was never spoken….”

Superintendent of the Homestead Works John Potter was sacked after the botched response to the lockout. But this allowed for the promotion of future company president of both Carnegie and U.S. Steel, Charles Schwab, a man whose savvy and business instincts at the time Carnegie admired possibly only second to Frick’s.

But the final falling out with Frick occurred in 1901. The book documents this situation, which took place in a time during which Frick was being approached by J.P. Morgan about buying out his interests in the Carnegie steel empire (a deal which, when completed, would result in the formation of U.S. Steel). 

A clash took place between Carnegie and Frick over what price would be set for the provision of coke and a provision known as the Iron Clad agreement, which dealt with the setting of each shareholder’s interests in the corporation. Their final falling out took place in Carnegie’s office during their last face-to-face meeting, during which Frick told Carnegie “that there is not an honest bone in (your) body” and that he was a “thief” before slamming the door on an exiting Carnegie. 

By early 1901, J.P. Morgan bought out Carnegie for $480 million and then formed the U.S. Steel Corporation, a combination of Carnegie Company, the National Steel Company, American Steel &amp; Wire Company, and the American Tin Plate Company. By that point, the book makes it seem like the sixty-five-year old Andrew was ready to relax and devote his mind to his own exact science of philanthropic giving full-time; by mid-March of 1901 Andrew and his family were sailing on the Kaiseren Theresa for a tour of the Mediterranean. 

A number of U.S. philanthropic organizations blackballed Carnegie in the aftermath of Homestead, and many felt it contributed to the electoral defeat of Republican Benjamin Harrison in the election held four months later.

But both before and after this Carnegie became a trailblazer in the field of philanthropy. 

Carnegie was of the belief that the best usage which a massive amount of individual private wealth like his own could be put to was the giving back to society of monetary gifts which uplifted the intellectual lives of communities: Universities, free libraries, hospitals, and parks were four things he felt worthwhile to donate large amount of money or seed money to in order to provide community uplift while leaving the helping of the extremely destitute to churches and local governments. 

He also became, somewhat surprisingly given his Robber Baron reputation, an advocate of progressive income taxes, especially on the ultra-wealthy, as a way to break up the sort of family fortunes he felt robbed capitalistic democracies of their vitality. 

An intriguing evolution which took place in the book was Carnegie’s evolving relationship with William Jennings Bryan. Carnegie strongly opposed his prairie populism during the 1896 and 1900 presidential matchups against McKinley. He gave large sums to the Republican’s campaign and was an outspoken opponent of Bryan’s pro-silver populist views.

But the two slowly warmed up to one another, largely over the issue of international peace. Wall spends a lot of time discussing how Carnegie, in the years following his retirement from steelmaking, made the pursuit of ending war forever through abritrarian treaties and donations to various foundations the capstone of his life’s work. To read about how optimistic both Carnegie and the international peace movement was even during the months prior to World War One breaking out in August 1914 made for heartbreaking reading.

Carnegie and Bryan had found common ground in opposing U.S. policy in the Philippines post-Spanish-American War under William McKinley, and their activism continued to overlap as Carnegie moved into founding ventures like setting up the Carnegie International Endowment for Peace.

By the time Bryan was Woodrow Wilson’s Secretary of State, Carnegie had become a huge admirer of the Nebraska populist Democrat. 

He also had gone more and more against the grain after leaving Carnegie Steel in 1901. He supported the Wilsonian style federalism interventions in things like banking and regulating major trusts like steelmaking and railroads. 

The book details how Carnegie also sought to give away nearly all of his wealth by the time of his death, and in this he was essentially successful. He gave it away to causes ranging from the international peace movement to annual pensions for everyone from former employees to former presidents and prime ministers to former First Ladies; universities and Cooper Union and the hundreds of Carnegie Libraries planted across the country were the exact legacies of learning and betterment he wanted to leave behind after his death in 1919.

The book includes a good bit about Carnegie’s personal life as well. He was actually in his early 50s by the time he married Louise, and they would only have one child (Margaret). They enjoyed taking annual trans-Atlantic trips to Skibo Castle, a countryside estate which Andrew had had built in his home country of Scotland. 

He comes across as a man who was as devoted to familial life as to building his companies, and the book creates a portrait of a man who prized his family and creating a better future above and beyond the amassing of wealth for wealth’s sake. 

Andrew Carnegie is such a well-rounded biographical work. 

Carnegie's flaws and positives come through, as does the elements of his character which set him apart from many of the era's materialistic-0bsessed business moguls. His philanthropic impulses and ultimately unsuccessful attempts to work toward world peace and League of Nations-style international understandings underscored that he wanted to leave an impact beyond the mere acquisition of things.

This book deserves five stars. It is chock full of information presented in such a readable way that it is hard to think of ways in which it could have been improved.

-Andrew Canfield Denver, Colorado