Rating: 3/5

This book is the literary equivalent of Chinese food. You really enjoy it sometimes, you share it with friends who enjoy it too, and an hour later you forget it because it didn't really satisfy you in some fundamental way. 

The better attributes of the book are the greater-than-average number of ideas included in the plot and the fantasy elements. Interesting choices of destinations in time and historical figures to meet (not the obvious choices) set the book apart right away. Then the description of the catacombs or chambers between worlds with their magic puzzles and traps takes the book to a cool fantasy place for a while. 

The weakest attribute of the book is the shifting perspective. It feels VERY short attention span to go back and forth between Ethan and Isabelle so often. This relates to the other major problem, which is anything that pertains to a character other than Ethan or Isabelle. Because Curley already has her hands full trying to flesh out two characters in a first-person way (which requires a lot more dextrous writing than having multiple main characters in third person omniscient), she just has nothing left to give the characters who aren't given a first-person voice. Arkarian, Matt, and Rochelle are all little more than sketches, which is disappointing when you find out that they are going to be much more important in the later books. 

I also don't think Curley does very well at giving Ethan and Isabelle distinct voices -- there's virtually nothing about the way they speak that differentiates gender, intelligence, priorities, interests, influences... and Curley misses almost any opportunity to have them think/see/notice different things about the secondary characters, which might differentiate Ethan and Isabelle better and give you more insight into the people they know. Also gotta say, Ethan is pretty smooth around the edges for a teenage boy, which starts to seem implausible the more seriously you try to take the book.

So, all in all, The Named is a lot like Chinese food among friends. You get to sample a lot of different things, some of which are pretty tasty and some of which are just variety for variety's sake. You have a nice, chill time. And soon after you put it away, you're hungry again.