Rating: 4/5

Will I ever finish this tome? But I did! Seven years later. When I ordered this book in 2010 from Amazon, I was surprised at the size of it. A small brown telephone book arrived at my door. While I polished off a few of the ten 'books' of it earlier on in the piece, life got in the way and it languished on the bookshelf waiting for opportunities of vast time spans to complete it. Which rarely came.
So I picked book after book off in close to a decade. I'm truly amazed at how some reviewers appeared to have treated it like a normal sized book. Neither was it normal sized nor was it normal. I needed to complete this in order to have completed everything Kerouac had ever written. This book is crucial to this, not simply because it was written by him but because it gives the reader so much more of the writer than almost any other book of his he'd written. While book of dreams gave us his subconscious, Some of the Dharma showed us his day to day thoughts on spirituality, a great underpinning of most of his novels and therefore an important viewpoint. It was written prior to his breakthrough with On the road and gives the reader insight into the suffering Kerouac was going through as a rejected artist. 
There are so many things to like about this book; the typescript for starters is visually entertaining. Kerouac typed it into various shapes and patterns which form individual thoughts and sentences, giving the reader a sense of the playfulness and experimental character of the author as well as the private aspects of this particular book. The writing is a very candid, very personal journey. He seems to give no mind to ensure that what he writes is accurate to Buddhism, instead churning out his own nihilistic versions and ideas on it. There are many Buddhist ideas straight out of sutras and religious texts mixed in with his own interpretations. Sometimes you find yourself cringing at some of the things he writes, but that is also what makes it important. It's an honest account of his personal exploration into Buddhism and gives an internal viewpoint of important books (Diamond Sutra for example) he was reading in his novels.
I was often laughing at a lot of things he wrote. He doesn't take himself too seriously, even when he does. It is filled with his ideas on writing, friends plans, disillusionment and even his battle with alcohol.
Sometimes his reiteration on Buddhist thought got a little boring, coupled with the sheer size of the work and its total lack of structure. It is after all a set of ten notebooks bound into one.
I'm glad I read it, happy I finished it but would never read the thing cover to cover again. There is just too much to read out there. I may take one 'book' at a time and read it as it is enjoyable and refreshing to read, but only in small amounts. And this is a big book.
Would probably only recommend it to die hard Kerouac fans.