Rating: 4/5

Note: Kristin reads and reviews both Christian and secular fiction on A Simply Enchanted Life. Out of respect for my readers, I am including a content review. This content review will help you decide whether this book is suitable for you.

Christian or Secular: Secular
ASEL Rating: no profanity, violence, bedroom scenes, or other content that could otherwise be considered disturbing.
Content to be aware of: Underage drinking, drug use (non-descriptive), a 15-year-old girl is dating a freshman in college. 
Suggested Age: 12+

My Thoughts:
Finally! A Sweet Valley book that didn't make me want to strangle Jessica! Of course, I know she's lying through her teeth when she says she's going to change. But, for the first time, she's actually kind of human!

As an adult, I can't help but wonder why Elizabeth doesn't tell Todd from the beginning that she isn't allowed on a motorcycle—and why! A lot of angst would have been avoided if she had just been honest.

Despite the fact that this book is teenage drama, it actually more of how I remember SVH. I definitely don't remember 1-5 being so annoying. I mean, it was still drivel. But, I didn't want to kill Jessica. Huge improvement!

Anyway, hold up just a moment...Enid is having her 16th birthday party in this book. So, she was strung out on drugs and dating a much older guy at 13-14? Holy crap. She's just turning 16 and she's dating a freshman in college? My mind is blown.

Anyway, this book ends with a massive cliffhanger. I may very well die of suspense. Whatever will Jessica and I do if Elizabeth dies?! Yes, I'm being facetious. Of course, we know Elizabeth can't and won't die. I hope.

Anyway, this book actually had a moral to it. Shocking, right? The moral? Don't get on a motorcycle against your parent's wishes. You'll end up in a coma.

This book is a delightful little train wreck that made me remember why I loved this garbage.

My rating now: 3 stars.
What I would have rated this at 13: 5 stars

Throwback Books is a theme centered around books in a series from a decade or more ago. To join TBB, choose a throwback series (for example, The Hardy Boys) and have fun reliving the past! Don’t forget to link back to A Simply Enchanted Life and Jami’s Words.

This review originally posted on A Simply Enchanted Life