Rating: 5/5

Joe by Larry Brown is a gritty, often repulsive, sometimes difficult to stomach, but ultimately immensely affecting and powerful novel. 

Brown’s subjects are a bunch of poor, and always down on their luck Southern rednecks who exist on the road, in shacks, trashed trucks and dilapidated mobile homes. From hour to hour, from cigarette to cigarette, from beer to beer with no apparent goal of meaning these people scrape a meager existence in the most depressing of circumstances. Most of the characters are hard, unforgiving, mean spirited and totally lacking morality or human virtue. However, the reluctant antihero Joe, despite his never ending habit of drinking a phenomenal amount of beer and whiskey, getting into fights with nearly everyone he encounters including the law, using his dog as a terrorizing killing machine, and driving his beat up truck while heavily intoxicated, still tries to live with a weirdly nebulous hard to pin down integrity. 

Joe Ransom is in his late forties, newly divorced, with two older kids that he rarely sees, and a not too committed semi girlfriend who’s barely half his age. His relationship with the law is ever aggravated because of his proclivity for driving drunk, often sipping from a bottle of whiskey, and slinging empty beer bottles out the window, but also because he lives with the bitter memories of the three or more years he spent in jail for assaulting a police officer while under the influence of the ever flowing alcohol. 
While Joe is an utterly self-destructive, hard-drinking, and sometimes ruthless individual caught up in the machoism of his demographic circumstances, he is essentially a decent kind of guy with a moral compass that is in stark opposition to nearly everyone else he encounters. Only his one and only friend John, who runs the local store and petrol pump, seems to genuinely understand and respect his often flawed attempt at decency. 
Joe is the manager a crew who poison trees for a lumber company, that is looking to replant an entire tract of land with more profitable spruce trees, and he reluctantly gives a job to a young teenage boy Gary, who’s the unfortunate offspring of a migratory unemployed and unemployable destitute family that lives in a remote long abandoned log cabin, and pretty much survives from the help of strangers or from what they can beg, borrow and steal. The young boy, although eager to work can’t read or write and lacks the most rudimentary skills for living, but Joe is impressed by his determination, and slowly a strangely delicate but respectful friendship develop between the two of them. Throughout the novel Joe acts as a kind of taciturn mentor to Gary, who’s drunkenly vicious, deeply amoral father violently steals the money from Gary as soon as he earns it, and Joe upholds his role as the boys unsung hero until the abhorrent and gut wrenching conclusion. 

Brown is a master of the descriptive detail, illustrated in various scenes that amongst others depict a rundown brothel, a gruesome and deadly dogfight, drunken men butchering a deer on a kitchen counter, and countless of scenes of late night driving and drinking. The novel is perfectly pitched, and the language is as stark and merciless as the cracked surface of a long dried out riverbed in the heat ravaged heart of Mississippi. 

I believe the strength of the narrative lies in the fact that Brown never patronizes his ignorant, alcohol addicted, promiscuous, good for nothing low life characters. Instead he fluently and persuasively imbues our protagonist and his young friend with a deep felt compassion, and illuminate their otherwise prosaic lives, so that the reader at the end feels a true human connection.