Rating: 5/5

I don't often reread books, but, first of all, I realised that it's been nearly twenty-five years since I originally read this (which is mildly terrifying), and second of all the chance to read it while I was on Cephalonia seemed too good to pass up. And it was a transcendent experience to be able to walk along the seafront of Argostoli (where I could imagine Pelagia's grandchildren had one of their souvenir shops) and past the little monument to the fallen soldiers of the Acqui division, where you could connect fiction to historical and geographical reality in a visceral way.

I loved this when I first read it as a teenager, though I didn't know much about the history behind the story. This time round, I was even more impressed by how brilliantly de Bernières combines interpersonal drama and historical exposition by means of that finger-snapping, multilingual prose style. It's all done with a massive dose of chutzpah, not just in de Bernières's willingness to appropriate the voice and feelings of people living in a very different country and time (for which, inevitably, he drew criticism from some quarters), but also in his willingness to ventriloquise so many specific historical figures, from Mussolini and the Greek dictator Metaxas to a host of minor (but real) ambassadors and military commanders, many of whom I was reading about recently in books of Greek history.

In fact it's the chutzpah that lets him get away with it: even at his most controversial, there is always a sense of heartfelt stylistic exercise to his writing, a conviction that his intent is as much playful as it is serious. I realise now, looking back, how much of an impression this left on me, and how much I measured other writers by this ability to enter into ‘foreign’ societies and mindsets, and to balance comic elements with moments of extreme tragedy.

Violence in de Bernières (at its most extreme, I think, in the nightmarish male-on-female mutilation of Señor Vivo and the Coca Lord) is often shocking but it never has the bleakness of, say, some of the passages in Cormac McCarthy, despite an outlook that can be equally pessimistic. (‘History repeats itself, first as tragedy, and then again as tragedy,’ he writes here.) Somehow the blackness of his stated outlook is contradicted by the wit and fizz of his prose style. He seems motivated not by despair but by a steely sense of outrage – he shocks you with the air of trying to slap awake someone in a burning building. Behind everything is this tremendous sense of wise, well-travelled humanism (embodied in this novel by Dr Iannis, one of the great characters of modern fiction) which I find more inspiring than ever when I think about how little I've encountered it in other writers since.

Back in the day, the consensus on this was that it was let down by the ending, which I'm now going to talk about briefly, so feel free to stop if you haven't read it. After spending three hundred and fifty pages to describe the four years of Axis occupation, he spends the final fifty pages racing through four entire decades. The effect is, indeed, a little jarring, but it always worked really well for me as a way of squaring the circle a writer is faced with in a book like this. After a military occupation, a brutal civil war and a colossal natural disaster, it would have been not just saccharine but offensive to have our romantic leads come together in a happy ending. It was something I was very aware of when I read it the first time: how's he going to end this? To crush their dreams would seem unbearably cruel, but to fulfil them would seem a betrayal, or at least an undercutting, of the tragedy of the historical experiences the book has been trying to evoke. De Bernières's solution is to locate a happy ending of sorts, but to position it outside the actual parameters of the story. He says, in effect: you want a happy ending? Fine – but no cheating. You'll have to wait half a century to earn it.

Far from being out of place, it's this final flourish that reinforces the sense you get from the whole book, and from a lot of his writing, that he is determined to offer up as much hope and happiness as possible – but not to offer more than history justifies.