Rating: 4/5

Ignatieff doesn't present any radically new ideas, but he does provide some solid, pragmatic justifications for using "lesser evil" methods in dealing with terrorism. He understands that we do not live in a perfect world, and that we have to commit evil (often limiting some freedoms) to keep other freedoms intact. Most importantly, he argues that "a people living in fear are not free", something that can often be lost in a libertarian argument to maintaining civil liberties to their fullest extent. 

That being said, he contradicts himself a number of times throughout the book. Despite clearly acknowledging that governments can, and do, abuse the public's trust during an emergency to unnecessarily curtail civil liberties, he still advocates that many of these abuses are ok, as long as there is a sunset clause. Later on, he criticizes the Patriot Act, a bill with a sunset clause attached, for it's overreach, but doesn't fully address the ratchet effect of enacting these bills in the first place that can often lead to permanent or semi-permanent overreach. This happens a number of other times where he argues from a theoretical point of view that some methods can work without a basis in historical reality. It's easy to agree with him on theoretical points that stress utilitarian outcomes, but it's less easy to trust democratic leaders to do the right thing under the mandate of lessening the harm for all, when there are innumerable examples of civil liberty curtailment, many of which he outlines, which end up doing much more harm than good. With that in mind, perhaps civil libertarians do have the right idea, in that the best outcome will usually be the one where there is little to no lawful room for an overreaction from politicians. 

Despite a few points of conflict, I did find myself agreeing with much of what he said. I was particularly impressed by his prescient advocacy for Western support for a possible democratic uprising in the Middle East, something that most North American politicians didn't immediately do when that did happen during the Arab Spring. Moreover, his recognition that "the response to terrorism, not terrorism itself, does the most harm", and that terrorist prey on overreaction. 

It's a shame that Ignatieff was never elected as Canadian Prime Minister; it's possible that he would have been one of the few politicians who deserved some wiggle room and practiced the lesser evil method instead of overreacting. The world could have been a better place, even if only slightly.