Rating: 4/5

This book takes place in the city of Fez, Morocco. It takes place in the 1950s, when the French are in control. The Muslims hate the French, and the French take many underhanded ways of trying to control them. The three main characters are Stenham an author, Madame Veyron, and Amar, a Muslim boy. To get an idea how much the Muslims hate the French, here is a musing by Amar:
P.129
"under his breath he began to invent a long prayer to Allah, asking him to see to it that every Frenchman, before he was dragged down to hell, which was a foregone conclusion in any case, might suffer, at the hands of the Muslims, the most exquisite torture ever devised by man. He prayed that Allah might help them discover new refinement in the matter of causing pain and despair, might show them the way to the umposing of hitherto undreamed - of humiliation, degradation and agony. 'and drop by drop their blood will be licked by dogs, and ants and beetles will crawl in and out of their shameful parts, and each day we will cut away one more centimeter from each Frenchman's entrails. only they must not die, ya rabi, ya rabi. Never let them die. At each corner of the street let us have one hung up in a little cage, so when the lepers come by they can use them as latrines, and we will make soap of them, but only for washing the sheets of the brothels. And one month before a woman is to give birth we will pull the child out and make a paste of it and mix it with the flesh of pigs and the excrement from the bellies of the nazarenes' own dead, and feed their virgins with it.'

Stenham prides himself on understanding the natives of Fez. He has spent 5 seasons living in Fez, and is regularly invited to dinner at the home of a Muslim family, who like him so much that they regularly ask him if he would not like to join the Muslim religion. But Stenham is an atheist, and one day, musing on what the Muslims said happened upon death, and what he himself believed, he thought:
P.197
"as a child of six he had known that when the physical organism ceased to function, consciousness was extinguished, and that was death, beyond which there was nothing.... matter was conditioned by time, but not consciousness; it existed outside time. Was there any valid basis for assuming that it was possible to know what went on inside the consciousness at the moment of death? It might easily seem forever, that instant when time ceased to function and life closed in upon itself, therefore it could prove to be inextinguishable. The immediacy of the experience had left him with a sensation of nausea; it was impossible to conceive anything more horrible than the idea that one was powerless to stop existing if one wanted, that there was no way to reach Oblivion because oBlivian was an abstraction, a fallacy.

Amar sees the world through the teachings of his religion, and his father, who is descended from the Prophet. Therefore, he strictly controls his feelings of greed when Madame Vervon gives him money to buy a gun, to protect himself in the war against the French.
P.361
"he folded the money carefully and put it away again. Then he took 200 francs out of the handkerchief in which his own money was tied and put it into his other pocket. When he came out, Mohammad was standing there, looking anxiously toward the door, as if he were afraid AMar might simply vanish. This was a mystery Amar had never been able to fathom. The rich were not ashamed to let it be seen that they cared about money. Where a man with only 20 rial in the world would as a matter of course use those 20 rial to pay for all the teas at the table, another with a thousand rial in his wallet, when the time came to leave the cafe, would begin to fumble inside his clothing and murmur aloud: 'let's see, there are six people at 15 francs each, that's 18 rial. I have only 15 francs change, which is exactly my share. Each one had better pay his own.' for the poor man such behavior was unthinkable : his shame would be so great he could never face his friends again. But the rich gave it no importance. 'that will all change when the French leave,' Amar was fond of thinking. The concept of Independence was easily confused with that of social equity."