Rating: 5/5

The first chapter on “myths and stereotypes” of African people was absolutely enraging to read. Author and historian Joseph E. Harris details some of the earliest thoughts on African people by non-Africans, and traces a direct and uninterrupted line of anti-Black prejudice and assumed inferiority, from ancient times all the way through to the present. It is this foundation of anti-Black thought, Harris argues, that has characterized much of the relations between African and non-African people through the ages. From this beginning, Harris analyzes the history of African people, both on the continent and in the diaspora.

“Africans and Their History” provides a nice outline of the numerous (but non-exhaustive) civilizations and societies throughout Africa over time. While Harris does not go into great detail about any specific society, his passion for refuting the lies and racist narratives about African history is immediately apparent. Harris’ basic thesis is that African culture and societies were trending in the direction of Pan African unity prior to the onset of the Trans Atlantic Slave Trade and European colonialism (the former paving the way for the latter). African centralization had become a theme throughout the continent during the Middle Ages, and Africa’s cultural continuity was uniquely suited to serve as a type of vessel for Pan African regionalism and nationalism. Unfortunately, European intrusion—some of which either replaced or built on earlier Arab / Asian intrusions—interrupted this process by leveraging European technical expertise and taking advantage of Africa’s relative lack of familiarity with global happenings, such as the “discovery” of the Americas. Harris convincingly argues that the various European nations—all of which had grossly repugnant views of African people (as discussed in Chapter 1)—obstructed the normal state building process of African polities, depriving Africa of the unified national development that Europe was able to take advantage of. 

Harris does a tremendous job explaining African history in a manner that can be understood by lay people. While it is impossible to provide any sort of in depth analysis of African societies (of which their are an innumerable amount throughout history) in just 300 or so pages, Harris’ descriptions were reasonably detailed and well cited. This is a great book for anyone who wants to learn about African people and the continent of Africa, as well as the external forces that have leaned on Africans for centuries.