Rating: 2/5

First airing in theaters in 1947, and based on a story by Valentine Davies (though the actual screenplay was by George Seaton) Miracle on 34th St. is one of America's better-known and beloved classic Christmas movies. In contrast, the novelization, done by Davies himself, is so little known that I had to add it to the Goodreads database myself when I began reading it two days ago. (I started reading it because one of my Goodreads groups has a thread for classic Christmas books, and I wanted to contribute something to that.) Having read the book, I could understand its relative obscurity. This is actually one of the very rare cases where I enjoyed the film more than the book.

The movie and the novel were released simultaneously; so Davies probably never watched the movie itself before novelizing it. (He probably worked from Seaton's screenplay, though we aren't told.) I'm guessing that his writing schedule may also have been considerably rushed to meet that deadline. At 120 smaller-than-standard pages, with good-sized type and a lot of white space, the book is definitely a quick read. It reproduces, in bare-bones fashion, the essentials of the movie storyline (some incidents in the film are omitted or changed here); but in general, the film version is the more detailed in developing the characters and events, and the more emotionally evocative. Davies comes across as very mediocre in his literary gifts; he's produced a dry retelling of the story, with a great deal of telling rather than showing, and a fairly flat tone. Since I've seen the movie (more than once), the book benefited from my familiarity with the characters, but if I'd only read the book, I probably wouldn't have been as engaged with them; and the fact that I'd seen the film acted to eliminate any suspense or tension in the narration. A better writer, with more apparent understanding of fictional technique, could have really adapted the material to the written medium and made it compelling; Davies didn't. (I was also surprised to find that the book has one d-word early on --the film, in keeping with the Hollywood standards of that day, has no bad language.) I didn't really dislike the book (it benefits from nostalgia for the movie); but I hesitate to recommend it --readers who've seen the movie are apt to be disappointed with this pallid version, while readers who haven't seen the celluloid version might assume it's as lackluster as the book, and miss a good viewing experience. My advice is to watch the film (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0039628/ ) and skip the book.

Also, I've always had mixed feelings about the message conveyed by both book and movie. Yes, I get that "Santa Claus" functions here (as in some other classic works, such as Francis Church's "Yes, Virginia, There Is a Santa Claus") for the warm-fuzzy side of human experience: altruism, optimism, belief in intangibles, recognition of a dimension to reality that's outside the coldly rational, pessimistic and self-centered. As such, I naturally sympathize. BUT, I also believe it's possible to reject a materialist and egoistic view of the universe without necessarily equating this with a claim that an immortal man in a red suit lives at the North Pole and delivers gifts to all the world's children via their chimneys on Christmas Eve; and that one can recognize the limits of reason without actually disparaging reason ("Faith is believing in things when common sense tells you not to" is, unfortunately, a prime example of the latter). What Seaton and Davies are preaching is essentially postmodernism: objective reality doesn't matter; all that really matters is whatever you subjectively want to believe. That's not, ultimately, the most helpful way of relating to reality. And it can be particularly pernicious when it takes the form of claiming that the warm-fuzzy side of human experience is a myth, but a myth that's the comforting province of childhood; i.e., children should be encouraged by adults to live in a cocoon of fantasy to shield them from awful reality (and then have that cocoon ripped away from them when they're "old enough"). It's always seemed to me that this is what the conventional practice of making kids believe in Santa actually is based on. (Of course, I don't know much about it from personal experience; I don't ever recall believing in Santa, and had figured out by the time I was five that he was just a man dressed up in a red suit and fake beard.)

My wife and I are both firm believers in the intangible dimension of reality: in the importance of love, caring and generosity; the idea of meaning and purpose in the universe; existential optimism; the value of believing in the unseen. For us, this is in accord with what reason leads us to, though it goes beyond reason, and it's centrally embodied in the baby born in a stable at Bethlehem, to bring mankind peace and goodwill in an eternal scheme of things. We always tried to lead our kids to the understanding that this is what Christmas is about, and we never deliberately told them untruths; they knew about the historical St. Nicholas as an example of gift-giving, and they always knew where Christmas gifts really came from. Every parent or set of parents, of course, has to do what they honestly believe is best in that area. But that's what we felt best to do, and I would do it again; so that colors my approach to this tale. All of that said, we've watched the movie as a family, and appreciated it as a fictional metaphor --we just didn't confuse metaphor with reality!