Rating: 4/5

(Be warned this review may contain spoilers for book 1, The ladies of Mandrigyn, so if you haven't read it and want to be surprised when you do, here's the short review for you: this book was really good, and I liked it very much. Now leave before spoilers occur. And have a good day.)

After his last adventure in Mandrigyn revealed his talent for wizardry, Sun Wolf, accompanied by his comrade Starhawk, is desperately seeking a teacher, as magical apptitude without training is a dangerous thing. In Tandieras, the fortress near the ruined city of Wenshar, the arrogant Kaletha claims she can train 'good' magic to any wishing to learn. But Wenshar was a city of witches who gained their power from demons, and soon Sun Wolf and Starhawk find themselves caught in a dangerous web of evil magic and murder.

Okay, melodramatic plot summary, but I genuinely don't want to give anything away. And if the plot sounds so hackneyed you don't want to read the novel, please reconsider. Yes, it may sound a little old and overdone (the book is 30 years old, after all) but the story is done so well it sucked me in and held me until I'd finished.

The fact is, Barbara Hambly is a great writer, and this 'trilogy' of self-contained novels (they can be read as stand alone books, but read better a set, I think) shows off her strengths. These are: well-rounded characters (as well as Sun Wolf and Starhawk the other characters are all well drawn enough to be entirely believable), excellent world building (both the main setting for this novel and the little notes about the rest of the world - for example, Sun Wolf notes the small wars that have erupted to the east of the Middle Kingdoms since the death of the tyrant Wizard King Altiokis - who, by the way, killed all the wizards who could challenge his power, hence Sun Wolf's quest for a teacher) and a simple honest to god ability to write well. As an aside, it's nice to find a book with a romance between the two main characters where they are mature enough not to have to obsess or fret about each other all the time; Starhawk's ability to become friends with other female characters is also a pleasant change from some novels - there is (thankfully) no 'mean girl' sniping going on.

What more can I say? I really liked it and found it a pleasant change to grimdark or 10 part fantasy epics!