Rating: 4/5

This book was recommended to me by a nutrition book
I was reading. The section I was reading was on
the effect of insulin resistance and the corresponding
health problems that develops because of it. The
book recommended reading the book "The Discovery Of Insulin" 
by Michael Bliss and I was able to borrow it from the
local library.

The book is a very interesting read on how insulin came
about. You can think of the book as being made up of
3 parts. The first part is a detailed exposition of
countless experiments by Banting and Best on dog pancreas 
(from 1921 to 1922)to find out if they can discover 
the "internal secretion" in the pancreas that can lower 
blood sugar and help with diabetes treatment for humans.

In this part of the book, you really have to have patience 
because it is mainly an exhaustive explanation and 
examination of countless experiments performed on dogs. 
(Being a pet owner myself, I was aghast at the dog 
experiments which resulted in the death of hundreds of dogs).

The second part is more interesting as the "internal
secretion" is extracted and then used successfully
in the treatment of diabetes. The second part reads like
a fairy tale as thousands of people from all walks of
life suffering from diabetes were suddenly "cured" using
the extract that was then being called isletin and later
on as insulin. In those days the usual treatment for diabetes 
was the starvation diet developed by a diabetologist with 
the name of Dr. Allen and it usually resulted in the person 
being kept alive but half-dead because of malnutrition. 
The book refers to these people as resembling victims of 
concentration camps or famine. And it was amazing how 
insulin was able to transform these people from walking 
skeletons into normal human beings in a short period 
of time.

The third part of the book deals with the question on who
should get credit for the discovery of insulin? Apparently
while Banting and Best did the experiments, several other
people also assisted. There was MacCleod who allowed his
laboratory to be used for the experiments and who gave
useful directions to Banting and Best and pointed them out
in the right direction. There was also Collip a biochemist
who was the first to develop a method to purify insulin so that
it can be tested on humans. And other personalities related
to patents and mass production of insulin.

The most interesting part in this section of the book was
the animosity among the members of the team, with Banting
and Best banding together vs. MacCleod and Collip which was 
exacerbated by the awarding of the Nobel prize (in 1923)
only to Banting and MacCleod.

In closing, I like the way the author ended his book. That
the various personalities involved in the discovery of
insulin wanted to immortalize their place in history, but 
really humanity is just grateful that they were successful with 
discovering insulin. 

The author closes with the following: "But perhaps the
group in Toronto misjudged both their situation and posterity's
viewpoint. They did not realize that those who understood history
would eventually come to honor them all. Above all, we
should honor their achievement". Well said! :-)