Rating: 2/5

World War I had already sunk into trench warfare by the time the Gallipoli offensive started. Conceived as a second front and as an attempt to knock Turkey out of the war, it's execution was similar and achieved the same results. Alan Moorehead tries his hand at explaining the campaign.

The Gallipoli campaign was envisaged by many young Englishmen as some sort of quest. Seen as a battle in a far off land, the romanticism of many were off the charts. However, the same kind of bumbling, ineffectual leadership was seen in the Dardenelles as in eastern France. After nearly 280 days, the campaign ended in a series of mass escapes that were pulled off in an impressive fashion.

The problem with Moorehead's version of events is that the same romanticism many young English men had is prevalent in his writing. His special adoration for the Australians can be forgiven as it has always been a source of national pride in their performance in their first campaign. The fact that Moorehead is himself Australian tends to give his stories an air of bias. Indeed, other than the notables on the Turkish side (Mehmet Talaat, Enver Pasha, Kemal Pasha), the Turkish forces have no role to play other than the heavies in this real life silent movie.

A second problem comes from his source material. While written in 1956, most of his sources for the book are from people who served in the conflict and whose works were created in the decade following the campaign. Forty years on from the campaign should have seen primary research that Moorehead could've tapped into. It gives the appearance to me of someone not looking for something he didn't want to find as it would detract from his story. Sadly, it need not have been this way. No one who studies or reads about Gallipoli has nothing but respect and admiration for Anzac forces who were on the peninsula.

In the end, Moorehead's "Gallipoli" suffers from the lack of outside scholarship, a slight hint of bias, and overt romanticism. This campaign has been discussed in a more abject way and as such Moorehead's tale ranks slightly above granddad's stories about his time in the war.

BOTTOM LINE: Mid-century tale that reads more like historical fiction than history.