Rating: 2/5

Content warning: The hero has sex on page with his mistress (before he meets the heroine) and receives a blow job from a maid in his house (after he meets the heroine). Then he proceeds to have sex with the maid while imagining that she is the heroine. 

Spoilers ahead as this is more of a summary of the book. 

The prologue and first 2-3 chapters set up the hero and heroine's background. Devlin witnessed his father's murder at the age of 10 and vowed revenge on the Earl of Aisley (surname: Hughes) not by killing him but by ruining him financially and taking Hughes's second wife as his mistress. Virginia is the 18-year-old American orphaned niece to Hughes. Her parents owned a tobacco plantation named Sweet Briar that was going into debt. The bank refuses to give her a loan so she travels to England to ask her uncle for a loan and gets captured by Devlin and his crew on the sea for ransom as part of his revenge plot. He's now a captain of the British Navy and is often referred to as The Prince's Pirate (or something like that). 

Side note: I really like the (female) narrator's voice for Devlin. 

It must be my adoration for pirate romances because my favorite part of this entire book is during her captivity on his ship. The battle of wills, the forced proximity, the sexual tension, the crew, the escape attempts, etc. I wish these chapters lasted longer. Devlin was raised to be a gentleman, so compared to other pirate heroes, Devlin doesn't immediately seduce Virginia. He does his best to remove himself from that temptation. When he does give in, Virginia becomes curious and wants to be seduced and/or becomes the seducer since Devlin refuses to seduce her a second time. I felt that this change in her character was rather abrupt, but it makes sense since Devlin is trying hard not to be the seducer. 

They arrive at his home in Ireland and we meet his younger brother by two years, Sean. Some reviewers compare the romance/plot to that of Stormfire by Christine Monson, and I can see why. After making love to Virginia, Devlin abandons her the very next day. I assume because he doesn't want to have feelings for her. They were separated for five months because he had a job to do (remember, he's a captain of the British Navy). The nation is about to go to war with America (her country). She lives with Sean for five months and he falls in love with her. Needless to say, she doesn't feel the same way. 

Devlin returns and takes her to London to finally ransom her off to her uncle. They refuse to pay, so he parades her around as his mistress. Again, he doesn't sleep with her because he's a "gentleman." Eyeroll at this point. But he can only resist for so long. There's a spicy scene at the modiste. 

At this point in the book, I am over his obsession with his revenge. It's gone on for too long. 

His stepdad (who is a de Warren, of which this series is based) and mother visit him and persuade him to marry her to save her reputation. So they do, but they are separated again for a few months because now Britain is at war with America. He returns on her birthday (how romantic!) and they discover that she is pregnant. She gives him an ultimatum: choose a life with her and their child or his revenge. He chooses revenge and returns to his duties in the war. She decides to return to her plantation in America (even though there's a war going on! 🤦🏻‍♀️🙄) An incident occurs that makes him realize that he can't live without her. 

I'm not sure how I feel about these last chapters about the war. Was it really necessary? 

An epilogue would have been nice. 

Other notes:
- Devlin's stepbrothers and stepsister are de Warrens: Tyrell, Cliff, Rex, and Eleanor.
- We see glimpses of Eleanor's feelings/infatuation for Sean (her stepbrother and Devlin's brother). 
- The blurb for Sean's book states that he's a traitor. There's a scene in this book where he and Devlin meet with other Irish farmers who voiced their frustrations with the English.

Final thoughts
I enjoyed the first few chapters when she was held captive on his ship. His obsession for revenge lasted way too long and the romance suffered for it and made the remainder of the book a disappointing read. I'm not sure if I'll continue the series if there are chapters of unnecessary stuff that just drag the story.