Rating: 4/5

Published in 1993, Pronto is the novel that introduced U.S. Marshal Raylan Givens, although as is typical of a novel by Elmore Leonard, Givens is only one of a cast of great characters who populate the story. The real center of the story is a sixty-six-year-old Miami bookie named Harry Arno. Arno has been operating for years under with the permission of a hugely obese mob boss named Jimmy Cap. In return, of course, he has been regularly paying Cap a percentage of the take from his operation.

As the book opens federal law enforcement authorities are attempting to make a case against the mob boss. In the hope of doing so, they want to turn Harry Arno into a state's witness, testifying against Jimmy Cap. When Arno refuses, the feds tell Cap that Arno has been skimming from him for a number of years. They assume that the mob boss will put a hit out on Harry which, in turn, will drive harry into the arms of the feds for protection.

Naturally, Harry is enormously unhappy with this turn of events and feels betrayed by the agents of his government, even though if the truth were known, he has in fact been skimming for years and has a fortune socked away in foreign banks. As often happens in a book like this, one thing leads to another, and Harry winds up in the hands of the feds. Enter Raylan Givens who is supposed to keep tabs on Harry while matters sort themselves out.

As a young man, Harry Arno served in the army in Italy during World War II. He visits the country on a regular basis and has always dreamed of retiring there. As his situation in Miami deteriorates, Harry gives Raylan the slip and escapes to Italy under an alias. This is the second time this has happened. Years earlier, Givens was also in charge of escorting Harry for federal agents and Harry gave him the slip then too, which caused Raylan's rise in the marshal's service to slow considerably.

Embarrassed, Givens takes vacation days and follows Harry to Italy on his own time in an effort to return him to the U.S. Raylan is also concerned for the safety of the older man because Givens knows that the mob is also on Harry's tail. What follows, then, is a very entertaining story with lots of great characters, interesting scenes, and witty dialogue. Here Givens is not exactly the same character that he will become in "Justified," but it's impossible now to read the book without seeing Timothy Olyphant as Raylan. All in all, Pronto a lot of fun.