Rating: 3/5

The author of this book was a trusted person in the psychoanalytic profession and was therefore given unique access to Freud's letters and libraries. He slowly uncovered that Freud's life and work had been censored by his successors, ostensibly to protect the profession. 

(For the rest of this review, be warned that the abuse of children is discussed.) 

This led Masson to the discovery that Freud had participated in medical malpractice with respect to one of his first patients: Emma Eckstein. Freud was suffering professional isolation, had a one-sided emotional intimacy with a man who may or may not have been a crank and a criminal (Wilhelm Fleiss), and allowed this man to perform an unnecessary surgery on Emma which led to her near death, permanent facial disfigurement, and complications which seriously impacted her life and led potentially to her eventual death. Dang!

What is worse, Freud chose to protect himself and his friend Wilhelm from the emotional and professional consequences of this crime. How did he do this? He decided that Emma's subsequent hemorrhages from the operation site (bleeding) were caused by Emma's own twisted fantasies. What?! The utter stupidity (and medical impossibility) of this self-serving viewpoint is astounding. The author includes Freud's own words on this subject and it is shocking. 

This cover-up marked the fundamental shift in Freud's thinking away from his original 'seduction theory'. In a massive about face, after this pivotal experience Freud denounced his own prior work and in addition his own patients as liars! 

To give you the cliff notes version, as a younger man Freud believed his patients when they reported horrifying and criminal childhood abuse. Freud even made the shocking argument that hysteria was caused by childhood ***ual abuse (this is the horribly named seduction theory). He lays out his entire theory and defends it in an article called "The Aetiology of Hysteria". It is an intense read. Ironically he comes to hold in later life the very positions he defended his theory against in this paper. 

Why did he initially believe his patients, when others in the profession did not? As a part of his medical training, Freud studied under French legal physicians who knew such things as horrific childhood abuse actually happened and with more frequency than anyone would like to believe. In addition, Freud almost certainly attended lectures in France in a morgue where autopsies of abused children were done. That is to say: he likely saw the evidence with his own eyes.

So why in later life did he denounce his patients memories as lies and fantasies? 

Masson tells us that Freud's was a failure of moral courage. 

He quotes Freud at length throughout the book, and Freud tells us in his own words that he " was at last obliged to recognize that these scenes of seduction had never taken place, and that they were only phantasies which my patients had made up or which I myself had perhaps forced on them, I was for some time completely at a loss . . . neurotic symptoms were not related directly to actual events but to wishful phantasies, and that as far as the neurosis was concerned psychical reality was of more importance than material reality." That is to say, Freud decided it did not matter whether the abuse had actually occurred. Instead only the 'fantasies' mattered. What?!?! 

Freud himself later ostracized one of his closest coworkers (Ferenczi) for making the very same argument he himself made before, that these were memories, not fantasies. 

It's all very upsetting. The charge that Freud was protecting himself and Fleiss from a malpractice lawsuit is serious. The charge that Freud was protecting criminal abusers of children and re-traumatizing his patients by convincing them that they were imagining it - is unforgivable.

I have vaguely heard of a more recent controversy surrounding this issue, with what I know being that psychoanalysts were accused of implanting false memories of abuse in their patients. 

In conclusion the amount of shadiness going on with Freud is off-putting to say the least. 

This is still a red-hot issue.