Rating: 4/5

This novel had me riveted to my chair for hours. And at just under 550 pages, that says a lot for the author. While much more suspenseful than truly frightening, it had its share of horror moments. I would definitely recommend it to horror-genre readers. And I've read somewhere that this book was optioned for a film. That ought to be good!

plot summary in brief

The first part of Jinn begins during World War II during a Marine landing on one of the Solomon Islands. The Marines are there in the midst of heavy enemy presence, the greatest part of which they overcome shortly after landing. Then the sergeant receives word that they have one more job to fulfill. A special unit has gone missing and no communications have been received since the last radio message in which a voice stated "revenge will be mine." So this group of Marines goes off in search of the missing unit, but soon it becomes apparent that they are not alone in the jungle. Something, not the Japanese, is after the group, and they begin to be killed off, one by one. One of the last survivors of this nightmare, Eric Davis, is taken on board a merchant marine, where he is put into the infirmary, remembering very little. But the Galla is hit by the enemy and sunk.

Flash forward from 1943 until 2007, when an American research ship carrying a submersible that can dive to 20,000 ft plus, is out on an expedition. The submersible is launched, and as the crew is proceeding across the ocean floor, they come across their apparent target, the Galla. They send up a signal and the machinery is set into place to raise the Galla (or at least a part of it).

Now move ahead again to Boston, 2008. The son of a prominent and powerful businessman is killed on the roof of his father's building. The police are sent to investigate, but clues from this crime lead to more savage murders, done in much the same way as the first. Before all is said and done, the police will realize they are dealing with something not human.

A lot of reviewers did not like this book, but too bad. It kept that tightness in the stomach that I always get from suspenseful books the entire time I was reading it. Many times I wanted to peek at the end to make sure things came out okay, but luckily I held back. I liked this book, and thought it was terrific. And this is the author's first book!