Rating: 3/5

I am a bit sour on this collection, even though more stories in it are good than not. The problem is that for a collection labeled “science fiction,” there are way too many fantasy, horror, and magic realism stories. This should just be called “best speculative fiction stories.”

I was also thrown off by the pessimistic tone of the introduction. It is trying to predict the state of sci fi in the future, and reading it now the predictions seem laughable. The guy who edited this did not know Star Trek: The Next Generation would be good even without Kirk and Spock. At least I like seeing guys like George R. R. Martin and Harry Turtledove before they got big.

I think the sci fi stories in this collection are better than the others. My favorite stories are “Against Babylon” by Robert Silverberg, “Surviving” by Judith Moffett, and “And So to Bed” by Harry Turtledove. It’s kind of weird that two of my favorite stories both involve some human-ape thing, whether it is Homo erectus or a human raised by chimps. I probably like “And So to Bed” because of the alternate history and “Surviving” because it is lesbian. I know I liked “Against Babylon” because I like aliens setting LA on fire.

There is a good amount of cyberpunk, generic main characters, “men writing women,” ambiguity, drugs, period-typical attitudes, and fiction where the speculative elements are all in the protagonist’s head. My least favorite stories are the last kind, and also stories where the period-typical attitudes are from the eighties rather than the seventeenth century or the old west. I think my least favorite story is “R&amp;R” due to military racism, although it is also the first story. 

All of these stories are of their time and sometimes it gives them a sort of charm. Then again, the most underrated story is “Fiddling for Waterbuffaloes,” which I think is ahead of its time. It is so cheesy to have West Germany or the Soviets or extrapolation of Reagan-era paranoia. There is a story called “The Beautiful and the Sublime” that has an interesting relationship to future predictions. According to that story, in the 2070s, writers and artists are flourishing because AI took all the science jobs. While the neo-romanticism in the characters is coming back because of AI, it is for the opposite reason.

All in all, this short story collection is more interesting than good. If this is the best sci fi of 1986, I pity that year. At least I got to read Orson Scott Card’s first Alvin Maker story. I will just remember the good ones and not all the stories where bad writing obscured the already ambiguous plot.