Rating: 4/5

White Jade Tiger is an interesting book. It's about a girl named Jasmine who is having a "perfect day"; everything is going the way she wants it to be, even though she's having inexplicable nightmares. However, while at her weekly tai-chi lessons, her dad tells her that her mom crashed her car into a tree and died on the way to the hospital. Jasmine is distraught. A few months pass when her dad is feeling lonely and dealing with his own pain of losing his wife, and tells Jasmine that he got a teaching job in China, so she must go live with her Aunt Val in Victoria for a few months until her dad gets settled. The next day, Jasmine goes on a field trip with her classmates to Fan Tan Alley. While there, Jasmine comes across a door with a sign saying "No Exit", but she doesn't see another way out. She then asks the cashier if she can go out through the door. He says "yes". Jasmine then goes through the door, but ends up in the year 1881! Jasmine meets an older boy named Keung who has come to Canada from China with aspirations of making his fortune building the railroad in "Gold Mountain" as B.C. was known, and also to search for his father who had come here years before Keung. Instead Keung is faced with the ugliness of racism, loneliness and bullying by a gambling den owner by the name of Blue-Scar Wong. The two youths go on an incredible journey through the Fraser Canyon. Canadian author, Julie Lawson, does a remarkable job tying historical facts with events in the novel. I won't ruin the ending, but the relationship between Keung and Jasmine was predictable, although that was thanks to the author who did a fantastic job in providing hints as the reader progresses through the story. I recommend this novel for readers who like stories about time travel, historical fiction and adventure. One caveat: the time travel is not always obvious; the reader really needs to pay attention to the "time zones." Also, Jasmine's nightmares are difficult to understand in the beginning of the novel and can be confusing.