Rating: 5/5

Ok, so I have always been intrigued by the lives of old movie stars. I've read about several, including Jean Harlow, Carole Lombard, Clark Gable, Marilyn Monroe, Bing Crosby, Hedy Lamarr, and Esther Williams, just to name a few. However, I haven't spent enough time exploring the shining stars of the (sadly) forgotten Silent Era. I've seen a good amount of silent movies though, and my interest has grew as well since I've read Joshua Zeitz's excellent book: "Flapper". Then one night I was off of work sick with the flu and while browsing Netflix streaming I came across "It" starring Clara Bow. The only other Bow film I've seen is "Wings", and after seeing "It" I was totally in love with Clara Bow.

Literally minutes after the movie ended I was already on Kindle buying "Clara Bow: Runnin' Wild" by David Stenn. And oh, was I pleased! I was trransported into Clara's life and her history was right there before my eyes. Her tragic childhood, random and miraculous movie beginnings, mad-cap height of movie and tabloid fame, and sorrow-filled decline of fame and mental health was a vivid and addicting read.

I was thrilled with how enthralling this book is. You just want to keep reading! It was also a fun treat to go back to 1920's Hollywood. People think that Hollywood today is drama filled; but would be shocked to read about the crazy headline scandals that the silent era had. Suicides, affairs, suidden deaths, crazy parties, gambling...the jazz age comes alive in this book. Clara truly was and is the original "IT" girl and by becomming America's first sex symbol (this is my opinion, others think that title belongs to Evelyn Nesbit) she paved the way for other actresses to become sexy icons in Hollywood. I feel if it weren't for Clara many actresses including Jean Harlow, Betty Grable, Rita Hayworth, Marilyn Monroe and Megan Fox wouldn't have reached the fame that they have acheived today.

The only con I can think of is that is you are not interested in the lives of silent movie stars then you may become bored easily. But thanks to "The Artist" (silent movie that won Best Picture at the Academy Awards last year) there has been a renewed interest in silent film. Clara shouldn't be forgotten, so if you enjoy interesting stories of true lives, give this book a shot. You'll be hunting for "It" on Netflix instantly!!!!