Rating: 4/5

Tea From an Empty Cup by Pat Cadigan is a cyberpunk Science fiction; the setting mostly is set In post Apocalyptic Noo Yawk Sitty (New York City), mixing with Japan cultures ( I was curious are most Cyberpunk books were influenced by William Gibson’s Neuromancer at the time) the post apocalyptic, dilapidated and surreal world is like any cyberpunk world. The Japan cultures are not quite vivid, like many cyberpunk science fictions that add the exotic element to the VR world. Although, Pat Cadigan combines the japan’s mythologies and the vanishing old Japan to the story, those Japaneses who are seeking for the land of already lost. In the world where true crimes don’t exist in the AR world, players were being immortality and anonymity in the artificial world where their identities aren’t transparent to each others. Those players pursue more violent , sexual, rapturous experiences that aren’t exit in reality. As the protagonist, Konstantin investigate the crime further into the AR, she will explore more repulsive truths beneath the artificial reality. I didn’t read any books by Pat Cadigan before and thus I didn’t know any things about the author. Just found out the book on the top books of the Cyberpunk list. I think this book Indeed gave me some similar feeling from reading by other books, but also had some distinct feeling of something quite unique than the other cyberpunk books. But I couldn’t tell what exactly it is. 

 The story follows the detective chef, Konstantin was investigating the crime about the boy was cut throat, and she think the best way to track down the murder which is entering AR world. Then she put on the hotsuit and used the boy’s billable time to play the game. Yuki is a Japanese girl, she wanted to find Body Sativa who can help her to find the boy she was looking for. The both POVs has distinct narrative of the story, give the readers two different experiences of exploring the AR world. Yuki the girl who also realized that her pursuing involved the reviving of the ancient Japan. In the book, Tea from an empty cup, Japan was destroyed by multiple earthquakes in the history, since then, the old Japan no longer existed. By AR those original Japaneses had the opportunity to recreate the old Japan. This part for me is interesting but not fully be developed. From Komstantin’s POV, I can see trace crimes in the World where identities always are beneath disguises which are hard to recognize. So her investigation was easily stagnant when she was looking the info in AR. 

 In summary, I quite like some of the concepts in the story and the Japan mythologies. Japanese characters aren’t likely to be actual Japaneses. The setting of the AR world would easily to be found of plot holes. It’s adequate not perfect In cyberpunk genre.