Rating: 3/5

Although I can see, intellectually, that James Salter is a talented writer, these stories failed to touch me emotionally or creatively.

Salter is very much a writer of moods - indeed, each of these pieces is like a different slice of atmospheric moodiness, usually melancholy, uncertain, searching for a resolution that never really comes.

He is also a writer of complex thoughts, and these are the moments that I liked best in his work. These are represented in the passages where we delve deeply in the thoughts and delusions of a character, often into ideas that are unsociable or even taboo.

Take this description of the character Malcolm in the opening story of the collection:

"Malcolm believes in Malraux and Max Weber: art is the real history of nations. In the details of his person there is evidence of a process not fully complete. It is the making of a man into a true instrument. He is preparing for the arrival of that great artist he one day expects to be, an artist in the truly modern sense which is to say without accomplishments but with the conviction of genius. An artist freed from the demands of craft, an artist of concepts, generosity, his work is the creation of the legend of himself. So long as he is provided with even a single follower he can believe in the sanctity of this design."

That is a brilliant observation, one that flirts with artistic narcissism and simultaneously deflates it. These are the gems to be found scattered throughout the stories in this book.

Unfortunately for me, these moments of lucid insight are not enough. I want story, man! Salter falters seriously in this respect, as we drift into the lives of his characters, see into their complexity, and then abruptly drop out again. There is not a story here that doesn't follow this exact pattern.

Look, I get it. There is a trend in American short story writing of this period that savors this type of writing. It's straight out of the Raymond Carver playbook.

But me, I want narrative, story, drive, conflict and resolution! It's there in so many other great American short story writers - yes, Poe, Hawthorne, James, all the classics. But it is also there in relative contemporaries such as O'Connor, Updike, even Cheever, to whom Salter is sometimes compared. Without that element to give the underlying ideas a bit of spice and coherence, this kind of storytelling is just not my cup of tea.