Rating: 4/5

saw this on offer at one penny on amazon and Karen (&amp; others) say it's great, so have ordered. It's got dogs though...

...good,good, good, but fucking dogs everywhere. Malamutes now. I never want to live in rural USA. If I visit I want to take an armed guard.

A superbly written novel that hooks you from the start. It bursts with memorable characters like the charismatic (mad?) Tannhauser, the leader of a marijuana growing gang, and Peanut the hitchhiker who evades several awful fates by luck (including being eaten by rampant wild hogs). Maybe the women are not quite as well drawn. It certainly has a masculine checklist, if I may be so sexist - all guns and trucks and dogs and fights (boxing, kind of) and aeroplanes and helicopters. Not usually my thing, but the writing is a dream, with wonderful set pieces. For example the truck crash chapter (which could stand alone as a story) is superb, like watching a film where you’re at the wheel and can do nothing to stop the mayhem about to happen. The sound of the crash is like a giant man digging his thumbs deep into your ears, way back in where it is waxy and dark and it is so sensitive that you can’t bear anyone to touch. Or that same place, if a bug were in there, a big black beetle, and its wings were beating against your eardrum a hundred times a second, and there was no way to get it out but to go in after it with something long and thin and pointed, something sharp made out of steel. Brilliant too on the aftermath for one of the survivors, who goes around grinning and describing the scene with its bodies and crushed metal to anyone around, ignoring his busted leg and those shocked by his excitement. ‘I’m not smiling,’ he says smiling.

I raced through this and enjoyed. There are some unexpected elements too, like the strange but fitting end which maybe  goes beyond death - having been warned that a 'weird' end was coming I expected the alien ship that Tanhausser said was buried just below the surface in the caves below, but this end is much more satisfying. 

Like Simon A. Smith it was a bit too adventure/macho style for my tastes (I'm a wimp) but I was pleased to have read it and been so hooked for several days. Is there a film? There should be, it’s so cinematic.