Rating: 4/5

4 Stars ~ Christine's been struggling to cover the mortgage since her mother passed away unexpectedly six months ago. As a nurse, she earns a decent wage but without her mother's wages too, it's just not enough. She's lived all her life in the community around Paddington's Bazaar, and the thought of losing her home has her anxious to rent out the upstairs for the income. It's at the Bazaar that Christine spies her "perfect man"; he's absolutely gorgeous and has an air of assurance that set him above and apart from others. Deciding he's way out of her league, Christine continues on with her shopping, only to come face to face with her perfect man and this time he's showing interest in her. When she tries to move on, he says "Don't go", to which Christine responds "I don't play with strangers." Determined, he tells her his name is Shane, and that "I saw you and an impulsive madness came over me. The urge to pluck you away from this crowd and take you somewhere quiet with me where we could talk..." Equally determined, Christine says no, and tells him "If you're so madly interested in me, you'll have to find me." Later that afternoon, when the doorbell rings, Christine thinks it's prospective tenants in answer to her ad about the upstairs, but when she opens the door, there standing on her porch is her "perfect man". When Shane learns that she has rooms to let, he grabs at them, offering her $1000 a week; an amount Christine can't afford to turn down.

This is a flirty light hearted romance with some laugh out loud moments. On their first date, Christine takes him to the local hotel restaurant, and it's here that Shane learns about her mother's struggle to keep her fatherless child. The hotel staff had embraced the single mother and provided them with the security that family had refused to give. Shane in turn shares about his more privileged childhood spent at boarding schools, sent there by a family who never wanted him. Shane's been staying in a hotel, having flown in to Sydney at the news that his grandfather has had a heartattack. He decides to stay near, in the hopes that the old man will reach out to mend the rift between them. Old Max turns out to be one of Christine's patients, and she finds herself placed in the middle of these two stubborn hard headed men. This makes for an exhilarating roller coaster ride to HEA for these two soulmates. 

In Ms. Darcy's author's note for this story, they reveal that the wife and husband writing team had dined in that very restaurant where their characters had their first date. In just a few hours the husband was to be admitted to the hospital, and they feared he may never come out. Loving the charming atmosphere of the hotel, they plotted this light hearted story about a single mother raising her little girl, and then the beautiful woman the girl became. The husband did come home, and they plotted several other stories together before he died four years later.