Rating: 2/5

This book is about the British Empire during Queen Victoria’s 63-year reign (1819- 1901). Useful bits Jan put in this book: “in 1837 it still took three days to travel from London to Ireland.” It took three months to get to Bombay and eight months to Sydney. In those days, Malaria was “often” treated by bleeding. In Canada, you would travel by sledge, canoe or horseshoe. Brit textile manufacture takes off when England is the first out of the starting gate with steam. At the beginning of her reign, 100 million were “in the empire”. Administering this empire took 1,200,000 Brits living overseas, and 56,000 soldiers. Possession of a hill without artillery in battle back then meant nothing. The Tory Party was the diehard party of Empire. India had the Thugs who for hundreds of years strangled strangers on Indian roads to please the God Kali. Between November and May of 1812, the Thugs murdered 40,000 people. Young Thugs started as scouts, then grave digger, then “assistant murderer” (seriously), then a boy’s first murder was a “cause of rejoicing”. Strangely, Thuggee was a religious custom. 

Jan quotes one guy calling the British empire an “accomplishment” on which “depends the happiness of the world.” Boswell thought it was robbery to stop human slavery and would deprive “African savages” of their “happier state of life.” Ruskin wrote of England, “She must ‘found’ colonies as fast and far as she is able.” At this time, one quarter of slaves were perishing during passage in the slave ships. In mid-19th century Sydney, Australia, “all sorts of animals were pitted against each other in gory combat, and dogs and goats mercilessly baited in the streets”. WTF alert: One visitor saw a “dog owner chop the back two legs off his animal to demonstrate it’s fighting spirit.” Sydney butchers “habitually skinned and plucked poultry while the creatures were still alive.” What perfect ads for the Australian Tourist Bureau. 

“They (the Brits) were not meant to be loved: they were made to rule the world for its own good.” “At heart, by now, nearly every Briton considered as his organic inferior everyone who was not white – the less white, the more inferior. Even educated people seldom bothered to hide their racial prejudices.” The free settlers (of Tasmania) wanted land and ruthlessly drove the nomads from their seasonal hunting-grounds.” Tasmanians were then deemed the enemy (and the genocide was on). By 1850 there were 44 left, soon the last one’s skeleton was strung upright with wires and was the most popular exhibited displayed in the Tasmanian Museum. Liberal Gladstone also said, “my mission is to pacify Ireland”; he then suspended habeas corpus so he could imprison freedom fighters without trial. He okays the British invasion of Egypt. “The last great field for imperial expansion was Africa.” Jan sees Africa at the time as just fighting constantly amongst itself (p.518). At the Berlin Conference of 1884, Africa is divided up by the white powers; “at Berlin the powers agreed that Africans were not exactly people.” Hitler took notice of three major Brit reasons for its world supremacy: patriotism, racial segregation, and “masterful behavior in the colonies.” But Jan says, “their racialism was more ignorant than malicious.” “Not many people doubted the rightness of Empire.” “They had no doubt that British rule was best, especially for heathens and primitives.” 

Jan’s Romantic Defense of Brit Empire (a.k.a. the civilized Brits never meant any harm): “The British did not wish to oppress the inhabitants, they just wanted no trouble.” Brits, after all, built roads (better to control Indians with) and gave them better justice (as long as the plaintiff wasn’t a Brit). Jan assures us, “In 1837 England seemed to need no empire.” She says, “the possession of an overseas empire seemed irrelevant to its wealth, dignity and interest.” “Still the British as a nation were not conscious expansionists.” “Considerations of prudence, of expense and of morality restrained the nation.” “Empire-building” was an “unpremeditated and often reluctant process.” “Imperialism certainly entailed expansion, but it was not bullying expansion. It was merely the extension of British institutions and wholesome influences, if necessary by force.” “The idea of Empire was becoming vulgarized.” “The very splendour of the empire was in itself an asset.” On page 536 Jan refers to the British national vocation as Empire during the Queen’s Jubilee. 

“Britain had 14,000 slaves in the 18th century scattered in what Jan calls “gentlemen’s” houses. Jan doesn’t explain how such “gentle” men would get their slaves to work. Jan says originally the East India Company didn’t want to rule India but just wanted to make money there. One colonist said, “what have I done that her Majesty should banish me to this vile and abominable place?” Poor baby, maybe stop invading other countries? “The British had almost filled the available empty spaces of the world.” Terra Nullius, again, land conveniently empty until we showed up. On page 391: “the half-hearted empire of 1837 had doubled in population and tripled in area.” Oops… Sorry, just meant to get the tip wet. But Jan to her credit does admit the common British view was that Africa was a cruel “continent congenitally inferior” and “possessed no worthwhile values of its own.” Apparently drinking tea from fine porcelain with your little finger sticking out, does. 

Jan’s Comical Endless Denigration of non-Brits: Jan on page 90 refers to the “decadent Chinese Empire”. She says the Afghan kingdom was making it’s living by “plunder and agriculture” and was “almost impossible to govern.” Afghan men evidently had “wide sleeves for the concealment of daggers or poison vials.” “Aborigines wandered drunken and dispossessed along the waterfront of Sydney.” Jan says Zulus fighters “slaughtered most of their neighbors.” Jan discusses India’s “hideous customs of widow-burning, infanticide, religious extortion” while along the Ganges, “night and day goats were sacrificed, their blood spilling down the temple steps.” She says the Boers didn’t agree with British “humanitarian imperialism”; they kept slaves and were bullies. Jan says the Maori “tribesmen frequently slaughtered one another and ate Europeans by the score.” Jan says Charles Darwin called New Zealanders “the very refuse of society.” Funny how in this book Jan has nothing appreciative to say about anyone who is not British. The perfect setup for “humanitarian” imperialism. Thus, Tasmanian women had “incipient moustaches” and when a Tasmanian died, the others “never mentioned him again.” Jan will tell you the Irish Famine was caused by a potato blight, but she explains that during the worst of the famine, Britain was intentionally and clearly exporting lots of food FROM Ireland because “it would be economically improper to interfere with the natural flow of commerce”. I guess it was more “proper” for the Irish to starve to death. Trevelyan also hated the Irish and didn’t object to the famine, and he referred to the “moral evil of the selfish, perverse, and turbulent character of the (Irish) people.” 

Jan’s non-Brit Insult fest Continues: Jan says the Ashanti seemed a disconcerting people; murderous, queer, alarming, with their fearful orgies of sacrifice.” “The root of the Ashanti policy was a lust for power.” “The Ashanti national practice of human sacrifice was ruthless in its scope.” The Company sailed 7,000 miles per year in Canada loading up “with the skins of foxes, bears, martens, otters and above all beavers.” Jan adopts “terra nullius” in writing, “Canada in 1845 was almost empty.” Instead of troubling the reader with unsavory stories of what the Brits did to Canadian Natives, Jan gives you a story of a man in Canada who ate 3 ducks and 22 geese in one sitting. Brit snobbery in Greece: “The officers and their wives loved it, contemptuous though they generally were of the Greeks.” First we invade your ass, then we’ll happily talk smack about you and your culture. Jan’s inner racist comes out for this tidbit: “The (Indian Sepoy) Mutiny had demonstrated indeed that not all coloured peoples were capable of spiritual redemption.” Want more uncloaked Jan racism? “The mythical Timbuctoo had been reached at last, and had proved a dreary fraud.” 

On page 318, Jan writes of New Zealand, “this was a Christian Empire” and later “Every aspect of Empire was an aspect of Christ”, while to most of us “Christian Empire” is an oxymoron. She sounds delusional when she writes, “Generals like Havelock and Nicholson slaughtered their enemies in the absolute certainty of a biblical mandate.” Then she writes “The administrators of Empire, and very often it’s conquerors were generally practicing Christians.” How so? By making others poorer? and using force to obtain their area’s wealth? – Like Christ would?  Jan continues with her inversion of Christianity with “guns were holy too” and “to abandon a gun was apostasy” – shades of Monty Python’s Holy Hand Grenade only Jan isn’t being satirical. 

Jan calls “enemies” of Britain (countries that don’t enjoy being invaded by Britain) “horrible” or “terrible”. There is nothing in this book about the British poor, the Raj, Britain’s Opium Wars, or the taking of Burma. Those invaded are insulted by Jan – Fijians are cannibals, Indians are Thugs, Zulus have no honor, and the Irish suck. In this book you get endless stories of personal stories of upper-class Brits (“he was a blue-eyed, blond English gentleman” or “was all in all a very dashing fellow” or “How truly civilized, to see Mr. Fawcett hard at work in his elegant Great House among the buddleias”) instead mentioning the crimes of the British Empire. These are stories humanizing invaders and conquerors dwelling on all the good the Empire brought and few stories of the bad. 

I was told by someone I really respect, that this was a great book I HAD to read – but instead of this somewhat nostalgic salute to British Empire under Victoria, read these following better books which paint a far more accurate picture. Barbed Wire Imperialism: British Empire of Camps (1876-1903), by Aidan Forth, Legacy of Violence: A History of the British Empire, by Caroline Elkins, Inglorious Empire, What the British Did in India, by Shashi Tharoor, The Trouble with Empire: Challenges to British Imperialism, by Antoinette Burton, The Chaos of Empire, by Jon Wilson, The Lion’s Share: British Imperialism 1850-2011, by Bernard Porter, The Last Man: A British Genocide in Tasmania, by Tom Lawson, Return of a King: Brits in Afghan 1839, by William Dalrymple, The Anarchy: East India Co Violence, by William Dalrymple, The British in India, by K.K. Aziz, Imperial Twilight (Opium War), by Stephen R. Platt, Paddy’s Lament (Ireland), by Thomas Gallagher, The Famine Plot (Ireland), by Tim Pat Coogan, The Scramble for Africa, by Thomas Pakenham, The Brutish Museum: history of Brit art thievery, by Dan Hicks, The Elgin Affair, by Theodore Vrettos, and Empire of Crime: Opium &amp; Brit Empire, by Tim Newark. I read/reviewed Peter Ackroyd’s six-volume history of England but it’s just as ineffective an Empire critique as Jan’s (although I really liked Peter 1st volume “Foundation”). Why was Jan silent on Brit art theft, Burma, and the Opium Wars? Who knows, but the above listed books will amply instruct you.