Rating: 3/5

The authors state up front that this is not a book about history but about the uses of history. The book reviews a number of (mostly) disastrous Presidential decisions (Bay of Pigs, Americanization of Vietnam War, multiple blunders by President Carter) and asks the question “if routine staff work had brought into view historical evidence overlooked or not sought, might ‘that’ not have occurred?” (pg xiii). Before diving into these though the author begins with a look at two successes (JFK’s handling of the Cuban Missile Crisis and Reagan’s Social Security Reform of 1983). In both instances, the leaders (and their staffs) used history to frame sharper questions and probe the undersides of their initial presumptions. It should be noted that the authors are not arguing for a prescriptive approach that guarantees perfect decisions but merely that “marginal” (and theoretically cumulative) improvements in decision making can be made by a closer look at history. Their primary goal is to get people to avoid the “usual” practice of plunging into action with an overdependence on fuzzy analogies. By stopping to think a second time, decision makers and their staffs are able to question their presumptions and stereotypes and evaluate their potential choices in light of the issue’s own history and possible future outcomes and come to better decisions (33).

A common theme in the book is that analogies are powerful tools that all too easily substitute for critical thought when a crisis arises. Facing a new crisis and the natural drive to do something now, analogies offer a readymade roadmap of actions taken in the past. Unfortunately, few stop to analyze the current situation and its similarity to the offered analogy. They suggest the first step of listing out the KNOWN, UNCLEAR, and PRESUMED points in the current situation. All too often, points are treated as known when in fact they are either unclear or presumed. Second, we should compare the analogy to the present situation, breaking out the likenesses and differences. All too often, our brains are quick to latch on to superficial similarities while ignoring the significant differences (for example the analogy of Korea during Vietnam). Conversely, we are too quick to dismiss valid analogies because of their apparent differences. The primary example given for dodging a bothersome analogy is the French defeat in Vietnam. This analogy was brought up during LBJ’s administration but in such a way as to easily dismiss it. They compared the differences and similarities between France in 1954 (domestic political unrest, fighting for colonialism, etc) and the US in 1965 (US would be fighting against communism, the administration had popular support). Unfortunately, this was a faulty report meant more for advocacy than critical analysis. To do the analysis justice they should have compared the US to France in 1950 BEFORE they had sent a million men into war and began suffering terrible casualties. Such a comparison would have had a lot more similarities than the differences and would have been much harder to disregard out of hand. 

The authors provide a few other practical “mini-methods” to help flush out the history of an issue before making a decision to act: Mapping out the historical timeline of a particular issue with key milestones and players involved. Ask “What’s the story?” instead of “what’s the problem?” (this leads you to question what the problem really is instead of jumping to conclusions). And asking the questions a Journalist would ask: 5W’s and How to help flush out the details that might be missing from a superficial analysis. Had JFK done this, many of his presumptions for the Pay of Pigs invasion would have quickly been shown to be false (that it was plausibly deniable, that the CIA had the correct capabilities to pull it off, that the Cuban’s would rise up and overthrow Castro, etc). In contrast, FDR’s enactment of Social Security is hailed as brilliant for his ability to recognize the historical cycle of alternating between the election of liberal and conservative administrations and crafting his legislation to address those challenges. 
 
Another mini-method is to consider the different perspectives of the history at hand (how its viewed by different generations, races, cultures, etc). All too often we act based off of stereotypes that may be largely false. Stereotypes can serve a purpose but by “sophisticating” them (adding different perspectives and filling in some of the blanks) will lead to better decision making. People naturally used the Korean War as an analogy when going into Vietnam but people from different generations viewed it differently. General Maxwell Taylor (former CJCS) remembered the terrible ordeal in Korea and was a staunch member of the “Never Again Club.” General William Westmoreland, a junior officer in Korea, was more enthusiastic to test his mettle as the senior commander in a war thought to be similar to one he had fought already. Dean Rusk, Secretary of State in 1965 had underestimated the Chinese during the Korean War and consequently overestimated them thereafter, exaggerating their menace as expansionists in Vietnam. 

The author make a point of the fact that the people we may seek to help or influence all carry their own memories (direct or vicarious) of past events and hold their own beliefs about persistent or recurring patterns. George Ball, whose October Memorandum would very accurately predict what the US experience in Vietnam would be like, was doomed to fail in his attempts at advocacy because he didn’t analyze his audience. His approach “challenged McNamara’s abilities, Rusk’s confidence, Bundy’s honor and Johnson’s pride.” 

Overall, the book makes several good points on critical thinking skills that can be applied to staff work and for that its worth a skim. The examples given in this book do help to articulate how to apply their methods but I will warn you that it does tend to get tedious for large portions of the book.