Rating: 4/5

I can definitely see why this has mixed reviews; the villain, 'Chaingang' Bunkowski is ridiculous, the prose experimental, and the plot rather thin. Yet, I did enjoy it, perhaps because I read it as splatstick rather than scary horror; Slob is really hard to take too seriously! Chaingang weighs in at 450+ pounds, stands ("on tree trunk legs") about 6'7", yet can move like a cat. Miller presents Chaingang as the ultimate killer, and kill he does, over and over.

Over the course of the tale, largely via numerous flashbacks, we learn Chaingang came from an extremely abusive household, but owes to that his canniness and almost 6th sense regarding danger. The army found him in prison and decided to make him part of an assassination team, dropping him in Vietnam as a killing machine, and boy did he kill! He later made it back to the States, where his killing spree continued. Our main protagonist, detective Jack Eichord, made his name tracking down serial killers, and he is part of an elite team nationwide that goes where needed; for this tale, Chicago, as some crazed killer is doing his thing and eating the hearts of his victims. 

Regarding the prose, Miller sometimes lets sentences run on and on, love to highlight words IN ALL CAPITALS, and takes the narrative back and forward in time repeatedly. We spend some time in Vietnam with Chaingang, his early years, his time in prison and so forth. For Jack Eichord, the tale is more linear, with him coming to Chicago to track down the killer and inadvertently falling in love. While the story fits in nicely in the 'slasher' genre so popular in the 80s (and beyond), the prose makes it stand out; you will either like it or hate it. Miller does get repetitious at times, however; Chaingang's 'tree trunk legs', his 'cigar-like fingers', etc. 

As an antagonist, Chaingang is rather unique, with his enormous appetite for both food and mayhem. Miller gives us lots glimpses of Chaingang's psyche and it is not pretty to say the least. Yet, perhaps unintentionally, Chaingang made me laugh over and over. Reading about him trashing a bathroom, pissing his 'odorous' urine in sinks and floors, belching hugely, eating 40 dollar sacks of eggrolls (with lovely sweet and sour sauce); yeah, Slob does fit as a title! 

Do not pick up Slob if you are looking for a scary read, but if you are in the mood for OTT splatstick, it may scratch that itch. I have only read one other book by Miller, Chaingang, which I also liked, but I am not sure if I want to track down more of this series. You really have to be in the right mood, so YMMV. 3.5 slobs, rounding up for the sheer audacity!