Rating: 5/5

Partly based on Olivia Manning's own experiences during World War II, The Balkan Trilogy is the first part of a set of trilogies (the second being The Levant Trilogy). Harriet Pringle and her husband, Guy, (recently and hurriedly married due to the war) live in Bucharest as King Carol II tries to keep Romania free of the war. The first two volumes of the trilogy follow their lives as British expatriates trying to belong in an foreign land. The third volume follows the Pringles to Greece after they are forced to evacuate Bucharest. Despite the danger and violence surrounding them, their marriage does not exactly grow stronger - Harriet discovers just how little she knew about Guy before they married, and struggles with the reality of living in a dangerous time while her husband fills his time with projects that do not include Harriet. Their relationship is tried time and again by the rumors that surround their marriage as well as Harriet's friendships with other men (and Guy's friendships with other women).

I thought at first that Manning's realistic characters was what made the story so darn addictive, but then realized that they would have to be as detailed as the environment in which they lived. It is clear that the author had similar experiences from which to draw and she manages to do it beautifully. While giving each character (and there are several) a well-rounded life and story Manning managed to also be able to illustrate a growing fascist environment while discussing the politics of the late '30s/early '40s.

At times Harriet's co-dependency wore me down, as did Guy's flippant attitudes (and my personal problem of only picturing John Cassavetes, the actor playing Guy Woodhouse in the movie, Rosemary's Baby - what is with the name 'Guy' being so popular in the '60s??). No character is without some serious faults, which actually made their story all the more believable. Harriet's need for companionship is sadly all too familiar and is exacerbated by the background of war and uncertainty - she latches on to safe characters, generally men, and even a couple of animals. Guy's need for work and projects keep his mind occupied and is, most likely, a way for him to remain emotionally detached from his wife.

The second narrative The Levant Trilogy apparently details their life as the war forces them to move on to Egypt. I look forward to reading it as well, hoping it lives up this first trilogy.