Rating: 5/5

We always want to keep the child with us and not kill the child inside of us. For this purpose, we develop human relationships, and when we are alone, we start to reveal it. Because in the first interpretation, this situation looks quite innocent and is easily accepted because it is not bad. However, a man experiences this innocent desire so dominant that he does not realize that it undermines both his own maturation process (facing his responsibilities and life) and his social relationships, he cannot.

For this type of man(they constitute a very wide segment of society), we can introduce a definition as follows; an inflated egoistic man of the patriarchal system. This ataerkillesme, starting in childhood from infancy increasingly, everything she wanted done, and the boss at the end of the community is flourishing in boys than girls boy who became recognized high tolerance of this personality disorder and normal socialization worse environment* to ensure that they are accepted as is.

Children who experience Peter Pan Syndrome postpone graduation from school because they are too used to readiness, avoid other responsibilities such as military service, work when they graduate, and if they are going to start a job, it should definitely be at a high level. Because he is the most valuable person in the department he graduated from and his job should be high in this respect. Although he has not yet faced the realities of life, the relationship situation of this type of man, who has become an adult in age, is also in a grave situation. At this point, the PPS case is looking for someone to take care of her like her mother instead of her lover. According to another interpretation, the slave... loses her value in the eyes of the PPS case every time the person opposite her does not fit this form and is labeled as a prostitute in her mind. The opposite is also an example. Like a man who does whatever his girlfriend or wife wants…
The situations I have described are the products of a completely unconscious process. Because, unconsciously, a man serves his mother, not his lover, and applies his mother as the basic criterion.
Peter Pan Syndrome also occurs at these two basic points and provides continuity. From the parents who take on the responsibilities of their son, from the ideal partner who accepts the maternal model and causes the PPS case to be confirmed*…

Dan Kiley has explained these points in all their clarity and detail. It has made today's adults open their eyes. this syndrome, which was discovered in the 190s, has perhaps the most illuminating content at the point of the self-problem of today's man. Kiley also told us this in a tremendous way. I wish urgent readings for interested, but more patriarchal men.