Rating: 2/5

I've been putting off finishing this for some time. One reason for that is the very justifiable one of relocating, something I am still in the midst of with my kitchen and my Internet set up while my clothes and my books are very much otherwise. The other is what I honestly expected to be confronted with as soon as I made up my mind to acquire a copy of this: the deep and long enduring incompatibility between me and Christianity, Catholicism in particular. Now, if there's something I've learned upon entering into my fourth decade, any facet of personality is worth probing to see whether the trait is something well earned or whether it could use some complication through the introduction of well crafted material. So, when it came to this particular subject, I looked at my far from straightforward, yet extremely fruitful relationship with Simone Weil, observed how frequently this particular piece of hers showed up in comparison to her far more unorthodox writings, and thought, if I was going to test my limits, I might as well test it with her. Now that I have, I see that, while she certainly says things that go along with my most fervent beliefs, mine come from a grounding in human biology, sociopolitical history, and modern day movements focused on generating equity and mutual aid, while hers are...well. Let's just say I have a better understanding of where Foucault was coming from and what is currently looking to set the rights of people with uteruses in my country back half a century. There's some bits and bobs that are worth taking into consideration in the long run, but for the most part, I just don't jive with a text that starts off with a critique of totalitarianism and then turns around to say oh but this one is different, and I never will.

Reading is inherently an experience of the crossroads, but the intersection of the words of the author and the intent of the publisher is still noticeably laughably peculiar in the case of this piece. The biographical note makes do with what it can, but the introduction is so bogged down with its selling point that it goes as far as to call Weil a martyr, and having gone so far as to take a university course on the hagiographies of female saints, my taken aback scrutiny is grounded in more than my personal biases on the matter. I had hopes when Weil's own words finally came in on scene in the form of letters that she wrote to a sympathetic priest, and the measured critiques and fervent compassion that I've come to expect from her made such positive assumptions seem justified. However, certain, dare I say it, bourgeoisie tendencies coupled to the more proselytizing/thoughtcrime aspects of Catholicism started creeping in as soon as the writing switched from letters to essays, and it became increasingly hard to care when everything was yoked to a One True Message and Weil proclaimed that the solution to habitus wasn't equitability, but to make everything Christocentric, as if there wasn't enough rabid evangelism poisoning social systems the world over these days. It's a strange thing, for while Weil's actions correspond a great deal with my own initiatives, she requires reality to be filtered through a specific lens that everything and everyone must conform to for the sake of a better humanity, while I view multiplicity as an inevitability of the world till now and don't throw up my hands simply because we're all going to die one of these days. A good lesson in cause and effect when it comes to motivation and action of those I may sympathize with but who in turn would, due to their world-grounding ideologies, would gladly see me dead, but nothing in the way of a conversion. 

For all that above, I'm still very interested in reading more of Weil. It's a matter of acknowledging complexities while delving into the facets more relevant to my interests, and while I have rather tempered expectations of Weil's writings on colonialism after having read this, I still feel that such a perspective is extremely valuable, if not necessary, to my own intellectual pursuits. Of course, good luck finding a copy that is priced similar to that of her Christianity adjoined writings, but with the upheaval of my life starting to settle down, I can start having thoughts on what the far more stable financial situation, which remains barely believable even while having qualified me for the apartment I now compose this piece within, will mean for my book acquiring habits. All that will likely not come into solid play for the next six months, at least, but finally getting this review over with was one more step in my personal reconfiguring process, so my personal rating doesn't matter as much in the long run. In any case, if this collection does folks some good, great. I personally can't give the voices in my head any more weight than I already do, and I'm not about to slap the label 'God' on it and hope that that solves the problem without any critical input on my end.
  My excuse is that by writing this I have reached a conclusion, for the time being at any rate.
Same here, Simone. Forever and ever, the same, and that's really what counts, no?