Rating: 5/5

Promises to Keep by Victoria Alexander- 5/23/01

Katie has met that once in a lifetime soul mate and left him go. In 1942 at the Canteen dance on Christmas Eve she met Michael. He told her he loved her and wanted to marry her right then. Because her brother died in the war and Michael was leaving the next day she just could not commit. And lived a full life of regret. At age 74 she went to see Santa Claus and remind him he promised her a gift. She was given her 2nd chance to love Michael, knowing he would die. Great story and have kleenex handy.

Naughty Or Nice - Sandra Hill 5/26/2011

Jessica Jones is dressed as a Santa and holding up the Piggly Jiggly. Lucas Carter is also dressed as a Santa and watching her mess up her hold up by saying the wrong phrases. When she shoots twice in the story and then kidnaps he thinks its not so funny. And then he sees her without her santa outfit.

Santa Reads Romance - Dara Joy 5/27/2011
A very endearing story. Have kleenex around.

A homeless man is taken in by the town spinster, who is very unhappy. 
Cornelia is a widow and her daughter Emma is a student at Miss Dovey's school. 
Nick, the homeless man, has a deep sadness about him so Emma brings him home to meet her mom- who she believes will have the answer to cheering him up.

Meanwhile Hunter McGrew comes to town, a man Neely has seen in her dreams often. Only it ends up he is here to build a road and take down their beloved Oak.

It is a story of restoring hope and keeping traditions. New love and renewed lives.

A very clean story as well.
When C. Hunter Douglas fails at finding his writer with the overdure manuscript and all his money at stake he is furious. While going through a town in Maine he hits a Santa Claus. He is trying to get the airport but Santa insists Hunter delivers these gifts to a children's home. All he gets is a bonk on the head by writer May Forrester. She recognizes the person she thought was up to no good as the publisher and is positive he was there to recruit her.

Then there is Benny the cute long haired dash hound that was to be delivered but stole Hunter's heart.

Cute story.

A Gift for Santa - Nelle McFather