Rating: 3/5

Very few books of short stories make it to my list because I don’t read a lot of anthologies. I picked up Windy City Blues because I had enjoyed other books by Sara Paretsky and thought her female private eye and erstwhile attorney, V. I. Warshawski, made for good reading. These stories didn’t disappoint. At times, they felt too short and, at times, I could sense exactly why they made better stories than novels. I suppose the collection has the added advantage that I already know the protagonist and some of the supporting cast, so I was immersed in the stories faster than I normally find myself involved vicariously in the lives of fictitious characters.

It helped that the first story in the collection dealt with mother issues and family issues. As a male who went through that “father issue” period (though, I am thankful that my Dad lived long enough for us to have a normal and healthy relationship—even if it did take 20 years and a painful failure in my life to make it possible), I can definitely believe a female protagonist grappling with who her mother was and especially when she didn’t have those late years in life to normalize that relationship like so many of us get to do (amazing how much smarter our folks get after we’re 40, nu?). The story was further strengthened by the idea of a potentially rare musical score and the fact that the protagonist kept making discoveries that may have put her mother in a new light for her. Sadly, I thought the author telegraphed the perpetrator in this mystery story pretty fast, but there was some ambiguity there that made it worth reading. 

Some of the other stories in the anthology also dealt with interesting subjects to me: workplace politics, stage-door parents (even though these stage-door parents were actually pushing their athletic progeny as opposed to theatrical progeny), psychological theory, professional musicians, and games (a very short, but intriguing mystery built upon “Go-moku” (in China, “Wei-Chi”). Sadly, the latter was the only story that really surprised me. I liked them all—maybe because I felt like 

I was “in” on the mystery in each story—but I like to be surprised a bit more often.
The best part of the anthology for me, though, was that all of the stories take place in and around Chicago—Wilmette where I live, Skokie where we like to go for shopping and entertainment, the Loop where I work, and the Lakeshore that is so beautiful. At one point in one of the stories, Warshawski mentions DePaul students where I teach and makes a classic Chicago observation while figuring her income for the month and listening to the Bears—neither was adequate. I loved it. It was “spoken” like most of the Chicago fans I know for most of the sports teams. We expect the worst and usually get it. Fortunately, with Ms. Paretsky’s mysteries, we usually expect a book we can devour and enjoy and we have yet to be disappointed.