Rating: 5/5

Quick Note for any Trekkers/Trekkies who are considering reading this book: 
If you have the time and desire, you should first read The Fifty-Year Mission: The Complete, Uncensored, Unauthorized Oral History of Star Trek: The First 25 Years. Why? Because this book from 1968 sugar coats the leaving of major players in the show’s production, like Dorothy Fontana and Gene Coon, so if you read or listen to The Fifty-Year Mission: The First 25 Years first, then you’ll have a very different perspective of the events mentioned politely in The Making of Star Trek. The strife behind the scenes is white washed here, but laid bare in The Fifty-Year Mission. 

THE GOOD:

This thick little paperback sold itself as “the book on how to write for TV” in 1968. It does not deliver a focused study on that promise. It does, however, give plenty of behind the scenes stories that enlighten the reader on the inner workings of a TV show and obstacles the producers, writers, cast, and crew had to overcome and plan for. Much of the book is generally forgettable but still an interesting read for old Trekkers like me. The book was written during the heady days of the second season and published before the show’s third and final season. That makes it a perfect time capsule of the original show at its height. 

The bits that serve as a memoir of how lewd Gene Roddenberry was in the professional setting of his offices was unforgettable. Remember, this isn’t a smutty fantasy novel, it’s a professional writer’s look behind the scenes of a professionally produced TV show. So, the fact that every woman in the book is described in terms of her looks and body shape - with the exception of D.C. Fontana - it’s glaringly inappropriate; especially the story (see below) about the underage(?) twins that are ogled, sexualized, and throw all the men into barely contained lust. 

Before I dive into my thoughts on Gene’s lack of professionalism as a Producer and Boss to his employees, I’d like to point out to the Trekkers and Trekkies still reading this review some of the good stuff in this book: Reading the biographies of the characters and the actors who played them - which comes nearly midway through the book - was a highlight and worth the book purchase. While most of the character bios are lifted word-for-word from the Star Trek Bible (aka Star Trek Writers/Directors Guide) freely available online, the actor bios were fresh and interesting. The Spock write up made me want to go buy an “I GROK SPOCK” pin/button from Etsy and gave a little more pop-culture impact than one would get from reading the ST Bible. Also, the costume design chapter that devoted several irreverent pages on women’s breasts is actually informative and interesting without being inappropriate for a professional reader. Also, the chapter on practical special effects was enlightening. 

We get to see correspondence from NASA, the Air Force, &amp;c asking to meet the Enterprise crew. An USAF Commandant pointed out that visiting his test pilots may help inform the Star Trek production staff. We get to see the Smithsonian request that the second pilot “Where No Man Has Gone Before” become the first TV series episode added to their collection as part of astronautical history. 

The fight to get the series renewed is well detailed - and probably exaggerated - but the authors point out that, in the end, the studio had to make a pure business decision and were likely not much swayed by fan efforts. Cal Tech students marched in protest to Save Star Trek! Fans wrote a deluge of letters to the studio begging for additional seasons. It’s fascinating stuff for fans old and new who have heard some of these stories over the years, but get them in more detail here. 

This book was the first to label Star Trek fans as a distinct fandom and the term used is Star Trekers (pg. 397). This is why many of us older Trekkers prefer the term Trekker in lieu of Trekkie; although I gladly identify as either and both. I heard Leonard Nimoy use the word Trekker once and, as a result, I’ve called myself a Trekker since then (sometime in the 1980s). Trekkies is perfectly acceptable as well - it’s just a matter of personal preference. 

The book ends before the third season goes into production. The author describes the feeling of staring down an uncertain future - stuck in the Friday night time slot of death - but reminds us of the hopeful and optimistic future Star Trek inspires us to become. 

Finally, in the section of “All Good Things…” this book also details Gene Roddenberry’s dogged fight for believability and his unique vision for Star Trek. While writers and studios chaffed at dealing with him, his faith in his vision and his fight to maintain that vision onscreen has truly made Star Trek what it is. Without Gene we wouldn’t have Star Trek and we wouldn’t have the Star Trek we know and love. This book (and the 50 year oral history of Star Trek book) clearly demonstrates that Gene really stood up for the show and his vision of the future. While the man had his faults, I greatly admire his creative side and the book deserves the 5-stars I gave it, especially considering that it was published in 1968 and was groundbreaking for that time. 

THE BAD &amp; THE UGLY: 

The WTF?! moments are limited to when Gene Roddenberry - by all accounts a very pervy, sexist guy by anyone’s standard in his personal life - is quoted or tells the story about his ‘prank’ where he has a girl strip in the office (more on that further down in my review). 

In the bio for McCoy, Gene says that they planned an episode where McCoy’s daughter would show up and Kirk, who is nearly 20 years her senior, would “of course” have a sexual relationship with her…it was the ‘of course’ part that really underlined Gene’s opinion of Kirk as an irresistible sex god…clearly Gene’s own personal fantasy of himself. Anyway, I’m a huge Trek nerd and love the shows and novels, but I’m also aware the Gene Roddenberry, the Great Bird himself, was a very lecherous human being in his personal life and having Kirk be involved with McCoy’s daughter flies in the face of everything we know about Kirk’s respectable attitudes toward his ship and her crew. No way Kirk crosses that line. Gene invented the daughter just to have this play out on an episode, I assume.

From George Takei’s bio: “…I wrote them back saying…Mr. Takei would receive three girls for every five that Kirk and McCoy got.” Obviously, George “Oh Myyy!” Takei is not interested in the girls ‘given’ to him by Gene Roddenberry, but by page 249 of this book after nearly 250 pages of sexist quotes from Gene, it just starts to get old and tiresome to read. Chekov has “the normal 22-year-old urge for young ladies.” Uhura is “young and desirable” fighting her “female need” to go home and start a family. Chapel is “desperately” in love with Mr. Spock. Every woman is hot to trot or lovelorn and every guy is an unencumbered sex magnet. 

I’m no prude and I’m happy to let people’s freak flags fly. I’m not judging Gene for his personal freaks, I just don’t think it makes sense for him to have every single male character be a sex-crazed maniac. In his write-ups for the characters in the Bible, every single female character is written as a babe - with the notable exception of Majel Barrett, his wife - and every single male character has at least one sentence about how much of a ladies man they are. It doesn’t offend me or anything, it’s just not believable. I’m retired Army and I can tell you that not every guy in the unit was a sex-crazed maniac on Leave. Scotty is fairly respectable, but in this book he’s described as “a hellraiser on shore leave, and his escapades usually involve women, the more exotic the better.” If Scotty’s a freak, cool; no shade. But these are fictional characters, so it’s distractingly unbelievable for Gene to write every one of them as sexually charged for a show about a naval vessel and her crew. If the stories were intended to be smut and presented as such, then these descriptions would fit perfectly in that scenario; but, they’re out of character as descriptions of high-ranking, senior officers of a naval space fleet.

Stripping in the office: The following story (from page 267-268) would be hilarious if between to old military buddies or college friends, but done in the office by your boss it is not at all okay - not even remotely professional - yet Gene Roddenberry did this and proudly published it in this book. Gene had a young girl go into a married man’s office for an ‘interview’ and strip, then Gene and a bunch of the man’s supervisors walk-in on him and are clearly upset with him; his wife calls him at the office at that exact moment. Remember, Gene is a co-author on this book. Gene quotes the guy, John D.F. Black, as saying he nearly committed suicide over the incident, then immediately writes how “classic” it was. How insanely dumb do you have to be? Gene would make a great drinking buddy, but I’d hate to have him as a boss.

There’s a story on page 349-350 that sexualizes two girls who are “about” 17-18 years old - in other words they had no idea their age and could’ve been even younger - and he talks about how sexy and hot they are and how the men didn’t know where to look when talking to them. Again, this isn’t a smutty fantasy novel, it’s a professional “How to write for TV” book for professional writers about professionals in the television industry. I felt filthy just reading it. 

And, of course, Gene isn’t going to have an opportunity like this without complaining profusely about NBC’s Broadcast Standards Department, which he calls the “BS” Department. While I agree that the changes they requested were Puritan even for the late 1960s, his complaints in the book are unprofessional and petty. I might not have even given it any thought if he hadn’t created such a pattern throughout the book of unprofessional behavior. I love Star Trek and I’m starting to understand why we didn’t get a Season 4; NBC was done dealing with this asshat.