Rating: 5/5

The Reavers of Skaith is an fitting capstone to Brackett's amazing "The Book of Skaith" sword &amp; planet trilogy, as well as to her stellar career. "Winter is coming" proves literally true and sums up the dark tone of this final chapter of Eric John Stark's adventures on the planet Skaith. The hope achieved at great cost at the end of the the previous volume is quickly shattered by one man's betrayal, leaving a dying world in despair and again under the shadow of tyranny.

"The Goddess moves, my lady Cold with her lord Darkness and their daughter Hunger. She has sent her spies before. This winter we shall see the first of her armies. And if the starships do not come soon, there will be no escape for any of us from the Second Wandering!"

The Skaith trilogy blazes with sword &amp; planet adventure, but what really sets it apart is the rich, diverse world that Brackett has so deftly constructed. Skaith is full of fascinating tribes of people, including a variety of genetically altered mutant species. As their sun dies they have been forced through waves of mass migration to the ever shrinking habitable zone of their planet, resulting in mass upheaval. Each has a unique character, as well as deep, even supernatural connections to their dying planet and their ancestral homelands. This imbues the narrative with a sense of mysticism as well as pathos as they face the decision to either abandon their ancestral lands (and ultimately their planet) and in a sense betray themselves and their heritage, or face death from the holy trinity - the goddess of Cold, her lord Darkness and their daughter Hunger.

"“If we fled from this place,” she said at length, and she was speaking not to the Diviners nor even to herself, but to Someone beyond them all, “what would there be for us in the bitter world? We have given ourselves to the Mother. We cannot go back. Nor can we ever build again as we built here under the Witchfires. We ourselves are dying. Better to die where we are loved, in the arms of the Mother, than on the cold spears of the wind Outside.”"

This series is really a standout in the sword &amp; planet landscape, and I can't recommend it more highly to any and all SFF readers!