Rating: 5/5

This heavy book is made up of 31 articles written by prominent historians, each of whom selected a day in American history that they believe were critical in forming the nation we live in today. For the most part, these aren't the typical events you would normally think of (signing of the Declaration of Independence, Pearl Harbor, ect.), but rather focus on the more obscure and overlooked events that nonetheless played important roles in our history. There is a very nice variety of topics discussed, including backroom meetings debating our form of government, presidential decisions on foreign policy, and even trouble in New Orleans that changed the face of Jazz music. If anything, there is an overly-heavy representation of articles focusing on the civil rights movements and Supreme Court decisions that influenced them.

One of the best aspects of this book is the incredible amount of illustrations and pictures throughout. Every article includes 10+ pictures helping to bring the stories to life. Important people, events, and scenes are displayed flawlessly, including full two-page pictures depicting most of the "days of destiny". My favorite article was written by the head editor, James McPherson, and chronicles the story of Jackson's famous "Lost Orders" that receives comparatively little attention in American History classes, but could be said to have changed the course of the Civil War.

The book is extremely well put together, with glossy pages and tight binding. While the layout is similar to a textbook, the articles themselves are very easy to read and entertaining. You'll be able to think of plenty of days that probably influenced America more than the ones included here, but this book isn't meant to detail the more well-known or the most important days. It focuses on the overlooked or forgotten days that these particular historians wished to focus more attention on. Extremely informative and entertaining. Well done to the editors, highly recommended.