Rating: 2/5

The overall thesis was interesting: humanitarianism cannot be separated from military intervention and politics. 

But overall was not a fan. Here’re some reasons why:

First off I hate books with this amount of information that don’t have subheadings. U can’t give 30 pages of facts and history and not break it up at all. Each chapter was unobstructed and rambly. Pet peeve fr there’s no organization. 

The two chapters on Bosnia and Rwanda do well to complement each other; Bosnia showed the problematic actions of the humanitarian actors while Rwanda shows the actors’ lack of autonomy from international political institutions. 

But the Bosnia chapter was so disjointed and lacks any insight into the war. As someone without much background into the Balkans I didn’t find it very informative. This was def not a beginners read into the Bosnian CW. Same goes with the Kosovo and Afghanistan chapters. Hard to understand humanitarian failures without having substantial background into the respective conflicts. 

Contrasting these with the Rwanda chapter is incredibly confusing; the Rwanda chapter is more chronological and much better written. Though I do have a fair bit of knowledge about Rwanda so it could all be my fault. 

I have an issue with the section preceding the Bosnian and Rwandan case studies, too. He hates on international development which, sure, definitely has problems. But to dismiss it by saying that there’s still poverty is laughable. Show some numbers. There’s been aid in many African countries since independence. To say it hasn’t worked is to say any growth since independence is irrespective of assistance... how do we know that, and what evidence does Rieff have to show what the counterfactual would’ve been? He contradicted himself in the conclusion by noting that when aid stopped in Mugabe’s Zimbabwe, a crisis ensued. Sure dependency is not a viable solution, but the assistance does work. 

Also in the conclusion he says “Given the choice between liberal imperialism and barbarism… I will take liberal imperialism. It may well be the best the people of Sierra Leone or perhaps even a Bosnia can hope for at the moment, much as we might wish it otherwise” - this quote completely misses the mark imo and ignores the histories behind the conflicts. Was kinda incredible to read. He outta read Paul Richards’ Fighting for the rainforest to understand these concepts better…

I found the book pretty pessimistic, disorganized, and vague. Though also out of date and could be a product of that. 

But, as someone with career ambitions in humanitarianism/development don’t run away from this just based on my review. Could def be some bias that made me dislike the book