Rating: 5/5

Cleanliness

Children's Bad Words
Name Calling - 2 Incidents: Birdbrain, idiots

Religious &amp; Supernatural - None

Romance Related - 1 Incident: A young girl rat has a crush on an older/teenager rat. She mentions he's not married and blushes at his name (all brief).

Attitudes/Disobedience - None
Violence - None

Conversation Topics - 6 Incidents: Mentions a little girl mouse was fond of dancing. [Spoiler Alert]: Several rats in the story were once lab rats, used for experimental research for mental enhancement. As a result of these experiments and the injections they received, they learned how to read and reason and eventually escaped. Because of their intelligence, they knew they could never live among other rats, so wished to develop their own colony, their own civilization. Some wondered, if given time, if they would be as brilliant as humans and might coexist, even dominate the world. Also, they wished to change human's opinions of rats by no longer stealing but producing everything for themselves. Mentions briefly how rats acted "millions of years ago" and how their descendants are prairie dogs. A man trespasses onto property and camps there. Discussions such as living a simple life, avoiding the "rat race of life" are topics in the book. Rats have a discussion on stealing: "Is it stealing when farmers take milk from cows or eggs from chickens? They're just smarter than the cows and chickens, that's all. Well, people are our cows. If we're smart enough, why shouldn't we get food from them?" "It's not the same. Farmers feed the cows and chickens and take care of them. We don't do anything for what we take."

Parent Takeaway
A great page-turner to read aloud with the family. References to character, right and wrong and some good ethical questions are raised. Story could be a little intense for very young children.

**Like my reviews? Then you should follow me! Because I have hundreds more just like this one. With each review, I provide Content Considerations, mentioning any objectionable content I come across so that parents and/or conscientious readers (like me) can determine beforehand whether they want to read a book or not. Content surprises are super annoying, especially when you’re 100+ pages in, so here’s my attempt to help you avoid that!
 
If you’re considering a book or looking for a new title to read, check out my highly categorized shelves, read my reviews and Friend  or Follow  me to spiff up your feed with clean, wholesome, living books.