Rating: 5/5

Virginia was 43-48 years old when she wrote this, and as this is in my age bracket, I was in a consistent state of awe of what her brain could compose vs mine at the same age. Even when writing about events that maybe aren't that interesting in and of themselves - home construction, or budgeting, for example - I was flabbergasted at the depth of her perceptions. 

The five years covered in this volume of diaries comprise perhaps the happiest (according to Virginia) of her life: professional success was attained (she published and/or wrote Orlando, A Room of One's Own, To the Lighthouse, Common Reader, and The Waves during these years); significant loves and friends were discovered (Vita and Ethyl); and she became financially independent as a writer and speaker. 

Although the abridged version of her diaries excellently portray these 5 years of her life, the depths of reading the unabridged version was far more satisfying, to me. With that said, I enjoy reading her letters more than her diaries; she interestingly reveals more of herself and of her emotions when writing to others, but her diaries contain so many beautiful musings on ageing, the nature of love, friendship, and astute observations of the people in her life, who are all fascinating (Werner, Wells, Mansfield, Elliot, Forster, Sackville-West, Stein, Hardy, Strachey, Carrington...her social calendar is a who's who of 20th century London).

She also writes quite a bit about reading, itself, and its necessity in her life. The only times she mentions suicide, in this volume, is when she is feeling so out of sorts that she can't concentrate on reading; she wonders who she is if she cannot read, and cannot engage her intellect with others on the printed page. I loved these passages, as well as her musings on the transitory nature of relationships, of how one perceives oneself versus how one is perceived.

Anytime I read her, I just feel such a sense of wonder that someone of her intellect existed, and such a deep gratitude that she left so much of herself behind for others to discover.

Also of note: the editor, Anne Olivier Bell, one of the Monuments Men and an interesting person herself, did a fantastic job compiling VW's diaries, adding footnotes for more detail on specific events, referencing Virginia or Leonard's letters for clarification on the diary entries, and much more.