Rating: 5/5

A Birthday for Frances had shocked me to my core, Frances throws a bloody fit over her younger sister having her birthday celebrations, what kind of sick freak gets jealous over someone else's birthday???? A sick badger like Frances! My daughter Barbara has been diagnosed with clinical depression because she wakes up sad everyday that it isn't her birthday, this has resulted in her trying to drug my wife and I with fentanyl when we sleep, my wife shit the bed last night out of severe stress and then our daughter tried to spread her fecal matter on bread because she was trying to be like Frances. (she may have developed a feces fetish due to these Frances books)

Frances has also affected my daughters ability to form sentences. For instance, yesterday my daughter was angry at us for discussing the possibility of having another child. She approached us and yelled "HOW DARE CHILD GIVE NO!" Later that evening, she laced our luxury eggs benedict with fentanyl. 

Think twice, thrice, hundreds of times before giving this book to your kid. It teaches children to be jealous over the basic facts of life: other people having birthdays. How stupid can you be, truly, to be like Frances? Well, you can ask my daughter Barbara. She has become an absolute abomination to our household and I have wished upon millions of shooting stars that I never fertilized this monster.

To make matters worse, this shitshow of a book promotes far right ideologies such as neo-capitalism, Frances doesn't like when anyone does anyone profits off of something without her, Gloria was profiting off of her birthday in emotional means and Frances threw a fit, my daughter Barbara does not like when my wife and I hug because she feels it is "betraying her". We spanked her a couple times but it has done nothing but make her poison us during breakfast. 

Frances gave my daughter clinical depression, and made her spread my wife's shit on bread. Not to mention, try to drug us with fentanyl. Things could not be worse. If I never write another review, you can be sure that I have returned to the Lord above. This is what Frances has brought to our lives -- utter ruin.