Rating: 5/5

Possibly the best, most enlightening account of Christian spirituality that I've ever read, at least in the context of our present age. This is the book that every modern-day person who takes an interest in spiritual affairs should read. Most Westerners these days live in a state of agnosticism, endlessly doubting which spiritual tradition or path to follow, if any. The different Christian denominations, including the Catholic Church, appear clueless on how to address this problem, after coasting through the last centuries, when Christianity was taken for granted, in a sort of bubble.

The recovery of the fullness of Christ's message and vision is the task of outsiders like American Hieromonk Damascene, who typically came from a dessicated Protestant background to then discover the savoury salt of traditional Christianity, not before tasting the rich Asian spirituality, which left him wanting more.

Men like him are in a more suitable position to understand the mindset and the struggles of the average Western non-believer, and they are also equipped with a rare knowledge of spiritual traditions other than Christianity, which have always been regarded with suspicion or outright contempt, due to prejudice and self complacency.

It is my belief, as a Roman Catholic, that Christ is the ultimate Truth and the Pattern that informs the whole world, but to pit that idea against other spiritual traditions as if they were competing ideologies in an election or a debate is a ghastly mistake and a gross misunderstanding of how religion works and has historically worked. Only modern Western people are able to see it like this.

Hieromonk Damascene makes a perfectly convincing case here that the person of Jesus Christ is what the best axial age philosophers had foreseen, like through a veil, and then spoken of, tentatively, using terms like the Logos (Heraclitus, Socrates, Plato), or the Tao (Lao Tzu). They intuited a gathering unity behind the created, visible world. They thought long and hard of it and managed to obtain extremely impressive insights, considering how they lacked the advantage of direct revelation that the prophets of Israel were afforded. Among them, Lao Tzu seems to have been the one who got closest to the genuine article, expressing thoughts and meditations that would find an almost identical echo in the Gospels, some five centuries after his death.

The average Western person would explain that as Christians appropriating aspects and terms of Chinese philosophy, just like all Church Fathers have been written off as mere parasites of Plato's thinking, but again, that is a typically Western mistake of having spiritual stuff backwards, as a result of a materialistic, mechanistic mindset and worldview. If Christ is for a moment contemplated as God (the source and foundation of reality that the Lakota, for instance, call "Wakantanka", if the more usual term makes anyone uneasy), then his whole arc, including the early beginnings of the Genesis, appears not as a broom that sweeps all traditions away but a frame that gives them their ultimate meaning and perfects them, shedding all erroneous aspects. Chinese people bred in the tradition of the Tao don't need to become European at all in order to be Christians. They just need to become aware that what they call the Tao is an actual person who walked the Earth and completed the knowledge that they treasure, and in whose existence they can participate very actively. Same goes for any other spiritual path in the world, except for crass idolatry like it was practised in the Bronze Age.

This is what this book is all about. A must-read.