Rating: 5/5

Part historical fiction, part fable, part meditation on the human condition and the nature of God and reality _Pilgermann_ is fully itself and ultimately sui generis. While hard to define I can at least say that it is certainly one of the most philosophical novels I have come across.

The story is told by the titular Pilgermann, the nom de plume adopted by what might most conveniently be called a ghost, but that is perhaps more appropriately considered a waveform entity made up of particles that once comprised a living human as it looks back on its life (what it can remember of it) from the point of view of something approximating eternity. This is Hoban, so we shouldn’t be surprised that we’re thrown into the deep end and it is chock full of weirdness. The plot, such as it is, revolves around several catastrophic events the entity currently known as Pilgermann experienced in 1096 and follows his subsequent pilgrimage to Jerusalem and the strange and apocalyptic events that follow.

Pilgermann’s adventures are filled with sex, ghosts, gruesome death, meditations on art (particularly religious art, which looms large in the tale, whether it be the paintings of Hieronymous Bosch or the carvings of the Naumberg master), the existence of God (as both "He" and "It") and ultimately the search for meaning in life. So, kind of the whole enchilada I guess.

The paradox of existence is central to the tale. Motion and stillness. Potentiality and actuality. Fate and free will. Multiplicity and unity. All of these contrary relationships are considered as Pilgermann ruminates on the nature of Life (both as a lived human experience and an existential reality beyond our normal perceptions). It is largely a novel about duality, the yin and yang that underlie the fabric of reality that can perhaps be summed up as the necessity of opposites: “It is in the rotation of Eden and gehinnom that we feel the cosmic dance that is the motion of the universe, and in the play of these energies come punishment and reward.”

This sounds pretty heavy, and it is, but this is Russell Hoban we’re talking about so there is plenty of humour, bawdiness, and humanity to leaven the tale (not to mention more than its fair share of grotesquerie and grisly violence). The high and the low combine to form the pattern of life and farce mixes with tragedy: the ghosts of talking dead bears and lustful slaughtered sows who tread the pilgrim road to Jerusalem with our narrator side by side with the wholesale tragedy of pogroms and genocide in the name of one’s religion. Antisemitism also looms large as a theme as does the general violence with which any sufficiently differentiated groups of humans seem to meet each other throughout the annals of history. Yet within the long view of eternity from which Pilgermann views the story of his life there are no easy answers or obvious and clear-cut black and white answers. All three of “the faiths of the book” are shown in their problematic interrelations and the final ‘rightness’ of one over the other is never finally arrived at. 

Really there is so much to chew on in this slim novel that I’m at a bit of a loss. What about the questions of fate and free-will? Fate and necessity appear to win out in that debate, though the potentiality of all possible actions still lies beneath the surface of the actual and is perhaps no less real than it…so who knows? The future is ever growing from the seeds of the past following an inevitable pattern woven into the fabric of the universe, but how much of this inevitability is pre-ordained, and how much of it is the result of our own free choices whose very freedom may simply be a matter of perspective? I think my head is starting to hurt.

I’ll end this ramble by simply stating that on this re-read there came a point when I was starting to think I might need to adjust my original rating of 4 down to 3, but you have to stick with Hoban no matter how strange and bewildering his guidance may sometimes appear, and as I finished I didn’t think I could give it any less than the 5 stars I think it ultimately deserves. Stick with it and I think this book will pay large dividends.