Rating: 3/5

This novel by Mary Elizabeth Braddon, written in 1864, is an interesting novel, or actually an interesting group of novels. One of its foundations and sources is Madame Bovary, and yet the depth of passion in The Doctor's Wife is not as interesting or intense. Another foundation is Sensation literature, but again, this novel does not nearly match the level and interest of Lady Audley's Secret. In other ways the novel has more than a winking relationship with Braddon's own life as a writer of Sensation novels and those more lurid penny numbers that she wrote throughout her life. I couldn't help but think that the writer Sigismund Smith in The Doctor's Wife was, in part, clipped from her own life as a writer on the cusp of, but never quite the summit of prolonged respect in the Victorian Era.

Our heroine Isabel Sleaford, marries a kind, gentle and somewhat obtuse doctor named George Gilbert. While he works away in a provincial backwater, his wife, an avid reader and hopeless romantic, creates an imaginary world in the form of the three-volume romance novel with added dashes of Romantic poetry and Shakespearian tragedies. If for no other reason than the thrill of the hunt, the reader of The Doctor's Wife can have a field day finding and enjoying the constant references to literature, writers, artists and social conventions of the time. Lovers of Dickens will especially enjoy the constant barrage of references to Dombey and Son.

Isobel meets a dashing, rich and available writer and poet by the name of Roland Lawsdell, and this event launches the novel into an improbable but rather amusing and enjoyable series of meetings, fantasies and shared platonic encounters. It is only when Lawsdell proposes they run away together that Isobel snaps back into the role of semi-dutiful wife. Alas, she has only been searching for a romantic love not a sexual encounter. The novel then spins its way through Isobel and Roland helplessly attempting to sort out their lives as the good husband-doctor remains completely oblivious to circumstances. 

Why ruin the ending? 

The novel gives us a good look at the Victorian social world and its morals and expectations. No doubt Braddon's personal life gave her much fodder to draw from and no doubt the reading public lapped up the novel. 

The Doctor's Wife is a good read if approached in the right frame of mind. Expect flabby writing in need of a good edit, and expect a novel that is neither sensational or sensual. Don't expect a book as good as Lady Audley's Secret. By all means, however, be prepared for an entire novel full of literary and artistic references. If nothing else, your read will be much like an episode of literary Jeopardy!