Rating: 4/5

Soon after starting this book I realized just how different the Jungian perspective is from what I have recently been reading/have been exposed to as a counselor. This showed up initially as some discomfort, eye-rolling, and feelings of silliness at certain aspects of the book. However, underlying that part of me was another that was deeply engaged and intrigued and this pulled me forward. I am so glad I continued with an open mind as this book was certainly rewarding! The author did a great job at breaking down and explaining Jung's psychology and frequently provided psychotherapy case vignettes that furthered my understanding, though of course there were some aspects that I grasped and connected with more than others. Ultimately, this book created a deep desire in me to further explore Jung's work directly. That is probably the best compliment I could give an introductory book! 

Some quotes: 
Pg 16-17 "The Jungian, as psychotherapist, approaches each new patient with interest, curiosity, and wonder. Here is the great mystery of humanity: that every man and woman, though sharing in the evolutionary history of mankind, is yet unique! (...) No one has ever been exactly like this person who sits with me- I must regard this person well, for there will never be another who is quite the same." 

Pg 31 "If I, as analyst, impose my concepts of the direction into which the analysis should go and what the outcome should be, I am doing violence to the potential unity of the patient's psyche." 

Pg 104 "The wonder of the collective unconscious is that it is all there, all the legend and history of the human race, with its unexorcised demons and its gentle saints, its mysteries and its wisdom, all within each one of us- a microcosm within the macrocosm." 

Pg 125 "For only by knowing what we have in common with others does it become possible to understand how we stand away from the mass, as free individuals." 

Pg 134 "The ideal of the individuation process, as Jung described it, is the conscious realization and integration of all the possibilities contained within the individual." 

Pg 311 "Statistics be damned, the only validation that I know for the analytic process is the validation which is stamped on the life of the individual who has experienced it." 

Pg 368 "Jung's psychology is, above all, optimistic. It is not so much oriented backward toward the cause of dysfunction as it is oriented forward, toward what the psyche can be when it is fully developed." 

Pg 385 "The distinctiveness of individual men and women is not in what happened to them nor is it in what has been thought about them. It is in their own being, their essence. This is why a man or woman as therapist has only one 'tool' with which to work, and that is the person of the therapist. What happens in therapy depends not so much upon what the therapist does, as upon who the therapist is."