Rating: 4/5

For some reason I thought I had read this, Michener's last novel but then I remember passing on it as it seem a bit depressing for someone who was only 48 in 1994. Now, here I am, about to turn 78,living in a retirement community near Tampa so the parallels to my life can't be denied.

And, as anyone who has read his work knows, Michener tells a mean story, draws you in, introduces you to interesting characters and produces well researched plot elements. Andy Zorn is a doctor, sued out of the practice of medicine who ends up running a Florida retirement community. His life is interesting as are many of the residents. Reminds me in a way of the John Kennedy quote, greeting a group of Nobel prize winners at the white house - "Never has so much intellectual talent gathered at a single table since Thomas Jefferson dined alone!" The community in the story does do a bit of overkill at praising the more accomplished residents and I downgraded the book a bit since it often comes across as a collection of anecdotes. Some of which are pretty creative - death by Pelican for example, or how to deal with the pest who moves in only to be sure that no one's family gets to exercise the living will executed by the dying relative.

I enjoyed the way he integrated the natural world into the tale but he has always been noted for that. Some of the issues he raises have been "solved", the AIDS crisis or the human genome map but still some interesting history and backround.

Many of the authors I have enjoyed over the years, I have had personal correspondence with or have met them at signings and have been able to thank them for the hours of enjoyment they provided. He was one that I never got a note off to, despite his launching my interest in contemporary fiction when I was 16 with the novel "Hawaii", but it does relate to the type of community he describes. One of the big advantages of living in a retirement community is that you meet a lot of new interesting folks; one of the big drawbacks is losing those new friends when they pass far too soon. Message? Express your appreciation, now, to those who enrich your life.