Rating: 3/5

COUNTDOWN: Mid-20th Century North American Crime 
BOOK 190 (of 250)
HOOK - 2 stars: "As dawn speared across the Far West Texas prairie, the last of the night's heavy dew fell. I sat up shivering." That's 3 cliched openings in the first paragraph: it's morning, there is a weather report, AND someone wakes up. 1 star, plus one star for including 3 cliches in such short a time and I laughed! If he'd just throw in: "I sat up shivering, the lights from the Christmas tree offered no warmth" he'd have hit the jackpot of cliched openers. 
PACE - 2 stars: I've read other novels by this author and this one reads slow. Toward the end, the same conversation keeps happening: Tommy predicts how a robbery is to take place while everyone else keeps saying ...
PLOT - 2: ....there will be no payroll robbery. But there might be. Tommy's friend, Four Trey, might be involved. Or might not be involved. Now, to Thompson's credit, since there MIGHT be a robbery, Tommy's speculation on how the robbery might take place could be putting ideas into the robber's minds. That's a stretch. And it's only in the last few pages we get to the meat of the plot, as we have to know about a certain event and the author withholds that information far too long.
CAST - 3: A hooker, Carol, has a heart of gold. A young man, Tommy, can't stand the thought that his beloved is a hooker, following a group of 600 pipe-layers across Texas. (She's also up to something else, and that something else may or may not happen...) Tommy's older friend, Four Trey, may be involved in the robbery. Or not. "Fruit Jar was on canned heat - about half the boes [hoboes] you saw out here were heat-heads. They eventually went blind from drinking it..." Bud Lassen is wearing a deputy sheriff's badge and...he's a mean dude and gets his due. Tommy and Carol are overdone cliche's, but Fruit Jar and Four Trey and a number of other characters make an interesting cast.
ATMOSPHERE - 4: Oh, "Canned Heat", that band that played at Woodstock: took me 45 years to understand the point of the name. (I think it refers to gasoline, but I think the characters here mix it with anti-freeze and/or evaporated milk and/or whatever else will kill these poor souls, dying fast in the soulless Texas nothingness. (I've lived in Texas, I've crossed the border into Matamoras: it's bleak and ugly and yes I felt Texas drying up my very soul...so I left ASAP.) 
SUMMARY: 2.6 stars. Atmosphere here rules, and it physically just HURTS. Still, for me this is one of Thompson's weakest work of the ones I've read.