Rating: 5/5

One of my favourite books and heroes of all time.

I picked this up at the airport when I was about 17, flying from Australia to New Mexico to see my godmother. She had cancer and it was really progressing and my mum and I knew we were going over to say goodbye so it was a really sad time. Sort of happy as well because we were getting the chance to say goodbye to someone, which most people don't get but, of course, sad too. Sometimes in these moments, the right book can be the perfect medicine and "Ice Station" took me on such an amazing and exciting journey that when I left, I left the book behind hoping my godmother would get to read it before she passed. 

Some scientists are digging in ice that is millions of years old in Antarctica and testing core samples to look at the atmosphere.......Zzzzzz ......they hit metal. Why the fuck is there metal down there?? They send down to some divers to check it out who have to ride a dive bell deep deep deep under the icy water and when they reach the cavern they have only brief seconds to confirm the existence of some sort of "space ship" before they are brutally torn apart by monsters unseen. The peeps back upstairs do their call for help ""Help help fucking help all of our scientists are getting eaten and they found some fuckin space ship!! Ahhhh"

So the call goes out over an open channel and a bunch of people hear it and send the troops in. I mean, in theory, alien technology could put any country ahead of the rest of the world so what if something like that was found in a place like Antarctica, that no one really owns, or certainly if they do claim ownership cannot hope to enforce it. So what we have is a group of countries that are allies secretly killing each other to get the ultimate prize which I loved! If you are looking for some Nazi's to hate you will find nary a Nazi in this book.

Shane Schofield, call-sign Scarecrow, is the leader or a marine force recon team. Lightly armoured and trained for fast insertion, intel gathering and holding the fort down until the rest of the gang arrives, the action starts straight away and never lets up. And is Reilly good at action of what. Seriously this book is all about bang and pop so don't be surprised if one second you are quite liking one of the characters, and then the next second they are destroyed by a fragmentation grenade that leaves their body shredded to the body and looking like a pin cushion. Scarecrow is the master of taking in his options and acting, using his lightening reflexes to save the day more than once and earn the loyalty of the men and women under his command. We have some awesome side characters in 'Book', the older more squat soldier who rescued Scarecrow when he was shot down as a pilot. It was this rescue that inspired Scarecrow to become the soldier and leader he is today so Book is in many ways like a father and a best friend. Then we have 'Fox' who is a cute blonde with killer skills and the object of Scarecrows affections. Then we have Mother which is short for Motherfucker. She is a giant woman who is tough as shit but is the mother of the group, looking after everyone and often throwing herself into the thick of action to save the lives of her friends. She is an unstoppable force of nature.

This book has everything. Nasty frenchman, even nastier Brits, Hovercraft chases, killer whales....people being fed to killer whales,secret government agencies, a friendly seal, a nuclear reactor, monsters, invisibility, all of this but it is not really science fiction as everything is entirely plausible. This was the start of a love affair for me. I've bought every book Matthew has ever written and the scarecrow series has now grown into 4 books plus a novella. The character is on a bit of a hiatus right as Reilly rediscovers himself and his style after some personal tragedy. If you have not read it I cannot recommend it highly enough.