Rating: 4/5

http://ebookstore.sony.com/ebook/loui...
Tom Chantry has all his future father-in-law's money to buy cattle and ship back East by rail. But in Las Vegas, he backs down from drunken Dutch Akin, and refuses to wear a gun. He buys stock from French Williams, of questionable morality, and hires French to lead the herd, on a bet Tom can stay the distance to the railway station. But most consider Tom a coward who cannot last. The familiar L'Amour Western, loner hero fights nature and villains for sweetheart and success, always has new twists I have not tired of yet. 

Sparrow sells stock too, and secretly assigns Mobile Callahan to help, so I guessed his role in the threesome that killed Tom's sheriff father and caused the boy to be sent East. Tom has to predict how they will plan to take him out, but mastermind villain is a surprise out of nowhere, so is painful final fate.  Sarah is whodunit, left to die in desert.  The crisis when, left unconscious, without shoes, weapons, or supplies, Tom has to find safety p120 has no easy deus ex machina, although Kiowa Wolf Walker comes close p223. 

Pa said "To just that extent that you lean on somebody, or rely on them, to that extent you are a weaker man" p56. But Tom hires Bone McCarthy and Sun Chief to tag along hidden, so I don't think the advice works. He needs them. The card-hand omen also sucks p147. I preferred when his "sense of survival" finally overrides "what's right" p150 and he takes pistol and rifle to hand. 

I like hero's honesty. Sparrow says "The decent people will simply ignore you, the bullies will hunt you down, ... the love of peace and the unwillingness to fight never kept anyone out of trouble. p12 Humor "your cows were the best in the country, giving you four of five calves a year" p60 Chantry. As always, I skip troubling boxing terminology p76 et al; "to the wind" I suspect means in the stomach, put the target out of breath, but can't find proof. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boxing see Punches. 

Author experience and philosophy naturally seep through. The white man will beat the Injuns with "store-bought things" p87. Tom realizes "money did not seem so important now ... They could start over. Out here that was possible" p327. The final note proclaims optimistic hope.

Typos: 
p15 "Las Vagas"
p31 footnote seems unnecessary
p38 "not less tha $50K" is expected, p280 Sara agrees "nearly $50K",