Unfortunately, I do not have time to read this the whole way through. I was asked to read it for work to decide if it was appropriate for our gift shop, or at all.
For a book published in 1983 [and reprinted in 2015], Thomasma was doing something revolutionary. To be blunt, the publishing world was controlled by old white guys. The old white guys wanted new white guys to replace them, so only white guys got published. It didn't matter if you had talent. The rules were different if you were a woman, of color, or a woman of color, in that order. I submit the bold claim that Thomasma packaged information in a way that the world (or at least the rich bit of pop culture that votes with money) was ready to find pallettable. For its time, this information is respectful. However, it did not age well. After 40 years, the world changes.
Amazon and AO3 came in and changed the world of publishing at large. Now I'm not a novelty for being AFAB and a published author. That's something to celebrate!
Native Americans are expected to tell their own stories, because we can finally give them a platform, and the world (again, the part with the buying power) is ready!
These books were produced when a Native American author would've faced more hurdles than I did as a broke white kid in 2016.
I've also got a spot bookmared where I found an example of Thomasma's teaching style that I love.
"'I could eat a whole Buffalo liver. I'm so hungry,'
'I'll take the heart and the tongue. We will eat these parts without cooking and cooking takes too long,'"
And then he goes on for about two paragraphs about how Native Americans would gather food, reiterating, that the parts the girls where talking about were tender and one COULD eat them raw.
These books are older than me, but we loved them as little girls. They were very educational, and Thomasma, meant no harm to the people he was writing about. Looking at my memories of them in 2022, I wanna give him credit for not having white main characters. That's a dime novel I've seen cross my desk a million times. I have seen more "white Indian"s and it makes me sick to my stomach. Yes, there were children that were either adopted or kidnapped by native Americans. That's just history. But the story of the white kid, who grew up with the native Americans, then had to reintegrate into the white man's world is tired. Thomasma wasn't writing for white comfort. Thomasma was writing to educate.