Rating: 4/5

My joy in reading this fast-paced, blackly humorous and deeply cynical novel by thriller-writer extraordinaire Ross Thomas was tempered primarily by the knowledge that it was the last one of the 25 or 30 he wrote in his career. 

It begins with Edd "Twodees" Partain, a former Army major, working at a gun shop in Sheridan, Wyoming. Twodees is visited by an old Army acquaintance -- perhaps "nemesis" is a better word for Col. Ralph Waldo Millweed -- who's out to ruin him. Edd quickly loses his job in Wyoming and then gains a new one, acting as a "security consultant" for Millicent Altford, an LA-based campaign fundraiser for the Democratic Party, who has recently discovered that someone stole $1.2 million from the safe in her bedroom without her knowing about it. As it happens, that is the same amount of money Partain was once accused of pilfering from a CIA payment to some Salvadoran rebels by Col. Millweed and his superior, Gen. Walker Hudson, whom Partain then assaulted (hence the "former" part of his military title).

As Altford and Partain (and Alford's attractive, ad-writing daughter Jessica) begin turning over various stones, a lot of people die amid an effort to wipe out every last witness to what happened. In the meantime we get to enjoy the company of various crazy characters as Emory Kite, a 5-foot-nothing private eye gifted with a voice that sounds "like the first cruel crack of doom": Nick Patrokis, earring-wearing co-founder of the organization Victims of Military Intelligence Treachery, or VOMIT for short; and Shawnee Viar, who decides to leave her boots on when seduced at the Safeway by a man her father warned her about. 

Along the way political veteran Thomas (mostly through Altford's anecdotes) dispenses some hilariously on-the-money insights about the role cash from various sources plays in politics and how politics actually works, especially as a new administration (Bill Clinton's, never named but just described as "Little Rock") is taking charge of the government. The scene where Altford explains the facts of life to a newly elected congressman and his committee counsel is my fave in the whole book, and one I will think of quite often in the future.

The best thing about a Ross Thomas book -- other than the titles and the pitch-black humor and the characters' improbable names -- is the fact that you never know which way the plot's going to turn, and that was definitely the case here. The climax certainly didn't turn out the way I expected, and I mean that in a good way. I zoomed through this book in just a couple of days, eager to see how it would all turn out, and now I want another one. 

This is my first book read in 2019, and I think my New Year's resolution (in addition to reading 52 books this year) is to read all the Thomas novels that I haven't already read in the last year or so. I've got quite a ways to go, and that's a good thing. Ah, hilarity.