Rating: 5/5

“Saturday morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in every face and spring in every step. The locus trees were in bloom and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond the village and above it, was green with vegetation, and it lay just far enough away to see a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting. Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and a deep melancholy settled upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a burden. Sighing he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank…”
-	Mark Twain, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer 

The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is one of the most beloved novels in American history. Mark Twain’s semiautobiographical tale of growing up in antebellum Missouri is filled with unforgettable characters, iconic scenes, and a keen sense of place. It’s one of those books that you can absorb almost by cultural osmosis. Even if you haven’t read it, you recognize it. That’s probably the reason it took me so long to finally pick it up. I figured I already knew it. This tends to happen when you visit Hannibal at a young age, and your parents make you pretend to paint a picket fence while wearing a straw hat with a dozen other people wait to take a turn. 

Having finally gotten around to it, I can confidently put The Adventures of Tom Sawyer into the category of classics that deserve the description. I really liked it, from first page to last. 

Despite its enduring stature, however, I was struck by the smallness of the novel’s scale. There is a lot going on, and at times, the stakes are nothing less than life or death. But this is not a weighty meditation on the universal themes of life. It does not contain profound observations or indelible insights. In short, it does not feel like the stuff of which masterpieces are made. Instead, it’s a book about children intended for children. Nevertheless, it has stood time’s test. 

*** 

The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is an episodic novel, so that it defies any meaningful plot summary. Suffice to say, it involves the whitewashing of a fence, the wooing of a girl, a murder in a graveyard, a surprising funeral, and some time spent in a cave. This is all probably ringing a bell with you, so I’ll spare you any further recitation.

Unlike its more grownup sequel, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is told in the third person, allowing Twain to provide differing perspectives and a few omniscient interjections. For the most part, though, we stick close to Tom, a burgeoning delinquent with a Walter Mitty-like penchant for flights of fancy. Tom drives things forward with his penchant for getting himself into and out of trouble. 

As far as characters go, Tom Sawyer is deceptively simple. He is a truant, but smart; good-hearted, but also something of an asshole. Typically, he does the right thing, but it sometimes takes him a while to get around to it. More than anything, he is a fantasist, a boy whose imagination knows no boundaries, and who finds himself in the unexpected position of having some of those imaginings come true. 

*** 

Perhaps the most striking thing about The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is the particularity of its setting. Tom and friends live in the fictional riverside village of St. Petersburg, famously modeled after Twain’s Hannibal. This basis in lived experiences shines through in the traditions and beliefs of its residents; in the idiomatic expressions and patterns of speech; and in the fine details of geography, especially the woods, the caves, and the mighty Mississippi, upon which float steamboats firing cannon in the hope of bringing drowned bodies to the surface. Twain really captures the place, so much so that you can almost feel the oppressive Missouri humidity clamped over your face. 

The Adventures of Tom Sawyer is also genuinely funny. Tom’s ability to psychologically manipulate his companions is a running gag, as are the boys’ ornate superstitions and rituals. Twain may have died 115 years ago, but his writing feels incredibly modern. 

*** 

Published in 1876, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer takes places at some undefined point before the American Civil War. This is a world in which slavery is legal. More than that, it is a world in which slavery is so ingrained in daily life that it is barely mentioned. Owning humans is simply part of the background. 

The Adventures of Tom Sawyer does not deal with the implications of slavery, either directly or obliquely. It is mentioned in passing, but nothing more, something that is unnoticed by the characters. Given the nature of the proceedings, I can accept this. After all, this is meant as a boyhood romp, not an exploration of America’s original sin. Still, it is hard to ignore this malign institution lurking at the corners of all the charm, humor, and hijinks. 

While on this topic, it is worth mentioning that The Adventures of Tom Sawyer does employ the N-word, though far less than in Adventures of Huckleberry Finn. This is an accurate reflection of how people spoke in nineteenth century Missouri, a demonstration of the era’s reflexive, unexamined racism. It is unpleasant, and jarring, but unfortunately not untrue. Sadly, many people still speak this way in the twenty-first century, long after all excuses have run out. 

*** 

When I pick up great literature, I’m often expecting something big. A big page count. A big subject. Great scope and penetrating depth. The Adventures of Tom Sawyer does not fit those descriptions. This is a low-key hang. 

For all the excitement that brims in these pages, my favorite section involved Tom, Huck, and Joe Harper just hanging out on Jackson’s Island. They fish and swim and pretend to be pirates. Tom and Joe learn to smoke, with variable success. This extended interlude truly captures the fleeting perfection of childhood, when everything is up ahead and everything is possible, but all that is for another time, because you’ve found absolute contentment just lying next to a river in the sun.