Rating: 5/5

The Innocents Abroad made Mark Twain. It was his first published book, a best seller sensation (it was his best selling book during his lifetime), it established his authorial voice, and, indirectly, it landed him his wife. (Libby was the sister of a friend he made on the voyage.) Before it’s publication, he was an obscure Western humorist and journalist, little known, and little regarded in the elite East. His fame, prestige, and family can all be traced back to this epic pleasure cruise of 1867 and the book that he wrote about it. The Innocents Abroad is where Sam Clemens became Mark Twain. 

This was my third read through of Innocents in the past twenty years. It fascinates me because it contains the essence of Mark Twain, both virtues and faults, already present here in his first published book. Here is his irony and sharp, sly wit, gently (and sometimes not so gently) dissecting both individuals and conventions. Here also is his self-deprecating humor, softening the razor barbs he aims at others. His scorn of romanticism and all forms of hokum are already clearly on display in these pages. His scattershot delivery, running randomly from serious descriptions, humorous asides, tall tales and shaggy dog story interjections, and full blown rants was first established here. 

Also in evidence in The Innocents Abroad is Mark Twain’s ambiguous relationship with the conventions of his culture. He presents himself as an outsider, just along for the ride, and much of the humor in his book derives from his mocking of conventions and the wealthy, established “pilgrims” who were his traveling companions on The Quaker City cruise. He mocks them, and he mocks the foreign scammers ready to fleece them in their naivety. Yet he clearly shows how much of their conventional cultural prejudices he shared, particularly when he writes scathingly of the Catholics, Turks, and Arabs that he encountered. These passages are jarring to modern ears, and are a perfect window into the cultural prejudices of mid 19th century WASP American culture. The irony of Mark Twain is that he leveraged his Western, outsider capital mocking the customs of the WASP Eastern establishment to gain a prominent position within that establishment. Nowhere is that central irony of his career more in evidence than in this, his first and most successful book.