Rating: 4/5

“The best thing for being sad ... is to learn something.”  

The Sword in the Stone is a 1938 novel of an orphan named Wart who comes to be tutored by the wizard Merlyn in unconventional ways that prepares him to assume his destiny as King Arthur. This is book 1 of 4 in the series The Once and Future King. It covers multiple genres elements: fantasy, legend, and comedy.

Most readers know, at least heard of, some format of this story. I know I’ve read various abridged books to my children when they were young. Perhaps you’ve seen the 1963 Disney film adaptation The Sword in the Stone. I decide to listen to an audio format narrated by Neville Jason after seeing the book on Guardian 1000 Books to Read and 1001 Children’s Books to Read list. 

Set in Medieval England, Wart is a young orphan being raised by Sir Ector in his castle in a forest alongside Ector’s son, Kay. The boys are training as a knight, though Wart could only become a squire because of his common birth. Wart meets Merlyn after becoming lost in the deep forest while chasing a falcon. Merlyn returns Wart to his castle home, staying to become the boys’ tutor. 

Fantasy allows for unique worldbuilding. My favorite element here was that Merlyn knew things about the future because he was living backwards in time. During the novel, Merlyn turns the Wart into various forest creatures as part of his tutelage. I thought this was a clever way to show empathy to children and make simple some explanations. It is only near the end of the book that the legend of King Arthur is introduced. 

As much as I loved the narration by Neville Jason, whose gentle soothing voice was perfect for Wart and the woodland creatures, I would have an illustrated print copy of the book available if I were reading this with a child. Yet I would not forgo the audio because it made the many songs and poems and Latin phrases most enjoyable. It also helped to gloss over digressions off the main story that occasionally had religious themes. 

This romping adventurous children’s tale has plenty of medieval culture for those fans – castles, a castle moat, falconry, jousting. And there is enough for fantasy fans – Robin Hood, shapeshifting, magical beasts (griffin). It is a timeless classic that should appeal to all ages.