Rating: 5/5

Brother Cadfael, a former crusader now turned Benedictine monk, is a thoughtful investigator. He dislikes injustice especially when the poor and the weak are wrongly accused.

The wrong man
When Liliwin, a poor birdlike minstrel, reaches the monastery only a few steps ahead of a wildly angry mob, the brother monks offer him forty days sanctuary. Then Brother Cadfael learns that Liliwin's accusers want to hang him for a crime he swears he never committed . . and Cadfael begins to investigate.

The challenge. Who will try the accused and who will protect him?
“I will hear you,” said Radulfus with a snap, “by daylight, when you come with sheriff or sergeant to discuss this matter calmly, and in proper form. But I warn you, this man has claimed sanctuary, and the rights of sanctuary are his, according to custom, and neither you nor any other shall force him away out of these walls until the time of his respite is over.”
“And I warn you, my lord,” flared the youth, blazing red, “that should he venture a step outside, we shall be waiting for him, and what falls out of your lordship’s lordship will be no concern of yours, or the church’s.” Yes, unquestionably he was moderately drunk, or he would never have gone so far, an ordinary young burgess of the town, if a wealthy one. Even with an evening’s wine in him, he blenched at his own daring, and shuffled back a pace or two.
“Or God’s?” said the abbot coldly. “Go hence in peace, before his bolt strike you.”

The kitchen maid - the girlfriend
“Is it true?” she asked, low and urgently. “He’s safe, there in the church? And you’ll protect him? You won’t let them fetch him away?”
“He’s with us, and safe enough,” said Cadfael. “No one dare touch him now.”
“And they haven’t hurt him?” she questioned earnestly.
“No worse than will mend now, in peace. No need to fret for a while. He has forty days grace. I think,” he said, studying the thin face, the delicate, staring cheekbones under the wide-set eyes, “you like this young man.”
“He made such lovely music,” said the child wistfully. “And he spoke me gently, and was glad of being with me in the kitchen. It was the best hour I ever spent. And now I’m frightened for him. What will happen to him when the forty days are up?”
“Why, if it goes so far—for forty days is time enough to change many things—but even if it goes so far, and he must come forth, it will be into the hands of the law, not into the hands of his accusers. Law is grim enough, but tries to be fair. And by then those who accuse him will have forgotten their zeal, but even if they have not, they cannot touch him. If you want to help him, keep eyes and ears open, and if you learn of anything to the purpose, then speak out.” Clearly the very thought terrified her. Who ever listened to anything she might say?

With little proof but much faith on his side the kindly Cadfael is determined to solve this delightfully twisted mystery.

Enjoy!