Rating: 5/5

Belle Teal, written by Ann M. Martin, is about a young girl who has to go through a time of racism by many people. She has to learn to deal with the struggle of not having much money. Her father and grandfather passed away when she was young and she now lives with her mom and grandmother. Her mother often works more than one shift in multiple jobs everyday to bring in as much money as she can for her family. Her grandmother is struggling with alzheimer's and Belle Teal and her mother have to learn to have patience with her forgetfulness. However the main problem that Belle Teal has herself is dealing with racism. In an all-white school, there are colored kids to be joining them and most parents and students believe that colored kids are unwanted. Belle Teal and her best friend, Clarice, want to make the new colored kids feel as welcome as possible. They know that it is wrong to judge based on how someone looks, but they can’t seem to get others to understand that. 

The theme of the book, Belle Teal, is to not judge by what you see on the outside. Belle Teal’s mother likes to remind her of that. Belle Teal’s mother states, “Hate just creates more hate” (pg 97) and she is right. When people show hate, all it does is make things worse. When the parents and students hate on the colored kids, it only brings more hate. Little Boss, a kid in Belle Teal and Clarice’s class, makes fun of the girls for hanging out with colored kids. However, the girls like their friend, Darryl, even if he is colored. They don’t mind that he does not look the same as them. The girls don’t understand why people have a problem with it. Having a different look isn’t what should matter, it is what’s on the inside that really counts. A few kids in the girls’ class give the girls a hard time because they don’t have as much money as some of the other kids. They also like to make them feel like they are doing the wrong thing by becoming friends with colored kids, but they don’t listen because they truly know what is right, which is that Darryl, Winnie, and Terrance are good kids even though they are colored. They know that the color of your skin doesn’t determine whether or not you are a good kid.

The style of the book, Belle Teal, is a narrative, and it was written to entertain but with an informing lesson being taught. It is an entertaining book but it shows the major problem with racism. I think Ann M. Martin does a good job truly showing how the girls feel about the racist students and parents. She tells what’s going through their innocent minds, they think about what they can do to get people to see the real Darryl, not just what’s on the outside. When the girls get ready for their first day of school, they are most excited about their new teacher, Miss Casey, who they have waited to have as their teacher ever since they first heard about her. Belle Teal saw angry parents standing outside the school with signs as she was walking inside the school with Clarice. She soon figured out that they were angry because of the new colored students. She had many questions as to why the parents were there chanting mean things at the kids and teachers. However, as soon as the girls felt the comfort of walking into Miss Casey’s room, Belle thinks, “All those questions that were forming on my tongue - the ones about the angry parents and their signs- melt away at the sight of Miss Casey at her desk” (29). She feels much more comfortable after she notices the presence of the nicest teacher she’s heard about. She can’t wait for her to mention the new students, even the colored ones, which she later becomes friends with. The girls face a lot of racism because they are friends with a colored boy. They are slowly learning how to deal with it, though. They understand that some people will just never understand that judging someone based on the color of their skin is wrong. However, Belle Teal has a few friends herself, that are very racist towards Darryl. Little Boss, Vernon, and Chas are all some of Belle Teal’s friends but they upset her quite often by making racist comments. In one chapter, Vernon was talking about a performance the class had set up about the birth of Jesus and when Darryl received the part of a King, Vernon said “Colored people had nothing to do with the birth of Jesus Christ” (148), which is very racist, and untrue. It is completely wrong to tell someone it is incorrect to be treated a certain way just because they are colored. Later on in the story, Darryl is accused of shooting Little Boss, although it was Little Boss who accidentally shot himself in the leg while playing around with his father’s gun. Belle Teal and Clarice both know that Darryl didn’t shoot him, but everyone else seems to believe it. Darryl had talked to the girls about how much trouble he could get in for this, but when the girls tried to reassure him that he wouldn’t get in trouble because he didn’t do it, all he managed to say was “But it’s our word against a white man’s” (175), which was sadly true. Although Big Boss, Little Boss’s father, eventually spoke up about the lie, it is sad that Darryl knew how easily he could get in trouble for something he knew he wouldn’t do. I think Ann M. Martin wanted to show that it is right to get to know someone before you create an opinion about them. It is wrong to judge someone in any way until you get to know them. Even if they seem to only be bringing negativity, you never know what they are going through personally. 

I very much enjoyed the book Belle Teal. I would give this book a 5 stars out of 5 because it is a very good and entertaining story however, it also covers a very important lesson about racism. It informs people about how much of a struggle it is for colored people every day. It shows a daily thing they go through just because of the color of their skin. I liked this book a lot and there are only a few minor things I would change. When people find out about Big Boss’s lie about Little Boss accidentally shooting himself in the leg, they never see Little Boss again and I would have liked to know where he ended up when he left. I also would have liked the story to continue on a little longer. The story only covers Belle Teal’s life over her first semester of the fifth grade and I would have liked to see more of her year. Overall, I really enjoyed this book and would suggest it to others.