Rating: 3/5

ANNIE'S HERO is a fantasy romance that I first read in 1998 and loved, giving it 5 weepy stars before placing it on my keeper shelf. However in my re-read I found that I didn’t enjoy it nearly as much. I don’t know if my romance expectations have changed or the romance genre as a whole has changed but this time through I found it to be fluffy, angst riddled and with far to much repetitive internal dialogue without any meat to keep me interested. The story idea is still intriguing and I fell for our anguished hero Richard just as hard but overall Annie’s Hero just didn’t do it for me this time.

Sweethearts since they were children, Annie and Richard share an unparalleled love filled with passion, joy and tenderness; they are a couple destined to be together always. (And the author tells us this a lot) However the fates have different ideas. Returning from their honeymoon Richard reluctantly leaves the bliss of their perfect world and returns to his job as a truck driver. On this day Annie has a bad feeling, and as the heavens open and lightning claps around her she knows Richard is about to leave her forever. 

As does Sir George, leader of the White Knights who witnesses Richard sacrificing himself to save a bus full of school children. As Richard’s fuel truck plunges over a cliff and explodes Sir George plucks him from his mortal existence and offers him a choice; he can pass over into eternity or join him and his Knights in their fight against evil. However in order to join, Richard must first give up everything he is including his memories, his name and even how he looks. Richard is now Ren, leader of the White Knights and he knows nothing except battle in this timeless world, battle and an all consuming emptiness and sorrow. 

8 months later Annie is trying to keep it together for the sake of her unborn baby but she’s a mere shadow of the woman she once was. She’s also brutally aware that she might just be going crazy because that man she keeps seeing all over town looks just like her dead husband. His hairs longer and he carries more muscle but she knows in her soul it’s him. Only why doesn’t anyone else recognize him? And how could he not remember her? Or does he? Only Annie’s love and passion can revive Richard’s stolen memories but by giving into what they both want Richard will be breaking the last of his vows and risks losing Annie forever. And then theres also the small issue of the Black Knight, sent to kill their baby. Cheers!