Rating: 4/5

"Save a stranger from the sea, and he will turn your enemee." - Old Cornish saying

In Book 8 of what is one of my favorite series of all time (in close running with Mary Stewart’s Merlin series), a stranger is rescued from the sea and inserts himself into the lives of the Poldarks. This handsome young man, to my surprise, is quickly accepted by the inhabitants of the surrounding close-knit communities. He is amiable, daring, a bit of a ladies’ man, and rather mysterious. Can we and the people of Cornwall trust this charismatic fellow? Obviously, you’d have to read this book (and all the previous installments first), to judge for yourself!

The Stranger from the Sea is set a decade after the previous book in the series. The war with France rages in Europe and the eldest of the Poldark children have grown into young adults. Ross and Demelza have matured and take up less of the spotlight now. I admit to missing them a bit; however, I thoroughly enjoyed getting to know Clowance and Jeremy Poldark. Clowance has become of age to marry, and both Demelza and Caroline are involved with trying to ensure the right match for her. Clowance, much like her mother, is a spirited young woman and not likely to take just anyone’s advice on the matter. Demelza struggles with the desire for her daughter to find a true love as well as a partnership that will be advantageous. Is it possible for her to have both, much like the life she has found with Ross? She balks a bit at the custom of bringing her daughter out into society to be judged by others. "My daughter is not a – a cow at a country fair with a bow of pink ribbon round its neck waiting for inspection from those who are interested in putting in a bid. She deserves something different from that!" In fact, this book speaks quite a lot to the different social classes and some of the petty customs that were in place at the time. Jeremy also gets caught up in an entanglement with a vivacious young lady who is evidently above his station. 

I was further absorbed by the relationship between father and son in this book. It seems that Ross and Jeremy do not fully understand one another. Ross sees his son as having neither direction nor ambition. But he has been away for long periods of time, off to Parliament in London as well as various excursions overseas on special missions for the crown. He has not been observant enough perhaps, has missed the subtle growth of his eldest. "Why hadn’t he, Ross, perceived more to his son than his apparent carelessness, his seemingly detached, feckless, facile attitude to life?" At the same time, Jeremy is uncertain how to approach his father. He sees a perfect gentleman with no apparent worries to consume him. Jeremy has a new interest, something that he is passionate about, and it was very interesting to learn of his latest endeavors. I can’t wait to see how this plays out in the next book. 

Once again, I can’t say enough about this superb series. I will confess a little less love for this particular installment – but I still adored it! I’ll just need more time to settle in with the newest characters, but once I do, I know that Winston Graham will take me to further heights of passion! For now, I’m going to stock up on popcorn and get ready for Season 4 on Masterpiece Theater in just 6 short days. Somebody pass the smelling salts, please!

"… the most important thing was to strike a balance: poverty and riches each in their own way caused unhappiness. With money, the way to be happy was to continue to have almost enough."