Rating: 4/5

The late, great C.S. Lewis brings the third novel in his Space Trilogy, “That Hideous Strength”, and reunites the reader with the elusive Ransom, the main protagonist from his previous Space novels. 

Lewis is a wordsmith, and this novel is not an easy one to read. His language is poetic and beautiful, and (as he is the stuff of Legends), he takes sentences to say what authors of this generation would say in a matter of words. But that does not mean “That Hideous Strength” is in any way an arduous or boring novel. Although this particular story was published in the 1940s, there are some ominous events that occur that could very easily have taken place in today’s society (i.e. the manipulated journalism market, a tech company with plans to overtake the world and its citizens, just to name a few). 

 A sinister tech company, ironically called N.I.C.E, is determined to take total control of Europe by “reconditioning” its “less desirable” patrons. Ransom and his friends must work together to destroy this company as quickly as possible before the world as they know it quite literally blows up. When both sides hear that the wizard Merlin may return, each is desperate for the magician to join their side. A husband and wife, Mark and Jane, are caught in the middle as their allegiances are split, with one ending up on one side, while their partner lies clearly on the other. 

“That Hideous Strength” closes out the Space trilogy in a complete and final manner but this is the only novel in the series that could be read as a standalone. Although Ransom’s background would be better understood if “Out of the Silent Planet” and “Perelandra” are read, it is not necessary to keep with the plot of “Strength” (although it is always suggested to ensure the full reading experience). 

Lewis once again brings fantasy, magic, religion and humanity to the forefront in another one of his magnificent works of literary fiction. “Strength” is a thought-provoking, cleverly written foray into a very plausible fantasy world, completely mesmerizing readers as only the great Lewis can achieve.