Rating: 5/5

When a book reaches its fourth edition it is a reason for questions. Some books are textbooks and might have included some typos or neglected to cover something clearly in the previous editions. There are cases when it is a well-earned release though, and the book Lore of Running is one of those situations. 

Lore of Running is written by Timothy Noakes, MD. Doctor Noakes comes across as a somewhat well-informed man, but the only reason I say that is because he perpetuates the idea that Columbus proved the Earth to be round. When it comes to the human body, however, Doctor Noakes seems second to none in terms of knowledge. As far as I can tell, all fields of knowledge and human endeavor have a paradigm, a certain framework with which to view reality and test results. It is the same situation when it comes to human kinetics as the book calls it. I don’t follow the scene of human kinetics or kinesthesiology or whatever you call it, so I don’t know if these matters have been resolved or not. In this edition, there are several models of how muscle contracts and why we get fatigued in the first place. The one supported by the author is that of a Central Governor. Basically, we can only supply so much blood at a time with each pump of the heart. Since the heart needs its own supply of blood, there is a system in place to prevent the heart from overtaxing itself. This is a really interesting theory to me, and it makes a lot of sense. When I was younger, I thought that muscle fatigue was caused by the buildup of lactic acid, but Noakes addresses that as well.

Lore of Running is nothing less than a Runner’s Bible. It covers everything you could ever want to know about running circa 2001. As I mentioned in the second paragraph, it discusses the biochemical and physiological basis of running. It gets into a lot of detail, even covering the proteins that make up the muscles and how they are thought to contract. It covers the heart, maximum oxygen delivery, running efficiency and so much more. Since it covers running, its main goal is to act as a training guide for the runner or running coach. This is not really meant to be perused at leisure. This is a serious guide to maximize performance. It contains charts and graphs and is rigorously scientific.

Lore of Running also discusses training menus and how to train for a big race. It covers the training schedule of famous runners of yore. In so doing, it also demonstrates what not to do. It covers how to tell if you are over-training and what to do about that as well. It gives a lot of specifics. The book is written so that it is in metric, but that isn’t really a problem for me. I mean, Doctor Noakes is from South Africa, so I don’t really know what I expected.

Finally, the book covers criticism of running that came about in the 1970s. I guess some people just need to find something to criticize, but I can’t think of many habits that are more healthy than running. Trying to conflate running with addiction is rather spurious in my opinion. I will admit that some people do run to the point of injury, but usually, that doesn’t happen.

This book is a bit old, so I don’t know if anything changed in the world of Running since 2001, like a shift in our understanding of how the body takes in and uses oxygen or how muscles work or anything like that. I also don’t know if the ideas behind training have changed drastically. Either way, this is a really good book.