Rating: 3/5

3 Stars ~ I'm a sucker for wrongfully accused heroine stories.  This one had that is spades.  At a mere 17, Natalie had been pushed out of her home by her vindictive lying step-mother.  She'd been accused of causing the accident that resulted in her step-mother's miscarriage and ending her chances for further children.  When she denied playing any role in the accident, even her father turned on her.  Unable to bear their rejection, Natalie used her inheritance from her grandmother to attend college and then establish her own home. 

Now five years later, her father's business partner, Lane has come to find her and bring her home.  Her father has had a stroke and he wants his daughter home.  Natalie loves her father but is reluctant to put herself back into that evil atmosphere with her step mother Britt. Lane, who is also, Britt's cousin, can't fathom the woman Natalie describes Britt to be.  He sees that Natalie is truly destressed about returning, but puts it down to bias from her grandmother against Britt and her own youthful jealousy.  Lane is taken aback when Natalie appeals for him to protect her from Britt's wrath.

  
   'I'm depending on you to be amazingly watchful, even if only to prove yourself right and me wrong. One thing no one can take from me is a sense of my own integrity. You've only seen Britt softly weeping or smiling. I've seen her snarling in a white-hot rage.'

   'Good God, child!' he said with fresh urgency. 'No one is entirely black or entirely white but rather a variety of colours. I get no picture of Britt as a Lady Macbeth at all. She's a cultivated, attractive woman, devoted to her husband. These wild stories of yours try me too far. Without your being aware of it perhaps it's an unhappy lack in yourself, a lack of generosity towards a woman other than your mother whom your father can love. If so, you should be ashamed of yourself.'
 
   'The one thing I assuredly don't suffer from is shame,' she said vibrantly, her searching, glowing grey eyes intent on his face, her young, slender body tautened like a bowstring. 'Britt's ghost still troubles my nightmares, curiously cold and chilling. Don't blame me if I can't believe in some miraculous change.'

   Lane Frazer drew an audible breath and his white teeth snapped. 'You're either a superb actress or a child deeply wronged. What is it you want of me?'

   'Protect me,' she said oddly, and fell silent, a pulse beating rapidly in her white throat.

Even though Ms. Way has a tendency for long monologues, she can bring out deep emotion in her characters as well.  I enjoyed Lane and Natalie's road to a HEA.