Rating: 5/5

Broadly loved beautiful and heartfelt Christmas story about the meaning of giving gifts and reciprocity of love. The young newly-wed couple living in poverty in New York, Della and Jim, have no resources to give one another the Christmas present they would like to.

“Tomorrow would be Christmas Day, and she had only $1.87 with which to buy Jim a present. She had been saving every penny she could for months, with this result. Twenty dollars a week doesn’t go far. Expenses had been greater than she had calculated. They always are. Only $1.87 to buy a present for Jim. Her Jim. Many a happy hour she had spent planning for something nice for him. Something fine and rare and sterling—something just a little bit near to being worthy of the honor of being owned by Jim.”

Our protagonists find themselves in tension that is inevitable in life, the gap between the life we would like to live in our fantasy, and the life we can live in the reality that often consists of suffering.

“Which instigates the moral reflection that life is made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles predominating.”

The intensity of their love makes them sacrifice their most prized possessions to give make another happy. The duplicity of their sacrifices elevates the story from pure sentimentality to brilliant comic relief in an ironic twist. O.Henry uses irony to expose that the sacrifices they made are useless, but only in the material realm. The narrator calls the protagonists both foolish and wise, foolish in failed intention to give the perfect material gift to another in the conditions of poverty, and wise enough to make the symbolic gesture that represents the intensity and generosity of their love. The perfect gift is the one in which a person feels the love another person has for her.
Della and Jim are suffering, as all humans are, but they found the silver lining of suffering, in making the best they can from given circumstances, in not being bitter and resentful but loving and giving. They invested all they have in what is truly their most prized possession - the relationship they have with their partner. 

“And here I have lamely related to you the uneventful chronicle of two foolish children in a flat who most unwisely sacrificed for each other the greatest treasures of their house. But in a last word to the wise of these days let it be said that of all who give gifts these two were the wisest. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are wisest. Everywhere they are wisest. They are the magi.”

Wonderful to read anytime but particularly at Christmas time.