Rating: 1/5

The Wings of the Dove			Henry James (1902) #26

June 8, 2007

	This has to be the worst book that I have ever read. Well, maybe not ever, but definitely the worst one yet on this list (and there have been some that have sucked mightily). How this book made the list, I have no idea, but it has rattled my already shaky faith in the validity of this list. I suspect that it has something to do with one Mr. Gore Vidal, who, judging from the little blurb on the back of the dust jacket of the copy that I have, thinks that Henry James is the be-all to end-all of modern literature. If I ever see Mr. Vidal (and I don’t even know if he is even still with us), I will be bound by honor to kick his ass for making me read this book. There are two more books of Mr. James’ on this list, and I hope that they are significantly shorter than this one. I own a handsome copy of The Ambassadors, and was quite proud of obtaining it before reading this book. Now I think that I might use it to soak up some oil stains in my driveway. At least it’s only just over 300 pages long. 
	To the book – James spends a huge amount of time being so descriptive about pointless things that the reader is left without a clue as to what is happening in the book, or who anyone is, or what he or she is even dong there. When I first discovered that I didn’t know what was happening in the story (and that I couldn’t relate with any of the characters), I thought that maybe I was too unlearned to understand James’ writing. After 40 or 50 more pages, I realized that the problem didn’t lie with me (or my lack of understanding, cognition, intelligence, ect..), it was just that the writing sucked. And sucked it did. For 700+ pages that dragged on and on.
	I am happy to report that I only paid a dollar for my copy of this book, which was withdrawn from the Conroe, Texas library, possibly in fear that it might, by some strange literary osmosis, make all the other books on the shelf suck as well. It had only been read once, by some unfortunate soul who was a sloppy reader and had spilled soup or something on the pages and had only made it to page 100 or so before either personally returning it to the library, or having it returned to the library by some friend or family member after prying it from the dead, cold hands of a reader that had eaten poison to relieve the painful existence that their life had become after reading part of this book. I digress…
	It only took 540 pages of agony for this book to get in the least bit interesting. Kate Croy appeals to Merton Densher (yes, Merton), her lover (of a Nineteenth Century sort), to marry her dying rich friend Milly so that when Milly dies, Merton will inherit her money and can then be “eligible” to marry Kate. Densher acquiesces to Kate’s proposal only if she will sleep with him that night, which she apparently does.
	There was a time in this novel, around page 585, which I briefly took interest in both the books plot and it’s characters, but I quickly lost interest again. I had, after all, just figured out that Mrs. Stringham was Susan Shepherd, and that led me to assume that Mrs. Lowder, i.e. Aunt Maud, was Maud Maningham, a fact that should have been made clear at the onset of the book. Suspense in writing should not come from figuring out to whom the author is referring to unless they are some kind of spy, double agent, or in some alternate reality. Thanks for the clarity, Henry.
	Looking back, I should have known that a book whose main character (or one of them) is named “Merton” would spell trouble. What the hell kind of name is Merton, anyway? Austrian? Dutch? I do know that Merton Densher comes close to sharing with Dick Diver the most unfortunate name in literature. Come to think of it, I want my dollar back.

0.7

A (although referred to off-handedly), T, N