Rating: 2/5

Walt Disney Imagineering: A Behind the Dreams Look At Making Magic Real by The Imagineers, is a book about what goes into creating the Walt Disney parks in Orlando and Anaheim. The book goes into the design process of creating new attractions or new resorts at their two flagship parks. This includes mostly early drawings and pictures of popular rides as well as the blue prints for entire parks like Epcot in Disney World and Animal Kingdom in Disney World. There really isn't any plot for this book and even lacks a ton of dialogue but that is not the purpose of the book. The book is really for Disney Enthusists that want to know more about how these places were created and what kind of things you don't see when you visit the parks. 

I gave this book a two out of 5 stars because it simply wasn't what I thought it was going to be. That isn't entirely the book's fault though. The lack of detail going along with these interesting pictures and early drawings is the book's negative quality. The reason why I read this book was to get more educated on the planning and engineering side of the Disney Parks. As a kid, I was able to go to Disney World a few times and it was always so great because of how interesting and fun the parks where. Now that I'm older, I wanted to know how that was all possible. The drawings and pictures were great but there just wasn't enough content for me to get anything out of it. Also, when this book was published, the Animal Kingdom was just opening at Disney World and it had been the first main park made in almost a decade and it must have been cool at the time to see all the blueprints and drawings of attractions that today are mainstays and iconic at Disney. There has been a ton of new building and improvements to the Disney Parks in the last 20 years, so it would be cool to see an update to this book with more detail about the engineering and designing process that goes into making a new attraction or an entire park. The main audience for this book would be Disney Fans and aspiring designers and upcoming engineers. I would recommend this book to anybody who is artistic and enjoys looking at drawings and pictures and the process of creating something from drawings.