Rating: 3/5

*4,5 out of 10 spiky stars

I suspect that I expected to find something similar to smutty contemporary sado-masochistic literature, and was therefore quite pleasantly surprised stylistically speaking. Having watched documentaries about De Sade which depicted him as a dribbling sot in an institution for the insane, I had expected... well... something much less intelligent than this. De Sade is obviously no fool, and his arguments are intelligently put.

In this novel, De Sade still conforms to Victorian norms in the respect that even libertine, rebellious De Sade felt he had to wrap everything he said in euphemistic terms, in spite of the fact that the content of the novel and the gist of his rhetoric would indeed have been wildly shocking to most Victorian sensibilities. 

Compared to certain contemporary literature, such as some of the works of authors like Palanuik, for example in his novel Snuff, also, various writings of J.G. Ballard, Samuel R. Delany's novel Hogg and others like the work of Brett Easton Ellis, Justine is not so very shocking in the contemporary landscape despite De Sade's reputation.

Of course, De Sade's later novels, especially The 120 Days of Sodom, truly do contain disgusting material, even by contemporary standards.

If one feels you really MUST read De Sade, I guess this is one of the most accessible ones, but, even though it is De Sade 'lite' it does nonetheless contain quite a bit of sadism, and poor little Justine does seem a bit of a sucker for punishment, the quintessential 'victim'.

Justine is the quintessential sad sac of the ages. De Sade paints her as a poor meek little thing who, according to him, deserves her end because of her continued piousness. His rhetoric is of course completely distorted, but one does get a sense that she (possibly unwittingly or subconsciously) invites victimhood. I hope people won't find it too cruel if I say that her end was actually quite a humorous piece of Deux Ex Machina. De Sade subverts a very common trope, by having a punishment that is usually visited upon sinners, strike down the innocent instead.

One often has to wonder why a lightning bolt never came down from heaven to strike the sinful Marquis himself down.

I liked that at least De Sade does not try to justify sadism as anything else than what it really is. He openly rebels against 'piety' with his proposed hedonistic rhetoric. The sadists and hedonists in the novel are what they are, fully and completely, and they don't make excuses for it, or pretend to 'love' their victims. They don't love their victims. They are most definitely not 'relationship' material, not poor misunderstood whelps who can be recycled if you just loved them enough. ...and perhaps this is precicely why de Sade is so reviled. He removes all the cobwebby romanticism, the smarmy treacle that these proclivities tend to be marinated in in popular fiction.

I don't agree with most of De Sade's philosophy, but from a literary stylistic point of view the book is probably a sight better than 50 Shades of Grey.

Proper review to follow when time permits.