Rating: 4/5

Miranda Carmichael is a companion to the eccentric Lady Wiston, who hires her servants from the street and frequently dons Cossack trousers and does yoga. Miranda loves Lady Wiston but she is not fond of her employer's Pug dog who causes her to stumble in the park wherein she trips over a man lying in the grass. Upon waking to rescue Miranda from harm, the man proceeds to kiss her! Miranda is outraged but her anger quickly turns to sympathy as Mudge the Pug bites the man. Peter Daviot is a self-proclaimed adventurer returned to London from years abroad in America. He is enchanted by the beautiful, level-headed companion and pleased to discover that she works for his aunt whom he has come to London to sponge off. As Peter sets out to put his adventures on paper he comes to rely on Miranda for feedback and advice. When Lady Wiston's late husband's nephew Lord Snell comes to stay, Peter instantly distrusts the pompous, arrogant man and is angered by the fact that Miranda seems to admire him. When Peter's instincts prove correct, he lets his pride get in the way which may spell disaster for those he holds dear. 

This is another excellent novel by one of the best of the Regency comedy writers. I enjoyed the main characters immensely, especially Lady Wiston whose eccentricities made me giggle. I especially liked how the relationship between the hero and heroine develops. Their romance begins with mutual respect and then friendship and love for Lady Wiston. The hero is refreshing, being neither a rake nor a Corinthian. He's very different and very charming. The plot kept me reading late. I couldn't figure out an easy and happy solution. I was satisfied by the ending, though I think it was a bit rushed and did not really make a lot of sense but it was fun anyway. I recommend this to lovers of Georgette Heyer and the Zebra and Signet paperback Regencies. I was excited to find this book in a used bookshop and though it's not a keeper, it's definitely worth reading a second time.