Rating: 2/5

My earliest memory of Donne is "Death Be Not Proud" and 10th grade stanza and personification lessons in a Christian school that exemplified his simplest work. Donne wit and medievalism was always embraced by my Christian educators, who harkened fondly back to the stark moral contrasts of the morality-play/inquisition era. They raised Donne up next to Milton, Bunyan and other Johns of letters sanctioned by the Church-State, not to mention his healthy bit of luck being male, white and born into the upper class. Who knows what classics we'll never read, written by the supposed inferior populations of the past? But anyway, we have Donne. For me, his sonnets – even the frenetic ones – mostly conjure Renaissance-fair-esque courtly cheesiness - plucking psalteries and dulcimers and tinny recitations of sing-song nausea. 

Aside from the misogynist vibe and the blatant Protestant vs Catholic scramble, Donne has interesting albeit crude ideas. One poem my schoolmarms never discussed in class is "The Flea." Taking a Sadean theme, Donne subtly conjures bestiality, the exchange of fluids, bloodletting, sacrificial rites, vampyric occult, etc. or maybe those are just the misperceptions of my guttered mind. At its most innocent, it evokes the crucifixion metaphor and marriage. In either case, it's a strange and fascinating piece of "metaphysical conceit" as they say.

I'd say his best works are his elegies. It's difficult to be critical of flowery verse when it's as final and honorific as an epitaph in stone. "The Second Anniversary" is the most beautiful elegy of any written in metered verse. Also "Elegie XVI - On His Mistress" is a lovely work, and a rare break from his sexist/chivalric theme. My favorite of all his work is "The Triple Fool." This is a modest but clever look at the mirroring effect of readership.

Overall, much of the verse is clever and capable of deeper interpretations than a first read can reveal. However apt and even ahead of his time Donne's work seems, it still fails in many ways to remain readable. The stilted meter, forced rhyme, the extreme bias and heavily censored content, all make me wary of spending more time with Donne than this work has given me.