Rating: 4/5

She moved away from him, rising to her feet. "And if we don't like what we find, then maybe what we had wasn't as strong as we thought it was."

"No.'' The word was low and tight, vehement, and he was on his feet, his hands on her arms. "We weren't wrong. It's strong, Whitney. It's real." He made a visible effort to pull himself together, and smiling, he gave her a little shake. "Best friends, right? No matter what."

He needed something from her, some kind of confirmation. She could see it in his eyes, in his too tense smile. "Best friends," she echoed in a whisper. "No matter what."

"That Boy From Trash Town" is the story of Whitney and Dean.

Get your tissues ready- this is beautiful.

Our heroine was five, and moved to a new town after her father's death, when the fourteen year old hero rescued her. He was from the "trash" part of the town, and being abused by his stepfather- she was the daughter from an effluent family, and being overlooked. They formed an unlikely bond, which grew stronger with age. 
At present, the heroine madly worships the hero, who works as an attorney. With her heart in her eyes, and a chatter that can drown a sonic boom, she is a ray of sunshine and a breath of fresh air. She forgets every sin, and loves unconditionally, dreaming of her imaginary wedding to the hero.
And that is when her world comes crashing down. As she finds out that her mother has been lying to her all along, the hero has an angry outburst which shatters all her illusions.
Utterly heartbroken, she leaves town and decides to find her destiny and make a name for herself. But are past bonds so easy to break? Will she ever find the truth?

What a wonderful read. The heroine was so adorable and loving. She signified purity, happiness and devotion towards those she loved. I think when the she started dreaming of her HEA, we as readers could hear ominous music, and alas, destruction soon ensued- of her dreams and her reality. However, she did not give up. Going out to find her true identity, finding success being independent and finally analyzing her complicated feelings for the hero. The heroine was loving, confused and really caring towards the heroine. He had been her shoulder to cry on for years, her constant companion, until he refused to deal with his feelings for her. When he inadvertently hurt her, he quickly realized his mistake, and spent the rest of the book slowly being there for her while giving her the space she needed.

My only grievance is that we didn't see a resolution between Lloyd and the heroine's mother- and that we didn't get an epilogue.

Great read.

Unsafe by definition
4.5/5