Rating: 2/5

I lived in Chile for 3 years and learned quite a bit about the Golpe Militar of General Agusto Pinochet, from Chilean sources, friends, museums, and academics. In other words, from the people that suffered. Upon my return I read the documents released by the CIA during the Clinton administration. David Rockefeller is a frequent name in this history. So, when I came across his Memoirs, I was curious what he would say.

In 560 pages Rockefeller dedicates all of two paragraphs to Chile. In substance he said that Allende was a radical communist (he was a socialist not a communist) who despite being elected by the people was set on nationalizing private production that would destroy the economy and democracy. He called the coup a time of settling scores. That unfortunately resulted in economic reforms that created a strong economy. He was particularly proud of the “Chicago Boys”, Chilean students that trained at the University of Chicago, and implemented Milton Freedman theories in Chile. Rockefeller received his PhD in Economics at Chicago as well (coincidence?). He fails to mention that there were 40,018 victims (the official toll accepted by Pres. Sebastian Pinera in 2011). So, reading this memoir for the purpose I sought was entirely unsatisfactory and indeed troubling.

The book reeks of an uber privileged scion of the Rockefeller dynasty playing politics throughout the world without ever really understanding or acknowledging the carnage that he contributed to. Rockefeller recounts his gilded youth, where he delivered food to the poor with the help of a chauffeur, roller-skated along Fifth Avenue tailed by a limousine in case he should grow tired, and attended dinner with a father and mother who ate every night in their formal wear.

David Rockefeller gave away nearly $2 billion in his lifetime. As much as he gave, Rockefeller had the same propensity for collecting. At one point, his private art collection was valued at $500 million. Despite his good deeds and philanthropy, I have a hard time with the man. I’ll let God be the judge but, in the meantime, I will stand by the families I know in Chile that lost friends and family, who were tortured, beaten, or just disappeared. I have little tolerance for rich men playing king maker roles and pulling the strings they think should be pulled while standing aloof of the impact of their views and policies.