Rating: 5/5

Originally published in 1949, Thomas Costain's Conquering Family is a history of Henry II and his family. It is the first volume in a series about the Plantagenet Dynasty and is told from a wonderfully British perspective. 

The work discusses the succession problems created when Henry I's son died in the White Ship crash. He continues through the death of that famously hated king, John. 

Costain uses his British style to introduce readers to the Plantagenet's with detail and an entertaining voice. For example, in describing Richard the Loinheart: Richard was always the knight, never the king. 

The author also addresses court rumor and works to help readers distinguish fact and fiction. However, because the book has an older publication date there are a few things that historians have discovered in the past 60 years. It seems history is always coming to light. One example of this is Henry II's illegitimate son, William. New research has discovered William is not Rosamund's son-- the child of one of Henry's other mistresses, Ida. 

Throughout the work, the author provides useful asides. For example, he gives a good description of Strongbow's conquest of Ireland, the Robin Hood Legend and the life of a villen during the period. These details help paint a picture of the times beyond just what was happening to the Plantagenet dynasty. 

One aspect that maybe tough for new readers to this period of history are the author's speculations. Every once in while he adds his own opinion of events. I enjoyed his ideas, however, people less well versed in the period my be confused and take his musings as fact. As long as you give the book a close reading, I don't think readers will be confused. 

I was reading this concurrent with The Plantagenets: The Warrior Kings and Queens Who Made England by Dan Jones. Jones' book is more recent (2013) but Constain's book is much better, more entertaining and readable. Over and over I found myself wishing I was reading Costain's when I was reading Jones'. 

Finally, I had the extra treat of listening to Conquering Family on audio and the narrator David Case does a wonderful job. His voice, accent, and timing add a lot to the book!