Rating: 3/5

Work without Hope draws nectar in a sieve,
And Hope without an object cannot live. - Samuel Taylor Coleridge.

This is a tale of unending misery, lighted by a slim ray of hope towards the very end.

This is the story of Rukmani, the wife of a tenant farmer in South India, just after independence. The life of the peasant in India is subject to the whims and fancies of the fickle monsoon, and also that of the landlord. They live and procreate in perpetual poverty which they accept as their lot. Sons are seen as assets, and daughters as burdens. Women who cannot conceive, and those who cannot bear sons, are seen as cursed. They have no hopes for the future; their existence is hand to mouth.

Rukmani and her husband Nathan are eking out their existence in this bleak scenario. Nathan's dream is to put enough money by to buy his own land in future,while Rukmani dreams only of bright futures for her children - a good marriage for her daughter, and her five sons working along with her husband as their life becomes a pastoral idyll. But sadly, everything falls apart due to vagaries of the monsoon, alternatively parching and flooding the fields, and they are left in penury.

There is also the tanning factory coming up in the village, and more and more people (including Rukamani's two elder sons) go to work there. Capitalism, even more heartless than feudalism, slowly start eating up the country. And the old ways of life are changed for ever, slowly dismantling the world of Nathan and Rukmani. The only bright spot in the entire narrative is Kenny the Englishman, working selflessly for the villagers of his adopted country.

I would have enjoyed this book much more had I read it during my youth. The tone is starkly realistic, and there is no sugarcoating of the bitter truths. Ms. Markandeya was a pioneer of Indian authors writing in English; she influenced a lot of others, as Shashi Tharoor says in the blurb. But her way of storytelling is all "tell, not show",which is terribly dated.

However, the following passage stayed with me:
NOT IN THE TOWN, WHERE ALL THAT WAS NATURAL HAD LONG BEEN SACRIFICED, but on its outskirts, one could still see the passing of the seasons. For in the town there were the crowds, and streets battened down upon the earth, and the filth that men had put upon it; and one walked with care for what might lie beneath one's feet or threaten from before or behind; and in this preoccupation forgot to look at the sun or the stars, or even to observe they had changed their setting in the sky: and knew nothing of the passage of time save in dry frenzy, by looking at a clock. But for us, who lived by the green, quiet fields, perilously close though these were to the town, nature still gave its muted message. Each passing day, each week, each month, left its sign, clear and unmistakable. One asks: even after sending rockets to the moon and Mars, has anything changed in India for the peasant? Reading about the spate of farmer suicides every year, one thinks not...