Rating: 5/5

I found this while looking around on my library's digital download site, and I realized that I had read this book before when I was a kid, then almost completely forgot about it. I decided to read it again to refresh my memory of how it ended.

Miss Cooper has to be one of the most crotchety elderly ladies I've ever come across in fiction. One wonders why she would even rent out her upstairs apartment to a single-mother with a child, especially when there is a girl next door who might come over to play if children move in. I guess she needed the rent that badly.

She certain doesn't mind the idea of calling the realtor and throwing her lodgers out if Ashley, the main character, keeps wandering into the overgrown garden in her backyard, even though Ashley wishes to fix it up for a place to play. Also, following the white cat that keeps showing up at night and calling outside her window is a big temptation.

The girls eventually dig up a box in the backyard with an old doll in it, and the cat draws Ashley through the hedge into a world of the past shaded in twilight even when it is broad daylight in the real world. Here she meets the former owner of the doll, now a ghost.

This twilight world leaves me with a lot of questions. Time is clearly progressing inside of this capsule world, and Louisa, the ghost girl, is clearly dying of consumption and they need to get the doll back to her before she dies. However, Miss Cooper mentions later that she had been hearing the haunted crying and seeing the ghost cat for many years now. So, does the world trapped in the past progress in time then reset itself? Has the time in this frozen world finally started to move forward because the girls visited, and would it have remained static if they never came?

The book never explains this, nor does it really need to for the resolution to be fulfilling. I just tend to over-think these things.

So did this book live up to my experience with it nearly 20 years ago? Actually, I'd say yes, although the focus of my enjoyment is different than it was when I was young. I don't find the book nearly as creepy or suspenseful as I did as a child, but now that I'm older, I'm better able to appreciate the exploration this book makes of feelings of guilt or resentment that can come when someone close to you passes away with things left unsaid or done.

The prose is solid, and the description enhances a sense of atmosphere without being too wordy. The characters have the level of simplicity you would expect from a Middle Grade level book, but they are still believable and act like someone of their age and personal experience.

My only complaint would be with the digital conversion of the ebook. The version I checked out from Overdrive is full of OCR conversion typos that were never proofread by the publisher. There are lots of reoccurring errors like "eves" for "eyes", "Up" for "lip", and garbled punctuation. And this isn't the first ebook I've borrowed recently that had these typos. I really wish that publishers would check their scans before putting these things out.