Rating: 5/5

Personal Response
I really liked the book  Lonely on the Mountain. I thought it was a good book because it always had something going on. It also had a really good story behind it, and it was hard to stop reading because you never knew what was going to happen. The author is also really good with detail, and that makes the book easier to read. The book was a little difficult to follow at times because it switched point of view without warning although it made the book much better, and it gave you a better idea of what was going on.

Plot Summary
The book first started out while Tell and Tyrel where driving the cattle to the north. They then got caught in a stampede and scattered all the cattle. Orrin worked his way west to where he was supposed to meet them, but he was told that everyone was dead. He still went west, and he started gathering cattle that was lost. He then started finding people, including his brothers that did not die from the stampede. They pushed the remaining cattle north where they lost some on the way. Once they got to the camp to save Logan, Shorty was shot and killed. So the next morning they fought the guys who wanted the mine to themselves and saved Logan. Finally they brought the cattle into camp, and the people who lived there had food. 

Recommendation 
I would recommend this book to anyone high school and older. Sometimes this book is hard to follow, and there is some high vocabulary words. There is also a lot of violence in the book. Some younger kids could read it also if they are high level readers. I would recommend reading this book because it is very good.

Characterization
The character Tell changed a lot while he was alone. When he was alone he did not feel as safe as when he met up with Orrin. He was always second guessing himself when he was alone, and he felt more confident later on. I think this was because he was a Sackett, and they grew up together. Orrin also changed because at the start of the book he was fighting a lot, but when he met Nettie he acted a lot better. I think he did this because they are not used to a lot of women, and when they are near one they treat them kind.