Rating: 4/5

In the Art of Rhetoric Aristotle does more than it seems possible given the length of the book. In under 160 pages he provides a comprehensive description of virtually all components of effective, persuasive, logical, and stylish communication. Even this description is too limiting. He captures the essence of knowledge, how it can be tested and known, how it is best relayed to others, and how one should go about using rhetoric, which he treats as a counterpart of dialectic. Fundamentally it is about forming and defending good arguments, challenging and understanding the bad ones, and presenting a case that is not only factually true but composed in a way to convince an audience without spectacle, trickery, or manipulation. His characterization of rhetoric as an art seems apt, considering the forms it takes and the many dimensions of it that can be practiced and mastered and executed with varying degrees of success.

Because of everything that goes into this art, it is only the third and final part of the book that directly discusses the formulation and application of rhetoric - in poetry, in political speeches, in courts, in legislation, in dialogue, in epics. Parts one and two lay the ground work. Logic, inductive and deductive arguments, proofs, probability, goals, ethics. These are some of the critical parts of rhetoric, and Aristotle makes good use of examples and abstractions when explaining the role of each. Even more basic elements are important for the underlying philosophical substance: understanding of pleasure, expediency, virtue and vice, justice and injustice, praise and blame, reasons for doing wrong, the character of criminals. These items are explored in the first section. 

The second section focuses on “the materials out of which a speaker has to construct his attempts to persuade or dissuade, to praise or blame, and to prosecute or defend”. Here we delve into the causes of anger and its opposite, the qualities of gentleness, what qualities people look for in friends, how fear operates and what events might cause it, shame and likewise its many faces, gratitude and pity and resentment and emulation and envy and character and luck and age and wealth and power and judgment. Proofs are revisited in the context of these themes, and how speech might be designed to use these ideas effectively. Again, many examples from Greek tragedy and epics and philosophy help him articulate his thoughts.

By this point Aristotle has given us a thorough look at many parts of philosophy and human nature and has dissected the very essence of intellectual existence. Without even connecting his examinations to the uses of language he has given us more than many philosophers offer in books four times the length. Part three sees his introduction of the intricate uses of language and speech, tying together everything previously discussed into a whole picture. Here he gives treatments of lucidity, metaphors and similes, novelty and artificiality, clever interplay between rhythm and turns of phrase, how one might avoid frigidity of language and instead favor good style by avoiding ambiguity, having fluency in the language, and giving language weight through description instead of dependence on cliches or common phrases. Expressing emotion and character, shaping the language to the purpose of the writing (whether prose or poetry or persuasion), employing analogy to give a concept fullness and depth, and using wit artfully.

The differences between Ancient Greek and modern English make some small part of Aristotle’s analysis mere historical artifacts rather than useful insight, but the majority of what is here has not aged in over two thousand years. In fact, most of this has become standard practice for writers and speakers across the world because the points Aristotle put into writing have proven themselves to be as enduring as any idea can be. While we may not be conscious of the heritage or development of our ideas on good thinking and good speaking, the Art of Rhetoric has long been a concise and yet expansive study of these ideas. I know of no place else that they have been so eloquently and expertly studied in a systematic manner.