Rating: 5/5

The book is about a person who's born without sight, but is gifted with a special vision. A vision ─a perspective in life that's more superior than a normal person with sight has. 

Though deprived of sight ─was it deprived or was it stolen? It no longer matters. He's born with an I.Q of a genius, born with talents, and unreasonable guts ─imagine a blind person doing something like a skydiving session. Wrestling with other human beings with sight and beating them ─does that exceed the word exceptional? Not to mention, he's a singer, a musician ─he compose musical pieces and plays any musical instrument. He's also a Psych Major. He even became a wrestling coach. And this sounds crazy enough, he even does Counseling. He does so many things that you might surely forget that he's blind. He's got the brains and the guts that compensates for his lost of sight. And obviously, he went through a lot of things more than a normal person does. 

The way he sees life without having the sense of sight is something that's truly unbelievable. Sightless, he is. But he found his true love. Found the meaning of his life and found his life itself. I will even say yes if you'll ask me that he sees more in life than I do. We, people with sight, tend to judge immediately. Not like blind people wherein they all use their remaining senses to know the person more. Just like in life. They delve deeper to the experience. They'll know life more.

He have met many significant people on his life w/c made a crucial role in his life. And he's lucky enough to have really really cool parents. 

There were times ─lots of it when he cursed himself for being blind ─cursed the WORLD ─cursed GOD. But in the end, he still managed to find the brighter side of it.

Thanks to him. I realized so many things. It's even scary to think about what I could have missed if I haven't read this book. The power of faith. The power of having gone through suffering. The power of learning the hard way. For it is only when one is stripped off of something he thought he can't live without that he will realize and discover the greatest of his potentials.