Rating: 5/5

On this speck of a volcanic island in the Pacific, one of the bloodiest battle of WWII was joined. Heroism was the word of the day as evidenced by the following information: The Medal of Honor was won by 80 Marines during WWII; at Iwo Jima , 22 were awarded, the greatest number of winners for any Marine engagement. As Admiral Nimitz stated, ".......uncommon valor was a common virtue".

The Americans were on their way to the home islands of Japan and land forces were "island jumping" to build up bases from which troops would embark. The Japanese, most of whom knew but would not admit, that they could only hold Iwo for a short time, would fight to the last man to slow down the Americans.

The author examines the strategy, personnel, and personalities of the commanders of the Americans and the Japanese which fleshes out the picture of the overall battle and why certain decisions were made.

The Americans expected to be challenged as they landed on the beaches but the Japanese commander had other ideas; they would not fire on the enemy landing vessels; no opposition to troops landing on the beaches; and the main defense would be made from underground installations located in the north of the island. And these underground installations were very complex and difficult for the Americans to pinpoint. The Americans were used to the banzai charges by the Japanese but these were not a part of the strategy of the enemy. And thus began a fierce battle of attrition which ended with 28,686 American casualties (death, wounded and battle fatigue) and 20,000 Japanese deaths (approximate).

The author provides maps (but no photos) and drawings of various artillery/airplanes that were used by both sides. I missed the inclusion of the iconic, Pulitzer Prize winning photograph of the raising of the American flag on Mt. Suribachi but we are all familiar with it as it now is a honored statue in Washington, D.C.

This book is very detailed which might bother some readers but that detail is necessary in my opinion. I would highly recommend this book for an understanding of the mind set of both sides and a chilling look at the battle as it unfolded.