Rating: 4/5

It was a curious thing. A lucky find I wasn't looking for that turned up randomly by chance; a collection of John D. MacDonald's shorts called "More of the Good Old Stuff" (1984) at a used bookstore. Enjoyed it so much decided it'd be worth finding an original hard-cover copy of the first published collection "The Good Old Stuff" (1982). Turns out to be quite collectible. After passing on a number of ridiculously-priced similar copies, a like-new edition turned up on eBay for $16. And it's as though it was never opened except for the tiniest marks ticked off by a mechanical pencil on the cover sheet notating 8 of 48 books he'd published by that time. No evidence of any other use, whatsoever. None. A mystery? Fitting. But an amazingly good deal for a vintage book in mint condition to complete the set. I only wish now I had the other 47 books along with his Travis McGee series that were my first reads in high school as a few of the paperbacks were tucked tightly into my parents' bookshelf squeezed between fatter, hardcover volumes of fiction. And, yes, along with a full arsenal of Collier's encyclopedias that, not to be snobby, seemed to be sufficiently more complex and of a higher caliber of writing than either the World Book (generic) or the better-selling Britannica collection. Fair warning: Good Stuff I and II are a drug if you're a "sucker" for the True-Crime shorts of pulp fiction among the tonnage of noir genre that hit the newstands during the late 1940's and early 1950's. MacDonald virtually owned the genre and this book features the best of his earliest works. Even as a rookie, Mac had what it takes. And as the years went buy, he honed his signature prose and tight dialogue and genius for character development to as potent a hybrid of storytelling as has ever graced a printed page. Haven't had so much fun reading "killer stuff" since I can remember. But not five stars. Four for a pop cult following (likened to Harry Potterdom series as a contemporary comparison). Five being reserved for classics the likes of "The Grapes of Wrath" which I finished previously. Next up: "East of Eden." An embarrassment of riches.