Rating: 5/5

After finishing the Rotten Romans, I was still in the mood to read about those gruesome Romans, so I picked up the Ruthless Romans, also written by Terry Deary. This book comprises of an introduction, a timeline of early Rome, one of the republic and a third one of the Roman Empire, interesting facts about their superstitions and traditions, the gladiators, the Roman army, their enemies, evil emperors, animal cruelty, horrible punishments and so on and so forth.

“The posh people in Rome were the ‘patricians’; the workers were the ‘plebeians’ (or plebs for short). The patricians may have ruled the country, but they needed to keep the plebs happy. So the patricians gave the plebs the bloody arena games, they gave them food and they gave them gifts.” Ruthless Romans, Loc. 307

I wrote in my previous review of how we are taught at school that the Romans civilised the people they conquered, yet, teachers and history books usually omit the darker side of the Roman culture. Luckily, Terry Deary doesn’t sugar-coat history because he leaves the shocking facts in for a better understanding of the Romans. 

“Yet the Romans did something the heart-ripping Aztecs and the Spanish burners didn’t do … they killed people for fun! The Romans made murder into a sport. They built wonderful buildings like the Colosseum, filled them with happy Romans and then massacred thousands of people and animals for entertainment.” Ruthless Romans, Loc 38 

Despite the similarities between both Rotten Romans and Ruthless Romans, here, the author focusses more on Rome, its history, its people, insane punishments and bloody entertainment. Though I recommend this book as a whole, the chapters that stood out to me were those about the gladiators, animals cruelty and the account about the Christian who were oppressed and killed by the Romans in the arena. Those stories about the Christian martyrs left a bitter taste in my mouth and made me think how cruel humans are to those who don’t share their beliefs. 

 “(...) the Christians suffered another 250 years of torture and death as emperor after emperor sent them to the arena to be torn apart by animals. There were many Christians who died bravely and their stories make grim and gripping reading…” Ruthless Romans, Loc. 1060 

To wrap it up, if you like history and want to grab a quick read, Ruthless Romans or any other volume from the Horrible Histories series may be a good pick for you because it contains curiosities, fun quizzes, jokes, puns, stories and games which make an engaging read for kids and adult alike.