Rating: 3/5

This book is full of the depth of emotions brought to the surface by the serious, possibly fatal, illness of a parent and the issues which this situation raises. Particularly when the parent lives far away or abroad and difficult decisions may need to be made.

Returning reluctantly to Berlin in about 1953 to visit her sick mother, the semi-autobiographical Anna finds that things are worse than she had expected. Even though Anna was very young when her Jewish family fled Berlin in 1933, she is afraid to go back, especially as there is international tension due to the Russian invasion of Hungary, not to mention the thought of what the Nazis did to the Jews. She is also somewhat reluctant as she is a newly-wed and has just been offered a writing job at the BBC. Anna has a complicated relationship with her mother, who comes across as a rather childish socialite who feels that the world has conspired against her and her life is over at the grand age of 56. Of course, she knows that her father was impractical and her mother had kept the family afloat during their time as refugees, but she also blames her mother for her drama queen tendencies and for the death of her father. This is mixed with guilt for not keeping in touch and for her mixed feelings. When her beloved brother Max arrives, she cannot help feeling jealous of his relationship with their mother and resentful of the way it is assumed she will stay longer with their mother. Max and their mother have always been close and Anna has lost her old confidant, her father, and cannot talk to her husband because of the difficulties of booking long-distance phone calls. However, Anna seems oblivious to the mental similarities she has to her mother, seeming somewhat neurotic herself.

This is a fascinating account of family relationships, the impact being a refugee can have on children and insights into memory and forgetting. Anna has vague memories of living in Berlin, but with time on her hands, she visits almost-forgotten places and finds that she is unable to completely remember. Yet she recognises places and they bring her back to her childhood at a more visceral level, at the level of feeling an emotion, the sense of how it was to be the small person of the title. 

"For a moment, as she looked at it [her childhood home], she remembered exactly what it had felt like to do this. It was as though, for a fraction of a second, she had half-seen, half-become the small, fierce, vulnerable person she had once been, with her lace-up boots and socks held up by elastic bands, her fear of volcanoes and of dying in the night, her belief that rust caused blood poisoning, liquorice was made of horses' blood, and there would never be another war, and her unshakeable conviction that there was no problem in the world that Mama could not easily solve.
 The small person did not say, "Is Mama home?" She said, "Ist Mami da?" and did not speak a word of English, and for a moment Anna felt shaken by her sudden emergence."

As the family had moved through several countries before settling in England, the children had been thrown together more than most siblings and there was a wonderful rapport between Anna and Max, mixed of course with the usual sibling rivalry. I love the mention of their trilingual jokes which nobody else understood and Max's private name for Anna. At the end of the book, nothing is really resolved. I wonder if Judith Kerr was planning on writing another book about her family; I would like to know what happened.