Rating: 4/5

The works of Leigh Brackett are, to-date, my favorite literary discovery of 2025. I'm always on the lookout for pulpy space opera, so when I learned that Brackett was nicknamed the "queen" of Golden Age space opera, I knew that I had to give her a read. The only problem is that it has been decades since many of her works received a major printing. A testament to Brackett's bizarre anonymity among contemporary readers, and a fact that forces lovers of physical media to seek out a vintage copies… In any case, it was quick work to order a (semi-reasonably priced) set of used paperbacks for Brackett's Book of Skaith trilogy. And now that I've finished The Reavers of Skaith, I can confirm that the entire series is a must-read for fans of fast-paced sci-fi fantasy in the vein of Edgar Rice Burroughs' John Carter novels. Top-notch adventure fiction.

As with its predecessors, The Reavers of Skaith is a quintessential example of the "Sword and Planet" sub-genre. We once again follow Eric John Stark- a human mercenary who finds himself on the primitive backwater planet known as Skaith. Stark has succeeded in rescuing his foster-father Simon Ashton from the clutches of the despotic Lords Protector, and has secured passage off world for Ashton and a number of Skaith's prominent dissidents. Yet just when Stark's adventure appears to be over, the space captain contracted by our heroes decides to imprison Stark and begin raiding the planet. Stark soon escapes, and he spends the remainder of the story undermining the space pirates while organizing a final defeat over the Lords Protector. Meanwhile, Skaith itself is rapidly plunging into an ice age, and Stark must somehow contact the galactic Commonwealth to send a humanitarian rescue mission for the planet's beleaguered inhabitants. Secondary storylines include the continuing romance between Stark and the prophetic Gerrith, as well as Stark's uneasy lordship over the vicious Northhounds.

The Reavers of Skaith provides a satisfying conclusion to Stark's storyline. Although the introduction of new, off-world antagonists was unexpected, it helped to keep the story fresh. It also allows for the incorporation for more sci-fi elements: whereas the first two installments in the trilogy leaned heavily toward the fantasy side of the Sword and Planet sub-genre, The Reavers of Skaith feels truer in spirit to the full-on sci-fi/fantasy hybridization in the John Carter novels. My only complaint about the core plot is how the first act felt extremely rushed. Seeing as the conclusion of The Ginger Star was similarly rushed, I'm forced to conclude that this was a product of length restraints. It still would've liked to have seen a brief epilogue, outlining the fate of our major characters. Otherwise, I was also slightly underwhelmed by the conclusion of the Stark/Gerrith storyline, and would've appreciated a bit more of the Northhounds, but the new plot additions more than make up for the absence of both of those secondary plot elements.

Overall, I'd place The Reavers of Skaith marginally ahead of The Hounds of Skaith as the best installment in the trilogy. Possibly a bit less interesting in its characterizations, but also a slight improvement in terms of world-building and overall plot. The Reavers of Skaith should be a blast for anybody who enjoyed The Ginger Star and The Hounds of Skaith.