Rating: 5/5

An incredibly suspenseful and atmospheric beginning, followed by a somewhat slow middle section, but concluded by an emotional and satisfying ending.

Let me say right away (no spoilers): the secret itself isn't difficult to guess, at least in its basic outline. It is, however, revealed only after overcoming many obstacles and delays, well into the second half of the book. Even more interesting than the secret itself were, for me, the consequences of the revelation. How do those affected react to the new knowledge? How will it impact their life? 

I had thought that the story would take a completely different direction, revealing the secret early in the book and then dealing with the aftermath. Collins chose to focus instead on the hiding of and the search for the secret, but in the end, I was very pleased with what Collins did. 

I must admit that I was very wrong about one character in particular and was therefore pleasantly surprised. In general, however, Collins could have done more with some of the characters he created. Sarah Leeson was a fascinating character in the first chapters but then faded into a supporting role. Likewise, Collins did not make full use of the potential of Mr. Phippen, Miss Sturch and Andrew Treverton.

This is still an early novel by Collins, and you can clearly see his progress as a writer in his later books. Not only creating original characters but also using them more effectively. The plots are also usually more complex, often dealing with obscure legal issues. He has, however, already mastered here the writing of emotions and some of the chapters are little masterpieces. 

Despite its several weaknesses and a slight lull in the middle, I'll give this book 5 stars (4.5⭐ rounded up). This is mainly due to the extremely sympathetic characters: Rosamond, Leonard, Sarah, and of course, Uncle Joseph. Their story was touching and, well, I generally give 5 stars to books that move me to tears 🥹

Read with the Victorians! Group, 2026