Rating: 5/5

This is the 18th Robert Ludlum novel I’ve read. I had devoured the first 17 books decades ago when I was in my early 20’s and I feel confident in saying they had a great deal to do with my career ambitions at the time. The fictional worlds of espionage and intrigue were just what my young indestructible self considered ideal at the time. But alas my life took a different and much more realistic turn and I was destined to experience my love of such things through reading.

I’ve read hundreds of novels in the thriller genre since my early Ludlum days and have found many worthwhile reads. In truth, I had sort of forgotten about those old Ludlum paperbacks…until a few days ago when I realized I still had The Osterman Weekend sitting there on my countless book shelves, surrounded by similar titles, mostly unread Covert One novels written in Ludlum’s name but by different authors. The timing was perfect, having just finished another book, and so I grabbed it off the shelf and took the plunge.

The Osterman Weekend is Robert Ludlum’s second novel, after The Scarlatti Inheritance and was first published in 1972. I’ve always felt the early Ludlum, which I loosely define as those written in the 1970’s, are far superior to the more bloated works of his novels written in the 1980’s. There are exceptions of course but generally I have found early Ludlums to be better. Ludlum's novels typically feature one heroic man in a struggle against some sort of powerful adversary whose intentions and motivations are evil and who are capable of using political and economic mechanisms in frightening ways. Many times the nature of the adversary isn’t well-defined…it’s enough that we know they are the bad guys.

This book is a perfect example. It’s a tightly contained story with a protagonist, John Tanner, who through no fault of his own, is set up in a dangerous situation as a foil to reveal the identities of the bad guys. The novel includes a handful of major co-characters, occurs over a short time span and continuously builds suspense. The big bad is represented by “Omega” but we never learn exactly what Omega is. We just know what John Tanner knows and that Omega needs to be stopped. The problem for Tanner is that he does not know whom to trust. Even though written in the third person, the reader sees everything through Tanner’s eyes. As his suspicions about the other characters rise and desperation begins to set in, especially with his concern for his family’s safety, the same thing happens to us. It’s very effective and certainly kept me turning the pages.

My trip down memory lane was a fun and exciting one. And while this particular novel may have transferred over to my “completed” list, I may just have to revisit my thoughts on a follow-on career in some sort of espionage or counter-espionage field…the game awaits.