Rating: 3/5

This second collection of Thieves World stories departs substantially from my initial impression of (and hope for) of a common setting for sword &amp; sorcery type adventures featuring heroes and rogues. Rather, the stories prove decidedly grim, tending to focus on conflicts among and between sorcerers as well as the vengeful new deities of Ranke and old deities of Ilsig, and their frequent meddling in human affairs.

Spiders of the Purple Mage by Philip José Farmer, the longest of the bunch, is also the most disappointing. This tale of infiltration into the lair of an evil wizard comes across as juvenile, in a setting that has few consistencies with the world as it's been depicted. Asprin notes in the first collection that Farmer's tale was originally intended to appear there, but he wasn't able to finish it on time. Apparently he didn't read any of those stories, or was otherwise too busy to revise his story to make it less incongruous.

Goddess by David Drake is a delightfully chilling tale of a brother seeking to avenge his sister by infiltrating a subterranean temple in order to slay a demon. This one has some good intrigue and mystery.

In The Fruit of Enlibar by Lynn Abbey, Illyra, using her S'danzo gifts, aids a cursed soldier seeking an ancient secret for creating powerful weapons. Abbey keeps the reader in the dark, deftly revealing just enough to keep one intensely curious to see how events unfold.

The Dream of the Sorceress by A. E. van Vogt tells of a doctor seeking to uncover the mystery of his father's murder, apparently at the hands of the gods. Enas Yorl the sorcerer makes an appearance here. With his gift (curse?) of randomly assuming the form of others he's one of the most interesting characters in Sanctuary. The writing is characterized by van Vogt's typical raw, unpolished exuberance and abrupt exclamations and transitions. van Vogt is one of my favorite sci-fi authors. He's written far less fantasy, so it was a great surprise to find a story from him here.

Vashanka's Minion by Janet Morris proved a confusing and roughly written tale of the deity Vashanka sowing chaos in the city by providing weapons to its citizens, in an apparent attempt to boost his popularity. It introduces an interesting character, the immortal mercenary Tempus, who serves as a vessel for Vashanka to occasionally inhabit. Tempus seems a bit morally ambiguous, manipulative but also willing to serve the young and inexperienced prince/governor of Sanctuary because he's taken pity on him.

Shadow's Pawn by Andrew Offutt is an excellent little tale that follows on directly from the appearance of the weapon shop of the previous story and also comes full circle on Shadow Spawn's experiences in the first story in which he appeared in the first volume. Tempus the Hell Hound, introduced in the last story, also makes an appearance. It's too bad that more of the stories aren't woven in as tightly with the others as Offutt managed.

To Guard the Guardians by Robert Lynn Asprin is a grim little tale where things come full circle for Tempus and we get a closer view of how the Hell Hounds operate, which despite being to the letter of the law may not always abide by its spirit.