Rating: 5/5

How I do love thee..let me count the ways..

I love epics and I think you can safely call this one. It's not 900 pages, only 431 in fact (though I would gladly have read another 400) but its epic in time and space. It covers about 20 years and the lives of two complete families: the Willoughby's and the Barshinskey's (an urchin family who moved into the run down cottage next door to the Willoughby's). From that summer on, both family's lives would be wrapped up together for better or worse.

The first half covers their childhood and I savored every page of this. It was funny, it was sad, it was touching. Oh. I just loved it! One memorable scene was the first day of school for Daisy Barshinskey. Sophie picks her up so they can walk together and Daisy comes out of the cottage wearing a "pinafore" that her mother had put together the night before. It was made from her father's old striped shirt and had buttons down the front and a rounded hem.The arms made two ties around the back. Sophie burns with embarrassment for her neighbor, knowing what torment Daisy will receive at the hands of the students.

 Daisy (the urchin) tells Sophie that striped pinafores are all the rage where she came from, "look at the special buttons...no one wants plain white pinafores anymore" but before they arrive at the schoolhouse, Sophie has managed to convince Daisy to stuff BOTH their pinafores into the hedge (and she takes her own shoes off to match Daisy) and they arrive at school together. Two urchins instead of one.

I loved seeing their early life because it helped explain how each one turned out as adults. Sometimes the characters made outrageous choices and they really disappointed me. My heart ached for some and burned in fury at others. But it made them real. And thats what separates a good story from a great one. 

The story takes place in both England and Russia and covers the Russian Revolution as well as WW1. Time, place and circumstances work to change the characters lives irrevocably.

The storyline reminded me of my much loved Tolstoy's Anna Karenina,War and Peace and Robert Tyler Stevens.

ps) almost took off half a star cos I really wanted to see more of Ivan and he wasn't a central character. But it is what it is and its still a great read.

CONTENT:
SEX: Fade to black (rape is an issue more than once)
VIOLENCE: Some wartime violence, domestic abuse
PROFANITY: Fairly mild
PARANORMAL ELEMENTS: None

MY RATING: PG-13