Rating: 1/5

I don't care if this book was the basis for The Aviator or not, it's full of misinformation and flat out lies. Scandal sells. But a little research goes a long way. There is plenty of information out there today readily available if you really want a better idea of who Howard Hughes was. It is clear that Howard Hughes had a mental illness that stemmed back to his childhood starting with his mother. He suffered from severe OCD and germophobia and most likely struggled with bouts of paranoia. Conditions that had yet to be discovered therefore impossible to understand. There is no doubt that the man suffered, however even in his state of suffering and while in reclusion, when it came to business, his mind was still very clear and sound and as a result he made many lucrative deals over the phone. As for dating, he was a single man and could date whomever he wanted. The women whose company he enjoyed, enjoyed his as well. And the women who dated him, spoke highly of him even years later and dated extensively themselves. He was not bisexual or homosexual but completely heterosexual, a stated fact that many of his former girlfriends attested to. There's also no doubt he suffered from concussions that went undiagnosed and untreated. His last plane crash should have killed him, with severe 2nd and 3rd degree burns, multiple broken bones, including every one of his ribs, both lungs punctured and a dislocated heart. Instead, 7 months later he flew the second prototype plane successfully, and secured a contract with the military. Hughes followed a rigid policy of test flying his aircraft himself. When questioned about this he said "if I have made a mistake in the design, then I'm the one who should pay for it. And I certainly would not ask somebody else to fly the plane if I were afraid to fly it myself". An admirable quality in my opinion. This is a man who accomplished more in 30 years than most of us will accomplish in our entire lifetime. From breaking the Transcontinental Airspeed Record to breaking the Around the World Airspeed Record set by Charles Lindbergh, then humbly saying that "any pilot today could have done the same thing". I highly doubt it. He was awarded with the Harmon Trophy in 1936 and again in 1938. The Collier Trophy in 1938. The Congressional Gold Medal in 1939. The Octave Chanute Award in 1940. Inducted into The National Aviation Hall of Fame 1973 and the International Air and Space Hall of Fame in 1987. Because of his interest in science and technology he launched The Howard Hughes Medical Institute for biomedical research. Research that contributed to discovering the impact that OCD has on those who suffer from its debilitating effects. Effects that include germophobia. Today The HHMI is the second wealthiest endowment philanthropic organization in the US and the second best endowed medical research foundation in the world. There are satellites in space today because of technology Howard Hughes developed. His contribution to the film industry, aviation, modern technology and the medical field set the standards that are still used to this very day. Here we are 40 plus years after his death, still talking about him AND reaping the benefits from his genius, I might add. Instead of focusing on the fact that he became reclusive and suffered in his final years, we should be utterly impressed with the fact that IN SPITE of suffering from severe OCD and most likely in constant pain from several plane crashes, that he was able to function at all! Why not just focus on his great accomplishments? I have read about and researched Howard Hughes over the years and I can honestly say that I do not believe that there has ever been anyone quite like him before or since. I for one prefer to remember the man for his incredible achievements. He once said that the only thing he wanted to be remembered for was his contribution to the field of aviation. Well Mr Hughes, you are very much remembered for that, and so much more. The fact that he suffered from a mental illness, like so many people do, only makes him more endearing. So I Salute you Howard Hughes. And I, like so many others remember you for your contribution to the world of aviation, a field I have spent 30 years in, and for so much more, thank you sir!