Rating: 5/5

Note, Oct. 10. 2018: I just edited this review to embed a link to an online article I referred to here. (When I originally reviewed the book, I wasn't as adept at embedding links as I've become since then.)

My first encounter with this book was as a grade-school student back in the early 60s; I'd read Wiggins' short story collection spin-off, New Chronicles of Rebecca, first (not sure why, now!), and that whetted my appetite to get Rebecca's whole story. The 1995 (approximately) date is for the second reading, when I shared it with my wife as an out-loud read; and she loved it as much as I do. Lately, I've been doing reviews of some of the classics I've read, and was inspired to pick this one by the recent excellent review of it by my Goodreads friend Bonnie (http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/... ). That review focuses on Wiggin's enormous influence on her Canadian contemporary, Lucy Maud Montgomery, in the creation of the latter's series heroine Anne Shirley. I'd already recognized that the two young heroines shared many similar characteristics, and have often said that if they'd ever met, they'd have found "kindred spirits" in each other. Bonnie's review, however, has a link (reproduced here: http://canadianicon.org/table-of-cont... ) to an illuminating online article at the site Canadian Icons, which establishes, through a close comparison/contrast of both author's novels, a clear demonstration of very significant literary influence. (That article focuses more on Montgomery's Anne, but includes much that's relevant to this book as well.) In this review, though, I want to focus more on Wiggin's work in its own right, which is how I first read it --at that time, I'd never heard of Anne of Green Gables.

This is basically the story of a smart, precocious, sensitive girl with a kind heart and a passionate appreciation for beauty in all its forms, growing from childhood to young adulthood in a prosaic Maine village under the not-exactly-sympathetic tutelage of two spinster aunts (though Aunt Jane proves more sympathetic than Aunt Miranda). The setting is probably 20 years or more earlier than the publication date, though that's just my impression; I don't recall an explicit date being given anywhere in the text. (Recommending the book to "fans of 19th-century literature," given the 1903 date, seems like an error; but I'm reckoning 1900-1914 as culturally part of the "long" 19th century.) Wiggin tells her story well, with an observant eye for the details of village life, an ear for New England dialect, and a primary concern for human relationships (family, friends, neighbors) and round characterization --the most fascinating character being Rebecca herself, though the other major and minor characters are lifelike as well. The author's very much a Realist, and a worthy peer of her contemporaries Jewett and Freeman. Of course, as a perhaps 10-year-old kid, I didn't know anything about that; I just knew that I was easily immersed in Rebecca's world. Nobody'd ever told me that, as a boy, I wasn't "supposed" to relate to girl characters as fellow human beings (and I wouldn't have been much inclined to slavishly listen to what I was or wasn't "supposed" to like if they had :-) ). I actually found Rebecca pretty easy to relate to; we were both intelligent, imaginative, and sensitive to things other than the mundane, surrounded by peers who usually weren't any of those things, and in the charge of adults who to a large degree didn't understand us.

This book was in my school's "library" (if we can call it that), and the BC library classifies it in the "Juvenile" section; but I didn't shelve it here as a children's book. That's not because I don't think kids could profitably read it --some would be prejudiced against it, and the setting of a non-technological, rural, Calvinist milieu would be too alien for the less imaginative to grasp; but the turn-of-the-(20th)-century diction wouldn't be difficult for intelligent kids, the story itself is universal, and teens who like historical fiction could relate to it easily enough, IMO. Rather, it's because I think calling it a "children's" book would wrongly mischaracterize it as too simplistic for adults, and it isn't; rather, it's one of those books with a child protagonist that nevertheless can speak to an adult perception and sensitivity. (Tom Sawyer, Huckleberry Finn, and Anne of Green Gables are other titles that come to mind in the same way.) It's significant that, as the Goodreads description above notes, even back when it was first written, some of the most enthusiastic fans were adults (including Mark Twain and Jack London, not to mention Lucy Maud Montgomery). If what I've written here sounds more intriguing than off-putting, I'd encourage you to give it a try --you might find yourself in the current generation of adult fans! (Or, if you're in the YA group, YA fans. :-) )