Rating: 4/5

Reviewed by Julie
Book provided by the publisher
Originally posted at Romancing the Book

This book is an absolute classic! Native American interracial/ cultural historical romance that dares touch upon openly voiced and acted upon bigotry and prejudice. Before the days of political correctness, historical romance novelist dared to cross the lines and face up to the facts as they were in this period of time. The message is the same then as it is now. When you open your mind and your heart you can look past the color of someone’s skin and see the person inside, and isn’t that all that really matters?

For Caitlyn it is hard to forgive “Indians” because they were responsible for the death of her brothers. However, she is not about to allow a man to be hanged for a crime he didn’t commit just because of his heritage.

Stalking Wolf has had to leave the Cherokee tribe he was raised in because of the machinations of a woman. Because he is part Irish, he deals with the moniker of being a “half-breed”. He vows never to trust a woman again. But, then he finds himself being held for a crime he didn’t commit and is healing on the ranch where Caitlyn and her father live. Almost from the the time Caitlyn lays eyes on Stalking Wolf she is physically attracted to him, but she continually reminds herself that he is an Indian and she hates all Indians.

Caitlyn will learn the most valuable of lessons in learning not to judge all people by their looks or heritage. Stalking Wolf was an easy character to like and I could imagine how gorgeous he was. Caitlyn’s character was a little bit more complicated. Naturally, she worried about the reactions of others and what people would think of her. I think that was just a human flaw and even today people can be that way. It takes her awhile to come around, but she eventually matures and lets herself falls in love with Stalking Wolf. I thought the author did a good job of showing the real fears many would have if they found themselves attracted to and falling in love with someone who is considered her enemy.

This was western/ Indian Historical Romance at it’s peak and I for one wish we could see these books come back in style. These books have really stood the test of time and since Ellora’s Cave has re-released these in digital format I hope they will find a new audience.

Madeline Baker has written a slew of Native American Historical Romances and for a time it was like a niche for her. I think she is in her best element when writing these historical novels. Many of you may know her as a very popular paranormal romance novelist who writes under a different name and also made a niche for herself in that genre as well. So, you know this is a good writer.

Try these titles out through online bookstores – especially if you like western romances. These stories are just as good now as they were then and I think you will enjoy them.