Rating: 1/5

1.5 stars rounded down.

Shoot. My first 1 ⭐️ rating for 2020. 😕 All my fears about this book have been confirmed, unfortunately. It may be a classic, but it hasn’t aged well, and it honestly isn’t good. Just a few of my issues with it are below.

I don’t see this as a book about survival because everything was handed to them. Survive what? Survive living on a utopia unicorn island full of every flora and fauna known to mankind, all conveniently located on a small desert island? Survive having a constant abundance of food and supplies? (PSA, this is NOT what you see on Naked &amp; Afraid lol.) Survive life in the wilderness when the patriarch knows literally EVERYTHING about every plant, seed, animal; all of their uses from every corner of the globe, how the Africans, Indians, AKA “savages” use them? It requires a little more suspension of disbelief than I can muster, I’m afraid.

EDIT: If you're looking for a book about ACTUAL self-sufficiency and ingenuity, I recommend this one I recently read. The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind: Creating Currents of Electricity and Hope.

I am not a reader that tends to be put off when an animal dies, as I can fully appreciate fictional stories, however, this book drove me nuts with all the animal killing, capturing and taming! They killed for sport, because they were annoyed, or because they simply wanted to know what type of animal it was and showcase it in their museum, but rarely did they kill out of necessity for food. (They murdered 40 apes for being mischievous and then were “grieved” by the sight of all the bodies. Like “Oops, my unchecked and uncivilized rage got the best of me and now we have to clean up all these apes I wish we hadn’t killed.”) Their domesticated animals were their beloved captives, and seemingly only placed on this earth to protect them and do their bidding.

This doesn’t work as a morality story either, despite the ceaseless and tiresome preaching of the patriarch. It is apparent the author feels everything on earth is placed solely for the use of white, “civilized” (I use this term VERY loosely because they acted in no way civilized) Europeans. Teaching that praying for something means it magically appears doesn’t work; that’s not even how the Bible teaches the way God works. Just because you pray for something doesn’t mean you automatically get it. Trying to teach that if you pray, everything will be perfect is inherently flawed. If you’re familiar with Christianity you know that God never promises a lack of adversity, yet this family faces zero adversity. It’s not realistic as a “teaching tool.” 

The colonists were also greedy. From their over-abundance of food, zeal for killing animals for no good reason, forcing wild animals into domestication, and development of numerous homes, abodes, and plantations on such a small island was ludicrous, but I guess that’s what colonizers do? 🤷🏽‍♀️

This book was perhaps my greatest insight into the history of fear-mongering racism. Their biggest fear was not encountering a wild animal, or drowning, or starving. What they feared most of all was crossing paths with BLACK SAVAGES. Apparently, the Robinsons are entitled to colonize a land not native to them, but had there been any natives who ALREADY owned that land, they would have shot and killed them on the spot to “protect” themselves. Sound familiar? 🙄

I’m a pretty avid reader and enjoy the classics. I understand that many were written in a time where racism was widely practiced and encouraged, however, there isn’t enough plot or characterization to interest me so that I can ignore the rampant racism. And I think it’s ridiculous anyway that people put that burden on minorities to somehow ignore hatred towards their skin color simply because “that’s just how it was back then.” How about we just concur that this book is no longer worthy of being a classic, and stop expecting people to read it without addressing their own moral compass?