Rating: 2/5

I came, I read, I laughed, I got bored, I hated (one or two stories), and I finished. I do not know why it felt such a trial to finish this, but it does. It wasn't a terrible collection. I was just hoping for something a little more fun and snappy instead as whole I kinda feel blah. Don't get me wrong there are some fun stories to be had, but there are also some dull ones here too. 

As it is kind of expected this collection feels rather dated being written in the early 2000's. 

Anyways, here are my thoughts on the individual stories: 

---- 

"Party Planner" by: Meg Cabot 

Charity Webber needs to plan the perfect holiday party to impress her up and coming hot boss. This story is told entirely through emails sent to and by Char except for a few exceptions. It is fun watch the drama through just the emails and to infer how Charity reacts to it. The ending is a little too perfect and abrupt but for the length of the story it doesn't really ruin anything. My favorite in the collection. 

"Traveling Light" by: Carole Matthews 

Alice is on a trip exploring China as a final hurrah before her marriage to a very straight laced reliable man named Stephen. She meets a man named Kane who is everything she wants and is afraid of being. There is nothing really new or special here. Some of the symbolism is very very heavy handed and exoticism is a problem particularly in one part (assuming the kite selling man is leading a harder life than they are). I guess it is nice to explore China with a dream guy and if you skim over the symbolism it is okay. 

"Cat Lady" by: Alisa Valdes-Rodriguez 

Teresa has turned thirty-five and is still single, so therefore it is time to become a cat lady. There is things to be said for stop trying so hard to attract a partner and let things come naturally. There is also a lot to say about doing and wearing what you want versus what society thinks. I was really hoping that this was the direction it was going in (and in some ways it does), but it just seems she was just in crisis. I will say the cat is a great influence on her and the cat did keep the super judge-y mother away which is a plus. I do like how Teresa falls into a new found love of animals in the end like it is just the natural order of things. I do actually find that charming. Also, the pet store she goes to should be reported for animal neglect. 

"Changing People" by: Sophie Kinsella 

Sarah's perpetually unemployed roommate Fizz decides that she can make money becoming an interior decorator without any classes or education. Fizz then takes on a high paying client after sneaking an insert into an interior decorating magazine. There is also an unfolding of a break up and mysterious backstory surrounding Sarah, but I really don't want to ruin anything by saying more. I guess this story is about how people change and mature. I am never wild about stories where people pretend to be something they are not, so I wasn't a huge fan. The story also wasn't as light and fluffy as I was expecting from Kinsella which is not a bad thing. 

"New York" by: Jill A. Davis 

This story follows Anne in her first week working at IT Magazine after recently moving to New York. I had a hard time with this one. On one hand she is successful at her job and fitting right in on the other hand I am not entirely sure if she likes it. I want to say I am slanted. That this high fashion celebrity culture is so far far away from what I like I can't imagine how the narrator can, but I may believe the author is intending to mean that this move is not a good one. Anne learns to smoke the first day, she is made to change how she looks, the co-workers are all have bulimia, and she even admits (to herself) that she never had respect for this magazine. Why is she here? It is like she fell in with the bad crowd. She came into this running from something and this might be her crisis that she needs to get out of her system. I won't go any farther because the driving force and reveal in this story is the unfolding of her backstory and I do not want to ruin it. 

"Revenge" by: Emily Barr 

The narrator is on the run from the police and regales the reader with her tale of how she got to this predicament. It was a bit heavy handed with the dramatic voice. I do not have too much to say about this one. The ending felt a little rushed. 

"Here Comes Harry" by: Jessica Adams 

 The story is made of three sections which are three different years of the narrator's life. I didn't really get too much out of this one. Very very little happens. There character's life does change, but I didn't see much change in the character. I want to care about Harry, but you barely spend any time with him. Also, there talk about an abortion the narrator had and her emotions around that, so if that makes you uncomfortable there it is. 

 "Know it All" by: Sarah Mlynowski 

 Shaun's roommate Dee can see into the future and she sees Shaun's ex ask another woman out. Shaun feels the need to stop this at all costs. This was fun. It does get a little frustrating that Shaun cannot let go as she was the one who instigated the break up in the first place. I liked the ending though. It was fun. 

 "In Agony" by: Isabel Wolff 

Jane is an advice columnist. It isn't a job she enjoys, but it is a job that supports her family. Very very little happens in this one. About two thirds of the story is exposition about her life. The ending is good, but I think the story would be a lot better if it was cut in half which sounds silly because it is already a very short story. 

"Dating the Enemy" by: Lauren Henderson 

In this story the narrator speaks of the dating scene in New York City to be of war and tells relationship examples from herself and her friends. It gives me Sex in the City vibes. I kinda found this vapid and depressing. People use each other as pawns in some kind of relationship war and while I don't find this unrealistic these are not the kind of people I would ever have interest in hanging out with even in a story. I found the ending to be fairly interesting, though. It does add some food to thought. 

 "From This Moment" by: Megan McCafferty 

 Cleo is the lead singer to Diamondz! a wedding band and she is running late to a wedding. As she travels she recalls her life story up to this point. Nothing happens in this story. Little to no action. It is interesting to listen to her backstory for a page or two, but it gets tiring. Even when we do get to actual action she starts going over MORE backstory! The ending really didn't go anywhere either. It all seemed rather pointless. 

"What Goes Around" by: Louise Bagshawe 

Husband and wife, Emma who is a small book publishing owner, and John, film executive have dinner together in a fancy restaurant. More backstory. More inaction. But, here's why it (mostly) works, the story is not too long and the backstory actually builds up the tension in this dinner. With every little thing you learn the more you get invested in what happens next. The backstory becomes part of the action. Now do I think this is an amazing story? No. But I did get a bit of joy arriving at the end and not because I finished it. 

"Rudy" by: Lisa Jewell 

Rudy is an unemployed nonconformist. He has never been employed nor has he ever been in a true relationship and he has no plans to fix that. He enjoys watching cute girls in the park and pretending he know everything about them. Rudy may be a tad creepy. Very little happens in this one, but the ending is totally worth it. 

"The Truth is Out There" by: Marian Keyes 

Ros is on a business trip to LA after having a big fight with her boyfriend. Also, unknown to her, she is being followed by a yellow alien named Bib. I want to like this one. Things actually happen. Its quirky, but the lessons and what the scenes wanted to do seem a little too perfect or on the nose. In some ways I worry Ros is only able to do the right things for herself because Bib was there to help her but, sometimes we all need help from our friends. I wasn't wild about Bib either, but that is a personal preference on my part. It was a decent story. 

"Here We Are" by: Lynda Curnyn 

Lauren has just recovered from a horrible flu and finds herself with her first free Saturday she has had in a very long time. She looks around her barren flat and decides it is time to get furniture and invites Jason, potential boyfriend, to furniture hunt. It was fine. It really became a story on being alone and the trip seems to be a nutshell on how relationships can change? It is interesting the depth of why she does not have furniture. 

"Siren Songs" by: Stella Duffy 

Siiiiigggghhh. Ryan has just had a horrible break up and has moved into a basement apartment. As he is taking a three a.m. bath (and pinning) he hears a beautiful singing voice and must find the woman. Most of the story is him creeping in front of the apartment building trying figure out which woman neighbor it is. I kinda hated this one. I hate that the solution to fix the relationship is to jump into another one. I know that isn't exactly how the story ends, but almost all the story is about him observing women and barely one page in a six page story is him moving on and fixing his life. It isn't a strong message unless you dedicate more pages to it. 

"The Marrying Kind" by: Anna Maxted 

The narrator tells the story of Michelle who has a lifelong goal of getting married. This was fun. It is written in a very conversational manner that makes you feel someone is telling you hot gossip over coffee. 

"Don't You Know Who I Am?" By: Adele Lang 

This is a set of recordings from Jeannie, a celebrity, who is into a Dictaphone for the publisher of "Girls Night In." They are supposed to become a ghost written story, but are actually put in raw. Basically we follow Jeanie through her afternoon getting ready for an event sponsoring War Child. The story pokes fun on the stereotypical alcohol drug addled celebrity and the voice is funny. I might have enjoyed it more if Jeannie wasn't such an easy to hate character. 

"Good Men" by: Jennifer Weiner 

Bruce is a part of a bachelor party blow out. There are shenanigans, there is a lot of drinking, talk about marriage in general, and whether Bruce wants to take the plunge. There is more depth in this than I thought there would be. Also, the dog will be fine. I hate spoiling, but the anxiety was too much. 

"Dougie, Spoons, and the Aquarium Solarium" by: Jenny Colgan 

Dougie and Spoons run a reptile house / tanning solon combo called Aquarium Solarium. Doug, who runs the reptile part, has trouble keeping girlfriends because of the fact he has a ball python. I haaaaaatttttteeeeed this one. I hated it so much. One, I hate the stereotype all woman think snakes are disgusting terrifying things. I am a woman who finds snakes adorable and I have many woman friends who think the same. Heck, I know one lady, who as a child, tried to keep a bunch garter snakes in her bath tub (spoiler: It did not end well. Confused snakes everywhere). I know there are people who are scared of snakes (that is fine and healthy fear especially depending on where you are), but not all woman are uninformed about thoroughly disgusted with the creatures. Two, all the characters felt like one dimensional cartoon representations of people (nothing felt real/true) and it was just not a fun read. Three, the ending was just so bad. It didn't seem like there was any growth or anything at the end of the tale. 

"Acting Strangely by: Chris Manby 

Linzi lives with her best friend Peter in a ramshackle apartment in New York City. She going to go on a, what she is afraid, is her last date with Thomas Malvern the Third and Peter comes up with a plan to keep the relationship alive. I know he is rich and I know she needs a money ticket, but why does she want to keep a man who cares nothing for her? It can't end well. Anyways, I did not enjoy this one as much. I did not really enjoy the humor (I felt too much second hand cringe), but for the right reader the character were fun and the story is light hearted enough.