Rating: 4/5

Actual edition: The Voice of Anna Julia Cooper: Including a Voice from the South and Other Important Essays, Papers, and Letters
  If women's own happiness has been ignored or misunderstood in our country's legislating for bread winners, for rum sellers, for property holders, for the family relations, for any and all interests that touch her vitally, let her rest her plea, not on Indian inferiority, nor on Negro depravity, but on the obligation of legislators to do for her as they would have others do for them were relations reversed.
I am, in a sense, cheating in this reading. It's not the first time I've acquired a more complicated edition for the purposes of reading the most significant work contained within, but in this case, the accessory material of Cooper's bibliography is so enticing that I cannot give up the text before reading its entirety. However, I do not wish to do the reading now. As such, I will be finishing and reviewing this edition that proclaims to contain only 'A Voice from the South' and keep the more magnified edition for indulgence at a later date. In addition, it was beyond serendipity to acquire this work when I did, so unlike most lucky finds, I am loathe to give it up so soon. As such, there will eventually be duplicate reviews on my digital shelves, but if it encourages curious readers to peruse this work in whatever form they find it in, all the better. To a public grown complacent in the idea that black women do not exist outside the frame of slave narrative during the entirety of the 19th century, this a much needed boon, and I must admit that I find Cooper's mere existence as valuable as her carefully measured arguments. I rail against the myriad forces that limited such breath of dignified intellectualism to such a small sector of fame and belated influence.
  Then, too, the South represented blood—not red blood, but blue blood. The difference is in the length of the stream and your distance from its source. If your own father was a pirate, a murderer, his hands are dyed in red blood, and you don't say very much about it. But if your great great great grandfather's grandfather stole and pillaged and slew, and you can prove it, your blood has become blue and you are at great pains to establish the relationship.
It's telling that, despite the truth of Cooper tackling black feminism, it's built up so much on an imagined everyman of European descent that the convolutions could be of something not grounded in black womanhood. That's not to say the arguments are bad, but they do contradict themselves at times when it comes to the decision of whether to throw other marginalized demographics under the bus, namely so-called "Orientals" and badly characterized Marxists of various degrees. I also don't understand Cooper's railing against the less deity infused ethics of agnostic atheism, though I can see how it might have allowed another amoral streak to creep into the average white man's already viciously self-serving personal code, as evident by such contemporary islamophobes in the literary record such as Hitchens and Dawkins. Other than that, there are some powerful nuggets of wisdom when it comes to humanizing black people, but so much of it is tied to such a limited sphere that it motivates me even more to eventually read the rest of the selection, just to see if those incipient ideas are ever fleshed out and rendered consistent. At this point, Cooper builds so much of her argument on putting down others in the second half of AVftS that her remark on white women's hypocrisy early on loses almost all of its force. Nevertheless, this is an extraordinarily, singularly valuable text, and so much of it cane be built off of its groundbreaking roots that one can forgive the exigent inconsistencies as a common marker of someone writing the majority of their argument in their 20s. Like many black intellectuals, she worked for a far longer period than popular history gives credit for, and I look forward to when I revisit her thinking in the rest of the extended edition.

  But even here we may remark that a painter may be irreproachable in motive and as benevolent as an angel in intention, nevertheless we have a right to compare his copy with the original and point out in what respects it falls short or is overdrawn; and he should thank us for doing so.

I care not for the theoretical symmetry and impregnable logic of your moral code, I care not for the hoary respectability and traditional mysticisms of your theological institutions, I care not for the beauty and solemnity of your rituals and religious ceremonies, I care not even for the reasonableness and unimpeachable fairness of your social ethics,—if it does not turn out better, noble, truer men and women,—if it does not add to the world's stock of valuable souls,—if it does not give us a sounder, healthier, more reliable product from this great factory of men—I will have none of it.
One of these days I'll be able to close a review without dwelling on the decreasing number of reading challenge books on the docket, but it is not this day. The good news is that, in finishing this, I've officially completed one reading women challenge and also that I can start the absolutely last book in the challenge stack, which will coincidentally work towards finishing my other reading women challenge. At this point in time, I'm too fatigued to be excited about future free reading, but I do still appreciate how serendipitously this copy of AVftS appeared just when I needed it to, as well as the inherent value of a black woman publishing her words so long ago. I will have more holistic things to say when I return and read the edition in its entirety, but for now, I'm ready to move on: perhaps to all those black women who Cooper inspired.
  Women should not, even by inference, or for the sake of argument, seem to disparage what is weak. For woman's cause is the cause of the weak; and when all the weak shall have received their due consideration, then woman will have her "rights," and the Indian will have his rights, and the Negro will have his rights, and all the strong will have learned at last to deal justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly, and our fair land will have been taught the secret of universal courtesy which is after all nothing the art, the science, and the religion of regarding one's neighbor as one's self, and to do for him as we would, were conditions swapped, that he do for us.