Rating: 4/5

The three books of the Manawaka Sequence by Margaret Laurence are all set in or around the fictional prairie town Manawaka, based on the author’s hometown Neepawa, Manitoba, Ontario. The times are hard. It is the interwar years of droughts, the Crash and the Depression. The time and the place are the same, but each book zooms in on different characters. In The Stone Angel the ninety-year-old Hagar Shipley and her closest family take center stage. Hagar is stubborn, outspoken and peevish in manner. Many see her as a total pain in the butt. The book is primarily a study of her. Her marriage had been rocky. She strongly favored her second son over her first. The book examines the relationships between mother and sons, as well as the eldest son’s wife. The most recent dispute relates to the decision to place her in a home for the elderly. The question is who exactly this is best for?! And at the same time, which son has been the one most caring and devoted? One mustn’t jump to conclusions.

I found this to be a very difficult book to read. I am going to be straightforward in my explanation. With the recent death of my husband, the question has arisen where I should live. In addition, one’s trust in the medical profession and reliance on doctors is not a given for many of us. The book focuses upon subjects that are emotionally upsetting to me. Had the book not been perceptively written, I doubt it would have upset me. The central question comes down to an analysis of Hagar’s character. I see her as tough. She had to be. She must take care of herself. One can scarcely be weak and submissive, or let’s say polite and sweet, if you are or at least see yourself as being totally alone. See what you think of Hagar. The situations and the relationships come alive for me. 

I can, at least to some extent, see myself in Hagar. Her behavior does go too far, but I can in some respects forgive her. It takes her an entire lifetime to recognize that her favoritism was all wrong! Her peevishness, this I can forgive. 

Are you able to laugh at yourself? If you say yes, I think you will at times also smile as you read the book. There is humor.

The Stone Angel in the title is positioned at the family grave. For me it symbolizes Hagar’s painful journey through life. It seems to me to be a double of her. Not sure I am right though.

I have told you the most important. Many of my GR friends dislike this book because they dislike Hagar. I could easily relate to its subject matter. I like the book very much, so I am giving it four stars. I do not necessarily need to like a book’s characters, but it does have to make me think.

I listened to this translated into Swedish. The translation felt genuine. The Swedish narration by Barbro Nordin I disliked at the beginning. I thought she mumbled. Having now finished the book, I have completely changed my opinion. I do not know how old Barbro Nordin is, but here in the audiobook she does sound old. The book is read as it should be read. It is hard in the beginning because you do not have clear in your mind who is who and what is going on. I have given the narration four stars, and I think the translation is also very good.

I simply cannot stop now after the second book in the sequence. I have chosen to immediately pick up The Diviners. This should tell you how much I like the author. Margaret Laurence has a style of writing that fits me to a T. Thank you, Rosemarie, for recommending her to me.

*****************************

Manawaka Sequence
*A Bird in the House 4 stars
*The Stone Angel 4 stars
*The Diviners TBR