Rating: 4/5

After an advertising campaign fiasco Edward Prescott III is forced by his boss to go undercover into the world of “white trash” -- a community of working class folk that had been the target demographic of his campaign – in order to study them. He must become one of them and experience their way of life first hand. The story unfolds slowly, gnawing its way under our skin as the protagonist's life ambles towards the more common and away from his privileged lifestyle. He takes up his scientific roost in a trailer across the Fulmer family of five and makes his way into their lives by trying to understand their interests, passions and idiosyncrasies. Throwing political correctness into the wind, Kilpatrick succeeds in entertaining his reader with humor that stems not from ridicule of the hillbilly lifestyle, but from observations of the everyday life in this community. Edward Prescott is a likable character because he does not judge what he doesn't understand; he tells it as he sees it, and finds what he sees fascinating, if at times bewildering.

When I was about three quarters through this book, I kept asking myself, “How is he going to tie all the loose ends in just thirty pages in a way that is thoroughly satisfying?” I was worried that all the things I had liked about the book until then were going to be sucked down the drain by a bad ending. I worried for nothing. The story culminates in a character transformation that is believable and one which had been happening throughout the book, as I came to realize afterwards. At a certain point I felt that the protagonist's life was made too easy by the other characters; however, I realized that this was saying less about Kilpatrick's ability or intent to create intense drama and more about the magnanimity and down-to-earthiness of those characters.

The antagonist in this story is very subtle but present at all times. The protagonist, having lived a privileged life, is at a loss for how to act and talk – for how to fit in. He is in a constant danger of blowing his cover and, as the subjects of his scientific study grow on him, he becomes anxious about revealing himself to them as an imposter. It is a part of himself, his inner struggle, that is the antagonist -- something I found very interesting.

In terms of the quality of the writing: clearly, Kilpatrick can write. I have noticed a few (very small) glitches in the plot, and the dialogue tags are sometimes a bit too fancy. But over all the book has a pleasant momentum that carries the reader forward. While (arguably) not high literature, this book has enough perks for readers of all stripes, be it those who enjoy colorful prose or just the ones looking to engage in a pleasant, highly intelligent and funny read.

Well done.