Rating: 4/5

The premise of this book sucked me in immediately: A group of college kids who play D&amp;D who get sucked into the magical world of their characters, AS their characters. It offers some interesting ideas on what that might be like - and most of it isn't pleasant for those experiencing it (One major character doesn't make it through their first encounter with the locals). There is a very original idea for how a magic-based world might deal with sewage, which is something I like about this series in general - throughout, there are interesting digressions into how a world actually works on a bigger scale than just, "Big guy with sword hits other big guy with sword!" 

Certainly, there are some flaws in the execution of this story from the early 1980s, as viewed by a 2017 audience. The female characters are generally underdeveloped and underplayed, often serving more as plot devices than as characters. This is a shame, because the male characters are pretty nicely fleshed out as the story moves along, with parts of the story being told through each of their perspectives, and each presenting different character traits that make them seem interesting and relatable. Why Rosenberg didn't do the same for his female characters, I don't know, but it's a bit of a shame. Of course, this is not unusual for the time in which this novel was written, but it's still a bit of a bummer. 

I am a bit dissatisfied with some elements of the ending; there are major backstories and mysteries teased, but there's not enough information provided to really pique the/this reader's interest; it seems like more of an annoying tangent than anything, though there is an implication in later books that there may, eventually, be further development of this concept at some point (just not in any of the first three books, unfortunately). 

Overall, this is a pretty entertaining first book in a pretty entertaining series. If you like relatively-realistic fantasy and action, this could scratch your itch nicely.