Rating: 4/5

This is a collection of several of Larry Niven’s early short stories. These suffer a lot from the time they were written in the way they portray women. Some of the speculation about tech is just wrong to the point of seeming dumb because it turns out tech does not work that way. It turns out to actually be hard to teleport something / someone and there is no way it could not be done without being able to track a person or package. It is also interesting that I remember reading several of these short stories but they were different edits of the story. Overall this was still an interesting read of classic science fiction. A quick note on each story is below.

Rammer: Interesting idea but not sure if protagonist is real corpsicle or false implanted personality. The evil "State" sure spends a lot of resources in a short time to create and train a Rammer - it makes no sense. One of the stories I have read with a different edit.

The Alibi Machine: I hate to tell Mr Niven but he is really bad at writing "Mystery" type stories. The case is not really solved at the end, they just caught a suspect. I have read a better edit of this story at some time.

The Last Days of the Permanent Floating Riot Club: Interesting use of instant teleportation. But if the government can redirect and block booths then the claim that teleporter booths makes smuggling unstoppable. All the police have to do is block booths in an area or block the sending booths number. The story also claims that it is impossible to track people via teleportation booth, but each booth has a number so there will be easy to track numbers. No government would approve a tech that amazing without a way to tell who went where. Also, it is not going to cost a coin to travel, coins can be counterfeited, the booths are going to use user ID or unique keys to ensure payment.

A Kind of Murder: Another "Murder" mystery and again Mr Niven uses that word but not sure he knows what it means. Teleporter booths don't give you a way to carry out the perfect crime, though it is cute that older booths do not compensate for elevation changes properly. I have read this story several times all slightly different.

All the Bridges Rusting: I lie the descriptions of the deteriorating infrastructure because people no longer drive due to the invention of cheap teleportation booths. But in the end more current science particles do not act as described in the story. Teleportation is not going to work over light years the signal will dissipate over distance and not be recoverable. 

There is a Tide: An actual Louis Wu Know Space story! The story is interesting but the idea that first contact of an alien species we never hear from again is weird. The alien is actually smarter than the human would have won if Louis was no so lucky. I call BS on the alien being in danger without his space suit. Louis has an autodock and an airlock. I’m sure that is not actually an issue as they are not that far from a space station / colony. I have read a shorter edit of this story if my memory can be trusted.

Bigger than Worlds: Cute article for Analog Magazine. Many of the ideas and concepts Mr Niven later calls out as bad or impractical in his writing. 

$16,940.00: I guess this is meant to be a mystery the story is not that good. We get a setup but no resolution. We never learn what was being used for blackmail.

The Hole Man: Another of Mr Niven’s weird murder mysteries. The speculative fiction about Mars is kind of interesting – but the crew selection process is so bad and un-realistic. 

The Fourth Profession: Another Mystery. But seriously no deep space traders that can sell you any skill or profession in pill form. There is no way someone who makes a living as a space merchant is going to accidentally give some local yokel a pill that gives the subject god like powers. Seriously. The rest of the build up to discovering the bartender’s new skills is interesting.