Rating: 4/5

Almost exactly one year ago, a friend read an excerpt of this book to a group of women. In the portion she read, Much-Afraid (the main character) is promised a new name by The Shepherd. I asked what name she was given, but my friend merely smiled and told me I should read the book myself. From that point on, the book has been in my mental queue, but the time was never right. Then last month, someone mentioned the book, heard I hadn't read it and loaned it to me on the spot. There's something to be said for waiting for the right timing in reading a book. I have no doubt this was the right time for me to read this book.

Hinds' Feet on High Places is an allegory. I've found that most allegories, especially Christian ones, are a bit heavy-handed. While that could be said for this book as well, the underlying sweetness of the story more than compensated for it. Hurnard didn't gloss over difficulties in Much-Afraid's journey, which made the entire tale more believable, enjoyable and readable.

Speaking of readability, the book is a quick read, but I found myself deliberately pausing after chapters in order to ponder the truths laid out. One such truth was that our greatest enemies on the path to the high places are internal - pride, resentment, bitterness, self-pity and fear. How often do I sabotage my own efforts for one of these reasons? How often do I let fear stop me from trying? Or pride stop me from taking the first step?

If you're looking for a book with crisp, clean writing, you should look elsewhere. But if you're looking instead for a book that holds a great many truths, waiting to be pondered, internalized and lived out, Hinds' Feet on High Places is a good one to read. No matter where you are on your journey, I suspect you will see yourself in these pages. I know I am Much-Afraid much of the time and this book left me longing to collect stones of remembrance along the way so that I will have the faith and strength to be given a new name - or live up to the one I already have.