Rating: 4/5

A few months back, I came across a bunch of John D. MacDonald's books at a local Goodwill, all of them part of his Travis McGee series. I was bowled over by the rough-and-ready noise elements of his hard-boiled fiction, and on a subsequent trip in June I found another McGee novel as well as this one, a stand-alone novel and also, as it turns out, MacDonald's first. It took a long while to get around to reading it, but here we are.

"The Brass Cupcake" is the story of Cliff Bartells, a former cop and current insurance adjuster who gets called into a nasty case of robbery and murder. A wealthy spinster has turned up dead in the small Florida city that Cliff calls home, and the only heir is a beautiful but mercurial niece who has a lot of reasons to be suspected. But she's not alone; everyone from the chauffeur to the pampered guy who escorted the woman around is a suspect. And Cliff has to navigate his way around the local police department, who are directly in the pocket of a local mobster and less than enthusiastic about letting Cliff do his job of retrieving the lost jewelry that may or may not have been the motive in the first place. 

Punching his words throughout with the grizzle of a world-weary man who's seen it all, Cliff Bartells is a worthy precursor to MacDonald's later protagonist McGee. A man handy with a quip or a firearm, he's no fool. And he eventually unravels all aspects of the case, even if he has to suffer some slings and arrows to reach the end. Will he uncover the thieves and the murderers? Will he melt the heart of the fiery heiress? Will he get revenge on the cops who beat him when he wouldn't play ball with their corruption? 

Some aspects of this novel won't play well with modern readers; coming as this does from the hard-boiled world of literature in the late 1940s, it should come as no surprise how much of the actions taken in this book aren't always palatable. But usually the worst offenders are the bad guys of the piece, so in that sense it might slide by (and when the offender is our ostensible hero, it's fair for readers to wonder if Cliff really is a good guy after all). But by and large, "The Brass Cupcake" holds its own with the Travis McGee books I've read so far, giving us a first-person narrator who can get to the bottom of the case while also sustaining his even temper despite the many body-blows he might take. Because in the end, he might be put through the wringer but he'll come out at the end ahead of those who have abused the law or committed murder to help further their aims.