Rating: 2/5

Dear dear dear..........
I'll try to be nice. But. The mysogyny.... it's bad even for the 60's! And the book is quite dated. I nearly choked from chuckling when he just wanted to get back to 'his pipe and slippers.' 
But let's get to the beat here.
The Star Fox has, at the least, on the base an interesting story, that maybe could be done differently. Earth's first (? but it seems highly likely) extrasolar colony (founded by France - Vietnam??) is raided by aliens who claim it too close to their system. Officially, the aliens, a cat-like race that seems brittle as glass, slightly shorter than humans, socially collective and communicate tonally (Chinese, anyone?), claim that they were attacked, retaliated and in the crossfires the planet was nuked, and there were no survivors. Desperate for peace (DAMN HIPPIES), the Earth Federation (Euroamerican race) tries to pacify the invaders. 
But only Gunhar Heim, former STAR FOX Captain knows the truth: the colonists were attacked by the aliens and the survivors taken prisoner. So Heim must raise arms as a privateer to convince Earth that War is the Answer.
So it seems Anderson wanted this to represent the Vietnam War, and why we should fight. There's even a passage in there where the alien admiral (or whatever he's supposed to be) explains why manifest destiny is not really the greatest thing ever, for the other societies. See. Earth society (European), though much younger than the aliens (Asians), grew, mechanically and industrially much faster than them, and soon took over as much space as they could; now crouching over dangerously near the alien's territory with no sign of stopping. Think about it in the context of Indochina and how much the natives love imperialism. He's of course, a hippie jerk who must die because as we all know, the universe is made for humans (Europeans). MANIFEST DESTINY!

Oh. And now let's talk about the writing style. Yes, it's pulp. I think maybe, this is the first pulp book I've read in a long time, if ever. The minstrel character, he doesn't do jack squat but sing old folk songs, that everybody somehow still knows even though most of them are unknown in 2012, lots in untranslated French or Hungarian. And the random quips in different languages! It looks like my first year in college where I would put random Latin words in essays so I'll look smart. It doesn't make you look smart, it makes you look pompous. Sacré bleu!