Rating: 4/5

This 1973 Penguin Classics edition of 'The Prayers and Meditations of Saint Anselm' offers key selections from Anselm including prayers, meditations, letters and his most important philosophical work, the 'Proslogion.'

The preface was written by English medieval historian R.W. Southern and the introduction by theologian/historian Sister Benedicta Ward who was also the translator and editor. Ward’s introduction is lengthy (over 50 pages) and offers helpful information on all selections, most of which are numbered. The actual inclusions from Anselm are about 175 pages. 

The one problem is that the book lacks numbered citations corresponding with the endnotes. This makes for cumbersome reading as you will need to maneuver between the main text and the notes; some cited are biblical verses which may be recognizable - and are often in single quotation marks - but there are other passages where you will likely need to refer to the notes.

Anselm (1033-1109), the one-time Archbishop of Canterbury, is regarded as the father of Scholasticism and is best known for his “ontological argument,” described like this by English philosopher John Cottingham:

‘… the argument works entirely a priori — that is to say, it does not require any premise drawn from experience or observation of the world. Instead it focuses simply on the concept or definition of God as the utterly supreme being, the greatest being the mind can conceive of….’ (‘Western Philosophy: An Anthology,’ 1996, p. 244).

In Chapter 2 of the 'Proslogion' (“That God really exists”), Anselm writes of God:

‘… you are that thing than which nothing greater can be thought… [a]nd… [t]hat than which nothing greater can be thought cannot exist only in the understanding. For if it exists only in the understanding, it is possible to think of it existing also in reality, and that is greater. If that than which nothing greater can be thought exists in the understanding alone, then this thing than which nothing greater can be thought is something than which a greater can be thought. And this is clearly impossible. Therefore there can be no doubt… [t]hat something than which a greater cannot be thought exists both in the understanding and in reality' (p. 244-5).

This is a simplified arrangement of the argument:

1.	The term "God" is defined as the greatest conceivable (thinkable) being;
2.	Real existence (existence in reality) is greater than mere existence in the understanding;
3.	Therefore, God must exist in reality, not just in the understanding. 

The ontological argument is part of a variety of philosophical/theological speculations in the 'Proslogion,' regarding God, justice, God’s goodness, God as aspatial and eternal (thus, unlimited), and spiritually though not physically perceptible. In Chapter One (“In which the mind is aroused to the contemplation of God”) Anselm offers a multi-section prayer, similar to the Prayers section of the book, castigating himself as an aggrieved sinner though generalizing this to all humans. Toward the end of the chapter, there is a fusing of reason and faith, common with the Scholastics:

‘Lord, I am not trying to make my way to your height, for my understanding is in no way equal to that, but I do desire to understand a little of your truth which my heart already believes and loves. I do not seek to understand that I may believe, but I believe so that I may understand; and what is more, I believe that unless I do believe I shall not understand’ (p. 244).

The edition contains nineteen prayers directed toward God, Christ, the Holy Cross, and a variety of saints including Mary, Paul, John, and Mary Magdalene, as well as those for “Friends” and “Enemies.”

The prayers are divided into asterisked “paragraphs” and, typically, contain sections where Anselm harshly chastises himself for various sins (mostly not specified, though in the prayer to St. Benedict, "gluttony, sloth, inconstancy, impatience, vainglory, detraction [and] disobedience" are listed, p. 197; in "Meditation 2," he also accuses himself of "fornication," p. 225) coupled with strong pleadings toward the various entities for love, grace, hope, redemption, all imbued with the common Christian theme of human fallenness. 

Anselm offers three separate prayers to Mary; this is from the first:

‘My sins, my wicked deeds, since you have destroyed my soul with your poison, why do you make it a horror with your filth, so that no one can look on my misery? If your weight is so great that I have no hope of being heard, who by your shame do you block the voice of my prayer? If you’ve made me mad with love for you, why have you made my senses unfeeling with your torpor? Alas what a shameful thing is the filth of sin before the brightness of holiness. Alas what confusion there is for impure conscience in the presence of shining purity.

… What I want to ask you, Lady, is that by a glance from your mercy you will cure the sickness and ulcers of my sins, but before you I am confounded by the smell and foulness of them. I shudder, Lady, to show you all my foul state, lest it makes you shudder at the sight of me, alas for me, I cannot be seen any other way.

… Most gentle Lady, heal my weakness and you will be taking away the filth that offends you. Most kind Lady take away my sickness, and you will not experience the dirt you shudder at. Most dear Lady do not let what grieves you be, and there will be nothing left to defile your holiness. Hear me, Lady, and make whole the soul of a sinner who is your servant, by virtue of the blessed fruit of your womb, who sits at the right hand of his almighty Father and is praised and glorified above all forever' (pp. 108-109).

Overall, the Prayers offer a lucid, emotional, often self-lacerating portrait of Anselm’s spiritual self, vivid and memorable, possibly eclipsing the celebrated ontological argument, oratorically - which itself is positioned as a gift for God, a plea for mercy and forgiveness. 

I recommend this edition though, as stated, it can be burdensome moving between the endnotes and the actual text.