Rating: 3/5

The Prize is the third instalment in the deWarrene Dynasty by Brenda Joyce and it is a great addition to the series. The Prize is the first regency in the series (I skipped The Game to get to this one!) and it stars Devlin O'Neill, one of the best Irish sea captains in the British army, if unorthodox, and he is completely fuelled by revenge against the Hughes family. His latest attempt to ruin them is to abduct Virginia Hughes, a niece from America, recently orphaned, and travelling to the UK to ask for help to rescue her debt-encumbered plantation. Did this ring a bell to Sean Culhane of Stormfire for anyone else? It even includes a lovely younger brother as a potential love interest too! 

The Prize is so, so, so enjoyable. Virginia is such a delight as the naive tomboy but still classically beautiful type, yet halfway through I simply wanted Virginia to tell it like it is to Devlin. She knew what she wanted and she wore her heart on her sleeve, but Devlin kept rejecting her in numerous ways and on so many occasions that we finally got this sentence:

She no longer wished to compromise herself for the sake of their marriage, for the sake of being with him.

Just be with Sean. Quick. Before he ends up in Eleanor’s book! I yelled at my Kindle. Yes I talk to my Kindle. I don’t know why, but I think it will help.

Aside from taking on the thankless emotional labour of educating Devlin to be a decent human being, Virginia’s quest in life is to protect her tobacco plantation, Sweet Briar. After her parents’ untimely demise, she is off to see her English uncle, and her guardian, so she can argue her case to not sell Sweet Briar but keep it in the family. 

I wished I knew beforehand Sweet Briar would be a powerful motivation for Virginia's character. At least I would have been prepared because if you don’t enjoy whitewashed plantation fantasies where everyone is friends with their slaves, maybe don’t read this. I just could not get into it in the same way I could not get into Connie Mason's Tender Fury even though I enjoyed both stories for the amazing BDs they are.

Authors and publishing houses should leave the OG BD scenes alone but if they want to update anything, start with problematic passages that reek of historical revisionism about the slave-owning South. If anything needs to be updated, it's one-dimensional portraits of plantation owners and the slaves. (Also, the horrible clip art covers. Something must be done about those Connie Mason covers.) "No one cared more more about their slaves” than Virginia. Right. I feel like the people who care the most about slaves are the ones that don’t have slaves in the first place. 

 

Not to mention when Virginia compared her situation of “being a lady" to that of "being a slave… being a lady was no different from being in shackles.” 

 

Overall, the Prize is a great addition to the deWarrenne Dynasty. Aside from Stormfire, I can't think of any other story aside from Lemonade that does a good job of a hero driven by self-destructive vengeance on this scale of crazy.