Rating: 2/5

This is an odd book. If I recounted the entire plot, you would think I was on drugs. It swerved back and forth from fairly horrific dystopia to comedy to fantasy to what seemed like, but turned out not to be, a gay coming-out story. It's set in the future, where there is ample political repression, but it's worse in some states than others. Iowa is highly repressed, Minnesota much less so. The whole East Coast is in a decline, sending dentist Abraham Weinrib and his young son Daniel to Iowa. The mother has abandoned them, but she shows up five years later and all their lives continue on as if nothing remarkable happened. Teenage Daniel has a paper route, but in Iowa this particular newspaper turns out to be obscene and seditious and he is sent to prison. There are no fences, gates, or razorwire; everyone is fitted with a stomach lozenge containing a plastic explosive that will be detonated by radio waves if one ventures beyond the confines of the prison yard.

After his release from prison (the Supreme Court has overruled Iowa's seditious newspaper law), Daniel marries a wealthy young woman named Boadicea. (Her father offers her hand in marriage after he has secretly watched them having sex.) On their honeymoon, they attempt to fly; some people are able to fly if they sing songs in a highly meaningful way. Their souls leave their bodies and fly around, sometimes rejoining their bodies, sometimes not. Boadicea is able to fly, but Daniel, who has wanted desperately to fly for years, is not.

At this point, Disch goes haywire and brings in insanity belts (chastity belts for men), castrati, people called "phoneys" who dye their skin black (short for faux noirs) except for one pinky so people will know they're not actually black. Food rationing is severe, so Daniel and the elderly woman whose apartment he shares concoct a delicious bread pudding made of dog food, Hyprotine powder, and artificial sweetener.

There's a Donald Trump connection. (What??) Yes. In prison, a former music teacher sends Daniel a book by a Reverend Van Dyke titled The Product is God, which advises uncertain devotees to deeply pretend to be Christian. This will be just as good as being so. Van Dyke is a preacher at The Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, "founded in 1628, ...one of the oldest continuous Protestant congregations in North America" according to Wikipedia. What real life minister was pastor of Marble Collegiate Church for 52 years? That would be Dr. Norman Vincent Peale, author of the enormous bestseller The Power of Positive Thinking. Trump's parents attended the church, and apparently Trump did as a youngster, or at least he claims he did. “Donald Trump has had a longstanding history with Marble Collegiate Church, where his parents were for years active members and one of his children was baptized. However, as he indicates, he is a Presbyterian, and is not an active member of Marble,” the church clarified last August.

“Dr. Norman Vincent Peale, ‘The Power of Positive Thinking’ was my pastor,” Mr. Trump said Tuesday. “To this day one of the great speakers I’ve seen. You hated to leave church. You hated when the sermon was over. That’s how great he was at Marble Collegiate Church.” Now I'm convinced Trump never heard Peale speak.