Rating: 5/5

Did you ever just not want to go somewhere that you were forced to go? In this case Jessica and her father go hiking somewhere but this year its different. The genre is fiction. This is a good book because it shows bravery and shows to appreciate your sibling even if they are not related to you. !!****SPOILER ALERT****!! The book is about Jessica and her father going on a hiking trip somewhere every year but things start to go south for Jessica. Jessica's mother died when she was just eleven years old. So her dad started to see someone else after a while and Patti and Jessica's dad were getting married. Jessica was not happy about this at all. To add on to the problems instead of hiking, Jessica was really excited about, they had to go on a boat with Patti and her daughter Amy. Jessica snuck out to go hiking to a lake and then Amy followed her. Amy was hesitate about her every move until Jessica started to think Amy wasn't so bad after all. Then on the way back Amy went down the waterfall and broke her leg and arm. Then Jessica left Amy to go get help and the dad and Patti sent a helicopter with Jessica to locate where Amy was. Finally Amy was in the hospital and Jessica learned to like Patti and Amy. The setting is outside by the mountain and on the boat. Jessica didn't like Amy or Patti and Jessica snuck out and Amy followed. When going back Amy got hurt and then they went with a helicopter to find her and she got help. Then Jessica came to her senses that Patti and Amy aren't so bad after all. This is person vs person because Jessica didn't get over the loss of her mother and she didn't like that Patti was going to take her "place" and how Jessica didn't like Amy, but came to her senses. To show she started to like Amy in the book it states " She's Amy, my sister. You did great." That shows Jessica is liking Amy. Also to show she was liking Patti she says "It felt good to be comforted by her." That shows she is starting to like Patti. This is a good book because it shows how one person didn't like there new family and she found out she started liking them after a while. I would rate this book a five star because this is a good book because it teaches that you should not be rude to someone just because they are going to be your new family. I would recommend this book to anyone because you go on a journey with them and find out how they change. So the memorial of this book is to be kind to everyone. Also who knows maybe you don't like it as first but might be interested later.