Rating: 2/5

There were definitely some good insights in this book, but there was also a lot that in my judgment was thoroughly underwhelming. I took notes as I read and the insights I considered worth making the effort to record and remember took up just a couple typed pages:

P. xviii
“integrity is the most important characteristic of a leader, and one that he or she must be prepared to demonstrate again and again.”

P. xxiv
“a more dangerous world makes the need for leadership, in every organization, in every institution, more pressing than ever.”

“leadership always emerged after some rite of passage, often a stressful one. We call the experience that produces leaders a crucible.”

P. xxv
“all leaders have four essential competencies. First, they are able to engage others by creating shared meaning. They have a vision, and they can persuade others to make that vision their own… Leaders, in every field, are richly endowed with empathy.
Second, all authentic leaders have a distinctive voice. By voice, I mean a cluster of things-- a purpose, self-confidence, and a sense of self, and the whole gestalt of abilities that… we now call emotional intelligence…
The third quality that all true leaders have is integrity… One component of integrity is a strong moral compass… Leadership is always about character…
But the one competence that I now realize is absolutely essential for leaders -- the key competence -- is adaptive capacity. Adaptive capacity is what allows leaders to respond quickly and intelligently to relentless change… Adaptive capacity allows today’s leaders to act, and then evaluate the results of their actions… 
Adaptive capacity is made up of many things, including resilience or what psychologists call “hardiness.”... Adaptive capacity is a type of creativity. And adaptive capacity also encompasses the ability to identify and seize opportunities.”

P. xxx
“To an extent, leadership is like beauty: it’s hard to define, but you know it when you see it.”

P. xxxvi
“In the same way that acting talent doesn’t guarantee stardom, the capacity for leadership doesn’t guarantee that one will run a corporation or a government.”

pp 3-4
“So let’s admit it: in a nation, in a world, as complex and fluid as ours, we cannot function without leaders. Our quality of life depends on the quality of our leaders... And we need more than one. As never before, we need leaders in all our organizations and all our institutions. We need leaders in every community, corporation, and country. That leadership vacuum creates an enormous opportunity. If you've ever had dreams of leadership, this is the place, now is the time.
There are three basic reasons why leaders are important. First, they are responsible for the effectiveness of organizations. The success or failure of all organizations, whether basketball teams, community-action groups, moviemakers, makers of video games, auto manufacturers, or lending institutions, rests on the quality of their decision makers. Stock prices rise and fall according to the public perception of how good the leader is. But, just as important, the leader is responsible for who is hired, the organization's goals and aspirations, working conditions, who has authority over whom, morale, allocation of resources, transparency, and ethical standards.
Second, the change and upheaval of the past years has left us with no place to hide. We need anchors and guides. The very best of our leaders serving that way. They inspire us and restore our hope.
Third, there is a pervasive national concern about the integrity of our institutions. It is hard to imagine that there was once a time when Wall Street was a place where a man's word was his bond… its reputation tarnished in the 1980s by the white-collar crimes of Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, and others, Wall Street was gravely damaged in the first years of the twenty-first century by the greed and double-dealing of a series of CEOs who received imperial compensation even as they built both shareholders and their own employees…”

P. 42
“The manager administers; the leader innovates.
The manager is a copy; the leader is an original.
The manager maintains; the leader develops.
The manager focuses on systems and structure; the leader focuses on people.
The manager relies on control; the leader inspires trust.
The manager has a short-term view; the leader has a long-range perspective.
The manager asks how and when; the leader asks what and why.
The manager has his or her eye always on the bottom line; the leader’s eye is always on the horizon.
The manager imitates; the leader originates.
The manager accepts the status quo; the leader challenges it.
The manager is the classic good soldier; the leader is his or her own person.
The manager does things right; the leader does the right thing.”

P. 135
“Leaders are, by definition, innovators. They do things other people have not done or dare not do. They do things in advance of other people. They make new things. They make old things new. Having learned from the past, they live in the present, with one eye on the future. And each leader puts it all together in a different way.”

P. 152
“There are four ingredients leaders have that generate and sustain trust:
Constancy. Whatever surprises leaders themselves may face, they don't create any for the group. Leaders are all of a piece; they stay the course.
Congruity. Leaders walk their talk. In true leaders, there is no gap between the theories they espouse and the life they practice.
Reliability. Leaders are there when it counts; they are ready to support their co-workers in the moments that matter.
Integrity. Leaders honor their commitments and promises.”

P. 178
“The basis for leadership is learning, and principally learning from experience.”

P. 184
Paraphrase: the true purpose of all organizations is to provide opportunities for the growth and development of individuals in order to nurture and unleash that individual’s true potential.

P. 188
“Max De Pree, in Leadership is an Art, wrote, “The first responsibility of a leader is to define reality. The last is to say thank you. In between, the leader is a servant.”

P. 194
“Leaders expect the best of the people around them… [but] leaders are realistic about expectations.”

P. 207
“No leader becomes truly great unless he or she accepts, even embraces, candor.”

From the leadership books I have read so far (only a handful), I would say that Stephen R. Covey and John C. Maxwell have much more and better things to say than what I read from Bennis in this book.