Rating: 3/5

"What she loves is the extravagance of feeling that focuses itself into the tiniest actions of human attention, like the tying of this pink shoe... 

So says the young mother Patsy in the story "Saul and Patsy are in Labor." I think this "tiny" description offers an appropriate insight into the writing style of Charles Baxter. Never before (save Chekov?) have I encountered a writer who expertly submerses himself in the small things - the little looks, expressions and emotions - that make up the tickings in the day in the life of a human being. The result - as it is with his other collections - is the breaking down of characters and scenes into the most tender of astute observations.

"Kiss Away" tells the story of a young woman embracing her hopes and fears as she uncovers portions of her new boyfriend's past. Jarring pre-climactic scenes add weight to this modern, romantic tale. Another gem, "Time Exposure" finds a middle-aged married couple in a situation where they must choose whether or not to trust their neighbor's character at the risk of alienating each other and "Saul and Patsy" explores the depression that follows the birth of Saul's child. In each instance, the choice to believe is weighed and the lengths one goes to restore trust in another is revealed beautifully.

Even though I loved the title novella, I think my favorite was "Flood Show," a story of a simple man, Conor, looking to reconcile with his ex-wife. This sort of description, flowing from physical to emotional and back again, to me, requires the deftest of touch:

"Despite his size, however, Conor is mild and kindhearted - the sort of man who believes that love and caresses are probably the answer for everything - but you wouldn't know that about him unless you saw his eyes, which are placidly sensual, curious - a photographer's eyes, just this side of sentimental, belonging to someone who quite possibly thinks too much about love for his own good."

Learning about Conor from the inside out helped me to understand why he might take such a risk near the end of the story to be re-united with his wife and I appreciated this from the author.

Though often sad, I never felt like Charles Baxter over-stepped his boundaries as an writer/observer by being overly sentimental in this collection. Rather, I felt compelled to "listen" ever so closely so that I wouldn't miss a word, or a moment, illuminated on a page. Thank you, Charles Baxter, for taking the time to construct such an eloquent collection of fiction.