Rating: 3/5

Philip José Farmer's Dark Is The Sun is an engaging, albeit uneven, journey through an Earth fifteen billion years in the future. Structurally, the novel feels a bit messy and episodic, suggesting it was not outlined in advance, but rather "discovery-written", as Brandon Sanderson calls it. While the initial plot-driver is the retrieval of the two human characters' stolen soul eggs, this functions less as a standard quest and more as a means of taking the reader through Farmer's imaginative landscape. The narrative only starts to show a recognisable plot structure after the halfway mark, following the confrontation with the witch Feersh.

What immediately sets the tone is the surprisingly extreme brutality. The protagonists — Deyv, Vana, and Sloosh — readily and casually kill other people (men and women) as if it's nothing, whereas in other works the heroes might think twice or at least feel a little bad about killing guards or even common servants, for instance just to avoid raising an alarm. One example is when they attack the airship of the witch Feersh (who ordered the theft of their soul eggs to force them to come after them), even after they are given information that she actually meant them no harm and was just summoning them to send them out on a quest. In this attack, they kill and torture Feersh's servants and children, yet experience no remorse upon learning that information they were given was accurate. Farmer does not critique this behaviour, suggesting it was meant to illustrate a future where survival requires constant violence.

This does cause the characters to be a bit less relatable. Deyv, the focal character, is frequently petulant and selfish (though not to the extent of the gleefully thieving and acerbic Yawtl). We get minimal insight into the characters' internal emotional states, despite the narrative being focused through Deyv's perspective. However, the brief intimate moments shared between Deyv and Vana kept drawing me back in, since I have a weak spot for romance, even as sketchily drawn as it is in Farmer's works.

Sloosh, a kind of centaur-shaped plant-man with advanced knowledge, serves primarily as the mouthpiece for infodumps about the world and the universe in general, delivering extensive, expository monologues that often go uninterrupted for multiple pages. While this technique tends to disrupt pacing, it's a common Farmer device for conveying the alienness of his world beyond that which the focal characters would directly experience through their actions. And I have to say that Farmer at least manages to build more engaging adventures around his infodumps than, for instance, Arthur C. Clarke does.

One thing he doesn't accomplish well is the handling of antagonists like the Yawtl and Feersh: upon their defeat and assimilation into the protagonists' party, they seem to lose much of their distinctive character, motivation, and formidable abilities. This reminds me of characters in the series The Lost Room or Jack Vance's Planet of Adventure, where former adversaries become ineffectual once they're de-fanged, suddenly becoming content to follow the heroes wherever they go. This is a common result of an author's priority of plot advancement over character arcs. As for my own tastes, while I've enjoyed some purely plot-driven works in the past, I've come to expect character development as a necessary element, even in idea-driven fiction.

Perhaps related is how he handles the addition of the Shemibob to the party, who is another "witch-like" character under whom the witch Feersh served as an apprentice. Once their relationship is established and the two are in the party at the same time, there's nothing more shown of the fact that these two have a history together. They don't interact in any way I can recall, and they're more or less interchangeable aside from one having an enmity with the Yawtl and a dwindling number of offspring, and the other being an alien centipede/snake centaur.

Farmer also tends to include a kind of foreshadowing that stands out for the wrong reasons. For instance, Sloosh once delivered a speech about the fact that sapience seems to be accelerating across all terrestrial kingdoms as a desperate evolutionary response to the impending cosmic catastrophe, and he rather pointedly highlighted that he hadn't seen any member of the mineral kingdom joining the ranks of sapient beings. So it was no surprise when they encountered Phemropit, a sapient, radioactive ore-eating stone creature rolling around on tank treads and shooting lasers.

Despite this fifteen billion year evolution giving rise to sapient plants and rocks, though, Deyv's dog and cat seem like ordinary dogs and cats, as unchanged by evolution as their human masters after this extreme length of time. Farmer's conceptual energy was evidently directed towards grand and alien spectacles, not the evolution of the mundane.

Eventually, it becomes clear that the Earth, which we already knew was reaching the end of its existence, would be dying not in a few more generations, but within the immediate timeframe of our protagonists, and the increasing frequency of earthquakes acts as a kind of ticking clock. The plot, therefore, becomes focused on finding a way off of Earth. Fortunately, there are several portals scattered across the planet that may (or may not) lead to other, younger worlds. These portals are stable enough to have remained open for years, if we judge from how long the Shemibob has been experimenting with the one in her fortress, yet as soon as the protagonists show up, some of these portals seem to become unstable — moving or having things crumble around them. This sort of thing made me start to suspect some kind of intelligent, underlying intent, that these things weren't just coincidences, but foreshadowing for a revelation at the end that perhaps their world was artificially constructed by powerful beings, or a simulation, along the lines of some of Farmer's other work, like World of Tiers or Riverworld.

The resolution of Deyv and Vana's romantic subplot was remarkably swift, after only getting a few moments of intimacy and sharing of feelings. One of the things holding them back from acting on their feelings was the fact that they were both missing their soul eggs, which are necessary in their cultures to confirm a suitable match for marriage. But once Shemibob used her alien technology to fashion new soul eggs for them, they were able to confirm that they were perfectly matched. Their subsequent marriage, Vana's pregnancy, and the birth of their child unfolded rapidly within the narrative, certainly not feeling like nine months had elapsed. This reduced the whole romantic subplot to its most basic functional nature, to raise the stakes and push them more toward taking the chance on whatever lay beyond the portals rather than returning to their tribes to live out whatever brief time they had left on the dying Earth. There was a similar event involving a quickly glossed-over pregnancy of a character and its aftermath in Farmer's World of Tiers.

Another thing that had been a barrier to their relationship was Deyv's revulsion at learning of Vana's tribe's custom of ritual cannibalism. But this detail, explicitly noted by Deyv early on, and brought up a few more times when he considered and rejected the possibility of a relationship, is simply dropped from the narrative. There is no hint of him actively overcoming this revulsion, or working through it together with Vana, or deciding that his feelings were too important to deny; it simply ceases to be a factor. This is another example of how internal character conflicts, for Farmer, have little importance compared to external plot drivers.

The novel's aforementioned brutality grew far beyond anything I could have expected as it ramped up to its conclusion. The majority of the party meets violent ends: Feersh's sons and daughters are picked off one by one. The Yawtl drugs and murders Feersh, only to be killed in another earthquake while fleeing. Phemropit runs out of fuel/food, left helpless and unable to escape the Earth's destruction. The young woman Be'nyar, the party's liaison with the only nearby tribe who they hope to bring with them to the new world, is slain by her own tribe for daring to approach the final portal, and her body is fed to their animals. Most surprisingly, Deyv's dog and cat, and even Vana's infant son, are all killed during a desperate attempt to broker peace with that tribe. Only Deyv, Vana, their newborn daughter, Sloosh, and Shemibob survive to pass through the portal. All of them lose their most important possessions in the process (Deyv and Vana's soul eggs, Sloosh and Shemibob's high-tech gadgets).

The final portal leads not to an alien world, nor to a revelation of anything like a simulation, but seemingly back in time to a prehistoric Earth, populated by Neanderthals. This is Farmer's take on the trope of "protagonists become founding ancestors", usually done elsewhere by showing that the time-travelling protagonists were the real Adam and Eve, but here the protagonists and the tribe that followed them became the Cro-Magnons who replaced the Neanderthals. (Sloosh explicitly comments that in the history he knows, Cro-Magnons seemed to "appear suddenly" in the fossil record.)

Despite its structural quirks, narrative inconsistencies, and disregard for character development, Dark Is The Sun excels in its grand scope, touching on the repeated rise and fall of humanity over billions of years, with societies rising to a tech level capable of averting one world-ending cataclysm after another before returning to barbarism. It was a good exploration of a farther future than I've ever seen in SF, unless you count The Restaurant at the End of the Universe.