Rating: 2/5

COUNTDOWN: Mid-20th Century North American Crime 
BOOK 235 (of 250)
Hook - 1 star: "On a day when the February sun is indiscriminately painting all shades, from cherry red to tobacco-spit brown, on the shapes draped across our beaches...On a morning when the tanned young things...On a morning when you are at last positive...On a sun-split morning...It picks that morning to happen. Incorrect." Then a flashback. Very slow oft-putting start. And no, one should never open a book with a cliched weather report.
Pace - 2: The plot kicks in by the second chapter or so and things move nicely.
Plot -2: An older lady is killed, apparently, during a robbery of her safe containing jewels worth about $750,000. She's from Boston and apparently spending some vacation time in Florida and had to bring along $750,000 of jewels. On vacation? And during the robbery it appears she is murdered. Clif Bartells is an ex-cop on the scene, as he now works for an insurance company. The plot is, simply, on the ridiculous side.
Characters- 2: Cliff Bartells is an early version of Travis McGhee. Cliff was a lieutenant, refused to play a dirty cop on the take, is demoted to foot patrol, then quits and goes to work for Security Theft and Accidental Insurance Company. He is charged with getting the jewels back, for a fee. And that's exactly what Travis McGhee is doing at the start of the McGhee series. So this is worth a read just to catch a glimpse of MacDonald's early take on McGhee. Melody Chance plays a typical dumb blonde seductress, Furny a spoiled young rich man, and we never meet the older lady who is killed during the robbery. 3 stars only because of the appearance of an early McGhee.
ATMOSPHERE - 1: Oddly, the first page tells us all about the weather and beaches and pretty young things and that's about as far as MacDonald goes: he has difficulty explaining why Old Miss Stegman, her only family member, Melody, her 2 servants, and her family friend, Furny are all staying at different places: MacDonald can't quiet convince us that there is a differing level of quality of service, etc.. It makes no sense other than to give Cliff an opportunity to drive around and have something to do. Lazy writing: a very early (first?) effort by MacDonald.
SUMMARY: My rating is 1.6, and this is only worth reading if you're already a fan of the Travis McGhee series.