Rating: 4/5

I discovered there's actually a name for people like me. People who lose track of time, or have no concept of time to begin with. People with good intentions and great enthusiasm but little follow-through. People who chronically procrastinate, can be extremely organized in some ways but suck at housekeeping, and are never on time.

I used to think that name was "loser". Or "lazy bum", or "complete failure as a mother". Now I know better. I am a SHE, a Sidetracked Home Executive.

I found this book on the Staff Picks shelf at the library. When I saw the subtitle: From Pigpen to Paradise, I had to give it a second look. Not that I live in a pigpen. Let's just say, when I tell the kids to pick up the floor, they ask me who's coming over. I hate clutter, and yet I live amid it constantly. Lest this reflect poorly on my mother, let me say that she is an excellent housekeeper, and she taught me well, and it's not her fault the Cleaning Gene passed me over. 

As I read this book, I nodded vigorously at several sections. In some ways I'm extremely organized. I was a secretary for years, and I loved the job. I loved the order. My desk was extremely neat, my work always got done, I spell-checked my own documents without the aid of the computer because it misses stuff (if it's spelled wrong, but makes another legitimate word, then it flies under the radar). I'm organized, darn it! And while I often lack motivation or self-discipline in certain areas, I will spend hours working at things I really enjoy and care about. You can't be a music major without self-discipline. I have always always always kept a balanced checkbook, to the penny. I'm disciplined! So what's my problem?

I read the following paragraph, and the light dawned with such brilliance that I wanted to kiss the authors:

"A Sidetracked Home Executive (S.H.E.) is a special kind of person. A S.H.E. can never be one of the born-organized people, but a S.H.E. can learn much from her organized friends. A S.H.E. must realize her self-discipline is not missing; it is just dormant. What she does lack is direction. She suffers from what we call the IGAD disease (I've Got All Day). She has very little awareness of time, and neither had we."

When I read that to my husband, he just laughed and said, "and you're just coming to this realization now?" Hey, I always knew I was like that, I just didn't know why. Or what I could do about it. Because, as the authors of this book point out, the people who try to teach others how to be organized are, themselves, organized. Born organized. They have no concept of why we can't just do what they say, any more than we have a concept of how they just do things. But these ladies are self-proclaimed reformed slobs. They get it. They understand that some of us are housework-challenged, and they have a way to help us through it.

I'm not saying their system is a cure-all. After all, you still have to implement it. But at least it's a system, spelled out for the slow among us. It involves a LOT of 3x5 cards and dividers and color coding, and it all sounds very complicated and very dated. That's because the book was first published in 1977. But the latest edition was published in 2001, and contains instructions on using the computer to stay organized. I wondered why they even bothered to keep the old card file system in the book when they updated it, but the more I read, the more I felt that I was one of those people who might benefit from the cards. 

I have clearly embraced the computer for many things, but even though I've tried keeping a calendar and to-do list on it, I always go back to my wall calendar and notepad. They just seem to work better for me. They're right where I need them to be, they don't have to be booted up or scrolled through. A card file would have a similar effect. It would be right where I needed it, and the physical act of writing in it would cement it in my mind. The mass of the cards would give me a more concrete idea of what I need to accomplish. It would be a more physically effective tool than random data in a computer. Plus, I get sidetracked by the computer. All. The. Time. I turn it on to do the bills, and two hours later I'm still reading blogs and playing Pathwords on Facebook, and haven't even logged into the bank website yet. A card file, well away from any electronics, would solve that problem, too.

So I think I might try it. Just on a small scale. It can't hurt, right? All I have to lose is a box of 3x5 cards and a couple of hours.