Rating: 2/5

The London Review of Books
AJ Ayer

For the most part, the letters reveal him at his worst: vain, drunken, quarrelsome, sulky and, above all, inconsiderate.

Having known him for more than forty years, I can vouch for his having a more attractive side. If one went only by this portrait, one would give Koestler credit for energy and courage, but his ability to inspire devotion would be unintelligible.

Koestler’s most ambitious work in the domain of the philosophy of science is The Act of Creation, which appeared in 1964. It relied very much on the all-purpose concept of ‘bisociation’, which Koestler had introduced in his Insight and Outlook, published in 1949, and employed primarily as a basis for a theory of humour.

The Act of Creation was very roughly handled by Sir Peter Medawar in a long article in the New Statesman. Having reread Medawar’s review and his rejoinder to Koestler’s letter of protest, I cannot agree with Mr Hamilton’s insinuation that Medawar’s strictures exhibited a prejudice against the intrusion of an amateur into his field rather than a rational assessment of Koestler’s mistakes.

---

The New Statesman

Peter Medawar

Although much of Koestler’s book has to do with explanation, he seems to pay little attention to the narrowly scientific usages of the concept.

Some of the ‘explanations’ he quotes with approval are simply analgesic pills which dull the aches of incomprehension without going into their causes. The kind of explanation the scientist spends most of his time thinking up and testing – the hypotheses which enfolds the matters to be explained among its logical consequences – gets little attention.

---

Kirkus Reviews

If we consider Creation as a continuation of Insight and Outlook, as well as of the in-between works, Sleepwalkers, a study of science, and Lotus and Robot, a study of mysticism, we are better able to appreciate the extraordinary ingenuity Koestler has brought to his investigations in particular and his conception as a whole.

The first part analyze creativity proper: the jester or comic inspiration, the sage or scientific discovery, finally the artist and the arts; all are seen to work through conscious and unconscious processes.

The second part extends the same concerns to the evolutionary hierarchy, from the simple fertilized egg to the complexities of the human brain; here the framework is biological buttressed with current developments in experimental psychology. Stated thus one might imagine a heavy-going clinical enterprise eetering with the terminology of various disciplines, and to a large degree so it is.

But Koestler, a formidable speculative thinker, is also the master of a sharp, sophisticated prose, capable of ranging from the aphoristic to the polemical and his learning, which he sports like a dandy, is well- nigh encyclopedic. These dazzlements, moreover, are put to use where dry-as-dust palaver is generally the norm. Certainly only a Koestler could contain, and with the same easy elegance, examinations of Skinner, Darwin, Kohler or Jung, as well as references to, say, Mallarme or Gombrich.

Further, his fundamental theory, that of bisociation, a transitory disturbance of emotion and thought producing creative manifestations on all levels of the animal kingdom, suggests one of the most startling and significant points of departure from the modernist idea of man as automaton we know of.

Thoroughly controversial and thoroughly invigorating. Koestler's most novel work demands and sustains many re-readings.

---

The New York Times

Koestler observes that collected facts get the genius nowhere unless rearranged in new patterns. He recognizes the deepest motivations revolving about men's vanity and ambition.

It is admittedly big and untidy, and cannot easily be read straight through. It gives an impression as though for some 10 years he had been throwing information about scientists, some of it good, some bad, into a wood box, that he had gotten, it out and stirred it around and come up with a book about as readable and unreadable as the original unpublished version of the “Origin of Species” most probably was.

It contains a shrewd novelist's insight and scattered gems of thought, as well as equal blind spots. It has chapters that are fascinating, read alone, and an occasional gullibility about the historical data he handles which is unjustifiable.

---

The New York Review of Books

I scarcely blame them. For one thing, The Act of Creation contains not one but two (no doubt related) books of very different ranges, perspectives, and styles.

The first is beautifully readable and, for the most part, intelligible to any informed twentieth-century reader; the other is highly technical, occasionally unintelligible except to specialists and sometimes (I suspect) not even to them, but at the same time immensely ranging, not to say visionary, in its purview.

For another thing, both books, for all their differences, have similar defects.

Here I am not speaking of factual errors, most of which could no doubt be removed without affecting the main drift of Koestler’s arguments. The underlying difficulty concerns the intention of the book as a whole. What is Koestler really up to? Would it be an egregious mistake to take the book at its face value? But, then, what precisely is its face value?

Practicing scientists will be, have been, disposed to dismiss Koestler as a possibly gifted but presumptuous and uncritical “writer” who has wandered unaccountably into a field for which, by training and aptitude, he is intrinsically unfitted.