Rating: 4/5

Given how briefly the best authors dedicated themselves to it, realism exerts far too much influence over our reading habits. Beware, when you pick up a Smollett, for here there is no character development, no tight plot, no interest--despite what the back of the book says--in faithfully depicting society. 

Humphrey Clinker is, rather, a weird mash-up of Horace and Juvenal's satires, eighteenth century travel literature, and story collections like the Canterbury Tales. It's an epistolary something or other, but 'novel' doesn't quite seem to capture it. The best analogue, though, might be: it's a really good sitcom, in which an ensemble cast goes through a series of incidents, with very little connection to each other, and the final episode is, well, just the end, rather than a nice conclusion. 

Who are the letter writers? Bramble is a Juvenalian satirist, complaining at great length about medicine, parvenus, the city and tourism. He could also (an uneducated guess) be a model Austen's Mr Bennett, since he combines his satirical grumpiness with much 'man of feeling' generosity. Melford is a Chaucerian story-teller, whose (anachronism alert!) campness and general lack of interest in the ladies must excite all sorts of queer-theorising. Melford's sister Lydia seems to have wandered in from a very boring Richardson novel. And yet the plot, such as it is, hinges on her. Bramble's semi-illiterate, man-chasing sister Tabitha is wonderfully awful. The yet more illiterate servant Jenkins gives Smollett a chance to make endless fun ("We were yesterday three kiple chined, by the grease of God, in the holy bands of mattermoney") of both his world and the romantic plot itself. 

If you come to this expecting Austen (or even Fielding), you'll be greatly disappointed. If you come to it expecting an eighteenth century version of Family Guy, you'll probably be very amused. In other words, to all the one and two star reviewers: this isn't a bad book of realism. It's an excellent work of its own kind. I blame your teachers. 

"I should renounce politics the more willingly, if I could find other topics of conversation discussed with more modesty and candour; but the daemon of party seems to have usurped every department of life. Even the world of literature and taste is divided into the most virulent factions, which revile, decry and traduce the works of one another." Bramble, p 136. 

"...now, all these enormities might be remedied with a very little attention to the article of police, or civil regulation; but the wise patriots of London have taken it into their heads, that all regulation is inconsistent with liberty; and that every man ought to live in his own way, without restraint-- Nay, as there is not sense enough left among them, to be discomposed by the nuisance I have mentioned, they may, for aught I case, wallow in the mire of their own pollution." Bramble, 154.