Rating: 3/5

The second Judge Dee novel which takes place while Dee is magistrate of Poo-yang, in Jiangsu Province on the Grand Canal, which had been built in the Sui Dynasty (590-618). Written in 1963, it is the fourth volume in the second series of Judge Dee novels in which the characteristics of Chinese novels had been toned down and also the cast of characters - Judge Dee is in each of these novels only assisted by one of his helpers instead of all four; in this novel it is his trusted Sergeant and old retainer Hoong Liang.

Judge Dee is attending the Dragon Boat races accompanied by his three ladies aboard his own official barge, a celebration marking the fifth day of the fifth moon. As the final sprint begins, the timpanist of one of the boats collapses. The verdict of the coroner is "death by poisoning." In addition, Judge Dee will have to solve the murder of the young second lady of a prominent local merchant and art collector which is witnessed by the Judge himself. And on top of that odd things seem to be going on in a deserted villa at the edge of the River Goddess's overgrown mandrake grove. There are also rumors about the discovery of an Imperial Treasure so that the judge has his hands full.

Van Gulik wrote this novel in a month's time in 1960, when he was ambassador in Kuala Lumpur. However, as he was back in East Asia after eight years absence and once again in daily contact with Chinese people and old and new Chinese novels as well as the Chinese theater (Malaysia is of course not Chinese, but has a large population with a Chinese background), he lost confidence. So in the summer of 1960 he rewrote the book, also changing the culprit.

Despite the rewriting, I feel it is one of the lesser Judge Dee novels: except for the description of the dragon boat race, for the rest the novel doesn't come to life atmospherically, and unfortunately Van Gulik uses here a tired formula of (Western) detective fiction, to describe ad nauseam the possible motives of the various suspects.