Rating: 4/5

“All my life, I have listened to the teachings of Luther . . . [He said that] the state is ordained by God and must be obeyed. Loyalty to one’s own country above anything else. But I no longer believe this. Germans, English, Americans, Italians, Russians all believe this, and are all wrong. The nations have become idols and I will not worship them. I have brothers and sisters everywhere on Earth. I have another country.”

“Being evil is worse than doing evil. Better for a lover of truth to lie than for a liar to tell the truth. Which is worse? To stay clear of political conflict for fear of compromising the church [and one's soul], or to be become involved out of love for neighbor and sin greatly in the process? To escape sin may be the ultimate guilt.”

“It would be self-serving to allow concern for the disposition of my soul to push me off my current course.”

Perhaps objectively Giardina’s best novel in my opinion, Saints and Villains chronicles the life of Dietrich Bonhoeffer. While the story on the whole is rooted in fact and research, the narrative gets constantly filtered through a novelist’s mind—and, as such, Giardina does not shy away from taking creative licenses in order to enhance the story, fashioning even a major Jewish love interest for Bonhoeffer who did not exist in real life.

Probably the most fascinating aspect of the novel for me would be Giardina’s depiction of Dietrich Bonhoeffer. She does not at all shy away from presenting him as a deeply complex and decidedly flawed individual. Young Dietrich is raised in an affluent household and quickly develops an apparent aptitude for the piano. While the Bonhoeffer parents initially hold high hopes of Dietrich becoming something a prodigy someday, they are told by a musical expert that their son—despite being technically flawless on the piano—lacks the passion or the innate “it factor” necessary for him to emerge as a truly remarkable musical artist or composer. Pushing his disappointment aside, Dietrich—being an exceptionally bright boy with a deeply philosophical mind—resolves to study theology instead. His family, being just nominally religious, are floored, and they endeavor to persuade him otherwise. But Dietrich insists that he aspires to challenge himself mentally, and that nothing can be more challenging than grasping the mind of God; to him, theology is simply a more rigorous form of philosophy. So Dietrich goes off to study Theology in America and throws himself into his studies there. While he becomes quickly obsessed with understanding theological concepts, he seems far more like an intellectual than a deeply passionate follower of Christ. He even at one point refers to himself as a “theologian who would like to be a Christian.” Although it is important to note that Bonhoeffer does have a few formative experiences in the United States. For one, he witnesses firsthand the persecution of the African Americans there and is enraged by it. Secondly, he meets a French student at his seminary, whom Dietrich initially deems as a rival due to latent World War 1 resentment—but the French student explains to Dietrich that, in his view, one’s allegiance to God out ought to come first and that nationalism is a form of idolatry. While it’s hard to say how much of this back story is factual, the research that I have done has shown me that the real-life Bonhoeffer was indeed initially much more interested in abstract theology than in any kind of tangible Christian practice.

But everything changes for Dietrich when he returns home and the Nazi party begins to take over Germany. He knows that the Nazi’s rhetoric toward the Jews and other groups is deeply incompatible with the teachings of Christ, and he knows from his studies that it is the duty of any proper Christian to speak out. And speak out he initially does, even becoming a founding member of the “confessing church,” which opposed the Nazi party—and which Bonhoeffer claimed to be the only true church in Germany, as it was the only national church to oppose Hitler. However, when World War 2 starts and military service becomes military becomes mandatory for Germans, Dietrich realizes that he must pretend to be on Hitler’s side. So he begins working from inside to topple the Nazi regime, even involving himself in a failed plot to assassinate Hitler. As Bonhoeffer is a pacifist, he sees himself as endangering his own soul for the greater good, which gives rise to some of the thought-provoking quotes that I included above. To Dietrich, escaping “sin may be the ultimate guilt” for him. His love of neighbor drives him to do what he regards as sin and thus endanger the state of his soul (at least in his mind).

The deconstruction of Bonhoeffer’s character and the ideas explored through his experiences make for some of the most impressive aspects of this novel. And his character particularly resonated with me on this reading, as—even while the stakes for me are not nearly as high as they were for Dietrich—I have also been endeavoring to follow my conscience lately and make a stand for my convictions, even if it means differing from of the majority of the church on certain issues. 

Yet another thought-provoking aspect of Saints and Villains are the “Doppelganger” sections—where Giardina explores how a man who is not too different from Dietrich (being deeply intelligent and obsessed with classical piano) might have turned out very differently and even come to supported Hitler, if given an abusive upbringing and deprived of all the advantages that Dietrich had throughout his life. Giardina is a Christian Universalist, and I think it shows in her writing. She makes us ponder, “but for the grace of God, there goes I.”

My only real issue with Saints and Villains would be that few of the characters besides Dietrich and his “doppelgänger,” Alois Bauer, stand out much. Fred Bishop is fascinating, but he is only in the novel for a very short period of time. Most of the rest of the characters rather seem like names that blend into one for me personally. Eventually, I stopped even endeavoring to differentiate between all of Dietrich’s friends and allies and confidants. 

Nonetheless, Saints and Villains makes for one of the most thought-provoking novels I’ve read in a very long time. It has been my second time reading it—and I definitely plan on reading it a third time eventually!