Rating: 5/5

Oswald’s Tale: An American Mystery by Normal Mailer has been on my radar since it was published in 1995, in fact it was on my book shelf until the time we downsized our life and thus our library, in not making the cut. But intrigued with all of the controversy that has been the undercurrent for years, I checked this copy out from my local library. Having been in high school on that tragic day, November 22, 1963, it has never been far from my memory. But I must say, that after all of these years, that when I read the part taking place in Dallas it was with great devastation and sadness, emotions still strong reliving that fateful day in Dallas overlooking Dealy Plaza as the shots rang out from the sixth floor of the Texas Book Depository.

It is a stroke of genius in the way that Norma Mailer has chosen to format this book beginning with the first volume devoted to Oswald in Minsk with Marina while Volume II of the book is the story of Oswald in America. The author states that it may well take the entirety of the book to decide whether such method of approach, to essentially search for the nature of the man before deciding on the plot can help one determine in finding out how John Kennedy was shot and why. Because as Mailer states,  “Until then, we will keep asking who was behind it and which conspiracy was operative.”

   “It is virtually not assimilable to our reason that a small lonely man felled a giant in the midst of his limousines, his legions, his throng, and his security. If such a non-entity destroyed the leader of the most powerful nation on earth, then a world of disproportion engulfs us, and we live in a universe that is absurd. So the question reduces us itself to some degree: If we should decide that Oswald killed Kennedy by himself, let us try to comprehend whether he was an assassin with a vision or a killer without one. We must not only look at Oswald from many points of view—first Russian and soon American—but even try to perceive him through bureaucratic lenses. All too often, that is all we have. Let us recognize, however, that it makes some difference to our commonwealth, each and every time, whether an act of murder is visionless and mindless or is a cry of wrath that rises from a skewed heart maddened by its own vision of injustice.”

“We have come at least to the philosophical crux of our inquiry: It would state that the sudden death of a man as large in his possibilities as John Fitzgerald Kennedy is more tolerable if we can perceive his killer as tragic rather than absurd.”

Norman Mailer brilliantly plots this book with all facets explored, including all of the conspiracy theories that were rampant and still raging, soon to be more-so with President Trump ordering the release of thousands of documents that have been previously held under seal. After living through all of the trauma over the years and reading this book, I am of the mind that Normal Mailer is correct in his assessment that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone. It was interesting that Mailer said that when he began writing this book he vowed to keep an open mind, although he admitted to be more aligned with the conspiracy theorists. However, in his research and plotting it all out in this magnificent book, he came to the conclusion that Oswald acted alone.

   “Given the yeast-like propensities of conspiracy to expand and expand as one looks to buttress each explanation, it can hardly be difficult for the reader to understand why it is more agreeable to keep one’s developing concept of Oswald as a protagonist, a man to whom, grudgingly, we must give a bit of stature when we take into account the modesty of his origins. That, to repeat, can provide us with a sense of the tragic rather than of the absurd. If a figure as large as Kennedy is cheated abruptly of his life, we feel better, if his killer is also not without size. Then, to some degree, we can also mourn the loss of possibility in the man who did the deed. Tragedy is vastly preferable to absurdity. Such is the vested interest that adheres to perceiving Oswald as a tragic and infuriating hero (or, if you will, anti-hero) rather than as a snarling little wife abuser or a patsy.”