Rating: 2/5

This was the only book I ever remember seeing my mother read. Written in 1954, the author was evidently considered to be a prominent nutritionist of her time. Part of this book is very relevant to food issues today. She talks about the importance of eating many fruits, vegetables and grains, but also emphasizes the importance of those products being grown in a chemical-free soil enriched with organic matter. She condemns over-processed foods. She also provides good visual imagery of how vitamins and minerals assist the body's functioning. But this is where her relevance ends. While I agree that proper nutrition is crucial to good health, I am not so sure that a diet that includes liver on a daily basis for breakfast and other organ meats (kidneys, heart, brains) at least 2-3 times per week is a key to good health. Nor do I believe that a good diet will cure or prevent the following: polio, depression, muscular dystrophy, insanity, eczema, alcoholism, homosexuality, irritability, psoriasis, infertility, lassitude, juvenile delinquency, etc. The author mentions circumstantial evidence to "support" these claims. She also claims that "too much salt rarely hurts." That is dangerous advice these days. As a woman of the 1950's, perhaps it is not surprising that she wrote the following, but I still found it rather appalling: "One can predict with fair accuracy both the sickness expectancy and the life expectancy of a family by observing the wife's cooking methods. Any man can be sure of decreasing his life span by marrying a fluffy-cake-and-biscuit artist or one who does good-ole South'n cooking..... I personally know one such woman....who has buried three husbands from heart disease. I call it murder by the lemon-meringue pie method. If you do wish to kill your husband, this method is excellent..."
I read online that the author's estate has been successfully sued after a follower of her method treated her infant with mega-doses of vitamins which resulted in the infant's death.

Enough said.