"De Liver
De Letter
De Sooner
De Better
De Later 
De Letter
De Madder
I Getter"

Ever since the second grade, noone has been a bigger fan of author Boyd Henshaw then Leigh Botts. Now in sixth grade, Leigh's life is in upheaval. His parents have split, his cross-country trucker father is absent, and a thief steals from his lunch bag almost every day. So when his teacher assigns a letter writing project, he naturally decides to write to Mr. Henshaw. What if his hero's answer could change his life. 

A story of letters, lunchs, and life. A tale of the power of words.

Trigger warnings for divorce and abandonment.

Upset and lonely, Leigh felt like a lost shoe on the highway. It was impossible not to hear the tough yet vulnerable anger in his questions. He wrote of his fears, worries, and want to be noticed, with a distinct voice we've all felt at one point in life. I loved how the state of his writing echoed his journey in processing his feelings about his parents divorce, new school, etc. Leigh was so relatably human.

From his hard-working mother to is primarily absent father, from his literary hero, to a kind janitor, the supporting cast truly impacted Leigh. Although we only saw glimpses of them through his letters, their different relationships with him truly took a toll on the young boy. His stable mother, and the caring Mr. Finely, the janitor, were wonderful, but I absolutely loathed his father. However, the way Mr. Henshaw's background but central advice rippled around Leigh's life was well written.

Opening Dear Mr. Henshaw was a good and bad trip down memory lane. Despite spending my fourth grade Labor Day weekend in tears, completing an overwhelming project about the book that was all for naught, I enjoyed the epistolaries of a young boy coping with divorce. Heartfelt, Beverly Cleary's story of loneliness was met with a healthy, hopeful attempt at laying bare pent-up feelings. Peppered with black and white illustrations, this was a quick, meaningful read.

Dear reader, I hope you have a hero like Mr. Henshaw.