Rating: 4/5

Len Deighton's Spy Line is the payoff to Spy Hook, a fun and exciting spy thriller that puts Bernard Samson on the front lines and under fire as he seeks the truth about his wife's deception. One lingering plot point from Spy Hook is brushed aside too quickly, but the rest of the book is good enough to make up for that cop-out. 

Bernard Samson is hiding out in Berlin now that British Intelligence has put out a warrant for him. Soon, he finds himself traveling to Vienna, competing with the CIA and running afoul of a deadly assassin as he unravels the full scope of Fiona's spy mission.

Spoilers...

My biggest -- and, really, my only -- gripe with Spy Line is that Samson stops being on the run almost instantly. He never has a chance to seem like he's in danger from his former colleagues because in the second or third chapter he's sitting in on an official interrogation. Not long after that, he negotiates a deal to come in from the cold, and suddenly he's back to work. Why even bother forcing him to go rogue if you're not going to do anything with it? It would've been cool seeing Samson outwit his buddies, proving that he really is better than they are, at least in the field. With this plotline discarded so fast, it feels like a waste. 

Once you accept that, however, Spy Line really kicks into gear, and it might be the fastest paced, most exciting and consequential book in the series. The sequence at the auction reminded me of Ian Fleming's short story "The Property of a Lady" (which became a scene in the film Octopussy), with Samson having to bid on an item the British want to get before the CIA does, with an assassin thrown into the mix for good measure. Soon after, Samson is taken on a heavily-guarded trip to see his wife (who also tells him to leave well enough alone), attends a costume party at the hotel formerly owned by Lisl and now run by Bernard's best friend Werner, and finally finds himself Fiona's only hope of making it out of Berlin alive. This one is a grand adventure, and feels like the culmination it's clearly intended to be.

That meeting with Fiona is a tremendous piece of writing. Once again, Bernard is caught between his anger at being betrayed and the love for his wife he can't deny. Part of him wants to lash out in anger, but he keeps his cool... mostly. He lets out the occasional verbal jab, and instantly hates himself for it, even though he's more than earned a few shots. These moments are incredibly human and make Bernard Samson relatable. His wife destroyed his life, ran out on him and their children, and now he can't even be mad about it because she's doing it for Queen and Country. Fiona will get all the accolades, be celebrated as a national hero (if only behind closed doors), while he has to swallow all his pain and join in the applause. Fiona won't get off completely clean, of course; her kids will likely never forgive her, and if she really does love Bernard she has to know things with him -- if there even is a relationship there anymore -- will never be the same. She, however, signed up for this; Bernard didn't. He's a victim in every sense, and his wife had to give the okay to tear his heart out. Spy Line ends at the right moment, but I'm glad there will be more to this because I really want to see how this plays out.

There are two major new characters in Spy Line and I really like them both. When he reaches Vienna, Bernard makes contact with an Austrian operative named Otto Hoffman. and he's delightful. He takes great joy in rich deserts and audibly revels in them as he briefs Bernard on his mission. I couldn't help picturing Christoph Waltz, and I hope he turns up again. Then there's Ronnie Thurkettle, the former homicide convict turned CIA asset who is now a killer for hire. His introduction is not what we think it is, and that makes him even more interesting (not to mention scarier). He appears to be working for the KGB, but the way things go in this series we can't even be sure of that. Thurkettle makes it out of Spy Line alive, and we'd better meet him again down the line, because he and Bernard are owed a showdown. 

It's good that Deighton introduced a couple of new characters, because in the excellent climax we say goodbye to two series stalwarts. Fiona's philandering sister Tessa drunkenly (among other things) tags along with Bernard and his team on the rescue mission -- dressed as a butterfly, as they're coming from a costume party -- and is the first to die in the resulting shootout. This was a big surprise, but not as big as Bernard's suspicion that Tessa was actually a target as opposed to a bystander. Why was she marked for death? Does Dicky Cruyer talk in his sleep? The other big death is Erich Sinnes, the KGB agent who played and humiliated Samson. I'm glad Bernard got a little bit of revenge, and Stinnes doesn't die easy either. Even more satisfying than Stinnes getting shot in the throat, though, is Samson finally punching out Dicky. That was perfect. 

Spy Line is great, and easily the most satisfying of the Samson enealogy so far. Rushing past Bernard's fugitive status is a bummer, but the rest of the novel is sensational.