Rating: 4/5

While I disagree with some of the authors claims, or more accurately ‘interpretation’ of things particularly when it comes to spirituality - my 4 star review pays homage to my respect and appreciation for this man for waking up humanity - including what’s covered inside this book. It’s compelling and in-depth information.

Considering the publication date of this book - he was clearly ahead of his time and one of the reasons I’m reading such an old book by a “controversial” author whom I love to learn from (even if I don’t necessarily agree with everything he claims) - because it’s fascinating to see him get proved correct time and time again. He has a talent, gift and will power to call things out for what they are and fill in pieces of the puzzle even if I don’t think he’s got all the pieces right - and believe me I’d rarely give a glowing review like this for someone I’d disagree about things with - but I believe in give credit where credit is due - and he deserve it no doubt.

The genocide of palestinian people going on currently as I write this review - which emphasises the sorry state and reality of the world - 2 decades later after this book came out is one of many evidences of this author being proven right. And sad to see how deep the rabbit hole goes to the evil that exists…

 - I pray God protects and guide him.

To Our Continued Success!
Seemy 
Waseem.tv/Blog 

👆🏼 P.S - 
If you found this review helpful - I’d like to invite you to discover more on our blog. Where the community share some of our most important insights to level up each others knowledge 💡- from experience in studying books like this, training programs, podcasts and much more - visit the blog link above to find out more.

P.P.S 😅 - You probably noticed from my profile that I’ve reviewed a LOT of books over the years now - if you love seeking knowledge like me I’d love to connect with you further as a like minded person (send me a friend invite! 😀) - Also if you are curious - here is my preferred and recommended resource for seeking timeless wisdom - Check it out via the website invite link below 👇🏼 (You’ll be able to claim some awesome books for free 📚)

https://Waseem.tv/GoodReadsBookInvite