Rating: 3/5

This is the first ‘James Tiptree, Jr’ novel – really three long stories – I’ve read. I quite enjoyed it.

My reticent appreciation is based on what, for me, is a typical difficulty I have with some sci-fi. The worlds the writer discovers are, I often find, rather clearer in her or his head than they are to the reader. Finding the balance between lengthy exposition and a subtle but lucid communication of the imaginary ‘peoples’, their behaviours and politics and social and cultural practices, their landscapes and buildings, their technologies etc is a tricky one, and it was only by the end of ‘The Starry Rift’ I was pretty much on the right wavelength.

Tiptree structures her stories interestingly. They are given coherence by the Librarian of Deneb University who has been asked by two Comeno students for ‘a selection of Human fact/fiction from the early days of the Federation’. He offers them stories which introduce both the students and, of course, us to those times more or less chronologically, from the Human discovery of distant galactic spaces and worlds, moving on to their exploration and early colonisation, and finally the first contact between Humans and the Comenor. All three stories show the central Human protagonists at their human best, operating altruistically, positively, generously, judicially, diplomatically, keen to promote intra-galactic friendship and understanding and mutually beneficial trading relationships.

I say intra-galactic rather than inter-galactic because all the stories are set in the galaxy that we know as the Milky Way. The Starry Rift of the title is the relatively starless part of the galaxy, on one side of which lie Humans while on the other are planets and ‘peoples’ as yet undiscovered.

Several narrative strands concern the Human mapping of the Rift to facilitate the navigation of it. Some Humans, however, have made the crossing on their own account with a view to colonising whatever they may find on the other side, displaying an aggression that the ‘peoples’ there – which include the Comenor - have long ago succeeded in excluding from their affairs. Along with these roughnecks that have earned the Humans a bad reputation, the Rift is cruised by Human space pirates and, in the first story, an alien creature hitching a ride to a new world.

I am going to hang on to my copy of this novel, as I think a re-reading will prove rewarding. Apart from anything else, Tiptree is determined to present us in our best light, and displays those qualities that, if practised, make us and our societies rather better places to live.