Rating: 4/5

I enjoyed these poems. They all generally have the theme of nature &amp; sadness/grief/melancholy

Tu Fu - nature &amp; aging &amp; melancholy
XXXIII
Stars and Moon on the River (this poem makes me think of autumn, and the scene in Jane Eyre when she walks through the crisp evening to mail her letter(
The Autumn night is clear
After the thunderstorm. 
Venus glows on the river.
The Milky Way is white as snow.
The Dark sky is vast and deep.
The Northern Crown sets in the dusk.
The moon like a clear mirror
Rises from the great void. When it
Has climbed high in the sky, moonlit
Frost glitters on the chrysanthemums.

Mei Yao Ch'en - deep grief for his beloved wife
One of my favorite lines is from XLII - Sorrow
"My eyes are not allowed a dry season"

Ou Yang Hsiu - springtime and grief
LI Spring Walk to the Pavilion of Good Crops and Peace
The trees are brilliant with flowers
And the hills are green. 
The sun is about to set. 
Over the immense plain 
A green carpet of grass
Stretches to infinity.
The passersby do not care
That Spring is about to end.
Carelessly they come and go
Before the pavilion,
Trampling the fallen flowers

LVI - Reading the poems of an absent friend
"The joys of poetry, for those who appreciate them, increase with time and familiarity, their richness never ends in satiety... But I who am lucky enough to appreciate these pleasures, the more I savour, the deeper I understand, the more I want."

LIX - Old Age
"Chance thoughts from I don't know where crowd upon me. When I get to the end of a train of thought, i have forgotten the beginning. For one thing I retain I forget ten. If I come across something interesting I have no one to talk to about it."

Sun Tung P'o - moonlight &amp; drunkenness
LXXXII - Autumn
The water lilies of summer are gone. They are no more
Nothing remains but their umbrella leaves
The chrysanthemums of Autumn are fading.
Their leaves are white with frost.
The beauty of the year is only a solemn memory.
Soon it will be winter and
Oranges turn gold and the citrons green.

Li Ch'Ing Chao - autumn &amp; loss
LXXV - Autumn evening beside the lake
Wind passes over the lake. 
The Swelling waves stretch away
Without limit. Autumn comes with the twilight,
And boats grow rare on the river.
Flickering waters and fading mountains
Always touch the heart of man.
I never grow tired of singing
of their boundless beauty.
The lotus pods are already formed,
And the water lilies have grown old.
The dew has brightened the blossims
of the arrowroot along the riverband.
The herons and seagulls sleep
On the sand withtheir
heads tucked away, as though
they did not wish to see
the men who pass by on the river. 

Lu Yu - wind

Chu Hsi - bodies of water

Hsu Chao - locusts on a dead body, grief

Chu Shu Chen - loneliness &amp; age