Rating: 3/5

Zweig's distinct style and preoccupations emerge from this collection: he favours monologues over dialogues and his prose has a descriptive quality that recalls Poe and Conrad; the monologuers in his stories typically unburden themselves by recounting a tramatic and dramatic experience to an interlocutor. The following is a brief review of each story in the order in which the story appears:
'The Royal Game' is a good choice as the collection's opener because it's representative in style and conflict to most of the other stories. Unlike them it's firmly historically located in the period of the Anschluss and the peace following the war's end, and it's possible to consider the story a metaphor for the then emergent Cold War.
'The Burning Secret' is the best story and deserving of its place in the book's title. Its premise is original and Zweig builds the tension between the boy and the adults expertly. It's also one of the only stories that unfolds through dialogue and not monologue.
'Amok' is a tragedy with an awful but fitting ending. Its protagonist goes to remarkable lengths to prevent the discovery of a secret that would taint the memory of a woman he hardly knows. It scarcely seems believable until one reminds oneself that human infatuation can sometimes be instant and overwhelming.
'Fear' is the weakest story because, apart from the twist at the end, it's mostly predictable. It would have been a better story if Zweig had chosen a different ending. You'll see what that different ending could have been if you read it. The passionless, deceitful husband in this story is for me the most despicable character in the collection.
The closing story, 'Letter from an Unknown Woman', suffers from the implausibility of the novelist character, R, not recognising after two years a woman whom he spent three nights with and gazed at in daylight too. It's also easy to predict the central dramatic revelation the woman makes in her letter. But the ending is good because no attempt is made to tie it off neatly and predictably.