Rating: 2/5

In 1997 Mordden produced a new book in the 'Buddies' series after announcing after the 1988 third volume 'Everybody Loves You' that the series was over and 'Some Men are Lookers' is less a continuation of the old series as a resurrection in a new format. The biggest difference is that all the earlier volumes were largely based on magazine articles (many were revised and new previously unpublished stories were included) and this volume while still constructed as a series of tales comes closer to being a novel than any of the other volumes. I first read it sometime in the early 2000's and enjoyed it enough to seek out the other volumes. The problem is that when I came to reread 'Some Men are Lookers' and even more when I read the previous 'Buddy' volumes I found that I had considerable problems with the whole series.

On a purely literary level I found most of the recurring characters barely more than ciphers, clichés, or cut-outs and woefully underdeveloped and the most opaque of them all is the narrator Bud who, although dominating the series, is the nullity at the heart of this unsatisfactory series of books. I have reviewed all the previous books in the series so will try not to repeat myself here, though almost anything I said in previous reviews could be repeated against this book.

The biggest problems in SMaL is the 'gay family' with Bud, Denis and Carlo as the 'adults' and Little Kiwi and Cosgrove as the 'children' always doing 'crazy' stuff. But the antics of Kiwi and Cosgrove are those of immature 14/15 year olds and suggests mental retardation not charming naivety. Neither Kiwi when he moves in with Denis Savage at 20 nor Cosgrove when he moves in with Bud at 18 are children - they are young men and that both play the role of 'house boy' to their older partners and have no friends their own age and no independent activities or interests outside their 'homes' and for most of the time are frightened of the city and of standing on their own feet is deeply creepy. I am not concerned with the age disparity, I am concerned that they have no interest outside of serving their partner. If you wrote a female character like Kiwi or Cosgrove it would be attacked, rightly, as a misogynistic and disturbing cliché.

Bud, Denis and Carlo are presented as men of the Stonewall generation - indeed Bud has written about how they bestrode that era - "Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive..." - they come to the city and forge lives and define a new era. Of course time passes HIV/AIDS happens and they get older - that happens to everyone as they age but what is unacceptable is that as men of the Stonewall generation who created 'Gay', in Mordden's annoying hyperbola, when they slow down, retreat from the fray and withdraw into private life they bring with them Kiwi and Cosgrove and instead of preparing them for the world they infantilize them. If they were females in heterosexual relationships Kiwi and Cosgrove would be described as being kept 'barefoot and pregnant'. Mordden plays around with Denis Savage's and Kiwi's ages in SMaL so as to downplay the grotesqueness of Kiwi's idiotic behavior as a 30+ year old and to hide the fact that rather than being a coeval with Cosgrove the age difference between them is at least 11 years.

I actually find most of the 'Buddies' series deeply disturbing because it is so false and fake - but I did enjoy SMaL when I read it - so I give it two stars.