Rating: 5/5

2019 Reread #2
 
Somehow these have become my no-stress reading. It seems reasonable to me. Ignoring the murder plots themselves, it's really striking me on this reread how very much Strong Poison is Peter's book, and how it's really all about him falling in love with Harriet and how it affects him. It's less about her. (His strolling into jail and promptly proposing is a case in point, as is how obvious it is to everyone around him that he's been profoundly affected.)

I bring it up, because I think this book is Harriet's book in much the same way. She gets to be on far more of an equal footing in this (i.e. she's not being convicted of murder and entirely beholden to him). And while this book doesn't show Harriet developing feelings for Lord Peter (well, perhaps a bit), it does do a fairly good job of showing her becoming, well, accustomed to having him around. We do get to watch her enjoying his company (even as she's determined not to). I particularly enjoyed on this reread the sense of how well they work together at solving the case, particularly in terms of the actually detecting, and how their minds complement each other. Also, enjoy that while his instinct is definitely to go to her when he believes her to be in trouble, hers is to do likewise. Peter is one of the few people in this that she trusts.

Also, when they're walking along the beach in parallel looking for clues.
Peter: Oy!
Harriet: Hullo!
Peter: I just wanted to ask whether you'd given any further thought to that suggestion about marrying me. 
Harriet (sarcastically): I suppose you were thinking how delightful it would be to go through life like this together?
Peter: Well, not quite like this. Hand in hand was more my idea.
Harriet: What is that in your hand?
Peter: A dead starfish.
Harriet: Poor fish!
Peter: No ill-feeling, I trust.
Harriet: Oh, dear no.

And as always, the fight is excellent.

2019 Reread

Continue to prefer this one to Strong Poison, mostly because Peter and Harriet can interact in less constrained circumstances. Also there is more Bunter. These are also good reading on the train.

2019 Reading Challenge - A book with an item of clothing or accessory on the cover

2017 Reread
I may have liked this one better than Strong Poison this time around. That may mostly be due to the fight (which is still spectacular), but I also find that I enjoy Harriet as narrator, and as fellow semi-sleuth, and I enjoy she and Peter detecting together (off and on). Also, there is dancing.

2016 Reread
4.5 stars, but I'm rounding up. Been reading this one off and on for the last few weeks.

I do really like this one. I think I just like how everything is random and really complicated, and nothing makes sense. I like the ever-more complicated theories to try and make sense of the facts. I particularly like the moment where Harriet points out that everyone's theories are terrible, for that reason. No one would do the things that needed to be done to make the facts (as they stand at any given point in time) work.

And I obviously love the Lord Peter/Harriet interactions. Especially the fight.