Rating: 3/5

Zel (also by Napoli) was fantastic; it won me over to fantasy. Since I was a complete fantasy skeptic pre-Zel, I kept thinking, “Was Zel a fluke? Can Napoli really be such a powerful writer that she can win over the most critical, anti-fantasy reader?” To test this hypothesis, I chose The Magic Circle, a reworked fairytale of Grimm’s Hansel &amp; Gretel. The result: Napoli proved to be a two-time marvel!

Circle is solely focused on The Ugly One, the character represented by the wicked witch in the original. The reader gets to read the tale from the antagonist view, making Circle a fresh departure from the original. In fact, the only remnants of the original are found in the closing chapters. However, this time, as opposed to the original tale, it is Gretel that seems the leader, the stronger of the siblings.

The original paints Gretel as a scared little girl looking to her brother, Hansel, to be her knight in shinning armor. In Napoli’s rework, Gretel is the dominate sibling, even poking fun at her brother’s folly (of dropping bread instead of stones on the second trek into the woods). Napoli writes Hansel as almost simple or slow. This frustrated me a bit, for it seemed Gretel was written as confident at the expense of writing Hansel as, well, stupid. The contrast also gave weight to Crew’s argument that both female and male characters need to break out of traditional roles to compliment each other’s growth, not just flip traditional roles for the sake of showing that girls rule and boys drool.

In addition to the compare and contrast of the original to the rework, there are also comparisons and contrasts found when looking at Circle and Zel. As Mother in Zel was written in the first person narrative, so is written the character of The Ugly One. Thank goodness the first person narrative drew me closer to The Ugly One. So much so, I found myself empathizing with her just as I had with Mother. Napoli masterfully crafted The Ugly One as the classic underdog, and therefore, as the reader, I found myself routing for her. The Ugly One also seemed as if she was tricked into her witch-hood, where it seemed that Mother made a conscious choice to become a witch. This also made me more compassionate towards The Ugly One as opposed to Mother.

Both books also presented a classic moral-of-the-story, which caused the reader to self-reflect on his or her own moral compass; Circle addressing pride (through coveting), Zel tackling greed (through possession). Was tricking The Ugly One an excuse for the reader to excuse her from her pride? Napoli leaves the reader to answer this question: is anyone safe from folly when their eyes are focused elsewhere? Yes, Napoli has done it again, with her beautifully written narrative and subtle, infusion of moral questions, Circle is another solid read in her portfolio of reworked fairytales.