Rating: 3/5

A rather lackluster and dated post-apocalyptic horror/thriller by Masterton, first published in 1978. From the title and back blurb, we know a deadly plague will strike the US. So, what makes a good post-apocalyptic novel? Typically, we have the odd group of survivors struggling after the Event and that is true here, but the characters Masterton gives us you want to see die rather than root for. Further, the science is incredibly flimsy here. While not quite a train wreck, this comes pretty close. 

Our main protagonist Leonard is a doctor in Miami with a practice caring for old, rich women. His wife divorced him a few years ago but they had a daughter together named Prickles (my god Masterton, who would name their daughter Prickles?). Leonard sleeps with anything walking and is a sexist bastard to boot; he is currently 'dating' his secretary. Other main characters include a medical union leader in NYC, a suburban grocery store owner, a scientist defending his bacteria patent in court (Masterton, they did not allow patents on bacteria until 1982!), and various other doctors and such associated with the plague's outbreak. 

Every one of the characters is a selfish, self-centered bastard and Masterton engages in some pointed critiques of American individualism (and politics, law, etc.) along the way. I am fine with a little USA bashing, but this, and the motley lot of characters, not only failed to engage, at times, it read as a screed. But if you are going to give us a screed, at least be sure to do some research into the USA. McDonald's does not serve pork and beans here! I did like, however, how the mayor of Miami refused to call a quarantine when the plague first emerged as it would hurt local businesses who were gearing up for tourist season. That sounds familiar in Covid USA... 

The science? Some radiation infected the poo NYC was dumping into the Atlantic and due to strange weather, it washed up in Miami's beaches. Some sort of 'super plague' (yeah, like the black death plague) evolved in the poo/radiation and kills people within hours. It seems the doctor is immune because he works with X-rays at work, and his daughter because she watches color T.V.; both therefore get small doses of radiation. Huh? 

The final verdict? 2.5 stars, only rounding up because all the assholes die in the end.