Rating: 4/5

One should go over the epigraph "Work without hope draws nectar in a sieve, And hope without an object cannot live". Each page in this book depicts the sufferings faced by a family (let's say a group of people, a village or surrounding as a whole). Each character in this book suffers a lot. One would have guessed it from the title. The story evolves around Rukmani. Rukmani is portrayed as a simple traditional Indian woman. Nathan, Rukmani's husband is a farmer. The age-old ethics followed by Indian women and Unreliable livelihood confronted by farmers are depicted well. The couple leads a very simple life with an ultimate purpose of survival alone. Constantly we get to think this couple is just born to suffer. The book describes how the couple tackles them all. This leaves the couple without any particular goal than survival. One can easily predict the plot which is more certainly an additional hardship piled up over the existing. Still the author turns the plot optimistic making the people around the main characters suffer more than them. (Yes no one leads a happy life or say a normal life). So anyone who completes this book will be left upset. But that's not how i felt. This book conveys two messages. (Yes kind of a moral book)
Firstly, The book portrays how any worst hardship can bring in hope. When people are desperate they will be forced to hope on God or some invisible force (or even better on ourselves). That's when things turn back again to normal. When our mind is exhausted of thinking negatively we will be forced to think positive. 
Next message, Any work should be objective-driven. Else we will be at same state or worse left behind. Simply stating set some higher-valued goals or you will regret later.
A Few After Thoughts:
A question from this book which made me think a lot. "Do you think spiritual grace comes from being in want, or from suffering?" Let's state the question this way. Which drives you to the solution or your needs? Being in want or suffering? Both of them are driving forces. Because suffering boosts up our state of being in want. When we hope to achieve our need with all our heart we can.