Rating: 5/5

Hospitality in the prairie country is not limited. Even if your enemy pass your way you must feed him before you shoot him. You must empty your larder into him before you empty your lead.
 - "The Passing of Black Eagle"

I picked this version of the book as my front because this was the version of the book that the Pantsless Group was reading, but this isn't the TRUE book I read.

The true book is the 1962 copy of O. Henry that my mother owned. It contains 35 O. Henry stories and is an excellent book.

O. Henry wrote funny, sad, and sweet stories. Almost all his stories have a twist ending. He died in 1910 - to give you some idea of what time period you are dealing with here, I think he did most of his writing between 1902 and 1910.

I hate short stories but I love O. Henry. This is probably due to the fact that I was raised on it, and probably first read this collection of my mother's when I was 8 or 9. Since it was a huge and constant part of my childhood, I have a certain fondness for it.

But this rating is not based on nostalgia, even my just-finished re-read of it shows that the book holds up excellently. It is not a book that loses its power when you read it again years later.

O. Henry is probably most famous for his two stories "The Ransom of Red Chief" - which is very funny, and "The Gift of the Magi" - which is very sad.

Everyone should read O. Henry, in my opinion. He's an American classic and he's a load of fun. Not boring or dry.

I'm going to put my (mundane, short) thoughts on the stories I read under a spoiler tag (NOT because there's any spoilers, there aren't any, but) because I don't want you to be bored. LOL Here's an example so that you can make sure there's no spoilers under the spoiler tag:
"Mammon and the Archer":
Cute.

That's the extent to which I've reviewed these stories.

The Ransom of Red Chief:
This is one of the most hilarious stories ever written.

The Cop and the Anthem:
A homeless man tries to get himself arrested so that he can spend three warm months in prison not having to worry about where his next meal is coming from during the cold winter.

The Gift of the Magi:
A sweet, sad Christmas story that brings tears to my eyes every time I read it without fail.

After Twenty Years:
Another sad story.

A Retrieved Reformation:
Finally, a happy story.

One Dollar's Worth:
Another happy story.

The Skylight Room:
I have nothing to say about this.

From the Cabby's Seat:
Cute, although he might be reaching for a twist in this one.

The Theory and the Hound:
There's a lot of animal abuse in O. Henry.

The Atavism of John Tom Little Bear:
Racist garbage.

Jimmy Hayes and Muriel:
Sweet and sad.

Hygeia at the Solito:
Great story.

Hearts and Hands:
Sweet and sad.

A Blackjack Bargainer:
Sweet and sad.

A Chaparral Christmas Gift:
Sweet and sad.

Two Thanksgiving Day Gentlemen:
Sad and sweet.

The Reformation of Calliope:
Sweet and cute.

Out of Narareth:
Sweet and cute.

A Call Loan:
Sweet and cute.

The Green Door:
Sweet and cute.

Hearts and Crosses:
Sweet and Cute.

The Adventures of Shamrock Jolnes:
Cute.

The Passing of Black Eagle:
Kind of weird, but still good-natured.

The Caliph and the Cad:
Cute and Sweet.

Friends in San Rosario:
Sweet and Cute. Awwwww.

The Whirlgig of Life:
Sweet and Cute.

Whistling Dick's Christmas Stocking:
Cute.

Mammon and the Archer:
Cute.

The Pimienta Pancakes:
Oh, that was kind of sad.

The Last Leaf:
Sad and sweet.

A Departmental Case:
That is a man. Very attractive. 

Vanity and Some Sables:
A bit weird.

Bexar Scrip No. 2692:
What the fuck was that?

The Ransom of Mack:
Funny.

The Caliph, Cupid and the Clock:
Sweet and Sad.

Tl;dr - In my opinion, O. Henry is a must-read. I hate short stories. HATE THEM. But I seem to love O. Henry. This is a testament to how good he is. At the very least, read "The Ransom of Red Chief" and "The Gift of the Magi." You can't go wrong with an O. Henry collection. He has an underlying goodness to his stories, even "bad men" usually show they have a good heart underneath in his tales. They are thoughtful without being sappy, and uplifting without being trite. O. Henry's sharp intelligence shines through in every story. I should probably berate him for some of his sexist remarks, but I can't bring myself to. This book (the 35 story one, not this one on GR) has such a special place in my heart.