Rating: 5/5

There are at least 100 and more books that are banned in the United States. Books of all kinds are being prohibited from schools and some libraries. But what’s the reason? Why are they being banned? Should books even be allowed to be banned? These are all questions that need answers.
	 I think books should not be banned. All subjects no matter how realistic they are should be allowed to be printed and exposed to the world. Reading books that covers certain topics can teach us how to look at the world differently, in someone else eyes. Banned books such as “Go ask Alice” and the “Chocolate War” was both interesting books. They exposed the down sides of life that many people only hear about or see on movies.
	 “Go ask Alice” was a diary type book telling the life of a young girl moving into a new town. Alice used to be a happy teenager but the town showed her a new life that she without notice, jumped in. She got her first taste of the drug LSD at a house party; leading her to a world feel with prostitution, drugs, and obstacles she must face on her own. Alice got so bad that she was sent to a mental institution. She later died from an overdose. This book caused much controversy amongst parents who were worried about their young daughters reading such a book. The book was supposed to be a ploy to stop the rapid drug rate in teens. Instead the book drew kids in so much it became a “must read book” in the 70’s. Parents were outraged. Complaints began to come and the book was banned. Parents felt the book encouraged drug use, sex, and the topic was to mature for teens. 
	“Chocolate War” is a book about an orphan Jerry Renault who attends an all boy school Trinity High School. There he is bullied and abused by the school gang “ The Vigils”. “The Vigils” assigned people in the schools, mostly the “losers”, assignments that they must complete no matter how physical they were. Jerry assignment was to sale chocolates, but he refused to obey “The Vigils” and their leader Archie Costello. The gang asked Jerry everyday and everyday he said no. This made them angry. Archie and The Vigils made Jerry life miserable after that. They would whip on him, trash his locker, and prank calls him all times of the night driving Jerry insane. This book was banned as well. Parents felt the violence that took place in the “Chocolate War” was not for young teens. The book also contained explicit language and masturbation went on in the book. 
	When people banned books in the United States its usually motivated by these factors; Religion, Political views, violence, sexual content, and homosexuality. Sometimes book critics and parents look to deep into books searching for these factors. When I read a book I read it for entertainment. It seems these days book critics read books just to search for a reason to ban it. It has gotten so bad that even children literature books are being banned. 
	Early this school year my English teacher assigned the class projects. We were asked to look up the banned books assigned to us. My book was ‘In the Night kitchen” by Maurice Sendak. Maurice Sendak was famous for his illustrations in child books. He was also famous for writing his own children books, receiving awards for many. He was mostly known for his book “Where the wild the wild things are”. He received the Caldecott Medal. When he released “In The Night Kitchen” he received nothing but controversy. Parents felt the book was to mature for young children. The character in the book “Mickey” who was no older than 3, roamed naked in the book. “In the night kitchen” was set in Mickey’s dream, which was in the kitchen of 3 jolly bakers. Parents wanted this book banned for 3 main reasons; Mickey was NAKED, he roamed the streets ALONE, and the book had MASTURBATION in it. Masturbation in a children book? Yes! The drawing in the book did not sit well with some critics. NUDITY + FREE FLOWING MILKY FLUIDS + “BIG PHALLIC” MILK BOTTLES = MASTURBATION. While Sendak had supposing admitted that the book is about a small boy glorifying in his sensuality. Critics have taken it to the extreme saying these things are convenient symbols within rebellious tale about masturbation. 
 	When I hear books are banned I feel like people are trying to withhold information. No information is to mature. I think no book no matter the topic or subject should be banned. If you think it is to violent, or have to much sex in it than you should put it down and pick another book more on your level don’t ruin it for those that like to extend their learning.