Rating: 5/5

For me, there's John Steinbeck, Elmore Leonard and Flannery O'Connor and then all other authors. That said, Leonard's work is championship caliber or DNP due to league substance violation. Hit or miss. His 1993 novel Pronto actually lopes along for 241 pages occupying the middle of the pack. Rather than a great novel, it's travelogue that reads more like backstory to a great novel. Then the last 24 pages happen and throw everything up for grabs.

The story opens in South Miami Beach, where 66-year-old Harry Arno ("He was the same age as Paul Newman", Leonard mentions) is in a tight spot. The manager of three sports books, Harry Arno splits his earnings fifty-fifty with Jimmy Capotorto, the local boss who for the exception of cocaine, gets a piece of all ill gotten gains in Dade County. Harry Arno is responsible for covering his own operating expenses, but that doesn't matter because Harry Arno's been skimming the mob for decades.

Tipped by his friend, vice cop Buck Torres, Harry learns that the Bureau has tapped his lines in an attempt to drag Jimmy Cap in front of a grand jury. The feds have figured out that Harry is skimming from his boss, and by putting that information on the street, hope Harry will run to them for protection, turning state's witness against Jimmy Cap. The Bureau has already tapped a conversation between Jimmy Cap and another party about handling Harry. The other party goes by the name Tommy Bucks.

Harry said, "Well, I'm not going to worry about it. If it was ten or twelve years ago, and Jimmy told Tommy Bucks in those words, 'Handle it,' that would be a different story. I mean back when he first came over," Harry said. "Tommy's a Zip. You know what I mean? One of those guys they used to import from Sicily to handle the rough stuff. Guy could be a peasant right out of the Middle Ages, looks around and he's in Miami Beach. Can't believe it. They hand the Zip a gun and say, 'There, that guy.' And the Zip takes him out. You understand? They import the kind of guy who likes to shoot. He's got no priors here; nobody gives a shit if he gets picked up, convicted, put away. If he does, you send for another Zip."

Keeping Harry in Miami is Joyce Patton, a 40-year-old catalog model and cocktail waitress he's been seeing off and on. His memory not what it used to be, Harry sometimes "reveals" to her a dark secret, the time in 1945 when he shot a U.S. Army deserter in the town of Rapallo, Italy. It's a secret Harry "reveals" to most any captive audience. The U.S. Marshals Service, anticipating that Harry needs to stay healthy long enough to testify, posts one of their men outside his apartment.

Enter Raylan Givens, a man Joyce reports looks more like a farmer than a fed. Stringy, hollow cheeked, a Stetson hat tilted over his brow just right with the accent to match, Raylan has met Harry before. Six years ago, escorting the bookie to testify before a grand jury in Atlanta, Harry slipped out on Raylan in the airport. Though Harry was not a prisoner and was never served with a warrant after his escape, Raylan never forgot. Or maybe he did. Taking Harry to dinner, Raylan realizes too late that his man is taking a while in the men's room.

After losing Harry in Atlanta five years ago, Raylan was reassigned to Glynco as a firearms instructor, the talent there is no doubt he possessed being the handling of guns. Raylan is estranged from his sons, Ricky, nine, and Randy, three and a half, who Raylan had wanted to name Hank and George after the greatest country singers of all time, until his wife Winona got her way and named them instead. Ex-wife, after she ran away with their real estate agent in Georgia.

When he loses Harry a second time, Raylan takes it personally. He draws some vacation time and boards a flight to London, where he has a good idea where Harry went next. He recalls the bookie telling him a secret five years ago, a story about the time Harry shot a deserter in Italy, in a town called Rapallo. Using far less sophisticated means, the Zip learns where to look for Harry and returns to his home country, where a network of fellow Zips are more than happy to help him find a guy.

Pronto is a novel I could take or leave through 241 of its 265 pages. I'll state why:

-- I like titles that I assume mean one thing, until I get deep into the book, and learn they really mean something else.

-- I don't like that for much of the novel, Raylan seems to be a poor law enforcement agent. He loses witnesses, proves inept at field work, has no professional allies and wanders into situations he doesn't know how he'll get out of. Even his ex-wife seems to have taken issue with Raylan's anger. 

-- I do like that Raylan is a straight shooter -- literally -- with an undefiable sense of justice. He's like the flip side of the coin of Omar Little from The Wire, a rogue beast who when you see coming, you just have to get out of its way.

-- I don't like that the Leonard's facility with strong, smart women goes vastly unused in this novel. Joyce Patton is underwritten. I kept thinking of all the feisty Italian women who might have turned up in this story, but it is not to be.

-- I do love Leonard's dialogue.

 "You didn't think I was Italian?" Harry said.
 "Uh-unh, not even you wearing your coat like that, like Fellini. You from somewhere on the East Coast. New York?"
 "Miami. The Beach most of my life."
 "You could be Italian, yeah, but not from around here the way you're dressed. Well, you could come from Milan, I guess, close by. But to look all the way Italian, man, you got to have the suit with the pointy shoulders and the pointy shoes with the little thin soles. You staying here on your holiday?"
 "I've got a place," Harry said, and then came right out and told him, "a villa. I'm making up my mind if I want to live here."
 "Rapallo? Man, this is all there is to it. You hiding out?"
 "Do I look like I am?"
 "I've run into all kinds of people over here hiding from something--the only reason I ask. I don't care, you understand. I see a man like yourself come to a place like this? Pretty much strictly for locals? I have to wonder, that's all."

-- I don't like that the novel seems like a novella that Leonard let get out of hand. There are a lot of scenes with guys talking about how they're going to wack someone, all of it courtesy one character, Jimmy Cap's bodyguard Nicky Testa, alias Joe Macho. I get what Leonard is doing with this turkey, the guy who's never killed anybody talking about how he could kill somebody, but he got on my nerves.

-- I do like that Leonard took a holiday from Miami Beach and tried his hand at a different locale, relocating much of the story to Italy. Harry's bond with Rapallo is well grounded in the memories so many of our servicemen seem to return from a foreign war with. The setting pushes new air through the corridor of Leonard's patented lawn flamingo pulp fiction. 

The saving grace of Pronto are the last 14 pages. I had Raylan Givens pegged as both a poor excuse for a marshal, but Leonard flips all those presumptions on their head in the climax. It isn't that Raylan lacks values, it's that his values went out of fashion with the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral. If Doc Holliday stepped out of a time machine into the present day, he'd behave a lot like Raylan Givens -- short on legal expertise or investigative techniques, long on marksmanship and justice.

Elmore Leonard circled back to Raylan Givens with his next novel, Riding the Rap in 1995. A novella featuring the lawman, Fire in the Hole, was published in 2001. Ten years later, the last novel Leonard would publish picked up the character with Raylan. A TV series starring Timothy Olyphant as the unorthodox marshal titled Justified aired on FX from 2010-2015. The opening scene of the pilot episode drew from the climax of Pronto while the plot was adapted from Fire in the Hole.