Rating: 2/5

Reading Freckles helped to broaden my literary horizons... and did serve it's purpose in my reading life.

✏️ 
  Review
 ✏️

I really wanted Freckles to be a more enjoyable read but just couldn't seem to find it that interesting. Why didn't I like it very much? Well, first off is the writing. I've read a number of books from the early 1900s so I knew a little of what to expect. But the writing style of this book wasn't that engaging. There were times when I did find the writing to be better; however, those were not so frequent.

Freckles and the Swamp Angel are sweet characters — they fit this story well. Since character development doesn't begin until over half the story has passed, the first part of the book lacks the connection between the characters and the reader. The second half of the book is much better. I did feel a connection then and felt more involved with this story. Even though the characters are sweet and innocent, the relationship between Freckles and the Swamp Angel went a bit too far. I didn't like how Freckles begins to worship the Swamp Angel and idolize her. This sorta lowered my view of the characters somehow. I wish the relationship hadn't gone to the extreme of idolization.

Freckles is a slow-paced read; that's the reason I chose to read it. I was looking for a book that had very little action. So the plot is bland for the most part. There are times when the action picks up, which helps move the story along. The ending is paced well; the conclusion is heartwarming and satisfying.

So there's my honest thoughts. I'm not trying to say no one should read this book or that it didn't do anything for me. Reading Freckles helped to broaden my literary horizons and did serve the purpose of why I read it: to enjoy a slow-paced read with little action. (I do plan to read the sequel Freckles Comes Home at some point.) So if this is the type of book you enjoy, then chances are you will be pleased about reading Freckles.

📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚

📊 
  A Quick Overview
 📊

👍🏼 What I Liked:
•The second half of the book; characters felt more developed at this point.
•The satisfying conclusion.

👎🏼 What I Did Not Like:
•The unengaging writing style.
•The bland plot — it just didn't draw me in as I wished it would have.
•The lack of character development in the first part of the book.
•The worshipful attitude Freckles has towards the Swamp Angel. I didn't like how this unbiblical act of worshiping and idolizing another person was presented as "sweet and innocent."

📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚

📖 
  BOOK BREAKDOWN
 📖 (Overall: 2/5) 
 ~Fundamentals: (1=worst; 5=best)
 — 📈 Plot: 2/5
 — 📝 Writing: 1.5/5
 — 👥 Characters: 3/5
 ~Content: (0=none; 1=least; 5=most)
 
— 🤬 Language: 2/5
•Several uses of d—; some uses of God's name in vain; and a few uses of h—.
 
— ⚔️ Violence: 0/5 
 
— ⚠️ Sexual: 0/5

📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚
 
📣 
  Random Comments
 📣

•Beware of the chapter titles. They basically spoil everything that happens in the chapter. They really toned down the elements of surprise and suspense. (Maybe this is why I didn't like the story so much? 🤔)

📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚📚

💬 
  Favorite Quotes
 💬

•"'[A person] can do anything if he's the grit to work hard enough to stick at it.'" (p. 38*)

•"'[W]e never know the timber of a man's soul until something cuts into him deeply and brings the grain out strong.'" (p. 94*)

*(Since there are so many editions of this book, page numbers for these quotes will vary widely from edition to edition. My page numbers come from the A-Lot-A-Books reprint of what I'm assuming is the 1965 reprint of the original 1906 edition.)