Rating: 3/5

The Sector General books have been on my bucket list for about as long as I've been reading sci-fi. Now I'm finally taking the time to read these goofy vintage sci-fi books. I found Hospital Station, the first book, to be a bit underwhelming. It had great imagination (AKA great aliens) and some enjoyable writing, but I don't feel that the characters were handled well from story to story and something was just... missing. I probably shouldn't have gone in with five years' worth of hopes and dreams. A couple months later, does Star Surgeon have what its predecessor lacked?

Yes and no. This is a full novel instead of a short story collection, although it still feels like a couple stories in one. I don't know if I like this more or less than the short stories; it loses a bit of its constant wit but has better characters throughout. But now that I'm on book two, I almost feel like I'm becoming part of the world. It's like watching a TV show with a cast of characters you know and love. For example for me, Frasier, or Deep Space Nine during its later seasons. You can watch any episode and feel instantly connected with the characters. That's what I feel with Conway and O'Mara and Priscila and Mannon. It's a good crew that I enjoy returning to. The book refreshes our memory about what Sector General is, how alien races are designated, how the alien tapes work, and all the other cool things that make this world tick. The aliens are as clever and fun as ever, and in general, I'm really enjoying the (albeit laissez-faire) world James White built. 

Alright, now that I've rehashed myself, let's rehash this book. It starts like a story out of Hospital Station - an unknown alien is brought into the hospital with a mysterious disease. This pear-like alien's ailment turns out to be  his sentient amoeba doctor trying to fix him from the inside out. Throughout the healing process Conway discovers that his patient is from the "other galaxy," because apparently cross-galaxy travel is about as uncommon as white vans handing out candy. (This is all in the opening part of the book). The alien, who is immortal and god-like, has a habit of running to random worlds and uplifting their 'savage inhabitants.' The world that he chooses to upstage in our galaxy has a few problems, so he calls his old buddy Conway to help solve them. This third of the book is like an old episode of Star Trek The Next Generation, where Picard and co must discover the dark secret behind constant planetwide disease. The answer? The central Empire keeps them sick so they can collect the donations to that world from all the other Imperial worlds.. After that, the last third of the book turns into A siege story where the Empire attacks Sector General as part of their civilization-revitalizing war. I feel like this part of the story went on a bit too long, and it's a really big event in Sector General's history that the next books really should revisit, but... it ain't a bad concept. My one question: whatever happened to the pear alien?.

Now that I've spent ten minutes rehashing the entire book... was it good? Yes, I think so. The characters were colorful and not horribly fleshed out, but enjoyable. The final act of the book got slightly drawn out, but it wasn't tedious in the slightest. It's a short book, after all. Was James White's writing good? I enjoyed his prose in Second Ending and Hospital Station, but I feel like it lost me a couple times here. I was sent back scrounging through the pages to find something that I'd missed, only to find out that I hadn't missed anything. Was this my fault of White's fault? I'm not sure, but I'm leaning to White... but, once again, I could have just been a distracted reader. 

So what's my final rating? I've been bouncing between 7 and 7.5 for the last few days. I can't make up my mind, and I won't let myself become so indecisive that I rate it 7.25. That would be setting a bad precedent for a review-obsessed nerd like myself... I think I'll go for 7.5, although I reserve the right to edit this review in the future. These are just genuinely good comfort sci-fi books for me; they're not the most well-written or most engaging books I'll ever read, but it's just a really cool world that I like to visit. There's nothing quite like Sector General, and I'm glad I have the omnibus so I can read the next one soon. Then I have to cough up the money for the second omnibus... but have no fear, I'll do it! Money is optional, but books are not... okay, I think I have to go to therapy now. I'll be back here on Goodreads soon.