Rating: 4/5

Winesburg, Ohio, small town, late 19th century, filled with the kinds of characters that later populated Bedford Falls in It’s a Wonderful Life; a town populated with a good-hearted do-gooder cop and taxi driver, and even a generous savings and loan president (with, of course, a cold-hearted banker as his foil; there has to be some conflict) and other charmingly eccentric characters, who look out for each other.

Is that what one expects when picking up a copy of the book and looking at the depiction of the town square looking warm and inviting on the cover? Expect, yes; get, no.

Here is what you get:

“The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.” – Henry David Thoreau 

As well as this which ran through my head as I read:

Ah look at all the lonely people
Ah look at all the lonely people

Eleanor Rigby, picks up the rice
In the church where a wedding has been
Lives in a dream
Waits at the window, wearing the face
That she keeps in a jar by the door
Who is it for?

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?

Father McKenzie, writing the words
Of a sermon that no one will hear
No one comes near
Look at him working, darning his socks
In the night when there's nobody there
What does he care

All the lonely people
Where do they all come from?
All the lonely people
Where do they all belong?
-- McCartney and Lennon

There is no leavening humor in the book, no heroes, there isn’t even much plot. It is neither fish nor fowl, but a hybrid that strikes a middle ground between novel and short story collection. There are twenty-two stories with each consisting of a character study, with a heavy dose of psychological insight. Sigmund Freud is not a character in the book, but his presence hovers above it. 

One individual, a young newspaper reporter named George Willard, is the main character in a couple of the stories and makes appearances in several others, primarily when the main character in those stories seek him out as a sounding board. His natural curiosity makes him a good and willing listener, but the persons who seek him out are nearly always so psychologically repressed that they are unable to communicate their thoughts.

But because he does appear in more of the stories than anyone else he is often named as the book’s protagonist. That, however, is stretching the characterization. He is not the unifying theme in the book; Winesburg is. The town, and not young George, is the real protagonist.

As a stylist, Anderson prefers short declarative sentences (He is said to have been an important influence on Hemingway, though Hemingway never acknowledged that influence.) and as the omniscent narrator he prefers tell over show.

Since Winesburg is clearly based on Clyde, Ohio, the small town in which Anderson spent his years from age eight to eighteen, one has to wonder what his life was like there. His book makes me believe that the dark mood that characterizes these stories, stories populated by so many isolated, unhappy, unfulfilled, inhibited, repressed, alienated individuals, "all those lonely people" who spend much time taking solitary walks at night in the streets and surrounding area of Winesburg, tells us much about his life in Clyde and the unhappiness that he must have experienced there.

Anderson wrote other books, but this is the one for which he is remembered. Published in 1919, it was not a commercial success (maybe too gloomy?), but it did receive some critical acclaim. Over the years it has gained many admirers and in 1998, the Modern Library ranked it 24th on its list of the 100 best English-language novels of the 20th century. 

Anderson, at age sixty-five, died in the Panama Canal Zone. The cause of death was peritonitis that occurred after he swallowed a toothpick while eating an hors d’oeuvre. Such an ignominious death would have made for an interesting story in his book.