Rating: 4/5

I would recommend that eye, the sky to fiction readers, but a lot of people will probably go away from it unsatisfied. There is a LOT to this story for which the author leaves no explanation and this may frustrate some people. Me, I love quirky writing and I know that I'll be mulling this book over in my head for a while now that I've finished it. For anyone who hasn't read a Tim Winton novel, I wouldn't suggest you start with this one -- try The Riders or Dirt Music (I haven't read anything else by him, but I did like the two I just listed). I plan to get my hands on every book this man has written.

On page 102, it's Christmas Eve morning and the Flack family is having breakfast. Twelve year-old Morton Flack, called Ort, offers a prayer: "Jesus fix us up. We're breaking to bits here." This one line sort of captures the flavor of the entire novel. Set in Australia, the story is told from Ort's perspective. After a tragic car accident, the life he once knew changes. Ort lives with his mom, Alice, Sam, his father; his teenage sister is Tegwyn and there is Grammar his grandmother who is old and perhaps a bit senile. The family got by by raising chickens and their own veggies; Sam took on the odd job or two. One morning, though, Ort learns that his father was in a car accident and after that life completely changed for everyone, but perhaps most keenly felt by Ort. The biggest change of all, though is the appearance of Henry Warburton, who shows up to "nurse" Sam, home from the hospital but unable to function. While Ort is busy trying to make sense of all of the changes, Henry is trying to atone and expiate for something that happened in his past. Ort just keeps praying for a miracle as his household falls apart.

You really have to take this one slowly. It is well worth the time and effort if you put some thought into it. If you're looking for straightforward plot line or everything neatly tied up in a bow at the end, you're going to be disappointed. This is a tough book to read, but beautifully written &amp; sort of reaffirms your faith in the power of a child's love.