Rating: 5/5

After my ten year old read this book, she said to me, "Mom, this might be my favorite book EVER." This is high praise from a child who averages more than three books weekly, so I decided to see why she loved it. After finishing the book this morning, I asked her exactly what she loved about it and was told, "Oh... I love the way Betsy transforms from a weak girl to a strong one and the way she helps the little boy in the book and well, everything about it."

I have to agree with my daughter that Betsy's transformation was the star of this story, followed closely by the wonderful writing. Dorothy Canfield Fisher is my favorite type of chidren's author - the kind that writes for children without writing down to them. The writing throughout this book is engaging, lighthearted and draws the reader in at every turn. Fisher clearly knows and understands children. The scenes where Betsy begins to understand that history is not just facts on a page, but actually happened to people in her family, is the best illustration I've ever read of how our brains eventually make the leap from learning as abstract concept to real, applicable fact.

And this great writing allows Betsy to shine. When we meet Betsy (Elizabeth Ann), she is a nine year old who is bright, but timid. Her pampered upbringing has taught her to be fearful and made her believe she is incapable of caring for herself. By the end of the book, Betsy is a ten year old who has grown into her own skin, knows her mind and understands herself and others. Seeing Betsy take her new found skills and sew clothing for others or pull someone out of a tight situation reminds the reader WHY we learn in the first place - in order to use our gifts to bless others.

Unlike many coming of age stories, Betsy's story doesn't just apply to children. Betsy learns to think for herself and do things for herself and is transformed. Her story reminded me how empowering it is to try things and succeed - or fail. It reminded me that the trying is the important part and encouraged me to continue help my children try to do new things and to try new things myself.

If you're in the mood for an old-fashioned good book, this is the perfect read. I read this book more slowly than the slim volume lead me to expect, but that was because I wanted more time with Betsy. I wanted to give her time between chapters to grow and settle in my mind. Read this book when you have time to savor it. Have your daughter read it. Enjoy Betsy together and see if she helps you understand yourself and others better.