Rating: 5/5

This is a 1962 book by Dutch diplomat &amp; author Robert van Gulik who, between 1957 and 1968 wrote a series of Chinese historic mystery novels featuring Judge Dee, a crime-solving magistrate in ancient imperial China during the Tang Dynasty. Van Gulik’s famous Judge Dee character is a semi-fictional character modeled after a real historic figure Di Renjie, who was a magistrate and statements in the Chinese Tang court. His exploits were featured in a 18th century Chinese crime novel. Similar to the original Chinese book, all van Gulik’s Judge Dee books contain three separate mysteries, sometimes interlinked. The Lacquer Screen is the 8th book in the Judge Dee series with a setting in Tang Dynasty in the year 668 A.D. in a fictional Chinese city called Wei-ping. I find the book very well written, fast-paced and interesting. It has quite a bit of twists and turns and its share of red herring. It also includes a few ancient Chinese style illustrations of the type seen in old Chinese books to give readers a sense of authenticity. New readers might easily believe the Judge Dee books are English translations of old Chinese mystery classics instead of original works written by a Dutch author in the 1950s and 1960s. 

Spoiler Alert. The book The Lacquer Screen is about Judge Dee (Dee Jen-djieh), who just finished a conference and was travelling back to his town Peng-lai. He decided to travel incognito (using a fake name Shen Mo) and take a few days of vacation in the town of Wei-ping. When he was there, he ran into a few mysteries. Dee ended up helping the local magistrate, Teng Kan, clearing up all of them within a 3-day period. During the process, Judge Dee and his assistant Chiao Tai had to disguise themselves and joined a gang of robbers to solve the cases. The three stories in the case are called: (1) The Case of the Lacquer Screen, (2) The Case of the Credulous Merchant, and (3) The Case of the Faked Accounts. 

The first case (The Case of the Lacquer Screen) involves the murder of the wife of magistrate Teng Kan. Van Gulik did a good job planting red herrings and led the readers astray. For most of the book, readers were led to believe it was the magistrate (who purportedly has a hereditary disease where he would have blackouts during which he would do things that he later has no recollection of) might be the murderer. It turns out the murderer is a very smart burglar called Kun-shan who specializes in carefully planned home burglaries and he uses a blowpipe to blow knockout gas into the victim’s room before entering the room to steal. The title of the book refers to a red lacquer screen with four pictures. One of which originally has the design of a husband and a wife drinking wine together. Somehow, the screen was altered soon before Dee’s arrival so that now it shows the husband stabbing the wife. That alteration presents an interesting plot twist which Dee ultimately saw through. 

The second case (The Case of the Credulous Merchant) involves the murder of a very rich old silk merchant called Ko Chih-yuan. When, in front of witnesses, a person who looks like Ko jumped into a fast-moving river next to his house, people thought Ko has committed suicide even though his body has not been recovered. It took some luck, and shrewd deduction and bluffing from Dee, to uncover the plot. It turns out Ko’s young wife was having an adulterous relationship with a young man Hsia Liang. The two plotted to murder Ko and take his fortune. They did so by doing it during a party at their house, hide Ko’s body under his room and fake his suicide by having the lover to dress like Ko and jump into the river to disappear. 

The third case (The Case of the Faked Accounts) is intertwined with the second case. The story concerns the theft of 1000 gold pieces from the rich silk merchant Ko by a banker called Leng Chien. Leng is an associate and financial adviser to Ko). Recently, Leng has stolen 1000 gold pieces from Ko and Ko was just about to find out. Leng played a not unimportant role in the second case. Finally, Dee solved his fraud case easily and Leng was arrested and convicted for fraud.