Rating: 5/5

What a wonderful book. The prose is reminiscent of Mary Stewart (The Hollow Hills) or Poul Anderson (The Broken Sword) due to its almost classical feel. This is a fantasy world that is heavily influenced by the historical real world. Without giving away spoilers, this is a book worth reading, the story revolves around several key figures from the various races. It is a story of violence, revenge, the passing of an era, a clash of cultures and love. The story concerns a young Erling's attempt to prove himself as a warrior, his father's attempts to make amends for his mistakes, a young prince searching for revenge and a King's attempt to transform his realm into a more civilized one that will resist attacks from the Erlings forever. 

While this is not Earth, the time frame is analogous to circa 800 AD England. The three main races are the Erlings (Norsemen), the Cyngael (The Welsh) and the Anglcyn (Anglo-Saxons). The Anglcyn King, Aeldred, is heavily influenced by Alfred the Great (848- 899 AD). The main religion of Jadism is Christianity and Jad is God.

The gist? The main characters have stories that start independent of each other, but they all end up intertwined by the end. An Erling warrior, Bern, flees his homeland due to the sins of his father, Thorkell Einarson, and joins the Jormsvik Erlings- an elite group of reavers/mercenaries who are based of the real life Jomsvikings ( an order of Viking mercenaries or brigands of the 10th century and 11th century who hired themselves out to various Lords). Meanwhile, two Cyngael Princes are caught up in a blood feud between a Cyngael lord named Brynn ap Hywll and the sons of "The Volgan", a renowned Erling reaver who died at Brynn's hand. Thrown into this mess is the Anglcyns who seek to build burghs and set up a system to prevent future raids (very similar to what Alfred did to fend of the Vikings in England).

That is all I will say about the plot. Oh, did I mention there are also fey creatures? There is certainly a magical element involved and it comports well with the old pagan beliefs commonly found among the historical Welsh peoples. I truly enjoyed the character of Thorkell. While never saying it directly, his actions show the deep love of a father for a son.

A truly wonderful book. Great story, beautifully written and at once magical, yet quite real. I will certainly look up more books by this author. Consider me a fan.