Rating: 5/5

Offering up a single-volume history of WW2 is a daunting task that has sunk many a would-be historian. Do you focus on diplomacy, niche yourself to cover naval battles of the Southwest Pacific, or limit yourself to cartoon images of the ultimate graphic novel? Weinberg took the unusual approach of going big and broad. There's no real history of the Nazi party, Japanese bushido, or the Holocaust here. Instead, he uses a thousand-some-odd pages to discuss how the war looked from every odd corner of the Earth.

As a result, we get the history of coups in Romania and Hungary, of the discussion of Madagascar as a possible Jewish concentration camp, of the grueling battles in northern Burma and Annam provinces in India. Weinberg treats the war as a global phenomenon, and gives us a view from the emerging nations of the Third World, and from the smaller nations of Europe.

Obviously, this means there is no detailed discussion of diplomacy or battle strategy, but we do get an integrated view of how political expectations and technology evolved in the period between the wars, to give a sense of how the last gasp of authoritarian imperialism came close to overtaking the planet, but was nevertheless discredited from the get-go. For the most part, Weinberg does his job well.

I am giving this five stars because the task seemed so impossible while the end result is satisfying, but that does not mean the book is free of faults. Weinberg is the type of historian-geek who loves to enumerate everything, and sometimes gives us numbers within numbers - three reasons the Danes felt they had to cave in to the Nazis, with four causes listed for the second of those reasons, etc. etc. If you try to read this book in a disinterested moment, you might get lost if the outline was not scrawled across a blackboard somewhere.

Still, this is a classic "big picture" work - not merely for trying to understand the Axis powers and the allied response, but for grasping how the former colonies responded to the creation of the United Nations, how new weapon technologies allowed a blanket-bombing philosophy that almost amounted to a "genocide by consensus" (not just nuclear weapons, but the strategic bombing of Dresden, Hamburg, Tokyo). Those who want to adamantly say "Never again" had better understand how evil makes itself manifest on the planet. Despite his scholarly tone, Weinberg is unafraid of using a word like "evil" when it is appropriate to do so.