Rating: 2/5

Oh boy... Nothing new, since the Greeks...

This was recommended to me. And I really thought the premise was so interesting, having lived in Europe, North America and Asia. The read was amazingly frustrating.

The author fails to give any satisfying definitions for the words he constantly misuses. He even notes early on that findings show that people from different European countries and the United States (I assume he is meaning that when he says "Americans" although some results seem to be from Canada - so who knows) sometimes think "more Eastern" or "more Western". But he still lumbs them all together as "Western", because... convenience?

Eastern are apparently Chinese, Japanese and Korean, although sometimes he seems to include the entire Middle East and India without any plausible explanation. I also found it borderline offensive that he kept claiming that "Easterners" were not used to apply logic. And that with some of his example sentences lacking logic in my view.

He draws conclusions and creates explanations that I found very doubious. All European cultures only go back to Greece. Rome apparently never happened and there was no other influence on culture anywhere in Europe or America. Also the whole of Eastern Asia has no cultural diversity at all. It's all Acient China... All European languages are the same as well as the East Asian languanges... As a non-English native speaker from Europe I am inclined to disagree. His examples do not meet the Grammar in my Native languange at least.

The confirmation bias in this book is ridiculous. Sometimes he does point out some differences in the groups that he lables as homogenious, only to dismiss them immediately.

I really hope the author takes more care in phrasing when he is writing a scientific paper. I wish he had narrowed his thoughts to the Cultures he had actually preformed studies on himself which were apparently US American, Chinese and Korean culture.

As you might have gathered, I would not recommend this book.