Rating: 4/5

In early December 2019 I had just met my GR annual book goal. I decided to knock off one of the many *long* books off my TBR list. Being a military brat I happened to have the good fortune to have been born in Hawaii. So the book I had in mind was James Michener’s Hawaii. I had not read any Michener before and didn’t really know what to expect. After plugging away for a little more than 2 weeks I was quite impressed. I made a personal goal for myself to repeat this experience in years to come by digging into other Michener classics at the end of each year.

So this 2nd time around I decided to jump into another epic book about a territory that would eventually become a U.S. state. While Hawaii was to become the 50th state ... this time my plan was to learn about the 49th... which was Alaska. Unlike Hawaii - which I had a personal connection to - I did not have any ties to or history with Alaska. Other than a place I had always wanted to visit - and watching several nature documentaries about it - I didn’t know much. Given my positive experience with Hawaii - I fully expected to conclude the book much more knowledgeable than I was going in. 

Alaska did not disappoint. 

Following his formula for Hawaii - Michener begins his tale going over the geological origins of the state - going back millions of years. Where Hawaii rose from years of volcanic activity - Alaska was part of the land masses of Asia and eventually North America. It shifted as the continents moved and like Hawaii it has much volcanic activity to thank for its features. One thing I learned early on is that both states are considered part of the Pacific’s “Ring of Fire”. 

Another big difference is that much of Hawaii’s local flora and animals were brought there by either birds or early settlers. To contrast Alaska was not isolated by thousands of miles of water. Much of the early life that flourished was a result of shifting exposed land from ice ages. This meant that many of those early animals traveled via a land bridge from Asia. It was interesting how Michener built his narrative in this section from the POV of one of the most famous of those early mammals - the wooly mammoth 🦣. 

The next section of the book followed early humans that traveled to Alaska - also via the land bridge from Asia. There was much discussion on hardships they faced as well as the many factors that encouraged the early people of Alaska to settle where they did. Scarcity of food was the biggest of those factors. The sections on whaling 🐳were interesting and unlike the whalers featured in Hawaii - that were driven by profit - the early Alaskans hunted for food. They could live off of the whale meat for months for a single kill and used much of the whale to make their lives better. They also talked about the discovery of seals and killing of them for pelts... a precursor of horrors to yet come.

One thing I love about Michener’s style of historical fiction are the many factual locations and landmarks to provide reference points to the reader. Of course, for me - the references alone didn’t mean much - which of course encouraged and motivated me to look up pictures and articles on the locations specified. This was especially true in the Explorers section. Many of these early explorers came from Russia - and specifically far Eastern Russia. I knew little more about these territories than that they are on my RISK board game... namely Yakutsk, Irkutsk, and Kamchatka. So the bar was pretty low 😀 I spent several hours looking up more about these very remote, but fascinating locations! 

The acquisition of the territory from Russia by the U.S. was interesting. This was shortly after the civil war.. The vote to do so was passed by one vote... and then Congress refused to appropriate the agreed to funds to pay for it. Sounds like our modern day dysfunctional political system. Michener circles back to this plot topic for a bit at the end of the book with a bit of controversy.

Much time was spent on the gold rushes - some 35 years later. About 30% of the book was dedicated to it. The greed and corruption during that time wasn’t too surprising. I didn’t realize the level of lawlessness that existed once the U.S. took possession of the land from Russia. I didn’t expect it to take 50 years to fix this. Again... likely due to faulty government. For so long Washington thought Alaska wouldn’t and couldn’t be expected to govern itself- deferring most policy decisions to Seattle. It also thought the land had no real value and had little interest in it. By the time gold was discovered there was no infrastructure in place to deal with the influx of people and legal disputes that came about. The first of the two gold rushes was actually in Canada (the Klondike) and the second was in Nome, Alaska and quite an unusual find.

The section on the salmon industry was interesting. This had two parallel storylines. One was through another POV of an animal... this time Nerka the sockeyed Salmon. My knowledge of salmon 🍣 was again fairly limited. (Most of it came from The Chemical Brothers “The Salmon Dance” song 😀. So yeah... not much.) I found this 6 year journey pretty cool. Interleaved with Nerka’s story was the story of the early developing salmon industry and subsequent overfarming. All of this stuff sounds pretty plausible- and probably is pretty accurate. 

One thing about the salmon section was that it repeated over-and-over a racial slur to describe one of the newly invented automation devices. While I don’t doubt this is what some called it... Michener could have said “it was nicknamed the *blah*”. And then refer to it another way in the text.... rather than repeat the slur every few pages. Although there were several other cringeworthy references scattered throughout the book - Michener is pretty sympathetic and IMO fair about his representations of the native Alaskan peoples. He doesn’t hold back much deserved criticism of the unfair treatment they were subjected to over the centuries... This includes how they were exploited by the early Russian settlers and eventually the Americans. He also didn’t gloss over injustices done to them as Alaska’s resources were taken out from under them without bringing many financial benefits back to the state. 

There was a section on the bush pilots and the many dangers of aviation in this part of the world during this time period (1930-40s). I learned why you might want to keep branches on your small plane. Even nowadays with more modern planes and instrumentation there are so many dangers from the weather. This section fed right into some interesting WWII bits. I was unaware of the aid given to Russia during this time. I was also not familiar with the skirmishes with Japan over some Alaskan islands. 

The last section of the book covered the arguments for and against statehood and the aftermath. Similar to Hawaii... the more modern the topics... the less interesting I found the stories. Maybe it’s just me, but I found hunting mammoths 🦣 and whales 🐳 more interesting than import/export legislation and corrupt lawyers 😀. It was still good though. 

Another comparison to Hawaii was that in that book there were very few real people referenced. The fictional characters were modeled off of actual people (or aspects of multiple historical figures) - and situations were real - but very few names you could look up directly. This was still the case here, but less so. There was a pretty good mix of fictional and non fictional characters. Although it leaned more to the fictional side - I still think he does this to provide generational continuity to the storytelling - he threw in a lot more actual people this time which I liked.

Overall it was quite an enjoyable read and a further motivation for me to continue my newly invented ‘Michener December’ I have started for myself.