Rating: 3/5

I was eager to read The Semi-Detached House after reading rave reviews of the forgotten novel online. Originally published in 1859 and now out of print, secondhand copies of Virago's edition (paired with another Eden text) are easily obtained online at a reasonable price. 

In reading about Eden's work, I came across multiple comparisons of the author to Jane Austen. Unfortunately, I consequently began The Semi-Detached House with high expectations that no writer could possibly meet -- there is only one Jane. This seems unfair to Emily Eden, as this text contains charms of its own.

The narratives centres around two families. Newlywed and expectant mother Blanche is reluctant to let a semi-detached house located in a suburb of London while her husband is away on a diplomatic mission. However, she quickly befriends her neighbours the Hopkinsons, a relationship that is further cemented with they discover a past connection between their husbands. 

Eden's strength is her dialogue, which is light and engaging. The Virago introduction references Eden's gift for social satire, and it seems particularly embodied in the Sampson family with its speculative husband, sycophantic wife and dandified son who speaks in an affected English-French hybrid. Since they're evidently Jewish, this anti-semitic subplot is slightly uncomfortable for readers in the twenty-first century, even if it wasn't an unusual Victorian perspective. Other jokes are a bit lighter, like a character's profession that she adores Shakespeare whilst naming works by other playwrights. 

Nevertheless, this is generally a sunny novel that sees the single characters nicely paired off by the end and the assurance of enduring friendship between the two families. It lacks the character complexity to be found in Austen; it's noticeably static. Hopkinson daughters Janet and Rose, for instance, epitomise pure goodness. Still, the friendship that grows was so heartwarming it was impossible not to like the little fictional world Eden creates within these pages.