Rating: 3/5

I've been interested in Gallipoli, one of the better-known battles of WWI, since my visit to New Zealand in 2015 and 2016. While in Auckland, my wife and I visited Te Papa, New Zealand's national museum. We experienced perhaps the most impactful exhibit I've ever been to (on the 100th anniversary of the battle, no less), and learned all about Gallipoli and its importance to Australia and New Zealand in the development of their national identity and international reputation.

Moorehead's analysis of this battle covers the Turkish military and political situation, the reasons why Great Britain (and France) decided to invade the Gallipoli Peninsula to secure the Dardanelles, what went well (and disastrously wrong) during the campaign, and why the Allied forces (including the 'ANZAC' corps from Australia and New Zealand) ultimately decided to retreat. Gallipoli could have been a pivotal moment in the War, but of the one million combatants on both sides, half were casualties and no military objectives were ultimately achieved by the Allies.

The writing style in this book is fine but not exceptional, and I do not consider this to be among the more riveting works of scholarship on WWI. The style and format of this work are dated (it was first published 62 years ago, after all). There are a number of photographs that do nothing to illustrate the events described in the book (generals, admirals, etc. posing for portraits in their dress uniforms), and poorly-drawn maps that do nothing to explain the sequence or position of military maneuvers. The author chose to focus on the "Great Man" concept of historical analysis and spends the majority of the book describing the decisions, disagreements, triumphs, and failures of a variety of important British (and a few Turkish) officers. Although he does mention what life was like for the men in the trenches, it's primarily through descriptions of anonymous soldiers rather than specific men (many of whom wrote journals, I'm sure, so there probably are a variety of available primary sources). The primary focus is on the British Army and Navy, with considerably less attention devoted to the Turkish perspective and virtually no mention of the German and French involvement in the conflict.

My understanding is that this is considered the primary mid-century secondary source for information and analysis about the Gallipoli campaign, so despite its shortcomings, this is a solid overview of an important moment in world history. Even though it took me a while to read this work, it's not especially challenging, so it's a solid choice for anyone interested in learning more about this campaign.