Rating: 3/5

This book tells one of the most interesting tales of technological conquest in American history: the construction of the transcontinental railroad in the late 1860's. The author clearly knows the subject well, he has done very impressive research, and his interest in the story is very clear. But I hate to say that I did not enjoy the book as much as I had hoped that I would. At 711 pages of text, it was a real slog to get through. I humorously thought that the book did a great job of conveying to the reader the long grind of the actual project, as I found myself towards the end girding myself for another hour or so of less-than-enjoyable reading. And unfortunately, the emphasis of the study was on the financial and political "wheeling and dealing" of the people at the top of the two enterprises (the Central Pacific building west to east and the Union Pacific building east to west). A while the actions and maneuverings of the small number of officers at the top of the two companies get precedence, the numbers of names presented throughout the book are far more than most readers can handle. The details presented concerning the funding, loan manipulations, etc. are impressive, but if one is not interested in this side of the story, the book becomes incredibly dull. While there is material presented about the physical construction of the railroad, as well as some stories about the men who did the actual construction, most notably the Chinese men who provided the bulk of the labor force on the Central Pacific project, in general the book is a top-down, rather elitist look at the enterprise. Not surprisingly, the epilogue of the book, rather than analyzing the long-term impact of the completion of the transcontinental railroad, discusses the Congressional investigation of the financial improprieties, popularly known as the Crédit Mobilier scandal. Twenty years ago I read Stephen Ambrose's book on the transcontinental railroad project, "Nothing Like It In the World," which was half as long and much more interesting to read. Unless one is looking for a complete dissection of the financial side of the project, the Ambrose book is the one to read.