Rating: 2/5

Another one of the 'club' books, where a group of friends form a club in order to earn spending money (like the babysitters club). 

 In "The 'Ghost' of Hanover Hill", a group of friends (the 'super squad') are hired to paint a haunted house. While painting they start hearing strange noises and decide to investigate. 

 The text itself is decently written. It's easy to read, and there's no glaring grammar errors or anything (other than someone saying they had 'sneaked in', which I think is technically correct despite how odd it sounds). 
 Plot-wise, it's alright. It might have been better if the author had kept things more of a secret rather than letting reader in early on, but it's okay. Nothing terribly exciting. 
 Characterisation is where things lack a bit. I found most of the girls a bit irritating - one of the characters, for the first couple of chapters, a good half of her lines are about various boys, how cute she thinks they are, etc. It's like she has no other personality. Otherwise, despite being told different things about the girls personalities and what differentiates them from each other, from what we actually see displayed, is that they kind of all blend together more than anything. And it's such a fast read, which doesn't help readers get to know them any better. 

 Other stuff that stuck out - the kittens. 
 They find a group of kittens and basically just take off with them, which is annoying on so many levels. Like, if you find stray kittens do NOT give them cows' milk unless there's nothing else. Don't move them - just because the mom doesn't show up in an hour doesn't mean she's not coming back. And she might be too scared to go to them if humans are near anyway.
 Plus, I'm sure the one girls' parents would have just loved her showing up with a kitten that she's decided she's keeping, without even asking. lol. 

-----------------

Found on the basement shelves - I can't actually remember reading this one before. Might have been so long ago, though (or a hand-me down from an aunt/uncle that got shelved and never touched).