Rating: 4/5

I like how subdued earlier Christopher Pike books seem to be. They don't rely on something crazy to be the focal point or a lot of gore and sex. Last Act is a murder mystery in a late 1980s high school setting even if the play within the story is set after WWII when Noir films were very big.

Melaine Martin is new to Careville, Iowa and hasn't made many friends yet until the day she helps Susan Trels in their mathematics class. They seem to hit it off and Susan convinces Melaine to try out for the play she is directing for their drama club to perform, Final Chance. Melaine is a little hesitant but once she finds out that the boy she's crushing on, Marc Hall, is already cast for the play...she reconsiders.

Melaine does well at the audition and meets a few other faces: Carl, Tracy, a girl named Heidi going for the same part as herself and Jeramie, the best actor in the school. That nervousness returns when three things occur: 1) Melaine beats out Heidi for the part of Melissa and it pisses Heidi off, 2) they are going to be using AN ACTUAL GUN WITH BLANKS because a character gets shot and 3) the girl playing the lead is Rindy Carpenter.

Melaine got in a fender bender with Rindy and the rich girl was clearly snobby and she's been trying to avoid her like the plague. Time goes by for rehearsals and a Sadie Hawkins dance to occur before opening night and Melaine can feel that there is something heavy between all the people she has met before she arrived but also, she and Rindy start to become friends when Melaine realizes there is something behind the rich girl's façade. 

On opening night, everything goes fine until the second act...and the dead body upon the stage is very real. Melaine now finds herself accused of murder and she has to find out who the real culprit is before it's curtains for her...

You get a very good pool of suspects and get to see the good, bad and the ugly side of each one to find their motive. We get background on the secret tying everyone together and I think Melaine is a very good main character, she's by no means a whiny weak girl. The reveal of the villain is quite impressive and there are some beautiful twists in the climax with a lovely ending, bittersweet yet funny.

There are some parts that have not aged well but other than that...Last Act is an excellent book and a perfect example of Christopher Pike I recommend you read.