Rating: 3/5

'Queen of Dreams' another mystical creation from the magical pen of Divakaruni... infact her name itself holds the mysticism, secrets &amp; wonderful traditions of India. She is definitely a mistress of story telling and weaves fantasy &amp; reality so beautifully that you seamlessly flow into the waves of the story. She has in her earlier works touched various aspects on Indian fantasy tales &amp; weaved them into the so different American world. How the magical power bearers come looking for a different world in America, trying to make a difference without giving up their heritage &amp; make their own space in the 'new America'. How they maintain the so called ‘AUTHENTIC’ Indian image which attracts the Americans (most of them being confused about their own backgrounds or of mixed races). How these NRIs are trying to prove to half the world that they are Indians and the other half that they are Americans. Also there are so many stories, books, movies, articles written on 2001 WTC debacle that it sounds cliché, the discrimination suffered by the Asians in Americans after this incident has also become so repetitive that it does not awoke any sympathy or sadness but boredom.

But the book missed something &amp; maybe it was that the pillars of the story the two central characters were a little weak, which is quiet strange because according to me, it is generally the strength of Divakaruni’s writing.

The character of Rakhi was not strong enough to hold the weight of the story. She was fickle, negative &amp; spoil sport always bringing the dullness to the story. She had nothing to boast off other than her good luck that she had such an interesting mother, lovable parents &amp; friends and an understanding &amp; patient husband. Not once in the story I felt that she laughed openly or enjoyed anything. She was always angry &amp; tortured without a reason, she never helped anyone or supported her own family. Infact everything she ever did was fake even her painting, her tea shop, her married life or her motherhood as she wanted to be perfect as her mother or content like her husband but didn’t know what she actually wanted. 

Or was it her mother, we don’t know her name, but she was a closed character – her journals throw some light but seem to be designed by her to create her image rather than showing her true self. For what she wanted to go to America, for what she fell in love with a man whom she shuns later, for what she never could be a true mother, for what she always closed her doors to real happiness, for the powers of the dream, the power with which she got to control other’s lives though she says she wanted to help them. That is why Rakhi turned out to be just like her – incomplete &amp; selfish. 

My favirite part from the book describin beautifully the art of stories &amp; story telling:

"Each thinking of the story differently, as teller and listener always must. In the mind of each, different images swirl up and fall away, and each holds on to a different part of the story, thinking it the most important. And if each were to speak what it meant, they would say things so different you would not know it wa sthe same story they were speaking of."

Finally a word on Chitra – she is a marvellous story teller with amazing creativity &amp; strong character sketches and she should continue to write her gems because we long to read them. I have finished almost all her books and waiting to grab the copy of her latest release... Thanks Chitra.. though I just found this book ok sorts but I will always be a fan because you have given me some wonderful times, beautiful stories and such dreams that they all seem real....