Rating: 4/5

Written from the perspective of a Jungian analyst, the book is covering the interpretation of myths, fairy tales, folk tales and stories from different cultures aimed at exploring the Wild Woman archetype of feminine psyche. Pinkola Estés argues that the archetype of the Wild Woman is an essential archetype for a female path of individuation.

The writing style is more in line with books of popular psychology/self-help books than more “serious“ books about analytical psychology, which explain the way was more appealing to the general public than some better quality, more significant books in a similar niche, but sadly, less appealing to me.
I think it is always hard to rate books that cover topics you've already read a fair amount about, in this case, analysis of fairy tales and myths and the path of development of the female psyche. But this book unarguably carries a lot of unique wisdom and gave me greater comprehension from which I will benefit both personally (in reconnecting to parts of self) and professionally (in helping others do the same). Because of that, it deserves a higher rating as I value more the change of perspective than a writing style and literary accomplishment (especially in non-fiction). But if you decide to read this book, be prepared that it is painfully uneven and somewhat repetitive, and would benefit greatly from a good editor.

Folk tales, fairy tales and myths carry deep knowledge and collective wisdom about sex, love, marriage, birth, motherhood, death and transformation.
The strongest analysis I adored were; Bluebeard, Vasalisa the Wise, The Ugly Duckling, The Red Shoes and The Little Match Girl, really worth reading even without reading the whole book.

If you are into the archetypal, creative, cyclic, intuitive, erotic, passionate, authentic, and FEMININE side of life you will certainly enjoy this book.
If you feel depressed, dried out, weak, powerless, silenced, confused, and unexcited about life, you could benefit from this book, as well if you want to nurture, heal or just explore yourself further.

If you liked this book and what to dive deeper in the topics of female development as well interpretation of fairy tales I would recommend: Amor and Psyche: The Psychic Development of the Feminine and Leaving My Father's House: A Journey to Conscious Femininity, for path of female individuation, and The Uses of Enchantment: The Meaning and Importance of Fairy Tales and The Interpretation of Fairy Tales for a psychodynamic approach to fairy tales.