Rating: 4/5

I feel bad not giving a book about the defining mythic and historic moment of 20th century gay American history five stars, but integrity is important. As a queer man Stonewall is something that I cannot ignore. Even though I didn't grow up during a time when being gay could get you institutionalized, I did grow up in a town and social environment where being gay just wasn't good. It was better to be closeted and be a good christian boy who only centered your desire on the opposite sex. I won't insult the people who lived during this period by saying I completely understand their struggle, but the closet is something that is timeless and known to every generation of gay people. I know Stonewall by its reputation, by it's significance, by its historic precedence, and by the mythic status it holds in the queer community.

Because of all this, I wanted this book to be more. Martin Duberman has written a beautiful oral history about a few of the principle characters that participated in the Stonewall Riots, but his work I not entirely centered on the actual riots themselves. Instead this book is the history of a handful of individuals who were present or were impacted by the events of Stonewall. And while this isn't a bad method or approach, by the nature of the title of the book I was expecting the book to be solely centered on the riots themselves. Stonewall is a tipping point in the minds of many people, and so the problem with this book is that I was expected more analysis and historical understanding about the event rather than the people who were changed by it.

There's also a profound lack of information about Marsha P. Johnson, the trans woman of color who supposedly threw the first brick, but that's it's own review.

This is an incredible book, and a vital read for anyone interested in the queer political politics, and Duberman to his credit does write many passages where he explores the realities of being gay in America before Stonewall. This book is brilliantly written, demonstrates a careful attention to research, and is a loving testament to the men and women who began a protest that allows queer people like me to be out and open without fear. Stonewall is a beautiful book and well worth the reader's time.