Rating: 3/5

Vera Caspary is playing a dangerous game. She's paying lengthy homage to Wilkie Collins' Woman in White, with its shifting stable of unreliable narrators. But she starts with Waldo Lydecker, who is a pretentious boob, and that means your guide for the first 40% or so of the book is annoying. 

I thoroughly disliked the book all through this section, because I thought this was the book; I didn't catch the signs that Caspary was in on the joke. When Lydecker says things like "I have been known to shout with equal fervor over the Beethoven Ninth or a penny lollipop," I didn't know whether it was the character or the author who was annoying. When he says that "Yesterday's disapproval had melted like an ice cube surprised by a shower of hot coffee," I don't know whether I'm laughing at or with her.

It gets better. Once other characters start talking, you realize that Lydecker is indeed supposed to be obnoxious; the other voices are - well, different, anyway - and Caspary starts to subvert noir tropes, particularly the femme fatale and the virgin / whore stuff that hardboiled detectives enjoy so much.

It's weird, though, she subverts those tropes partly by falling into different tropes - romance tropes. "He ought to be hardboiled," someone says of the detective. "You'd expect him to be tougher. I don't like his trying to act like a gentleman." Okay, but a gentleman isn't more interesting. Caspary seems to be writing a book that's dressed like noir but plays like save-the-princess wish fulfillment."You don't talk like a detective, either."
"Neither hardboiled nor scientific?"
We laughed. A girl had died...We drank strong tea at the kitchen table like home-folks. Everything was just the way I had felt it would be with her there...interested in a fellow.
So that's it? We take away the sordid fatalism, and we get tea? "Interested in a fellow"? I know this is my fault - I have this aversion to tea in literature - but listen, no one drinks tea while they do something interesting. When tea shows up, you are not at the exciting part. If my choice is between femmes fatale and tea, I'll take the femmes.