Rating: 4/5

A complex plot and a smattering of well timed twists ensure that The Zebra-Striped Hearse sits as one of the stronger entries in the Lew Archer series. Once again the private detective has the job of measuring the moral fiber of a young man with the aim of protecting a young lady from a potentially dangerous friendship.

The case begins as a seemingly innocuous one but, as so often happens, becomes increasingly complex as more characters are drawn in by Archer’s questioning. On top of that, the body count connected to the case begins to grow.

Archer’s task is to investigate the background of a young artist who’s engaged to Harriett Blackwell, daughter of Colonel Blackwell, the client. Blackwell is your classic rich blowhard who’s overly protective of his daughter and suspicious of any man who shows an interest in her.

Archer starts his investigation and it’s not long before he figures out the man, named Burke Damis, is really Quincy Ralph Simpson and he’s not only on the Missing Persons list but it was his wife who reported him missing. As it turns out, the man is more than just missing. He’s dead - stabbed with an ice pick. And what’s more, he’s not the man Archer knows as Burke Damis.

A quick trip down to Mexico helps Archer with some background on Damis as well as allowing him to meet and talk to Harriett’s mother. Then it’s back up to California again and into the citrus belt where the body has been found.

What follows is an increasingly complicated web of deceit that is gradually unraveled by Archer’s persistence. As is often the case, he takes the heavy handed approach when confronting his various witnesses, suspects and potential allies. On occasion the approach yields results but, by and large, it merely results in clumsy parry and thrust exchanges that seems to provide him with little in the way of progress.

What the story is blessed with is a stunning array of plot twists to ensure that there’s little chance of guessing where the investigation is going to take us next. I was pretty sure, a few times, I knew the identity of the murderer and their motives, only to find I was seriously off in my reasoning. Fortunately, Archer’s on hand to provide the clear and level thinking and is also prepared to share his thoughts with us and confront those who need confronting with some straight talking.

This is another example why Ross Macdonald’s Archer series remains one of the most highly thought of classic PI series. The Zebra-Striped Hearse is packed with all of the action, sharp dialogue and clever plotting necessary to remind us what a hardboiled detective story should be all about.