Rating: 4/5

The Rack, the only published novel by playwright Derek Lindsay writing under the name A.E. Ellis, was first published in 1958 to critical acclaim. It has recently been republished in an attempt to restore its status as a classic. It’s not difficult to see why this has happened now, as The Rack captures a brief period in medical history when knowledge about how to treat a condition was evolving quickly. In this case, the condition was TB and the novel is set in the late 1940s.

Protagonist Paul Davenant and some fellow students are sent as a party to a sanitorium in the Alps to be treated for TB. While most of Paul’s contemporaries have straightforward cases and are able to move through the programme of treatment and return to their former lives, for Paul it is just the start of a long, frequently painful process.

Paul is treated by a succession of doctors whose primary aim seems to be the cementing of their own reputations rather than providing empathic patient care, and as well as brutal medical procedures he has to withstand numerous episodes of grandstanding by the medics, each of whom promises to have the solution to his health woes if he will just invest another three months. 

There are also various friends who drift in and out of Paul’s life during this period, displaying a range of poor social skills. Paul tolerates everything placidly; at times it is hard to know whether he is a rather passive individual or just a man who has been driven to clinical depression by the endurance test he is on. Things pick up when he meets and falls in love with another patient, Michele, but even this relationship seems to bring Paul as much distress as it does happiness, as they navigate issues including Paul’s dwindling funds and Michele’s need to go back home to Belgium.

The Rack is a lengthy read at over 500 pages and, due to the subject matter, it is not an easy one. I am glad to have read it, as it gives a unique insight into patient care just before the corner was turned and effective TB treatments became available. The descriptions of sanitorium care were fascinating as well, giving many insights into the running of these large institutions that were once commonplace.