Rating: 5/5

Speculative fiction (SF/F/H) has an unfortunate history of orientalism or "Othering"; giving a group designated as "the enemy" all the characteristics of, say, the indigenous cultures of Africa, or the Turkic peoples of Central Asia, or whoever is the "them" in the "Us and Them" paradigm the author has set up, the "Us" being patriarchal capitalist Anglo-Americans. As much as I've enjoyed reading Tolkien, I have to admit that his orcs follow this pattern; they are described as relatively unintelligent, degenerated, almost atavistic humanoids straddling the line between ape and man, whose unnatural unions with humans produce mongrel creatures that are "horrible: man-high, but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed." All of which, to put it mildly, duplicates the rhetoric of racism and prejudice with an alarming degree of accuracy. Tolkien even, in a letter, directly said that the facial features of the orcs are modeled after "degraded and repulsive versions of the ... least lovely Mongol-types." From what I've heard, Robert Jordan's Trollocs are cut of the same cloth; certainly Paolini's horned, barbarous Urgals are. (Ignore the five-star rating I gave Eragon, I did so when I was a lot younger, hadn't read much fantasy, and was in awe of the fact that a teenager got a novel published. Nowadays, my rating would probably be more like a three; I still respect Paolini's accomplishments and think that it's a pretty good book, but I'm also more aware of all the cliches. But that's beside the point of this review.) There are plenty more examples, many of which also feature the related problem of essentialism, assuming that all members of a race share the same characteristics.

However, the gold metal of Othering, as Marie Brennan and other intelligent authors and scholars have pointed out, belongs to the drow. These are the dark elves of Dungeons and Dragons and the novels that have spun off of the game. In all depictions, they are matriarchal, clan/caste-stratified, slave-owning, violent, devious, dark-skinned worshippers of (among other deities) a malevolent spider goddess. In other words, they are a collection of stereotypes imperialists associated with non-white cultures (particularly stereotypes associated South and Southeast Asian ones, though not exclusively), projected on to a fantasy race described quite explicitly as, with a very few exceptions, pure evil. Needless to say, this is decidedly problematic.

And this is one big reason why I love Daughter of Elysium. Because although it's science fiction, not fantasy, it also features a family of matriarchal, communal, goddess-worshipping dark-skinned people .... except they are sympathic, realistic protagonists whose culture serves as a supportive fabric. Blackbear and Raincloud Windclan are not drow-style Black Devils, nor are they Noble Savages, but an intelligent scientist and translator (respectively) trying to make ethical choices in an environment utterly foreign to them. There's an minor but interesting subplot about their daughter Hawktalon's absorption of both the Clicker culture she receives at home and the Elysian ideas at the shon. Neither culture is perfect, and in the end both make their mark upon her, but the particularly relevant thing is that neither is demonized. In fact, that's a common thread throughout the novel. The lifestyles and civilizations of the Elysians in their floating cities, the Sharers on their rafts, the Clickers on Bronze Sky, the L'liites ... are all written from a position of equal respect. Even the Urulans, the closest thing this universe has to a "bad" culture (laden with militarism, sexism, hierarchy, etc) are still shown to have a number of redeeming features. Ditto the various expressions of parenthood and sexuality throughout the novel; community raising of children, individual education, single motherhood, gay and lesbian monogamy, heterosexual monogamy, and promiscuity are all featured here, and none are valorized or demonized. 

I also really enjoyed the nano-sentient revolution towards the end. Revolt by AI or robots is, of course a common theme in science fiction, but this was a somewhat unusual portrayal, led as the revolt is by teaching robots, and the eventual resolution is an optimistic, although not particularly fleshed-out, vision of biological-mechanical coexistence.

Lastly, I have to mention the philosophy. Blackbear and Kal have some really interesting discussions about whether reproduction should belong to the individual (with Blackbear's perspective sometimes verging on nihilism) or the republic (with Kal's perspective occasionally drifting into etatism.) The Clickers have a subversive retelling of Genisis that I appreciated. And there are a number of excerpts from The Web, a dialogue written thousands of years earlier which provides a nostalgic glimpse of Merwen and other characters from A Door Into Ocean as they debate the nature of compassion. I'm not going to pretend that I entirely understood The Web - sometime soon I'd like to go back through and reread it - but it made me think more than I have while reading entire books on the topic.

Daughter of Elysium does have some flaws. The prose, while lovely, can get somewhat repetitive. The Urulan subplot drags on for a bit too long, in my opinion, and the idea of gorillas being reclassified as a different kind of human seemed farfetched. Worst of all, in the Web, which was presumably written not long after the events of A Door Into Ocean, there's a reference to a half-Valan Sharer. The hell? I realize that it's intended to show that Spinel settled down and had a happy life with Lystra, but it's explicitly stated more than once in the first book that Sharers were incapable of having children with Valan males, because after centuries of living without men, their bodies had altered to the point where heterosexual intercourse would cause toxic shock to their internal organs. The inconsistency annoys me. Nevertheless, this is a great novel, and a worthy sequel to its predecessor. I recommend these to anyone tired of drow (and their equivalents) who wants to read a thoughtful, complex story about love, parenthood, multiculturalism, population control, and the rights and revolts of AI.