Rating: 2/5

I chose to read this because a friend invited me to join her in a book group of ladies who were reading and discussing chapters over a period of weeks. My extent of Christian allegory reading has been Pilgrim’s Progress and now this book. John Bunyan, when he wrote Christian’s story in 1678, was imprisoned for violating a law that prohibited holding religious services outside of the Church of England. According to Wikipedia, it is one of the most significant works of theological fiction in English literature. I enjoyed it greatly and would recommend anyone to read it and find significant meaning. 

Hind’s Feet on High Places was written in 1955 by another English author, Hannah Hurnard, taking its title from Habakkuk 3:19, “The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds’ feet and he will make me to walk upon mine high places.” Hurnard was a Quaker who as a youth struggled with her faith. Knowing this, I can see herself in the story of the main character. 

This is an allegorical story about a young girl named Much Afraid who journeys from her family, the Fearings, into the high places with the Shepherd. She is guided by Sorrow and Suffering and we see her going through trials that she must work out herself and onward toward maturity. The goal is to show the stages of spiritual growth from unbeliever to young believer to mature believer. 

Much Afraid must deal with her Fearing family members, Pride, Bitterness, Resentment, Self Pity, etc as she grows in her faith in following the Shepherd who represents Christ. 

While this novel was stylistically similar to Pilgrim’s Progress, it is not as striking or as affecting to me personally. I found the prose a bit flowery or overmuch for my taste. I enjoyed some of the Biblical messages and lessons presented throughout as part of a story but I was stuck on some of the theology that Hurnard presents. She doesn’t seem to believe in salvation by faith in Christ who died for our sins. She focused on suffering and affliction as the way toward self-discovery. None of Christ’s sacrifice on the cross is ever mentioned in the book. It is also interesting to note that this was her first book and later in life she veered from her roots of Christianity into more new age ideas including reincarnation. 

So for those reasons, I have to put this in a different category altogether than Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress.