Rating: 4/5

This was the sixteenth outing for Charles Paris, Simon Brett's immensely likeable yet singularly unsuccessful actor who has developed a facility for unravelling the murders that seem to dog him wherever he might go. 

Throughout the previous tales we have become familiar with his drinking, and occasional philandering, from which he emerges as a man almost wholly lacking in any vestige of willpower. As this volume opens Charles is enjoying a period of relative success. Not only has he been given a part in a touring production of a new farce, but he has also landed some additional work as a reader for the burgeoning audio-book market. Admittedly his role is relatively minor, and he is extremely disdainful of the play itself, but it is work and will both help to stave off some of the more enterprising of his creditors, and serve to bolster his all-too-fragile self-confidence. 

Similarly, the book that he is recording (a formulaic romance story with characters that are barely even two-dimensional and an utterly anodyne plot) might not ever be rated as great literature, and is not something that he would ever have dreamt of reading of his own volition. It does, however, yield a modest fee, and Charles is additionally buoyed up by the fact that, having arranged the work himself, he will not have to pay a cut to his agent. Consequently, his outlook is rosier than it has been for a long time, and Charles even begins to consider attempting (another) rapprochement with Frances, his estranged wife.

Needless to say, before we are far into the novel, an untimely death occurs, and Charles sets to unravelling the truth behind it. In this case it is Mark Lear, a former BBC sound engineer with whom Charles had worked in ‘the good old days’ when they were both younger and the BBC had plenty of cash. Mark is found dead in the small independent recording studio that he and his partner Lisa were running, and where Charles had been doing his book recording.

Simon Brett is a master of understated comedy. He has obviously worked in many aspects of the theatre and the sphere of television "light entertainment" and he exposes the pomposity and hypocrisy that is rife throughout the theatrical world. However, his light touch and the humour sprinkled throughout the book never detract from the integrity of the plot which is well thought out and very plausible.

Another strong theatrical whodunnit!