Rating: 3/5

WERE NEARLY ALL OF FREUD'S THEORIES A RESULT OF COCAINE USE? 

Elizabeth M. Thornton wrote in the Introduction to this 1983 book. "this book makes the heretical claim that [Freud's] central postulate, the 'unconscious mind,' does not exist, that his theories were baseless and aberrational, and, greatest impiety of all, that Freud himself, when he formulated them, was under the influence of a toxic drug with specific effects on the brain... This book presents evidence that Freud resumed his use of cocaine in the latter half of 1892, the year coinciding with the emergence of his revolutionary new theories, and asserts that these theories were the direct outcome of this usage. None of this is to be found in the definitive biography by Ernest Jones [The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud], yet all the clues are there, unnoticed in the thirty years since its publication." (Pg. ix)

She adds, "Jones's dramatic picture of a tormented genius wrestling with the demons of his unconscious mind actually tells the story of a cocaine addiction following an almost classic course. Freud's rapid mood swings... his episodes of clouded consciousness and periods of hyperactivity... are actually cocaine effects, as are the mysterious heart symptoms that appeared at about the same time. Freud's bitter complaints of ostracism and victimization... were the paranoid delusions of persecution peculiar to the later stages of cocaine addiction; his suspicions and bitter denunciations of his disciples arose from the same cause. The unaccountable lapses in memory... were also cocaine effects." (Pg. x-xi)

She suggests about Freud's 1884 paper, 'Über Coca' [reprinted in 'The Cocaine Papers'], "much of Freud's enthusiasm for cocaine arose from the euphoria engendered by the drug itself." (Pg. 22) Although Freud wrote another paper in 1895 which claimed cocaine was not habit-forming, "Freud was to regret this paper two years later when reports of addiction and its frightful consequences had begun to flow in... and he was having to defend himself against the accusations ... that he had unleashed on the world the third scourge of humanity, the first two being alcohol and morphine." (Pg. 27)

She observes, "in due course both men [Freud and colleague/friend Wilhelm Fliess] developed considerable REAL nasal pathology. Such pathology is concomitant with chronic regular use of cocaine... Infection of the ulcerated tissues leads to severe sinus infections, from which... Freud suffered badly in the second half of the decade... That it occurred to neither man to wonder if the drug was not [the cause]... [was] probably due to the fact that both men had begun to suffer from the effects of cocaine on the brain. Hence the progressively bizarre quality of the theories of both men as the decade progressed." (Pg. 126)

She asserts, "Freud's abrupt conversion to the sexual hypothesis was not caused by any chance remark of Charcot or any other such influence. It was caused by cocaine. It was cocaine too that induced the early cessation of sexual activity in both Freud and Fliess they called the 'male menopause.'" (Pg. 143) Later, she adds, "Freud's unusually vivid dreams, which he had no difficulty in remembering, are explained by the peculiar properties of cocaine, when he was then using so freely." (Pg. 210)

This is obviously a highly controversial book, but it is one which anyone seriously studying Freud's life and ideas needs to deal with. (For my part, I found her documentation of his continued use of cocaine---particularly with the encouragement of Fliess---beyond his traditional "quitting" date of 1896 convincing; but I was much less persuaded that almost EVERY aspect of Freud's life and ideas were due to cocaine.)