Rating: 4/5

On the whole, the western genre doesn't inherently appeal to me. I'm not a modern emasculated male yearning wistfully for a time 'when men were men, and dames were etc.' I am relatively content being a gangly Gentile nebbish afraid of his own shadow and estranged from his natural heritage of hunting, foraging, and defecating unashamedly in a shallow hole behind a cactus. Nothing at the heart of my being cries out for a pistol, a lariat, or a fitful night on the prairie punctuated by the wails of a coyote or the whooping of a marauding Indian band. I am neither a hero nor a survivor by nature. I am an endurer, an eker—an avowed anti-Rousseauist who cringes at dirt, bugs, heat, and peril. Especially peril. As a consequence, I don't find many vicarious pleasures in the western genre, per se. The strong, silent gunslinger isn't an ideal of mine, even in the wildest, farthest-flung reaches of my imagination where I let the 'what-if' impulse have free reign. Although I try to keep an open mind (but often fail), I can't help but find the idealization of these steely male archetypes childish and self-negating. Not childish in the sense of enjoying the healthy play of imagination, but childish in the pejorative sense of stunted and entirely reactionary. But I'm being priggish again.

Meanwhile, True Grit is in fact a western, and I enjoyed it very much. I toyed with the idea of giving it five stars, but I feel as though I've become slutty in my star disbursals lately and—truth be told—the climax is a bit much, with misfortunes seeming to compound in a extravagant way. 

In order for genre fiction—and in this case the western particularly—to work for me, it must transcend its status as genre fiction. It can't only be, say, a simple, classic western narrative with the usual livery trappings, populated by braggadocio and swagger and a mouthful of chaw because I don't fetishize these things. These aren't enough for it to be enjoyable. True Grit more than satisfies this requirement for me. As you probably already know, either from the book itself or its two film adaptations, it's a story told by a teenage girl, which already tweaks the genre out of its usual torpor. She—the heroine, Mattie Ross—is an old-fashioned eccentric: precocious, indomitable, moralistic but practical, pedantic, stubborn, loquacious, and—because of all these traits—contrary to the western archetype of the teenage girl. Of course, I say the 'western archetype' very loosely because is there really an archetype for girls? If there is one, it probably doesn't extend much further than the idea of a pigtailed girl fetching water from a well or praying in school in her ankle boots and gingham. Or maybe I swiped that from Little House on the Prairie.

I won't dwell too much on the book itself because its story is fairly well-known. Mattie employs a drunken, one-eyed Federal marshal of dubious lawfulness to avenge her father's death. Along the way, they join forces with a puffed-up Texas Ranger who's chasing the same man for a reward in Texas. But this is neither here nor there for me because the success of True Grit depends on its generous characterizations and its wonderful ear for language. In these ways, it certainly transcends caricatured rote that hobbles so much genre fiction.