Rating: 5/5

Another nostalgic read for me. This one Nancy and her friends are at a Bent Fender concert getting to meet the band. The lead singer in the band Barton disappears out of no where Nancy is immediately through into the mystery while looking for clues she finds a wallet she is hit over the head and knocked unconscious. Alan Wales Nancy’s best friend Bess’s boyfriend and instant star fills in for Barton so the show can go on. Nancy’s searching leads her to Harold Marshall who has a women working for him by the name of Vivian. But in the end Vivian has played Marshall and he is doing work for her. They are pirating music and making a huge profit. Barton finds out about it so they kidnapped him so no one will find out. Nancy can’t figure out the truth because Harold tells her that they made Barton disappear for publicity and that he was fine and safe. Then Alan gets a record deal with Harold and Nancy is not buying it. He tells Nancy that he seen Barton and everything was on the up and up he even had on the purple bandana that was lucky for him. But then the security guard at there last venue finds the bandana and Nancy knows Alan is lying. Bess and Nancy get in a fight when Nancy calls Alan out. But it turns out that Alan was lying to protect Bess and Nancy George and Ned. He overheard what Vivian was doing so she was doing things to keep him silent. When they were getting ready to ship off the music to China. Nancy understands the dragons on all the stuff they kept seeing and Nancy and Ned run into one of Neds old college friends Dave he works for a guy by the name of James Li who was running the whole operation in the end Nancy find Bess and Barton. Bess was kidnapped durning a concert Bent fender was putting on to keep Alan quite. But he didn’t stay quite he told the whole story to Nancy and they end up find Barton and Bess in a Chinese restaurant that James brother owned. They end up getting held there at gun point by Vivian and James but Alan saves the day pouring hot soup on Vivian. The police show up after being in handcuffed then Dave finally tells the whole story so that the police can find James and the shipment and everyone is safe. Bess and Alan are going to take it slow and Nancy and Ned are working on there relationship. I loved that Nancy’s dad was present in this one and that his love interest Ann Nordquist wasn’t involved though I was lead that way in the beginning. This book like all the rest was a great story and a fun and interesting read. I really enjoyed it. On to the next one!