Rating: 4/5

General Sherman was a good writer, besides being an effective general in the US Army. The 2000 Penguin Books reprint I read was of a revised 1886 edition of the Memoir initially published in 1876. And Penguin has added a fourteen-page Introduction by a Sherman biographer, Michael Fellman, who cautions that the general still omitted a few parts of his life that were less than stellar, as he also accuses his subject of excessive “self-display.” Fair enough, but the story as Sherman tells it is still worth listening to. His reputation in the southern states remains as demonic, but one might honestly observe that there was plenty of bias to leak into the viewpoints of “both sides.”

The Memoir races through his childhood, which was truncated by his father’s death when he was nine, following which his mother sent him to live with a family friend, the lawyer and politician Thomas Ewing. (All but the youngest three of ten siblings were either launched on their own or also taken in to be reared by different families.) After rigorous schooling, the future general was sent at age 16 to West Point, from which he graduated four years later as 6th in a class of 43 (the survivors of the 100 cadets starting the class). His military career then began with assignments to Florida, Georgia, Alabama, South Carolina, and then across the continent to California, where he happened to be at the time gold was discovered. The peripheral history of the US during this time period is often overlooked, and its review through this eye-witness account is rather fascinating.

Of course, the bulk of the book is the story of his part in the Civil War. He first had to rejoin the Army, from which he had resigned to work in a series of civilian enterprises for about a decade. Appointed in 1861 as a colonel of an infantry brigade, he joined several like units in his first battle experience at Manassas Junction in the First Battle of Bull Run, which he describes as chaotic and ill-organized. Then after a summer of military drilling around Washington under the direction of General McClellan, Sherman was assigned to a Western Division in Kentucky, Tennessee, and Missouri. Here he encountered a different kind of chaos in which political differences among the citizens of those states were undermining Union efforts to both recruit men and sufficiently arm them.

But as fighting heated up, he filled an important subordinate role to General Grant, in the Union victories at Vicksburg, Shiloh, and the eastern Tennessee battles around Chattanooga. The two generals became good friends and respectful military partners. When Grant was appointed to command the whole Union Army, he divided the top ground command between himself in the East (to counter General Robert E. Lee) and Sherman in the West (against General Joe Johnston). Leaving subordinate Union generals to maintain control of and fight skirmishing battles against Confederate units in southwestern states (where the Mississippi River had already been secured), Sherman then marched his infantry from Tennessee southward, eastward, then back northward through the southeastern states in a well-known history, for which he has been vilified ever since. But General Sherman makes his own case for what, how, and why he fought as he did, feeling always that he was under orders to not only defeat the Confederate armies militarily, but also to cripple their supporting civilians’ ability to supply them with whatever materiel they needed to carry on war against the Union.

An irony largely unnoticed is that General Sherman’s first instinct when accepting General Johnston’s surrender—during which negotiation he first learned of President Lincoln’s assassination—was to be lenient with the former enemy with whom he now wished to be friends, and for such disposition he was condemned by radical thinkers in the north, beginning with the Secretary of War Edwin Stanton. Sherman writes that he intentionally followed the format of the agreement that Grant had made with General Lee at Appomattox Court House scarcely a week before, and that he also felt he was fulfilling the wishes of President Lincoln, expressed not only in the national address offering “charity for all, malice toward none” but also in a personal meeting when Grant and Sherman had met privately with the President fewer than three weeks earlier at City Point, Virginia, as all three men hoped for imminent Union victory. Sherman apparently spent at least the next twenty years post-war trying to clear his name from what he considered slander by politicians and not a few journalists, and that is surely a major reason he put into writing his own story of his life and his part in the US Army during America’s westward expansion both before and after the American Civil War as well as his part in saving the Union during said war.

My criticism of this Penguin paperback is that its printed maps are smeared to the level of illegibility.