Rating: 5/5

When you get down about your artistic work, you’re supposed to invoke your muse. Problem is, as Neil Gaiman pointed out in Sandman, sometimes a lesser muse of a finite part of creation will tempt you to chain her to your type writer and force her to inspire you and that’s no way to treat a lady. So, as Boethius says, sometimes you need the greatest muse to kick out the lesser muses, to point them in their place, to call them the hussies they are. You need whom Milton called The Muse of Sinai: the Holy Spirit. And when the Spirit shows up, she can manifest herself in the encouragement of ten thousand friends. As the poet said, Christ plays in ten thousand places. 

And in my darkest hours of my career, consistently, when I have appealed to the Muse of Sinai against other muses, he has sent me Jackina Stark. Jackina has, more than any one person, fueled my craft over the years with books and lectures and atta boys so that I could not quit if I wanted to. She texted me out of the blue on the most depressing day I’ve had in ten years concerning the craft about a Madeline L’Engle writer’s conference called Walking On Water. “I love her book Walking On Water,” she said.

“I really need to read her. Haven’t yet,” I said.

“WHAT? Not even A Wrinkle in a time?”

“Okay, Wrinkle I have read.”

“Her non-fiction writing/spiritual book Walking on Water is one of my very favorites! So beautiful. Get it immediately. Or I’ll have to have it sent to you.”

“I’ll see if the library has it. Likely can’t afford another book at the minute,” I said.

“But Walking on Water! I need you to be reading it this very minute. I’ll help your head and heart. Where should I send it?”

A day later it was in my inbox. I finished most of it in two days, got distracted, finished the last twenty pages yesterday. And as when she sent me On Writing and Story and Bird by Bird, she gave just the right medicine at just the write time. Muse of Sinai once again gave me Jackina at my darkest hour and Jackina once again gave me yet another new light in my flickering candelabra.

Walking On Water, unlike most writing books, is rather ethereal. In some ways it reminds me of Bradbury, but in most other ways it reminds me of of devotional classics by mystics. She at no point minimizes the discipline and craft of writing. Rather by humbling the proud, she makes it possible that we might enter the chapel of great writers by kneeling through the tiny door: the door that only children may enter.

1. COSMOS FROM CHAOS

She begins the book not by doing or recommending doing, but by being. Properly ordered, this reminds me of Heschel’s Sabbath where an architecture of time orders work that follows: we don’t become who we are from our work. We know who we are, rest in who we are, be who we are, and then work out of that wisdom and confidence. Proper being predicates proper doing.

And so silence and stillness predicate all good creative works. And that is precisely what we have so little of in society in general and my life in particular — ESPECIALLY at the start of a project when I am so prone to neurotic flurries of intense activity. 

Madeline reminds us, like Lewis before her in “Christianity and Literature,” that whatever Christian standards we apply to art (she rails often against pornography, brutality, the sorts of things folk do in secret because they’re afraid to let the children see), we still must measure the work by what is common to all good art. So on the finite end, “Christian art” is simply a marketing genre of kitch art for shallow Christians, but art itself is predicated upon the truths of Christianity and so, in a sense, all good art is Christian art. God is Beauty therefore all beauty is God’s beauty. God is goodness therefore all goodness is God’s goodness and so forth.

From there she transitions (which she seldom does in this book, but I don’t know if poor transitions is always a flaw...) to the idea that all learning under compulsion has no hold on the mind, a thought from Plato (she draws from deep wells, which in and of itself makes me want to continue with my program in reading the western canon). She rightly points out times she learned under compulsion and then quickly shifts to show the role of play with the mind, something Chesterton spoke of often as did Lewis.

The job of the artist, first and foremost in her mind, is to find chaos and speak cosmos firmly into it. To create another world in places where our own world is crumbling. She gets this from a musician but applies it universally. And the. she moves to Mary.

Being an Anglican (Anglo-Catholic) helps her in this regard because she doesn’t treat Mary like a Juliette who happened to go through a Juno pregnancy and got lucky it was Jesus. She speaks of incarnating thoughts: that angels come to us to bear anointing and we, like Mary, must become obedient to her command.

Obedient to the work because the work comes and says, “Enflesh me.” We either bear or refuse. To hear is to obey and the younger we are, the more we see the angels and hear their commands and feel willing to say, “Yes, and...”

Here she points as she points often to Aristotle’s idea: “that which is impossible and probable is better than that which is possible and improbable.” Because, simply, possibility is higher than probability and if we something consider something impossible and yet we _know_ it’s probabilistically possible, that opens up entire new realms of possibility as opposed to merely putting limits by being improbable. Improbable possibility is hitting your number on the lottery. Probable impossibility is turning water into wine. 

The Nazi engineer focuses on the former and the Christian artist focuses on the latter, efficient bullets and Bonhoeffer’s poetry in the concentration camp.

She points to Peter whose faith went three layers: first believing in who Jesus was, then believing in what Jesus could do, then believing in who he was in Jesus, and last believing in what Jesus could do through him. The last bit is the hardest, but it’s the one if taken obediently Madeline hopes will enable her to one day walk across her pond, listen to those great disembodied minds we call angels (the ones with thoughts so vast they give us nose bleeds and seizures), and ultimately all things that lie on the other side of reason: the dark and unknown we do not willfully admit exists. Faith seeking understanding.

This too is where art interjects: to speak of what we have no words or data on. What’s miraculous to her is that Mary said, “Yes.” And how that obedience carried her through delivery and rearing. 

She speaks of all writing as a lake: that some like Dostoevsky feed the lake with rivers and others like your local poet does it with flicks of raindrops, but the calling is to feed the lake and obedience makes it bigger, better, more beautiful. 

To pursue what we want to make in the chaos while praying, “If this is not your will for me, then change my will.” To pray he gives what he commands: that we, like little Christs, give flesh to the thoughts of God. That we, like subcreators, make in the image in which we are made.

2. ICONS OF THE TRUE

Madeline moves on to show how Christ didn’t come to make us suffer but to show us how to suffer well. She points to Orthodox iconography where anonymous painters use anonymity to encourage time at task, care and virtue in the work.

Unlike signs, the symbols we make actually contain some quality of that which they represent. And because of that, they testify to spiritual realities if they remain accurate even when the artist does not believe in God. Therefore, according to Buber, we must utter words not as if they come from our mouth but as if when speaking them we enter the word. We ultimately see God manifesting his unknowable universal bounty into the particulars of the everyday. Therefore the thought that we must, we ought to write, never leaves us.

She also points out that the scandalous particularity of God is what flies in the face of something like the Spanish Inquisition and even sets the stage for the scandal of incarnate art. The beauty of writing, for her, is that a reader co-creates with the author in a marvelous way — much in the way that the author co-creates along with God. Therefore the work wants not to be signed because the work itself and the dialog with the reader matter far, far more than the author. To make icons of the true renders us all prostrate.

She so believes in this icon theory of writing that she compares the diminuation of vocabulary copywriting to that of a dictator, both of which she calls anti-Christian.

God I wish I could have met this woman.

Having leveled that critique, she turns her ire to the book of Common Prayer and shows why there and elsewhere in the feminism movement — to which she considers herself a proto-player — well, I'll leave it to her:

Nor do I want to be stuck in the vague androidism which has resulted from the attempts to avoid the masculine pronoun. We are in a state of intense sexual confusion, both in life and language, but the social manipulation is not working. Language is a living thing; it does not stay the same; it is hard for me to read the language of Piers Plowman, for instance, so radical have the changes been. But language is its own creature. It evolves on its own. It follows the language of its great artists, such as Chaucer. It does not do well when suffering from arbitrary control. Our attempts to change the words which have long been part of a society dominated by males have not been successful; instead of making language less sexist they have made it more so. Indeed, we are in a bind. For thousands of years we have lived in a paternalistic society, where women have allowed men to make God over in their own masculine image. But that's anthropomorphism. To think of God in terms of sex at all is a dead end. To substitute person for man has ruined what used to be a good theological word, calling up the glory of God's image within us. Now, at best, it's a joke. There's something humiliating and embarrassing about being a chairperson. Or a chair. A group of earnest women have put together a volume of desexed hymns, and one of my old favourites now begins: “Dear Mother-Father of personkind.” No. It won't do. This is not equality. Perhaps we should drop the word woman altogether and use man, recognizing that we need both male and female to be whole. And perhaps if we ever have real equality with all our glorious differences, the language itself will make the appropriate changes. For language, like a story or a painting, is alive. Ultimately it will be the artists who will change the language (as Chaucer did, as Dante did, as Joyce did), not the committees. For an artist is not a consumer, as our commercials urge us to be. An artist is a nourisher and a creator who knows that during the act of creation there is collaboration. We do not create alone."

Reminds me of St. Catherine of Siena:

"What made you establish man in so great a dignity? Certainly, the incalculable love by which you have looked on your creature in yourself! You are taken with love for her; for by love indeed you created her; by love you have given her a being capable of tasting your eternal Good."

Lady's got style.

3. HEALED, WHOLE, AND HOLY

Biggest pickup from this chapter is that she too got and gets called a liar as I was. This is the West's modern analytic philosophic failure to understand the value of narrative hypothesis when it comes to logic and math and science as well as the practical value of concretizing experience. 

She believes, correctly, that all children are artists and it's an indictment of our culture that so few remain so as they age. The freedom of the iterative spirit gets lost as we age: the freedom to climb trees, chain mountains together (as Chesterton said in his defense of Rash Vows), and to run across the lake when called. Writing — and performing, to some degree — returns us to that prime creativity. To what Tolkien called subcreation: a participation in the ongoing donation of being.

Interestingly enough, the qualitative nature of subcreation means that He chooses folks who look bad on paper. And as someone who has perennially scoffed at LinkedIn, resumes, and the like — I really appreciate that. 

She points to how pain sort of lances the boil (to use my name in a pejorative sense) and opens up the wound that needed healing all along. Through the healing, we become what Nouen called Wounded Healers, but through the creative act. Pain isn't inherently creative: some seek out pain, which becomes a masochistic inversion of reality, inherently nihilistic and parasitic on the true creative act. It takes a receptivity to move towards the pain, but creatively. To move towards the abyss and say, "Let there be." 

4. A Coal in the Hand

She moves from healing through our wounds towards being healed through THE wounds. She also points to the name of trust, the childish "Baba" or "Papa." The coal in hand bit, if I can remember right, I think relates how she thinks we should consider how being "90% of children are highly creative" but how that languishes to 10% in adulthood. And how to foster that: childlikeness without childishness, developing into joy rather than arresting development into despair.

5. Probable Impossibles

This is connected to her rendering of Aristotle's idea that a probable impossible is greater than a possible improbable. She wants to enlarge possibility, which reminds me of the Dickenson poem: "I dwell in possibility — a fairer house than prose — more numerous of windows — superior for doors." She's illuminating how hypothesis predicates execution, how ideation predicates delivery and so forth. So it's better to say, "This impossible thing is probable" — that is, the illumination of our metaphysics and frame for the world so that we might learn to love greater, better, truer than how we're currently permitted to love. It's far, far better than the critical eye that desperately searches for the far end of the bell curve outside the standard deviation. Because most data sets have blind spots, black swans they never considered. The Probable Impossible writes stories about black swans. They transfigure. They move and shape and form. That includes never assuming such impossible joys are your DUE: you don't deserve it, it's currently impossible. Therefore it's not there for you, it's not there so you can prove something, it's there as a gift for you and you're meant to share it.

I'm running out of characters — only 300 left — but I would continue a chapter-by-chapter analysis. It was a well-timed book provided by a mentor who's never late or early, but who arrives precisely when she means to. And I mean both Madeline and Jackina in this instance. 

Read on friends. 

Lancelot of Little Egypt