Rating: 4/5

Image of Dench and Branagh, 2016: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/content/da... 

Reviews of audio books count, so I guess watching a play should, too. Perhaps more so, as that was the author's intended medium.

I saw a stage production of The Winter's Tale a few days after finishing Jeanette Winterson's modern novelisation, The Gap of Time, which I reviewed HERE.

My mother tells me I saw the play in my late teens, but I have no memory of it. My knowledge of the plot was from Winterson's summary and then her adaptation.

I enjoyed the play, but it was odder than I expected (I see now that it's usually categorised as one of the "problem plays" because it is both tragedy and comedy). Many of the key events happen off-stage (e.g. deaths), though it does have the famous stage direction, “Exit, pursued by bear”.

Somehow, it worked, though. 

1. Royal Tragedy

Act one establishes a happy family and a happy court, before things rapidly disintegrate through the tragic and alarming madness of the King Leontes, obsessed by the lie that his pregnant wife’s baby is that of his childhood friend. 

The steadfastness of his wife is admirable and moving, though it perhaps stretches credulity. Or maybe I’m just not as hopeful, loving, or forgiving as Hermione. Nevertheless, those are entirely positive attributes.

More problematic, are the unpalatable, immoral, and illegal actions demanded of some, under the guise of loyalty to their king. Zimbardo’s infamous Stanford Prison experiment and Milgram’s obedience experiments came to mind.

Death comes to the court, and profound loss in addition to that.

2. Bucolic Comedy

The second act fast forwards sixteen years to a lively sheep-shearing festival, young love vetoed, and some comic routines from a pickpocket/peddler, amongst others.

The more subtle theme (emphasised far more strongly in Winterson’s version) is about the goodness that can be found in ordinary people – selfless love, whether of an adult for a foundling, or between young people, not thinking of wealth or social position (or their lack of).

3. Revelations, Resolution, Redemption?

It ends with revelations, resolution, and a transformation that might be magic, an hallucination, or a straightforward trick. 

Forgiveness. 

A happy ending that is another reason why this is no tragedy. But it is strange.