Rating: 5/5

Another religious romantic novel by Grace Livingston Hill, "An Unwilling Guest" is wonderful hopeful read about love and serving Christ. Two different families in so many ways, can they find love? 

Story in short- Evelyn is a rich, spoiled young lady who cares only for her own happiness, this all changes when she meets the Greys.

"Five miles away, speeding toward the same station, another girl of about the same
age sat in a chair car, impatiently watching the houses, trees, and telegraph poles as they flew by. She had gathered her possessions about her preparatory to leaving the train, had been duly brushed by the obsequious colored porter who seemed to have her in charge, and she now wore an air of impatient submission to the inevitable. She was unmistakably city bred and wealthy, from the crown of her elaborate black chiffon hat to the tip of her elegant boot. She looked with scorn on the rich farming country, with
its plain, useful buildings and occasional pretty homes, through which she was being carried. It was evident, even to the casual onlooker, that this journey she was taking was hardly to her taste. She felt a wave of rebellion toward her father, now well on his way to another continent, for having insisted upon immuring her in a small back-country village with his maiden sister during his enforced absence. She drew her pretty forehead into a frown as she thought the vexed question over again and contemplated with dread the six stupid weeks before she could hope for his return and her release from exile. She pouted her lips in annoyance as she thought of a certain young man who was to be in New York during the winter. She was to have met him at a dinner this very night. She wondered for the hundredth time if it could possibly be that papa had heard of her friendship with this fun-loving young fellow and because of it had hustled her off to Hillcroft so unceremoniously. Her cheeks burned at the thought and she bit her lips angrily."

🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻 spoiler alert🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻🔻

I was hoping that Richard would fall in love with Allison. It would be interesting to know what his profession is and how she will adjust to her new life. I think she will succeed with the Rutherford's help but not lose herself. I was glad that Evelyn and Maurice finally found out that the other loved the other. 

"Your aunt, Miss Rutherford, was unable to meet you and I have come in her place. If you will give me your check I will see that your baggage is attended to at once.” “Indeed!” said the bewildered traveler, and she followed the other girl with an air of injured dignity. Was this some kind of a superior servant her aunt had sent to take her place? Her maid, perhaps? She certainly did not speak nor act like a servant, and yet Then her indignation waxed great. To think that her father's sister should treat her in this way, not even come to the station to meet her when she was an entire stranger, and had never even seen her since she was three years old! In New York, of course, she would not have expected it. Things were different. But she had always understood that country people made a great deal of meeting their friends at the station."

“I am very sorry, Miss Rutherford, that you should suffer any inconvenience,” she said. “It certainly is not so pleasant for you as if your aunt had been able to meet you as she planned. No, this is not her carriage. It belongs to us, and we are her neighbors and dear friends.”

“Yes, your aunt was expecting you, ‘looking forward with great pleasure to your coming, she bade me say,” went on Allison, reciting her lesson a trifle stiffly, “and only two hours ago she discovered serious illness among her household which they are afraid may be contagious. They cannot tell for some hours yet. She does not wish you to come to the house until they are sure. She hopes that it will be all right for you to come home by tomorrow, or the next day at most, and in the meantime we will try to make you as comfortable as possible. Allison was almost in her usual spirits as she finished speaking. It would not be so bad after the stranger understood, surely. She did not add what Miss Rutherford had said about having her niece with herself, Allison, as she hoped another girl’s company would make her feel less lonely and strange, for Allison saw at once that this was not a girl who cared for other girls' company a straw, at least not such as she."

“Do your people keep a boarding house?” she asked, turning curious eyes on Allison, who flushed again under the tone, which sounded to her insolent, but waited until she had disentangled the reins from the pony's tail before she replied gently: ‘‘No.” “Well—but—I don’t understand,” said the guest. “Did you not say that my aunt had arranged for me to board with you?” A bright spot came in each of Allison's cheeks ere she replied with gentle dignity: “No, you are to visit us, if you will. Your aunt is a dear friend of my mother, Miss Rutherford.” She resolved in her heart that she would never, never, call this girl Evelyn. She did not want the intimate friendship that her old friend had hinted at in telling her first of the coming of this city niece."

Allison Grey is waiting for her mother's friend niece, Miss Evelyn Rutherford at the station. Miss Rutherford, Evelyn's aunt is not able to come because a possible case of small poxs in the household. Evelyn is not happy to hear this and after hearing she is to stay with this country girl's family, she asks about a hotel and soon finds out they are not too inviting. Evelyn's father had to go away on a trip, after he found out that his motherless daughter has been seeing a young gay man, Mr. Worthington, he looks to send her to the country. Her brother Dick is far away, does he end up faling in love with Allison?