Rating: 4/5

During a course on post-WWII history in 1970 at my small liberal arts college, I learned of the significance of the battle of Dien Bien Phu. I mention this only because shortly thereafter I had the opportunity to sit in on a small seminar on Vietnam history at a nearby university that was far more prestigious than my school. I was shocked to observe that none of the students there seemed aware of Dien Bien Phu, much less its importance as a bellwether of the situation the US had got itself into by that time. 

That was the day that I came to realize that the size or status of an educational institution does not in itself indicate the quality of the education received by the students. 

So, yet another personal backstory to a reading choice. Now that I have that out of the way, on to the book.

 Hell in a Very Small Place is generally considered to be the definitive book on the siege of Dien Bien Phu. France had been the primary colonial power in Southeast Asia, and as with so many other locations, after WWII the locals wanted them gone. In this case, those locals had several advantages: they were supported by the conveniently-located Chinese communists, and they were led politically by the committed and charismatic Ho Chi Minh and on the battlefield by the brilliant strategist General Giáp.

Dien Bien Phu was a valley area in the far northwest of Vietnam. The French established a garrison there in early 1954. Why? Good question. There was no agreement between the top two military leaders in Vietnam, Generals Navarre and Cogny on the objective. Cogny wanted a small installation that would be a “mooring point” for other actions, while Navarre wanted a major entrenchment that could withstand a long siege. This conflict went on throughout the battle, which lasted from mid-March to mid-May 1954, and continued afterward as each pointed the finger of blame at the other for the disastrous outcome.

Fall, by contrast, did have a clear objective in writing this book. He wanted to set the record straight, to debunk myths and uncover truths, and with a PhD in history, experience in the military, and a background as a journalist he was uniquely qualified to do so. He was also (at least) tri-lingual, having been born in Austria, fought with the French resistance, and obtained advanced degrees in the US. 

Regardless of the reason, the action was probably ill-advised since it would have required substantial air support, something the French were not able to supply on their own, lacking sufficient equipment and trained pilots. The US provided both on a more-or-less covert basis, although Fall argues that more support near the end of the siege would have avoided the worst of the outcomes. Why the US chose not to get more involved at this point deserves a book of its own; the reasons are both understandable and regrettable.

The nature of the siege demonstrated the tactics successfully used by the North Vietnamese during the US involvement in the 1960s. Despite having no air support of their own, the Viet Minh were able to surround the French “fortress” (a poor term if ever there was one), and using Chinese-supplied heavy artillery, destroy the landing field and most of the encampments. Because so many air drops of supplies for the French were poorly executed, the Viet Minh also had the use of French armaments that fell within areas they controlled. Finally, they successfully employed tunneling to infiltrate the remaining boundaries. 

Despite their mostly valiant efforts, by May 7 the French were overrun. The Viet Minh took around 11,000 prisoners. Many of the most severely wounded were repatriated fairly quickly, but only 3,500 of the rest were ever returned. (Reading about the march to the POW camp was reminiscent of Richard Flanagan’s description of the Burma death march in The Narrow Road to the Deep North.)

The victory improved the bargaining position of the communist Vietnamese at the Geneva conference, which began the next day and resulted in the partitioning of Vietnam into North and South. It also inspired other post-colonial revolutionaries, most importantly the Algerians, who shortly thereafter began their own battle for independence from the French. 

Along with Graham Greene’s novel The Quiet American, written the year after Dien Bien Phu and reflecting his observations as a journalist of the debacle, Hell should have been required reading for American political leaders in the 1960s. Even though the US had troops on the ground by the time Fall’s book was published in 1966, an earlier withdrawal would have been a godsend in terms of lives saved. Sadly, Fall died while embedded as a journalist with American troops in 1967.

LBC