Rating: 4/5

Friend or Foe is a historical fiction novel about World War II, that grips the reader from the start. This book allows the reader to develop their knowledge and understanding of the second world war, through the description in the book. 
David and Tucky have been evacuated from London, and are enjoying (as best as they can) their new life in the countryside. On night out of their bedroom window they watch as the skyline of the moor is lit with gun flashes and the distant rumbling of bombing miles away brings the memory back of war. It is when a German bomber plane crashes, that the boys David and Tucky feel they should hate the German soldiers inside. However, it is one of these German Soldiers that save David’s life. The two boys end up helping the German Soldiers and you follow the boys throughout their journey. 

Michael Monpurgo has an extremely descriptive writing style which makes it very easy for the reader to picture what it was like during the war from a child’s view point. Scenery is described so you can almost envisage it as you are reading the book. This book gives great opportunities in art- drawing what David and Tucky saw out of their bedroom window as they watched the skyline of the moor lit up, or the walk David took with his mother through London on the way to the train to Devon. 
This is a really good book to use with KS2 for a WWII topic. You could also use this book in English as there are a number of dilemma scenarios in this book. My favourite and possibly the most important - where the boys have the dilemma of whether or not to help the German soldiers they found on the moor. Get the class to have a debate- either split the class in two and have each side debating their argument or give each child the chance to put their own opinion across. With this you could use A, B, C (agree, build or challenge), getting the children to challenge courteously (this could be your learning objective). 
The theming in this book opens opportunities for History such as looking into what it was like to be an evacuee - Didcot Railway Centre offers WWII experiences to schools. 
Alongside this, there are a number literacy activities you can do with a KS2 class including letter writing - writing a letter home as David, describing how you are feeling and what you have seen. Article writing, David and Tucky make the front page of a paper- write the article. Character analysis- David, Tucky, Mr Roberts, the German Soldiers etc. And finally setting description- as I’ve already mentioned Monpurgo has such an extreme descriptive writing style it would be a great opportunity to give the children a chance to use this book to help them with writing their own description of a setting in WWII either in the countryside or in London.