Rating: 3/5

Leigh has come to Peru because her fiancé has stopped answering her letters. A little while ago, she met this great guy and he was all dashing and charming. Daddy didn’t like him. Leigh’s dad is wealthy and has fingers in many pies. To prove himself worthy of Leigh, the fiancé is given a job on a project in the Andes to build housing for locals displaced by an archaeological dig. Initially the fiancé chose to be amused. How droll, your father is sending me to South America to make me into a man, he would write to Leigh, well, anything for you darling!

Then, the tone of his letters changed. He got all bitter and paranoid and erratic. Nobody liked him. The living conditions were primitive. His boss, this archaeology guy named Rourke, was being super mean. Then, the letters stopped altogether. 

Now, Leigh’s a stubborn person and she wants her fiancé, regardless of what Daddy says about him. She’s prepared for it not to be that easy to get to him and get him out. She’s prepared to be outraged and impatient about it. She’s even, when she meets Rourke and he’s crap to her and she’s crap back, prepared to invite him up to her room and get her flirt on, to see if it makes any difference. It doesn’t. Or, at least not in the way she’d hoped.

Leigh is another one of Sara Craven’s spoiled princess heroines who are most admirable because they are super confident and won’t give up. I like a spoiled princess, especially when she’s scheming and has a fundamental conviction in her own abilities to take on anything and make the world over to her liking. Without getting overly whiny or stroppy about it along the way. Her fiancé has disappeared, she’s getting no help. If Rourke won’t help her, if the entire male population of Peru shows up to threaten to rape her, it doesn’t matter. Leigh’s got a bee in her bonnet, and she’s going to get the job done. Rourke refuses to take her out to the dig site? No problem, she can get herself out there. And, she’s insistent that she wants the fiancé, even though she’s fighting her attraction to Mr September on the sexy archaeologist calendar.

Rourke is chock full of glares and sneers, veiled threats and punishing kisses. He naturally finds Leigh irresistible, and also naturally thinks she’s a terrible person. Hang on, why? Oh, he’s not going to say. Nobody’s going to say. Instead, they’re going to eye off Leigh and whisper to each other. They’re going to suddenly break off conversations whenever she enters a room. Leigh’s fiancé had hinted to her that he was planning a bit of artefact smuggling, so she thinks maybe it’s about that, but she’s going to make sure that he doesn’t do it, and anyway, why do they think she’s involved at all? She’s been sitting around in England, waiting to get letters, not plotting to deprive the indigenous population of their cultural artefacts.

Of course, the fiancé turns out to be heaps villainous, and Leigh finds out about it after she’d already decided she wasn’t into him. That order of discovery is very important, because the heroine can’t look like too much of an idiot, or too much like she’s transferring to the hero on the rebound. She also can’t look too much like an indecisive ho, so most of the hotness between Leigh and Rourke is at a simmer. 

Leigh has lots of dangerous adventures and gets to see a condor up close. I didn’t like this one quite as much as Craven’s other Romancing the Stone – adjacent romance (Flame of Diablo), because that one had far more crazy fun. I felt frustrated for Leigh. I thought she was incredibly confident and very capable at adjusting to a very different lifestyle than her own. I think she would have been fine, except the whole secrecy and the way the other characters, including Rourke, shunned her, was emotionally devastating. She didn’t deserve it.