Rating: 5/5

Somehow I always disliked the title The Phantom of the Opera… I thought the story was an insipid pulp and never wished to read the book… But not long ago it accidentally attracted my attention… And all’s well that ends well…
A prima’s dressing-room… Young girls of the ballet bring disturbing news…
“It’s the ghost!”…
Sorelli was very superstitious. She shuddered when she heard little Jammes speak of the ghost, called her a “silly little fool” and then, as she was the first to believe in ghosts in general, and the Opera ghost in particular, at once asked for details:
“Have you seen him?”
“As plainly as I see you now!” said little Jammes, whose legs were giving way beneath her, and she dropped with a moan into a chair.
The ghost once was met and described by a sober and trustful witness…
“He is extraordinarily thin and his dress-coat hangs on a skeleton frame. His eyes are so deep that you can hardly see the fixed pupils. You just see two big black holes, as in a dead man’s skull. His skin, which is stretched across his bones like a drumhead, is not white, but a nasty yellow. His nose is so little worth talking about that you can’t see it side-face; and the absence of that nose is a horrible thing to look at. All the hair he has is three or four long dark locks on his forehead and behind his ears.”
Such terror… Such horror… Such sarcasm… Irony reigns over the entire extravagant Gothic mystery… The atmosphere of suspense is as thick as autumn fog… A mysterious love story… Uncertainty… Torments… Jealousy… The young man is in despair… What is happening to his beloved?
To what extent, at this time, was she really a victim? Whose prisoner was she? Into what whirlpool had she been dragged? He asked himself these questions with a cruel anguish; but even this pain seemed endurable beside the frenzy into which he was thrown at the thought of a lying and deceitful Christine. What had happened? What influence had she undergone? What monster had carried her off and by what means?
“Poor Erik!” His beloved calls to the ghost… And also a regular mention of the skull… “Poor Yorick!” An allusion to Hamlet is apparent… Yes, the Phantom is a bloodthirsty jester… Appearance of Red Death – The Masque of the Red Death by Edgar Allan Poe… Sleeping in a coffin – Dracula by Bram Stoker… The ratcatcher – The Pied Piper of Hamelin…
For true love phantoms are just ghostly obstacles.