Rating: 3/5

I received an advance copy of Cat’s Eye from the publisher through Netgalley in exchange for an honest review.

I really enjoyed the first in this series, Cat’s Cradle. Pulp horror from the mid 70’s to early 90’s is a favorite nostalgia trip for me as long as I don’t overdo it. While I enjoy the genre very much I have to say that, as with any pulp fiction (Edgar Rice Burroughs for example) I can only read a couple books at a time before the whole formula driven prose starts to get a bit old. At least it does for me. Even as much as I love Agatha Christie, if I read several of her works in a short period of time the formula starts to become more obvious and my enjoyment starts to wane. It is also that way with Johnstone.

Kensington has released quite a few of Johnstone’s horror works recently and I have read and reviewed most of them. I can only think of one that I really didn’t care much for—Rockinghorse—and the others were quite a bit of fun. I bought several more of his books and have them waiting on my Kindle. I am sure that I will enjoy them, but will probably wait until next year and space them out a bit more.

This Cat’s series (Is two books a series? I guess it is.) is really one big story that I think could have been pared down into one good book and it would have been much more exciting. The plot drags under its own weight with too many characters, too many situations, too many threats (zombies, shape-shifters, demons, Egyptian gods, disembodied homicidal body parts, killer house pets, killer worms, those ever-present and pesky Satanists as well as satan himself) and it loses its focus as well as the tension and suspense. This novel is also a bit more heavy handed in the whole religious aspect. I mean, how many satanic cults bent on destroying the world are out there? In Johnstone’s world they are like boy scout troups and every town, no matter how small, has one. It passed into eye-rolling territory for me.

Somewhere between 2 and a half and three stars for me.

My favorite of the new Johnstone releases: Jack in the Box and Cat’s Cradle. Check them out.