Rating: 5/5

This is book 38 on my read-through of the Star Wars Legends books.

I think I set my expectations for this one a bit too high. All I've ever heard is praise for this book -- many people call it one of the best Star Wars novels ever written, if not the best. And, considering how much I loved the Wraith Squadron trilogy, I went into this book fully expecting it to top those and emerge as a 9.5/10 or even my first 10/10.

In retrospect, the book could never have lived up to my expectations. Nor does it feel like the author intended to meet some lofty aspiration. Starfighters of Adumar doesn't have the grand dramatic highs, laugh-out-loud punchlines, or indelible characters of the Wraith Squadron series. I've heard people say this book is comedic, but I think that is a mischaracterization -- this book isn't "funny" so much as it is "fun." There is a spirit of deliberate light-heartedness that permeates this book.

I will admit, I really got off on the wrong foot with Starfighters of Adumar from the first chapter. Seriously, Wedge, how the hell do you fumble a hot blue alien scientist gf? I was always rubbed the wrong way by the way the X-Wing books introduced a new human love interest for Wedge in the form of Iella, despite knowing about his chronologically later (but written early) romance with Qwi Xux in the Jedi Academy books. Admittedly, KJA already muddled that romance with that stupid mind-wipe, but Wedge and Qwi seemed to be doing great in Darksaber, which takes place only a few months before this book.

The way Stackpole and Allston inherently treated that relationship as if it were a temporary fling and his true love must of course be a generic human female just feels...vaguely alien-racist? The second Wedge breaks up with Qwi, he basically pretends the relationship never happened, and Iella even makes some weirdly off-putting comments about her. Admittedly, I am biased because of my undying love for Mass Effect's hot blue alien scientist gf Liara T'soni, but this book just feels so wildly disrespectful to poor Qwi Xux. It doesn't help that her replacement is so underwhelming. Is it crazy that I don't find Iella interesting at all? Seriously, I don't think I could name a single character trait about her. Vaguely determined, I guess? Wedge, you're going to give up Qwi Xux, who is both a super-genius and an all-around sweetheart, for this generic human woman you work with? Justice for Qwi Xux!

Anyway, what was I talking about? Oh right, a book. It's actually really good.

Despite the fact that I don't particularly like Iella, Allston manages to make their romance work, due to his usual sharp dialogue. The fact that Iella is boring is mostly due to the fact that she's a Stackpole character, and Allston does his best to inject her with some personality. There's only so much he can do, but the interactions between her and Wedge were very cute and the ending was nice.

This book takes a while to get going. In fact, the entire first half had me scratching my head about why people like it at all. But then you realize it's all setup for an absolutely sensational second half. Again, I think my expectations were to blame: I went in expecting the hectic plotting of Allston's other X-Wing books, where there are dozens of small missions sprinkled throughout and the story constantly evolves through twists and turns. But Starfighters of Adumar instead adopts a more straight-forward plot structure with a clear build-up and destination. By the end, I found myself appreciating the first half for the way it carefully put all the pieces in place so that the later parts could knock it out of the park.

Above all, I would describe this book as cinematic. Reading this felt like watching a top-tier summer blockbuster. This is basically the "Thor: Ragnarok" of the Bantam era, a tightly crafted light-hearted stand-alone adventure released right before the giant epic saga was slated to begin (i.e. Infinity War and the NJO series, respectively). The space (and land) battles in this don't display the same creativity as those in the Wraith Squadron books, but they have an epicness that none of the previous X-Wing books had, and a very kinetic, movie-like energy. Thematically, this book does have "things to say," but they're the kinds of messages you'd expect in a blockbuster: simple, well-worn truths that are none-the-less articulated in a very satisfying way.

The writing quality, dialogue, and characters are not at the level of the Wraith Squadron books, but they are very good. Allston is quite obviously one of the best authors to touch the Star Wars franchise. He excels at imbuing even minor characters with a lot of personality and care, and he manages to fit in quite a few character arcs into such a short book.

I do wish Wedge's three companions had more to do -- the four of them basically function as a single unit from the start, but I suppose that's to be expected from people who have worked together for so long, and it's better than manufacturing drama or having something horrible happen to one of them. Adding additional side plots with one or more of them would have taken away from the streamlined nature of the book, so I suppose it's for the best. But still, I can't help but feel like Janson, Hobbie, and Tycho got the least attention of any of the characters, other than a couple fun quips here and there.

Anyway, I really liked this book. It doesn't quite reach into the upper echelons, but that was an unreasonable expectation for me to have in the first place. A solid 8.5/10, but I could see this being one of the Star Wars books I return to again and again over the years when I want something fun to read.

By the way, I thought I might start including some of my synesthesia colors in these reviews. This book is extremely "red," which is one of my favorite colors. The Wraith Squadron books actually had fairly complex color profiles: reds and purples and blues and greens. Planet of Twilight was very green, like a rich verdant green -- which is weird because it mostly took place on a desert planet.