Rating: 5/5

In Prairie Nocturne, Ivan Doig once again presents a host of authentic, memorable, three-dimensional characters who will remain with readers long after they get to the end of this long-ish novel. Readers have encountered many of the characters before in Doig’s impressive sequence of a dozen-or-so Montana novels, including two of the three main players this time around—music teacher and vocal coach Susan Duff, and wealthy rancher and land owner Wes Williamson. Making his first appearance, however, is Monty Rathbun, African-American chauffeur to Wes.

The central plot concerns the discovery of Monty’s singing voice and the persuasion of Susan by Wes to take on the development and shaping of Monty’s vocal abilities such that he can perform professionally. Doig does a convincing job of describing all the tricks of the trade voice coaches might use to discipline and fine-tune a rough and untrained voice, hitherto only used to singing songs his mother taught him. Susan is relentless in her voice training exercises and practice sessions, and Monty eventually entrusts his faith in the teacher and her unorthodox teaching methods.

Monty’s transition from chauffeur to a singer on radio and on stage is actually his second self-reinvention. His first was going from rodeo entertainer—which involved hiding in a barrel that is being gored by a raging bull—to chauffeur. But this is 1920s America, the era of extreme racial prejudice, and the Ku Klux Klan has even made it all the way to the vast, sparsely-populated state of Montana. Naturally, the KKK does not approve of the combination of a white teacher tutoring an African-American adult male—the voice lessons can only be a clever artifice for more wicked and forbidden mischief.

A successful attack on Monty damages his voice and jeopardizes all his hard-won fame and celebrity as a singer. What and how he sang before is no longer possible with his new limited voice range. Once again, Susan is called in to work her magic in rehabilitating his voice. This time, she enables Monty to reinvent not himself, but his musical repertoire, creatively adjusting the song selection to suit his voice. Monty is a rising star once more, eventually heading for Carnegie Hall and a European tour.

The novel’s romance, not surprisingly, is the second-time-around, torrid love affair between Susan and Wes. They had parted years earlier after their affair compromised Wes’s political career, leaving Susan still single and Wes in an unsatisfactory marriage. However, boundary-pushing Doig, with the utmost subtlety, teases readers with the possibility of feelings developing between Susan and Monty. Well-intentioned, taboo-panicked friends caution them both, and the relationship becomes a surprising revelation to Wes.

The poignant resolution of this love triangle is masterfully done. In the skilled and sure hands of a writer such as Ivan Doing, readers’ emotions will be tugged and stretched to breaking point. While the breathtaking ending may surprise some, it will disappoint none. Despite the venture into New York, Prairie Nocturne is still vintage Doig writing about his beloved state of Montana. As in all his other novels, the earthy and atmospheric descriptions of the land and its unique people will have enduring effects on readers’ senses. Ivan Doig’s fiction (and nonfiction) is the most satisfying and entertaining way of learning about America’s west.