Rating: 4/5

The tranquil River moves slowly , steadily , eternally an endless thing a constant majestic stream that never is scared or cares for the human struggle, but they're blind to the mammals though, its dull eyes and the smooth flow continues its ceaseless mysterious wanderings down the channel around the corner it bends yet the view as the Sun strikes is spectacular how such a sight seems so idyllic for any but the people on the banks. Years past yet little changes for those who walk on two legs, a paradise everlasting which bit by bit reveals the ugliness for all. Resurrected in heaven or hell, aimless without goals provided substance not living just existing, beings need some reason to rise in the morning light from a warm bed, a sharp pain may do the trick a little ...
sting, otherwise what's the point? Celebrities permeates the scenes, people in the billions nevertheless, Mark Twain, Sir Richard Burton the explorer, Tom Mix, Jack London a Neanderthal even a German fighter pilot from WW1, King John of England however not a joy, others to many to mention however Cyrano de Bergerac is very amusing. The mystery is who are the Ethicals, are those the Aliens that created this weird nebulous planet, on a hidden fragment of the Universe, putting the dead here, they breathe for a time and give them a second chance. Are their reasons honorable or nefarious, maybe an experiment which will cause the inhabitants suffering, excruciating pain a gigantic zoo to entertain the bored omnificent, arrogant maybe even divine creatures...Blimps, riverboats and balloons right out of a Jules Verne novel, float in the cerulean skies, any vehicle they can build, the people men and women travel in to reach the elusive north pole not for gold. The polar region is rumored to give away the secrets of this bizarre world the competition between the good and bad is fierce in fighting, might is not right, still here it's the only way for salvation for the soulless Riverworld series is an unique bunch of stories which showers pleasure to readers, my third voyage to the land of the strange, it feels well again. On to the next novel for these colorful players will somehow abide or fail but not without maximum effort. A wonderful imaginative dream which can bring enchantment or nightmares...