Rating: 3/5

“Dear Rowan,
You are a big boy now so I hope you will enjoy these adventures.
Love Mrs Hammond.
Christmas 1997"

Growing up, I lived the opposite end of the state to my grandparents. I missed their everyday presence. Next door lived an elderly couple – The Hammonds. They despised each other, yet were always friendly to us. Their grandchildren lived interstate, and because of this, we filled a void in each other’s lives. Mrs Hammond often made appearances on birthdays or Christmases with a small gift. For Christmas 1997, I received The Adventures of Tom Sawyer.

It has taken me 28 years, but I have finally read this book, and experienced Mark Twain for the first time. I’m not sure why it took me so long – but know the language would’ve been too difficult for me back then - despite Mrs Hammond’s best intentions! It confused me even now. 

But that wasn’t a problem. I had greater issue with how redundant large sections of the story were. It was a slog. Twain himself, perhaps best described my reading experience:

  “Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse.”

It took considerable time for something resembling a plot to emerge, and once it did, characters were soon bored or plagued by melancholy – much like myself. I never want to see or hear the phrase “by-and-by” again, nor do I want to be subjected to racist language. I anticipated this product of the times, but it was another thing seeing it on the page.

Twain did, however, accurately capture the sense of adventure that accompanies youth. I enjoyed reminiscing about aspects of childhood. I particularly related to Tom’s immense dislike for school, and trying to avoid it at all costs.

  “He canvassed his system. No ailment was found, and he investigated again. This time he thought he could detect colicky symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope.”

Another highlight was Huckleberry Finn – one of the most memorable introductions of any literary character. I enjoyed the back-and-forth banter between Tom and Huck and the book felt at its best when their rapid dialogue was front and centre. 

  “Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry Finn, son of the town drunkard.”

Twain succeeded in making me laugh numerous times. Some of my favourite scenes included the boys listening to their own funerals, and the pinch-bug, dog, and the church. I even learned that ‘spunk-water’ apparently cures warts!

There’s no doubting the impact Twain had on American literature and all those who followed. Unfortunately, that wasn’t enough to ensure my enjoyment of this classic.