Rating: 4/5

Don't let the title "The Anarchist Cookbook" fool you. This revolutionary handbook was written for patriots wishing to fight back against an oppressive government. Tailored to the US, but dated from 1971, the author claims to support neither the right nor the left in politics. As a matter of fact, the tone sounds like he considers both wings oppressive.

Today's misguided youth may think they are unique and out to change the world with protest marches, but according to the author, he sees this as foolish and, like Mau, he believes that the real power comes from the barrel of a gun. For those of us who grew up in the 70's, the Weathermen, Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), and Black Panthers spouted such revolutionary ideals. The big difference between then and now was politics versus racism, which is much more appealing to the masses.

Written much like a manual, (it seems like he copied pages and illustrations right out of US Army FMs) the author gives instructions on making and using weapons and explosives for guerilla warfare. Tactics are included.

He advises true revolutionaries to stay away from demonstrations. Valuable and practical advice is given on what to do if stopped or questioned by police. He advises not to talk back, argue, or resist arrest and to treat the officer with respect. That is the first step for staying out of jail. Failing that, advice is given on what to do and who to call if arrested. Unless you are a troublemaker with a record, Mom and Dad would get you out of jail as quick as any lawyer, at least in the 70's.

Wiretaps and listening devices are explained, for 70's technology. Addresses are listed for businesses that sold parts, kits, and ready to use equipment. 

Also included are recipes for making drugs, explosives, poison gas, and incendiary devices. I guess this part does make it a sort of cookbook, but unless you have serious lab experience, I would stay away from attempting to make them as he says that you will just kill yourself as well as innocent people, and I can see that happening. Many components and chemicals could be bought from the many small companies that flourish back in the day before being wiped out by the sinking economy.

Hand to hand combat is covered too, but my personal advice is that unless you spend countless hours practicing, don't think you are going to be another Bruce Lee just by reading this book. There was a deadly move mentioned though that I saw recently on a John Wick movie, so this guy must know what he is talking about.

The reason for the drug recipes was twofold. Drugs were seen then as a new (which it wasn't) recreational alternative to booze, and the drugs were very much a part of the anti-war movement of the day.

This book gives you a taste of the underground history as it was back then. Not for the squeamish.