Rating: 4/5

I read this book about 10 years ago, and have just finished reading it aloud a second time to my daughter. Generally I would only read a book twice if it were a stellar classic. I cannot say that about this book--- fine literature it is not. But it strips away my complacency on the issue of persecution of political and religious dissidents in China. It is successful in that it will not allow me to forget those imprisoned for their faith, those who desperately need to be brought before the public eye, the "least of these" who need targeted support and prayers.

This is well researched fiction, centered around the friendship of a rising corporate businessman (Ben Fielding), and his former Harvard college roommate, Quan. Both men became Christians during their college years, but the ramifications of that decision were different for them. As Ben climbed the corporate ladder, his faith waned and became dormant. Quan, on the other hand, returned to China and found his faith severely tried when he was barred from using his coveted Harvard degree because of his profession of Christianity. His faith was vibrant in direct proportion to his persecutions.

When Ben arranges a visit with his old friend in China, he is shocked to find that Quan is forced to be a lowly locksmith--- totally barred from exercising his brilliant scholarship. *SPOILER ALERT* The timing of Ben's visit to China is strategic. He witnesses the joys of Quan's very humble home life, his pride in workmanship, and the fervor of belief in the underground church. He also witnesses Quan's arrest and from the sidelines sees the torture and ultimate martyrdom of his friend. 

Ben returns home shaken, a changed man. He is able to redirect his energies and his corporate influence in such a way as to call attention to human rights violations. He is able to extricate his company from using political slaves in their factories.

Also of interest is how Ben is able to do missions-in-reverse after returning to America. He teaches and mentors and befriends Chinese university students, who---like his former college roommate--come to this country for education. He makes sure they receive a special book, a wonderful book, a dangerous book--- the Bible.