Rating: 1/5

Above: Henri Rousseau, The Dream, 1907.

In the foreword of my edition of Swiss Family Robinson, it's mentioned that readers of the time couldn't decide who they loved more: adventurous Jack, mechanical genius Fritz, studious Ernest or angelic Francis. Some still were in the camp of their ever-wise 'Papa' or industrious and faithful 'Mama'.

Well, I can decide: I hate them all equally.

I was prepared for Swiss Family Robinson to piss me off a little. I mean, to most people of color, any novel from the 19th century is bound to contain some kind of barb. You just have to let that slap land if you ever want to enjoy a piece of media from a bygone world.

But boy oh boy:  Swiss Fuckin Family Robinson.

For the first part of this book I could picture our dear Robinson family as nothing but a set of chomping, pearl-toothed mouths. They kill any new or strange thing they encounter, often for food, but sometimes with the idea of taxidermy for their museum (!) or just because they can. They spread across the conveniently verdant island like a virus, bringing European 'order' and making good Christian use of the natural resources that previously existed unmolested around them.

The 19th century cult of the museum is well at work too. The Father, journal keeper and intrepid leader of this set of fleas improvises countless native technologies, sometimes even improving on them, from his years of studying them from afar. I won't go into how offensive and ridiculous this notion is. Anyone who's ever tried to build as much as a fire-saw knows that most Indigenous techniques require practice, mentorship and specific natural resources.

The prose throughout the novel is passable, though it mostly reads like an inventory of assets the family acquires. There's never any real danger- at most a storm, the late kidnappings, and even a bear attack are all opportunities for the family to add to their hoard, or thank their faith for preserving them. 

The island itself is a strange fevered creation on Wyss' part. It contains whatever the family requires (berries for candle making, buffalo for cattle, caves for rock-salt, chests of washed-up cargo for tools to name a few) and expands every time they make a journey. I think this is actually an aspect of the book I enjoyed- Wyss makes no effort of hiding the wish-fulfillment that this 'Happy Island' is. No corpses ever wash up from their doomed voyage, no one experiences dysentery from the tropical freshwater, and only one snake is ever sighted.

If anything, this book has given me another layer of understanding of colonization. The pervading feeling of the intrepid Robinson clan is that they are improving their surroundings. The conviction is lodged deep within their beings, right next to their unshakable faith in God's plan. 

Who are the Swiss Family Robinson without these ideologies? Savages gnawing at the world with less grace than any animal on the island. Characters I certainly would not introduce to any of my future children, and a book I would question if it appeared in anyone's modern nostalgia.

I'll leave you with these words from Krista A. Thompson, from her 2006 book An Eye for the Tropics, on the subject of Rosseau's  The Dream, as pictured above. It's an image from a century later, but the flavour is the same babies.

“Rousseau’s tropical world was the imaginative concoction based in part on his dream-inducing visits to Paris’ botanical gardens. The Frenchman never visited the Americas, as he claimed, before realizing his tropical vision on canvas. Such artistic sources, along with fantastic representations of tropical nature from the natural and human sciences, helped to construct an imaginative notion of the tropics or a “dream” of tropical abundance, to use a term travelers frequently employed, which provided a model for the picturesque in the Anglophone Caribbean. […] Picturesqueness in the British Caribbean referred to the landscapes’ conformity to these exoticized and fantastic ideals of the tropical landscape. The picturesque denoted a landscape that seemed like the dream of tropical nature. 

Crucially, “picturesqueness” also frequently characterised parts of the islands that had been transplanted, ordered, or “tropicalized” variously by the British colonial government, planters, British and American corporations, and tourism promoters. As such, the picturesque […] denoted the landscape’s conformity to these colonial, imperialistic, or touristic ideals of the tropics.”