Rating: 5/5

Now, I’ve read Sixth Grade Can Really Kill You by Barthe DeClements more than once, and I must say, I have found plenty of awesomely neat things to say about it. 

For one thing, the main protagonist, 11-year-old Helen Nichols (who tells the story in the first person), sure is pretty neat, and she does have her flaws (as all of us do). Also, she is quite bright but has a reading problem (because she turns letters around), although she is good at math and sports. 

If I had to pick one or more than one part of this book that I would choose as my favorite, it would be these:

On Tuesday we had tests in spelling and health. I didn’t mind the spelling really. I knew I was going to flunk it. During most of the test, I wrote down the first three letters of a word and waited for Mrs. Lobb to go on to the next one. Unfortunately, since there were fifty words, that gave me a lot of time to be sitting up straight and smelling Warren. Why didn’t he take a bath? I felt like giving him a hard punch.
 Part of the health examination was putting the right numbers on a diagram of the digestive system. Down below the drawing were the numbers followed by words. I couldn’t read all the words, but since I knew the digestive system by heart, I could figure most of them out.
 When I wanted the number for the esophagus, I looked through all the words to find one that ended in gus. When I wanted the number for pancreas, I looked through all the words to find one that began with pan. I was so busy, it startled me when Mrs. Lobb asked us to hand our papers in because it was almost lunch time.
 “But I’m not finished!” I said right out loud.
 “Neither am I,” added Warren. I almost liked him for a minute because he was the only other one in the room who wasn’t done.
 Mrs. Lobb frowned at us for not raising our hands, thought a minute, and then said, “Well, if you don’t mind being at the end of the line, you can work until the lunch cart is ready to leave.”
 I worked like mad while the other kids filed into the hall to get their food. Jack poked me in the back to let me know when the last kid brought his tray into the classroom. I scribbled down an answer to the final question, slapped my paper on Mrs. Lobb’s desk, and went for the lunch cart. The creamed chicken over mashed potatoes was cold, but I didn’t care. I knew I wouldn’t get a good grade on the test because I couldn’t read all the directions. All I hoped was that I did enough to pass.
 The next day was social studies. Twenty-five true-or-false statements. My fingers clawed at my head as I tried to guess the big words from the little words around them. I felt a little better when Mrs. Lobb returned our health papers. All my numbers on the digestive system were right and my grade was a D-plus.
 Thursday was reading. Ten long gray paragraphs followed by questions. There wasn’t a chance. Before school was out, we got our social studies tests back. Mine was an F, of course. 
 I handed it to my mother at the door of the house. “Here’s another F. I got an F in spelling, and I know I got an F in reading today, so that makes three Fs and a D-plus. I might as well quit right now.”
 She looked quickly over the paper and then turned it face down on her desk and took in a breath. “All you can do, Helen, is your best. That’s all anyone can do. When is your arithmetic exam?’
 “Tomorrow.” I headed for my room.
 “You’ll get an A for sure. Wait a minute. Don’t you think we should go over some of the problems?"
 “No,” I told her from halfway up the stairs.
 “But . . .” She started after me.
 I beat her to my bedroom and closed my door. (p. 55-57)

I kept trying, for all the good it did me. On my report card, I got Fs in reading, spelling, and social studies, a D-plus in health, a C in arithmetic, and Ss in the rest of the subjects, except for citizenship which was a U. Under “Comments” Mrs. Lobb had written, “In danger of failing sixth grade.” (p. 69)

Recess, reading, health, and music dragged by until at last the day was over. Mrs. Lobb stood in front of the class with our cards. She called up each student in alphabetical order. Brown, Cannard, Hanson, Hinkler, Ingram. . . Jimmy grinned at me before he sat back down. He must have done all right. Jackson, Jenson, Keller, Mathews, Nichols. I stumbled getting out of my desk. When I reached for my card, it seemed almost as if Mrs. Lobb wanted to hang on to it a while. I kept my hand out until she gave it to me.
 I didn’t look at my report until I was back in my seat.
Reading—F, Spelling—F, Social Studies—F, Arithmetic—B, Health—D, P.E.—S, Art—S, Music—S, Citizenship—U. Comments: Helen is working below the sixth-grade level in the majority of her academic subjects. If she continues at her present rate of progress, she will not be promoted to junior high.
 I slapped the card face-down on my desk. (p. 100-101)

Eventually, Helen is assigned to Mr. Marshall’s room, where her friend, Louise Martin, is, and then learns of her getting help for her reading problem.

If you want to find out what happens next, I suggest you read the book to find out.

Finally, I highly recommend this book to anyone who likes stories about school, and I give it five stars (although ten stars would be even better). 😎🏫📚