Rating: 5/5

'The Narrow Road to the Deep North' is a collection of travel essays by the great Japanese poet Matsuo Basho, who invented the Haiku poetic form. This book has five essays recounting travels that Basho did at different times. All the essays have prose interspersed with poems. Sometimes the poems describe the poet's impression of a particular scene, sometimes they delve on past events and fascinating personalities, sometimes they take the story forward. 

In her introduction to the anthology of classic Japanese travel writing, 'Travels with a Writing Brush', translator Meredith McKinney says this – "The greatest pleasure a literary traveller could experience was the pleasure of arriving in person at a place hallowed in poetry. The brief scene in the early Ise Tales in which the man (traditionally identified as the poet Ariwara no Narihira) sends a poem to his beloved from distant Mount Utsu echoes down the centuries in the journals of travellers along the Tōkaidō, who continued to search out the place identified with this scene...it was not the characteristics of the place itself so much as the presence of its name in literature (and sometimes in history) that lent it special power. The term for such place names, and by extension for the places that bore those names, was utamakura (poem-pillow), and their central role in travel literature was one of its defining features. Utamakura places were in a sense sites of literary worship in a manner similar to holy places on a pilgrimage route, places where the traveller would pause in awe, perhaps recite the poem or poems associated with the site, and compose a poem in turn, often incorporating some allusive reference to that earlier poetry, almost as a pilgrim will offer up a prayer...A traveller who was moved by an utamakura site, or by seeing far overhead a flight of wild geese in an autumn evening, was moved the more deeply by partaking in an experience shared with so many others, and thereby drawn into the force field of a greater tradition that imbued his or her own insignificant and contingent experience with far richer meaning."

This passage describes Basho's travels and his essays in this book perfectly, far better than I ever can.

While we read the essays we can feel Basho's style evolving across time, till it all comes together perfectly in the title essay which is also the longest essay in the book, 'The Narrow Road to the Deep North', which is a perfect blend of prose and poetry. It starts with these famous lines – "Days and months are travellers of eternity. So are the years that pass by" – and from there onwards proceeds to reach sublime heights. Basho's prose is beautiful and poetic, and he delves into deep ideas while also displaying a fine sense of humour, occasionally mocking himself gently, which makes us smile. 

The book has an insightful introduction by the translator Nobuyuki Yuasa, in which he gives a short history of the Haiku poetic form and Basho's contribution to it. At one point, Yuasa quotes Basho's most famous haiku poem –

"Breaking the silence
Of an ancient pond,
A frog jumped into water –
A deep resonance."

And then he proceeds to give a two page commentary on it which is brilliant. 

Yuasa also gives a brief introduction to Basho's life and work, and looks at the essays in this book in detail, on the travel experiences which shaped these essays and how Basho's prose style evolves across time. 

I loved 'The Narrow Road to the Deep North'. I can't wait to read more of the Master's poetry now. 

I'll leave you with one of my favourite passages from the book. It is from the essay 'A Visit to Sarashina Village'.

"Above my head, mountains rose over mountains, and on my left a huge precipice dropped a thousand feet into a boiling river, leaving not a tiny square of flat land in between, so that, perched on the high saddle, I felt stricken with terror every time my horse gave a jerk. We passed through many a dangerous place...the road always winding and climbing, so that we often felt as if we were groping our way in the clouds. I abandoned my horse and staggered on my own legs, for I was dizzy with the height and unable to maintain my mental balance from fear. The servant, on the other hand, mounted the horse, and seemed to give not even the slightest thought to the danger. He often nodded in a doze and seemed about to fall headlong over the precipice. Every time I saw him drop his head, I was terrified out of my wits. Upon second thoughts, however, it occurred to me that every one of us was like this servant, wading through the ever-changing reefs of this world in stormy weather, totally blind to the hidden dangers, and that the Buddha surveying us from on high, would surely feel the same misgivings about our fortune as I did about the servant."

Have you read 'The Narrow Road to the Deep North'? What do you think about it?