Rating: 2/5

2.5 Stars

1) 
  Always
 google who you are going to fall in love with. 
"Reserving judgments is a matter of infinite hope."

2) For the
   love of God, 
make a 401K
"They had spent a year in France for no particular reason, and then drifted here and there unrestfully wherever people played polo and were rich together."

3) 
  Never
 swallow a thesaurus.
"I was within and without, simultaneously enchanted and repelled by the inexhaustible variety of life."

Jay Gatsby is rich - the kind of exorbitant rich that other rich people like to hang out with him, just so they can bask in his richness.

He's also in love, with one Daisy Buchanan...who's already married to one, surly, cheating and backstabbing man.

Our narrator has front row seats to all the glitz, the glam and the gore that circles around Jay Gatsby's chaotic life. (Cause, whenever you throw that much money at something, you better be prepared for something to be thrown back.)

Overall, I liked this one better the second time around. I'm a bit more familiar with the story, and I have more of a feel for the way Fitzgerald writes.

I really enjoy the character of Gatsby this time around and love Daisy a little bit less.

The one thing I disliked in round 1 (and have disliked every time I go through this novel) is the language. It just seems...SO over-the-top and flowery. 

It really just takes forever to say anything in this book. Like this: 
"So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past."

and this:
"It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up and down, as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be played again."

 AND THIS: 
"Gatsby turned out all right at the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what foul dust floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my interest in the abortive sorrows and short-winded elations of men."

Ultimately, this one was not the one for me. Maybe I'll give it another shot in a couple of years... 

YouTube | Blog | Instagram | Twitter | Facebook | Snapchat @miranda_reads