Rating: 4/5

'Sorting Out Billy' by Jo Brand was a fantastic book! It had me giggling and laughing and bawling the entire way through! It was laid-back, easy going and extremely girly!

Front Cover.
Erm. As far as front covers go, this one was a bit sh*t. And before anybody starts preaching the words, "You shouldn't judge a book by it's cover" to me, let me make it clear. I'm not judging the book by it's cover, I'm just merely giving an honest opinion and saying it's not very nice. I don't get it. Yes. There's a heart on it. And then some symbols from off a pack of playing cards surrounding the heart. And it's the most yackiest shade of green I think I have ever come across...

  

  The book's about...

So, 'Sorting Out Billy' is about three women who are close friends, Martha, Sarah and Flower. Sarah begins seeing a guy called Billy, who is a complete and utter asswipe, and who treats her like a fool. Once they get so far into their relationship, Billy becomes worse, and starts emotionally and physically hurting her. 
After Martha and Flower receive a phone call from Sarah telling them what has happened and that Billy has lifted a hand to her, the three girls meet up and talk about what needs to be done to this vile, vile man. Sarah tries her best to cover up the seriousness of what has happened, and doesn't seem willing to take it any further, but Martha and Flower have other ideas. 

Once Martha and Flower are alone again, they devise a list between them of things to do to Billy. The problem is, they have no other choice but to keep this list from out of Sarah's view.

So, the book is about three women, two of which want to split their best-friend and her abusive boyfriend up. 

  The characters were...

In my opinion, I thought the characters were perfect for the story!

You have Martha who's pregnant, but she's refusing to tell anybody who the father is. She's messy, lazy, and a complete gob-shite, especially towards her father, Brian, who she hates more than anything else in the world! Living in a particularly bad area in London, she's finding it hard to leave the house without being verbally abused or threatened by thirteen year old hooligans!

Next up is Flower. Brought into the world by hippy parents, hence the name Flower, she refuses to wear make-up and is trying her damn hardest to make it in the comedy world. As a stand-up comedian, she's travelling here and there trying to get her name known in the industry, but the problem is, people just don't find her funny! To accompany her to her gigs is her over-protective boyfriend Charlie, ready to punch up anyone who insults or laughs at his girl. Charlie is also a bit of a hippy himself, and has always wanted to have a dog. But with Flower's PMT spiralling out of control, he doesn't want to put a dog in any danger. Flower seems peaceful and at one with the world, but damn, she has one fiery temper!

Sarah is the third of the ladies. She's the one with the abusive boyfriend, the one who won't leave the house without her make-up done, or her eye-lash curlers for that matter. Sick of her friend's interfering with her relationship, Sarah is ready to make a stand. She's fine. Honestly. She's got it all under control. Billy won't take it any further than a push or a shove, surely. And she can stand up for herself anyway, right? 

  Did the author pull it off?

Damn right she pulled it off! As I said before, this book was absolutely hilarious! some of the things that Martha and Flower come up with on their list are down-right insane, but they really made me laugh until my sides hurt! All the way through the book, I just wanted to swing one in the general direction of Billy's face! Grr, piece of SH*T!

  

  Surely there must have been one bad point?

I'd say that sometimes I think the comedy was taken maybe a bit too far... Sometimes I was left sitting there like, wow, did they really just say/do that? But the majority of the time, I was giggling, so meh, that doesn't bother me too much!

  Final thoughts?

I'm just glad I didn't overlook it and picked it up! ;)