Rereading this book felt a little bit like being able to review the strange plotlines that unfold in a long and complicated dream. It's weird, but then, what else would you expect from a dream?

I think I must have read this book several times as a kid, but I remembered vibes and impressions more than specific details. The dusty yellow brick of the school buildings, the smell of boiled cabbage, and the image of Lina crouched on her bed, ready to turn into a panther and pounce, are all things that lingered with me from those original reads. I also remembered the tiny tear-droplet world at the very end, although I thought it had something to do with resolving the plot, and it's just in the epilogue. 

This book is about Tria Tesserell, a magically-Gifted girl who is sent to an academy for Gifted students. It's not at all what she expects, and the school doesn't match what she sees on the brochure at all. Plus, her roommate can turn into a panther, seems to be self-serving if not more than a little evil, and the food is terrible.

And then one of Tria's classmates kidnaps two students and imprisons them in a hell dimension, and Tria, her catgirl roommate Lina, and another student are challenged to defeat him, if they can. Things get weird. There's interdimensional travel, mirror selves, and as dreamlike as this book feels at times, it also veers into the realm of nightmarish once or twice.

I don't know if I fully grasped this book when I read it as a kid, but I found it compelling enough to reread. I still found it compelling as an adult. It's weird. It doesn't fit neatly into modern YA or middle grade categories - the tone and quick pace are maybe closer to middle grade, but Tria is 16. The world, or the hints and glimpses we get of it, remind me of Howl's Moving Castle or Studio Ghibli movies - an early 20th-century level of technology slowly supplanting magic, although magic users still exist. 

Should you read this book? Maybe, if you can find a copy. I think it's been self-published by the author due to going out of print with the original publisher. It's a weird, quick little read about a magical school and the weird power struggles that happen therein, as the main character struggles to figure out how to solve her problems, save her friends, understand the true nature of her world, and above all, do everything ethically.

(There is a little bit of fatphobic sentiment in the portrayal of Nubba, which sucks and I condemn it, but I think it's milder than a lot of other examples from the early 2000s.)