Rating: 2/5

Cyberpunk is field I never got into decades ago, when it was fresh and pertinent, and now, alas, as an SF sub-genre is seems rather … passé. I did read some cyberpunk, just as I’ve read some steampunk, but it would be fair to say these arts never “spoke to me” -- so I’m probably able to see the wood for the trees with a little more clarity than readers who’re steeped in these genres. 

Metrophage struck me as very much a first work from a writer who’d eventually go on to great things. It’s a short(ish) novel that certainly shows much potential, so it’s not surprising that Richard Kadrey went on to hit the NYT best seller list, with at least one novel filmed. I guess everyone needs to start somewhere, and Metrophage is a debut … somewhat shaky, but promising.

Perhaps it’s cyberpunk as a genre that’s tired by now: by 2018, we couldn’t exist without our tech. The only thing we don’t do yet is plug in our brains. That’s about ten more years away, along with the holographic displays you see in the Iron Man films. Metrophage dates from ’88, and at the time was out there on the cutting edge of tech, but … but …

It’s too much punk, not enough cyber. The backgrounding for the anarchistic story is wall to wall grunge, in a thoroughly despoiled Los Angeles. Everything is corroding. Everything stinks, including the people. Everything is trash, including -- yep. Halfway through, the reader is simply tired of grime, filth and “weirdness for the sake of weirdness.” 

The anarchistic storyline itself is extremely simple, overlaid by a wealth of embellishment, a world of creativity. If Kadrey had staged his story against less fetid and weird backdrops, I wonder if the plot might have be able to stand on its own, robbed of its ornament. Perhaps it would have been stronger, if the reader were not so put-off by non-stop description of trash! Or perhaps the grunge is actually a major player in the piece, and without it, Metrophage might till be languishing in a desk drawer. Good question. 

The book is hampered by fundamentally “iffy” writing, which only time and experience can cure … but which a good editor could have straightened out in 1988, if s/he had wanted to! (Example: I’ve never understood why writers must hammer constantly on a character’s name, stating it scores of times, when there is no other character in the scene. Kadrey will quote “Jonny” four times in a single paragraph, while Jonny is alone. After a while, it’s irritating. (He’s not alone in this habit, nor the worst. A terrible offender was Ernest Hemingway, whose Islands in the Stream makes me want so scream, with its use of “Thomas Hudson,” every single time Tom’s name is quoted throughout 435pp. Take out every unnecessary “Hudson” or “Thomas”, the book would have been 100pp shorter!)

Kadrey’s plot isn’t bad; but it’s a “grasshopper” story, as our Jonny travels from place to place, group to group, (too?) briefly meeting people, leaving them behind, in a kind of quest. Strip away the set dressing, this is what you’re left with: quest fiction, which is fair enough, though the novel is so brief at ~90k words, short shrift is given to each group of characters, leaving the reader dangerously uninvolved.

This has been described as “one of the quintessential 1980s cyberpunk novels,” and this does surprise me. I have to say, William Gibson did the “cyber” part better (Neuromancer, in 1984). Punk is a genre I’ve read, but didn’t keep the paperbacks and honestly can’t recall any of them, after thirty years. In order words, I wasn’t terribly impressed. In fact, the cyberpunk that did make a huge impression on me was Mel Keegan’s Mindspace, which lived on its “cyber,” and didn’t overdo the “punk.”

The last remark I’ll make on Metrophage is, if this is your kind of thing … buy a copy. The freebie epub is such a mess of typos and assorted typesetting gaffes, the sheer volume of errors jeopardizes the “reading experience.” Pay a few bucks, maybe pick it up used (not that Amazon is a great place to shop for used books now. $1.29 for the book, sure; plus $3.99 for shipping. Ouch). 

Two stars or three? I’m hovering around 2.5, because Metrophage is inventive, fast paced, and in its day must have been quite visionary. I don’t *not* recommend it, but … know what you’re getting into!