Rating: 4/5

With the reignited public interest in Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz thanks to "Being the Ricardos", a high-profile TCM podcast, and an upcoming Amy Poehler documentary, 1993's "Desilu" by Coyne Steven Sanders and Tom Hilbert has been reprinted again, following 2001 and 2011 reissues. Part corporate biography, part dual celebrity biography, "Desilu" covers both the history of the Desilu studio and the lives and careers of its founders, Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball, giving interesting insights into all three. While neither the company nor its two principals escape unscathed, the biographers do a relatively good balance of presenting the good and bad of all. (That balancing grows a tad thin toward the end when the writers quote someone who was thrown out of the company after say, 25 years, and then follow up that example of cruelty with someone saying, "But Lucy could also be loyal." We get it. For four hundred pages we have examples of her bring a contradiction. Enough.) But to their credit, the writers don't do a fan piece; this isn't a book that glosses over the stars' personal demons nor does it play armchair psychiatrist and attempt to understand either. (This also is not the place to go for insights into every I Love Lucy episode as very few details about specific episode are included. The details focus more on how its production operated than backstage gossip) Later biographies--book, podcast, and other--have mined this book for content since its initial publication 30 years ago so some may find it old news to even casual Lucy or/and Desi fans. But in its telling of three powerhouses, it ends up being very moving--from how Desilu became so big it overwhelmed the Desi/Lucille marriage, through the divorce that may have legally ended their marriage but may not have ended their love for one another. Informative, yes. Touching? Definitely. Gripping? Absolutely. A perfect balance that could have gone wrong but, skillfully, stays readable and fascinating, page after page.