Rating: 5/5

Dee Jen-djieh was a real magistrate in the Tang Dynasty. Some of Robert van Gulik’s novels featuring his version of Judge Dee are based on ancient manuscripts describing certain cases and some, like The Emperor’s Pearl seem to be plausible, but fictitious. Despite a title suggesting some royal treasure, Judge Dee’s inclination is to dismiss the “pearl” as a convenient piece of legend to cover up other crimes. Is the murder of a dragon boat race crew’s drummer tied to Tang-era “sports betting?” Is the murder of a young, second wife of a nobleman a vengeance killing or a sadistic assault? Are these and other crimes tied to the kidnapping of a local courtesan? Who is the woman who can defeat the judge at fisticuffs? Who is the individual who wants to offer a human sacrifice to the idol of the river goddess? In less than 200 pages, including the ink drawings in the style of Chinese sketches of the era (drawn by van Gulik himself), Judge Dee unravels these mysteries and more.

The Emperor’s Pearl is a legendary artifact that was supposed to have been removed from the royal court decades ago. Judge Dee is convinced that this was a specious use of the legend to entice a greedy individual to a lonely place and abscond with the exorbitant price that could be exacted for such a treasure. He is also convinced that all of the extraordinary crimes taking place in the area converge around the same motive, but he is very challenged—right up to the “unmasking” of the villain in a meeting of all the suspects (at least, those still alive at that point) that wouldn’t be that out of place in an English countryside drawing room mystery. There’s even a faux supernatural bit with a disembodied hand that doesn’t exactly work out as the judge had hoped. 
Don’t get me wrong, though. This isn’t and English countryside mystery with a veneer of Chinese cultural ornamentation. Van Gulik is exact in his scholarship down to details of dress and customs. As in the last Judge Dee novel I read, The Chinese Nail Mystery, I particularly enjoyed the way van Gulik describes the morning tribunal sessions. In this one, I appreciated the descriptions of social interaction within these polygamous marriages. I especially like the domino game with his wives which had a more portentous result than initially expected. 

As The Emperor’s Pearl turns out, Judge Dee isn’t nearly as “omniscient” as his protagonist of comparison, Sherlock Holmes. Judge Dee’s investigation proves successful, but there are several assumptions which prove groundless. Despite those assumptions, however, the story wraps up with satisfying poetic justice for the main perpetrator and solves two older mysteries, as well. For me, it was one of the finest conclusions to a mystery ever.