Rating: 4/5

Sometimes it takes a while to get there. There, could be anywhere of course and might even be mythical. Our hero Peter Matthiessen is found, at a rather earlier age, in the spiritual middle of the Amazon struggling to find meaning amid odds a civilized man like himself can't but struggle to overcome.

Divided into roughly three sections, The Cloud Forest, is as much a travelogue as it is an anthropological study of differing cultures and lost worlds. The first section is the affable telling of getting to and into the Amazon on a commercial boat. Here PM encounters his first Culture. He describes seafaring characters and the attendant struggles at ports and with navigation and schedules that must be endured while a sense of community and commerce evolves on the ship. It is a picturesque telling and is a nice contrast to going up the River rather than down.

The second section is a wholly different South America. This one starts at Cuzco and winds itself through the Southern states on a search for the Cape of Good Hope, which PM never sees. (yes he does not make it to Hope) It is about the Wild West of the white ranchers and the degradation and marginalization of native cultures who clash hopelessly against the territorial and resource gobbling "civilized" society. After a while he wanders back into Brazil, finding and leaving an old shipmate, and once more Cuzco and eventually the lonely halls of Machu Pichu.

It's at this point, at the behest earlier of a shady character named Cesar Cruz, that PM and an adventurous companion named Andres set out in search of some Inca ruins and a gigantic fossilized jaw bone.

Throughout this downstream journey PM steps his descriptive and emotional prose into high gear. In fact add 50 more pages of description to this third section and a condensed but longish intro of the earlier material to the front and the Cloud Forest would join the Snow Leopard as a must read on anyone's bookshelf.

The journey is long and hot and sticky and muddy and rainy and dangerous and full of evil smells and contrasting beautiful flora. PM and Andres meet many unsavory characters as they work their way down the river. The haciendas with their not exactly enslaved tribal members feel like something out of Apocalypse Now, and the Land Owners seem shifty at best. Filled with challenges and moments of self doubt PM and Andres with an ever-shifting cast of vaguely dangerous companions make it to a spiritual doorway that will possibly glide them to safer territory.

In this different territory they become friendly with some missionaries who guide them in a motorized canoe to a jungle town where they devise plans to obtain the fossil and after meeting up with Cruz come to realization that they have missed the ruins. Which is perhaps the definition of culture in this land of poverty among the colors of exceptional beauty. It seems everyone from the colonists to the natives somehow never quite makes it to the boat.

This book seems like a hard won effort to write an adventure story like many before detailing the out of place European in the unforgiving landscape of South America. However, without this writing I don't believe PM would have had the ability to write At Play in the Fields of the Lord, Dry Tortuga, or The Snow Leopard.

I would like to give this 3.5 stars with caveat that if you want to know where some of his other works had their beginnings here would be a great to place to begin. Instead I gave it 4 because it is still a great place to start and GR only allows for whole ratings. Grrrr.