Rating: 3/5

I love how convoluted this ending was. The Bone killed Sandy out of possessiveness n jealousy n her need for co-dependency, but she achieved it by allowing Chub to keep his muse in Sandy, only now in a way that served her. Does that make sense? She killed Sandy because Chub was enamored with Sandy and SANDY was the one who brought him the inspiration to write again, NOT her; even though Sandy was just a pretty, surface girl who could never write like them. Even though all they did was write together and all they did was write. She killed Sandy i think just as much for his benefit as she did her own… (maybe.) i suppose it’s pretty implied that she wasn’t pleased with Chub’s reaction to knowing it was her who killed Sandy because she wanted him to return to his dependency on her and he didn’t. If I assume she did it knowing he’d use her as a story, it takes away the chill of him actually doing the act, and the implication that he’s abandoned all humanity in favor of his writing. And that’s the best part of the book- art is inherently so self-centered(especiallyyyy writing)- so Chub’s final portrayal being so evilly self-serving sat very well with me. Especially when you think of his life throughout the book and realize him being a ‘good person’, so highlighted prior, only happened around moments of inspiration, career success, and time with his daughter. Especially once she was gone, the book makes my stomach flip when it became obvious Chub was always this star-seeking sociopath; never appearing as himself, only getting so close as to make stories out of people. So how much then, really, is The Bone’s fault? I love that he judges her and sees her differently after finding out what she did, when she did it for him because it’s what he’s always wanted, and she’s the only one who ever knew him so deeply as to truly know that. The ending/his reaction goes so far as to argue because it was only a matter of time before he did it himself. Writer’s block comes when things are good; all of my favorite writers are pretty bad people — shame.