Rating: 4/5

I've read The Collected Stories of William Trevor, and a couple of his late-career novels, but I've never read any of his early works, and The Boarding House is one. I think it was his third novel. Set near London, it is about the inhabitants of a boarding house established by one William Wagner Bird, who dies at the start, leaving behind a will giving the boarding house to two of its inhabitants, Nurse Clock and Mr. Studdy, who have been for years mortal enemies. Nurse Clock was nursing Mr. Bird, the last person with him at his death, sees herself as a great healer, although she fails to abide by Mr. Bird's last requests, and being left the house taps into her hidden viciousness and avarice. Mr. Studdy is a con man, a thief, a nasty man who preys on people by writing anonymous letters threatening them with some secret he thinks he's discovered about them and demanding money for his silence. The will requires the boarding house be run as it has been run, and everyone's places are safe, but soon, these mortal enemies will work to put away their enmity in order to try and subvert the will's intention and effect Clock's desire to remake the boarding house into a home for the aged. Which means these two want all the tenants gone. The tenants in the house were each handpicked by Mr. Bird, and he kept a journal about his tenants, revealing his views of them. Each is a social casualty, unhappy or lonely, fighting their pasts or their presents, their quirks rather than their characters dominating. Mr. Bird's secret motto had been: "I build that I may destroy," and perhaps that is what he intended to effect by leaving the house to Clock and Studdy. The tenants are varied and interesting - in addition to Nurse Clock and Mr. Studdy, there is Major Eele, who loves strip-tease revues featuring black women; Miss Clerricot, who hates her face and is embarrassed all of her life and wants just one amorous adventure; Tome Obd, a Nigerian exile who came to Britain to become a doctor but does not accomplish that, and for twelve years has left letters and flowers for a woman with whom he used to play ping-pong who does all she can to avoid him; Venables, who cries easily and suffers stomach pain; Mr, Scribbin, who loves to listen to recordings of trains; and Miss Cave who constantly imagines her dead mother. There is a very dark fairy-tale feel to the novel, irony and awfulness combined seamlessly, and the idea of a boarding house that might confer some idea of fraternity among its tenants, feels more like a zoo where the small defenseless animals might be gobbled up. These lonely middle-aged and elder waifs are always fighting their fates, and with the ascendance of Clock and Studdy, their fates are even more precarious. In Trevor's stories, there is such realism and sympathy, and there is great sympathy for these characters too, but a great deal of marvelous blackness as well.