Rating: 4/5

Update - I tried to re-read this book as a lead-in to re-reading the whole series (there are new books!) and I just couldn't get through it. Maybe it's my age now versus when I originally read it, or maybe it's something else, but this time around I got about half way through before deciding it wouldn't get any less cringey and I put it down. 

As other reviewers have stated, this book reads a bit like a mid-life crisis sex fantasy. It feels like there's almost no internal monologue or character interaction that isn't describing, judging, or imagining someone based on their looks or sexual veracity, with many of those characters being still in high school. Giving Hamilton the benefit of the doubt, I think those characters may very-well be that randy/narcissistic and their unfiltered thoughts are probably not too far from teenagers and similar people in real life, but it was just too much for me as a reader.

----- Original Review:

I was almost scared away by the 2 star review this book seems to carry with it, but I'm glad I picked it up anyway. 

Misspent Youth was a departure(albeit a pleasant one)from the space operas I expect from Hamilton. A core group of three or four characters all interacting to form a fairly dysfunctional family experience character development and individual changes that his stories don't usually get the opportunity to delve too deeply into considering how much is always going on with as many characters as are usually involved in a typical Hamilton plot.

You will love and hate all of the characters at some point, and by the end, you'll really come to appreciate how important they all are to one another.

What I really enjoyed about this book was the focus on the characters living their lives through the short window the story covers. Typically in most Sci-fi I've read, certainly in most of Hamilton's books, the story is one of heroes accomplishing extraordinary things in a high tech world; here is a story that just took a family, put them in the not-too-distant future, and looked at how life would be different. Even the main character's major lifetime accomplishment, the one which garners all his current status, occurs before we meet him. To be sure, there are some out of the norm things happening to this group, but for the most part, it's not their doing. They are just normal people who have found themselves in fairly understandable circumstances in a different, but not un-relatable world.