Rating: 4/5

Note, July 13, 2024: I've just added some material to this review, partly copied-and-pasted from a comment by fellow Goodreader Brian E. Reynolds in the Works of Thomas Hardy group, briefly explaining the differences in content between different editions of this collection.

Thomas Hardy was born in 1840 in Dorset, a county in southwestern England, and grew up there. He was deeply steeped in the rhythms and folkways of traditional rural life --which still largely survived in his childhood, and into his young manhood-- in England's southwest (and tended to regret their passing away, as a result of the increasing pressures towards cultural homogenization and economic centralization in the later 19th century, driven by the agenda of the rising industrial economic elite). Most, if not all (I'd say all, but I haven't read all of it, though I've read all of his major novels) of his fiction is set in the southwestern counties, which in much of his corpus becomes his fictional county of Wessex, named after the early medieval domain of the West Saxons. (Names of localities in his works are typically changed from the real-life ones --Oxford, for instance, becomes "Christminster"-- but the real-life localities and geographical relationships are clearly recognizable to anyone who's familiar with that part of England.) All six of the stories here are set in Wessex, and though the collection was originally published in 1888, the circumstances and flavor of the tales suggest a setting decades earlier (and draw in some cases on real-life events he was told about as a child, which he refers to in his short Preface).

"A story must be exceptional enough to justify its telling. We tale-tellers are all Ancient Mariners, and none of us is warranted in stopping Wedding Guests (in other words, the hurrying public) unless he has something more unusual to relate than the ordinary experience of every average man and woman," Hardy wrote in 1893. IMO, the stories here pass that test with flying colors. Their tone is often (though not always) somber and pessimistic; and I've now come to share the critical consensus that Hardy ascribes a major role in shaping his characters' situations to Fate. He's also pessimistic about the ability of many humans to live up to their better potential (since his view of Fate doesn't deny that his characters make choices --and often unwise and/or selfish ones--that influence their circumstances, and those of others). But it's clear that he wishes that they would, and has no problem with thinking that they should; his fiction is guided by a moral compass which, one would surmise, probably came from his childhood rearing. Of course, it's a moral compass that also leads him to be critical of hypocrisy and injustice in Victorian society.

The three most memorable individual stories here, for me, were "The Three Strangers," "The Withered Arm," and my personal favorite, "The Distracted Preacher," whose title character is a high-principled Methodist minister who becomes pastor of a seaside congregation in a community where smuggling is a mainstay of livelihood for many of the people. (Though raised in the Anglican church, the adult Hardy was a religious skeptic who wished he could believe, but couldn't; but his treatment of a clergyman protagonist here is sympathetic rather than hostile.) Smugglers' tactics here are depicted with a realism born of listening to real-life oral descriptions from a former smuggler, who in later life worked for Hardy's father. (I'd previously read the first two stories named above; the first one was actually my introduction to Hardy's work, back in high school.) Themes/messages which appear in the stories of this collection include dysfunctional marital and family relationships, the destructive effects of pride and of misunderstanding between people, the oppressive effects of the legal system on the rural poor, and implicit criticism of the double standard of sexual morals which acquitted males and penalized women. Several of the tales reflect regional customs and folklore, such as the idea that the touch of a newly-hanged criminal's dead hand had power to cure certain physical ailments ("The Withered Arm"). In general, Hardy's literary style can fairly be called an effective blend of Romantic and Realist; he seeks to (and does) produce an emotional effect on the reader, but also to produce a true picture of real life in his setting, which gives the stories a strong feel of regionalist Realism, and the one goal seems to be as strong as the other. (Some readers might view "The Withered Arm" as supernatural fiction, but I personally believe that the author saw the phenomena depicted as purely psychological in origin.) Though some were more memorable than others, I found all six of the stories to be worthwhile reads.

The six-story version of Wessex Tales which I read is the 1896 edition, which adds the story "An Imaginative Woman" (first published in 1894) to the other five included in the collection's initial publication in 1888. In a third edition published in 1912, he reversed that decision, deleting "An Imaginative Woman" from that edition, but adding two other stories, "A Tradition of Eighteen Hundred and Four" and "The Melancholy Hussar of the German Legion." These three also appear in various editions of another collection he published in his lifetime, Life's Little Ironies.