Rating: 4/5

In this book, Thomas Sowell coolly dissects the phenomenon of race and gender preferences, usually identified in this country with the euphemism "affirmative action," as this phenomenon exists around the world.

Sowell begins with countries where the racial group which exercised political power voted itself formal racial preferences. Sowell is able to identify only a few examples under this rubric: the pre-1960s American South, pre-1990s South Africa, which remained under apartheid control when Sowell wrote his book, and some places in India. Sowell's most remarkable finding perhaps is that the only effective resistance to either system was led by private enterprise. This finding should not surprise anyone. Discrimination imposes costs. For example, it is more expensive to provide separate railroad cars for blacks and whites than it is simply to put everyone together. Similarly, the costs of overlooking the best applicant for a job in favor of a less qualified applicant with the proper skin tone should be obvious. These costs make private business and the free enterprise system the natural enemies of irrational racial discrimination.

Sowell proceeds to analyze those more numerous instances where a political minority has been voted preferences over members of more numerous and successful groups. Sowell fails to consider the extent to which Public Choice theory may account for these programs. Public choice theory recognizes that where the benefits of a program are concentrated among members of a motivated minority, while the costs are diffused widely among the public at large, the minority can wield outsized influence over the program in question. This idea explains why many unpopular and unjust programs, including racial preferences and most government "pork barrel" programs, remain in place despite widespread public opposition. This failure is perhaps the most obvious shortcoming of the book.

Sowell finds that the justifications for preference programs tend to be similar from country to country. These justifications include the claim that preferences are only temporary, are needed to lift up underprivileged people, are small in scope, and merely compensate their beneficiaries for past discrimination going the other way. Sowell shows that these justifications are, at best, illusions based upon faulty assumptions and research. I would go farther and say that at least among those who have any knowledge as to how preferences work, such arguments are not mere illusions, but rather knowing lies on the part of people trying to defend a policy they know cannot be defended.

Sowell concludes by arguing that all of the various "illusions" offered by the proponents of preferential policies should be discarded in favor of cold, hard facts. It would be even better simply to adhere rigorously to the principle of equal standing under the law. This principle is so self-evidently fair and reasonable that very few people openly challenge it, no matter how strenuously they may seek to defend preferences.

Preferential Policies: An International Perspective was published in 1990. As a result, it necessarily is somewhat dated. Indeed, most books on public policy would be completely archaic after 26 years had passed. One of the depressing things about racial preferences, however, is that very little has changed over the years. The defenders of preferences have been engaged in a decades-long program of massive resistance against equal protection under the law, and have chosen to employ invective over rational discussion. As a result, the issues and arguments have hardly changed, and Sowell's book remains useful and informative.