Rating: 5/5

As always the editor prepares a summary of the last year in science fiction and provides great introductions for all stories. 

Rachel In Love by Pat Murphy: 5	
The story of a chimpanzee that has had her personality (and memories?) altered to be like a researcher's daughter and the event that follow after his death. 

Dream Baby by Bruce McAllister: 5	
A story set in the Vietnam war about what people can accomplish with powers obtained when pushed to their breaking point

Flowers of Edo by Bruce Sterling: 4.5	
A peculiar encounter where a samurai and a comedian have with the spirit/ghost of progress.

Forever Yours, Anna by Kate Wilhelm: 5	
A man that studies hand-writing and his obsession with a woman after having studies her handwriting as part of a case in the theft of secret technology.

At the Cross-Time Jaunter's Ball by Alexander Jablokov: 5	
A critic of realities/alternate worlds runs for his life after an artist took his crticism a bit too seriously. 

Dinosaurs by Walter Jon Williams: 5	
2nd best story of the anthology: A political story between the encounter of future humans with an alien species that have the values and beliefs humans once had. 

Perpetuity Blues by Neal Barrett, Jr.: 4.5	
The story of a girl that is able to finally escape her upbringings thanks to her talents and the help of a peculiar man.

The Temporary King by Paul J. McAuley: 4	
A fugitive from an advance society tries to con a group of people and a young girl from a less advanced society into sheltering him.

Buffalo Gals, Won't You Come Out Tonight by Ursula K. Le Guin: 3.5	
A girl's journey back to human society after she is taken in by a group of animals after a plane crash.

The Pardoner's Tale by Robert Silverberg: 5	
The loss of a duel and subsequent capture of a hacker forces him to confront the consequences of his past actions.

Glass Cloud by James Patrick Kelly: 4	
Aliens pull-strings to get a human architect to design the tomb of an alien God.

The Evening And The Morning And The Night by Octavia E. Butler: 5	
The story of a hereditary disease that began as a side-effect of the cure for cancer and the experiences of some of the people that have to live with it.

Night Of The Cooters by Howard Waldrop: 3	
What if the aliens from War of the Worlds had landed in Texas? They get blown to pieces...

Angel by Pat Cadigan: 4	
A woman and her alien friend are kidnapped by a woman that had developed a close relationship with the same alien in the past.

Shades by Lucius Shepard: 3	
A story about a ghost of a US soldier killed in the Vietnam brought back to life as a ghost.

The Faithful Companion At Forty by Karen Joy Fowler: 5	
Ke-mo sah-bee's reflection at the age of forty make him realize that there are more kinds of people than leaders and followers

Candle In A Cosmic Wind by Joseph Manzione: 5	
3rd best story of the anthology: A meditation on the fragility of life.

The Emir's Clock by Ian Watson: 5	
The soon to be Emir receives a vision which catapults his emirate to the forefront of technological progress. 

Ever After by Susan Palwick: 4	
A vampire adoptive mother does all she can to protect her daughter in a religious society.

The Forest Of Time by Michael Flynn: 5	
A compelling story about a what if the US had never been formed and the way different people from this alternate reality would react to the arrival from a person of our (more technologically advance) reality.

The Million-Dollar Wound by Dean Whitlock: 4	
Watch how advances in medicine reshape the meaning of a phrase used by soldiers forces to return over and over to combat.

The Moon Of Popping Trees by R. Garcia y Robertson: 3	
3rd worst story of the anthology: The story of some outcasts seeking refuge from the white men. They find it on another planet and they get there thanks to a peculiar alien.

Diner by Neal Barrett, Jr.: 2	
1st worst story of the anthology: A man wants to throw a 4th of July party at a diner located in Chinese controlled Texas.

All the Hues of Hell by Gene Wolfe: 3	
2nd worst story of the anthology: A couple along with their android and (pet?) macaw encounter dark matter lifeforms

Halley's Passing by Michael McDowell: 4.5	
A tag-along with a force-of-nature-serial-killer obsessed with not falling into patterns

America by Orson Scott Card: 5	
1st best story of the anthology: A tale about how the almost full expulsion of Europeans from the American continent came to be.

For Thus Do I Remember Carthage by Michael Bishop: 3.5	
A roman man comes to terms with scientific knowledge brought by his long-lost son.

Mother Goddess of the World by Kim Stanley Robinson: 4	
A story about a race to the summit of Everest to find the body of a famous British explorer between a group of British climbers, a filmmaker guided by a Tulku Lama and a US documentary crew.