Rating: 4/5

It's long been an observation that Westerns are Romance Novels for men, with many of the same beat patterns and relationship woes - cowboys finding women, losing women due to the harshness of the land, and winning them back - running alongside their long ubiquity and similar length on the bookshelves. Sackett takes that one step further. 

Sackett is what you get when Nora Roberts writes a Conan pastiche. And I mean this as very high praise. 

Conan is an iconic hero: just simply more physically capable and in tune with nature than most men, he carries in him a deep philosophical code that powers his ability to restore the world to its rightful order when he lives by it. Sackett is the same: L'Amour is quick to let you know that Sackett is not just physically powerful, a crack shot and kilt him a bar when he was only 3, but also that he is an incorruptible spirit of the civilizing power of the United States - his family fought for the US in every war, wouldn't turn traitor in the recent conflict, and driven not just improve himself at every opportunity (improving his literacy by pounding through legal philosophy texts) but also to carve out towns that would run by the rule of law and would allow the coddled Eastern folk he occasionally derides to walk the street in peace and prosperity. (In all this he is a reverse Conan, who survives by Barbarian purity in a world where civilization is decadent and corrupt.) 

Through this he has an romance very much of the Nora Roberts (to my mind the queen of the romance novels) vein, just with the steamy scenes cut to make room for gunfights. 

It's a very satisfying book. It's not complicated, but what depth is there is well thought out and grounded in a real love of the land and country. There's a very clever treasure map that I am so stealing to use in a D&amp;D game at some point, desperados, a lost gold mine, foolish young gunslingers, wise old coots, evil land grabbers and even a pipe smoking old mother at home in her rocking chair. Sackett has everything any western could ever need.