Rating: 3/5

The writing and illustrations are fantastic however I had a really hard time believing the entire concept of the plot which is that Sam (Samantha) is a "reckless liar". Let me give you a little rundown of the story. Sam is the daughter of a fisherman who dreams rich and lovely dreams--moonshine, her father says. But when her tall stories bring disaster to her friend Thomas and her cat Bangs, Sam learns to distinguish between moonshine and reality.- Goodreads book description 

There are other reviewers who agree with me about the concept and those reviewers weren't difficult to find so I know I'm not alone in thinking this about the plot. Sam says many tall tales, especially to her friend Thomas. Some of the things Sam says are that her mother is a mermaid, she has a pet lion, her pet cat, Bangs, can talk, and she has a carpet pulled by dragons. However, these aren't lies, they are part of an active imagination of a lonely little girl. In the story young Thomas believes these stories and the climax of the story, Thomas actually becomes endangered because of one of these stories but I still don't buy it because I have 3 kids and none of my children would actually believe any of these stories after the age of, at the maximum age 5, and at that age they shouldn't be outside unsupervised. Yes, maybe I am looking at this way to literal but I just had too much trouble with Sam getting in trouble for telling these stories, or moonshine, as her father calls it because what the reader actually finds out is Sam's mother has died and she is lonely, experiencing grief, and having a difficult time coping with her loss. Her father won't talk to her about her feelings of grief and the loss of her mother. Sam doesn't really have any friends her age so she uses her imagination to cope with her loss. Sam's father tells her to stop telling "moonshine" rather than sit down and actually talk to her about her feelings.

I haven't used this in the classroom but if I did I would be certain to discuss why Sam was telling these stories in the first place. I used to work in a Catholic school that had a small curriculum for character development and this would be a good book to use when learning about grief and how to cope or when there are national tragedies that now seem to happen on a regular schedule and are totally normalized. In my opinion, using the book with the exact themes that the author was aiming to convey are a little extreme for the age group that this book is aimed for. I flip flopped between a 3-4 star rating and decided on a 3 star rating because the themes and plot are hard lined and, like I said, not lying...she was using her imagination and being creative to cope with some difficult feelings. 3 stars.