Rating: 2/5

This was okay, not great but not bad either. Overall it was cute but it was over so quickly and didn't have the ending I was expecting. It's shorter than the average kid's book and I could feel it as I thought more would happen as it was wrapping up. There was also an element of repetition that I don't like in books, with each new character saying the same lines so it gets old fast.

All of the animals said "A tortoise out in winter? Ridiculous!" and then laughed in whatever speech they have. So the duck went "Ha-quack-ha!" And the dog said "Ha-woof-ha!" The cat said "Ha-meow-ha!" The bird said "Ha-cheep-ha!"

The illustrations were okay, not really to my liking though. They're really simple drawings, a loose, sketchy style that I don't really like but they're not bad.

It was amusing that Shelley's parents were telling her it was time for bed now that winter was here, and she said she wasn't sleepy and didn't want to go to bed. She asked why tortoises sleep for the winter and it was just like a human kid, always questioning things. 

Mr. Tortoise fell asleep and not long after Mrs. Tortoise fell asleep, and it was funny that not long after that Shelley left to see what winter was like. As soon as she did she met a duck that said it was ridiculous for a tortoise to be outside. The duck challenged her to break through the ice with a beak to get food like he can. 

A dog told her to keep warm by running around like he can, and the image showed 5 blurred dog images as he ran around. That was pretty comical as was the disconcerted look on Shelley's face as she watched. But I thought a dog would have a better thing to do than running around to stay warm. Just running through the snow would have been enough. 

There was a cat who climbed a tree to get away from the dog, and the cat was huge! Like colossal, and it looked exactly like the cat from Alice in Wonderland. Her dare was for Shelley to run inside a warm house as fast as she can. I expected a better ability from a cat, because that wasn't very good. 

A bird told her to fly home and cuddle up with her family. Shelley said she couldn't fly, when she can't even hop. She started to cry thinking of her family, announced that they're all right and a tortoise out in winter is ridiculous. That was sad and I felt bad for her.

Idk what I expected to happen next, but it's not what did happen. I guess I thought she would realize her purpose, but crazily enough, she slid on some ice and ended up playing out the actions of all the other animals better than they did. She ended up falling down the hill faster than the dog could run, faster than a cat. Then she hit a bump and went flying in the air like a bird. The illustrations had shown the dog watching her, and the cat watching her, dismayed. But it didn't show the bird. What's up with that? If all the other animals were going to watch her beating them, why didn't the bird see her fly??

She landed back at the pond where she'd started, where the duck laughed at her for not being able to break the ice that had covered the hole in her shed. Shelley realized she could break the ice using her shell, so somehow with her walking forward she was able to build up enough momentum to break through the ice... I didn't even understand how ice had formed over the hole in the wall anyway..I was disappointed in her grand purpose. But the picture of her tumbling through the air with legs splayed out and ice flying around her was funny. 

Her parents were sleeping in a big wooden house each, and I was wondering why they were doing that because tortoises wouldn't live inside a shed in real life. They should have been in their natural homes. But anyway, her mom heard her and asked if she'd been outside. Shelley was like "A tortoise out in winter? Ridiculous!" which was supposed to be funny that she used the same line everyone had been using on her, but she should have been honest and said she had gone outside and experienced winter like she'd wanted to, and she survived. That would have proved to her parents that she did have abilities even in the winter. But the whole thing kind of proved her parents right because she ended up falling asleep and the whole time she was realizing what she couldn't do, she couldn't do any of what the other animals could. And her strength ended up being something totally random that turtles aren't known for, it's not an ability they have, and no one would expect...for them to use their shell to break through ice so they can get into a home they wouldn't even have in the first place. 

It missed the mark but I guess it shows kids that even though you can't do what other people can, you can find the one thing that you can do. That's about the only takeaway, and there was some slight humor.