Rating: 2/5

Six years have passed since The Vampire Prince and the vampires are at war with the vampaneze. Along comes Mr. Tiny, bearing an ominous look into the future. Darren, Mr. Crepsley, and Harkat Mulds are dispatched on a mission to do the impossible; find and kill the Lord of the vampaneze. If they should fail, the destruction of the vampire world will be on their hands.

Plot

Though I found the overall plot of Hunters of the Dusk boring, I’m glad I didn’t have to sit through the six years that Darren was stuck inside of Vampire Mountain. The short amount of time with Darren inside Vampire Mountain in The Vampire Prince was more than enough, six years honestly might have killed me. And it’s sad to say, the plot in this book was boring as the last one and didn’t pick up until the very end. The same thing happened in The Vampire Prince; the majority of the book is about preparing for something and the last part is action packed. I wasn’t as enthused to read this book since it has a same sort of feeling as The Vampire Prince. At the very least, the story is finally, finally moving forward. It’s taken many set up books but at least the end is in the horizon.

In Hunters of the Dark, after a six year time skip, Darren and the vampires are at war with the vampaneze. Mr. Tiny shows up and really gets the ball moving. This is good, but it feels forced. And then Darren &amp; Co. go out into the world to search for the Vampaneze Lord. The majority of the book is just them travelling around; that’s where the boring part comes from.

Writing

The writing was lackluster. If a writer has to include things into their book that isn’t very thrilling, they need to be able to make it exiting anyways. I’ve said before in and earlier review of one of the books in this series that Shan doesn’t do this particularly well. Usually he just skips over these parts, but when he can’t and has to write them, the reader suffers. His writing is still good, I’d probably never say it wasn’t, but when he’s not introducing new things or writing action scenes, Shan’s writing isn’t very engaging. 

Characters

I feel very odd about Darren. He’s mentally around twenty-five, I believe, yet he still thinks rather foolishly. The scene where he’s going through the Purge is the best example I’ve seen. He’s actually talking to his reflection like a toddler; not like a child but more like a baby. I don’t know if Shan wrote that part for laughs or what but it wasn’t all that funny. We know Darren is smarter than that so I don’t know why that scene was dragged out for more than a second where Darren should have been startled at first but then quickly realized that it was his reflection.

We have two reoccurring characters: Mr. Crepsley and Harkat Mulds. Even though Darren is supposed to have a close relationship with the two of them, once again, it’s not really shown. It’s not like Shan doesn’t know how to write friendships, he did it easily with Darren’s friendship between Steve, Evra, and Sam. I guess because they are more adult characters.

And we meet a new main character, the missing Prince Vancha March. The first few chapters with Vancha made me not really like him. He was obnoxious and it feels like his personality was played up too much. I can see the potential in him and liked him a bit close to the end of the book.

Things I Didn't Like

My biggest problem with Hunters of the Dusk was how boring it was. It was just dull. I hope the action picks up again the next book, because it’ll be difficult going through five more books like this. There’s not much more to say about that.

The other problem I had with the book was how I noticed the female characters are treated. There are six women total in the Cirque du Freak series thus far that have at least one line of dialogue and names. They are Mrs. Shan, Mrs. Leonard, Mrs. Hemlock, Debbie, Arra Sails, and Evanna (who is introduced in this book). The first three women have no other roles except to be mothers for a short period of time. Debbie and Arra Sails are both love interests, Arra of which who is killed to incite man-pain in Mr. Crepsley. Evanna, we are told, was created so that vampires could have babies with her. IF a vampire wants to have a baby, she is the only person who can carry it. This is a terrible ensemble of female characters. Yes, Arra and Evanna are powerful in their own right but Arra was defeated and killed and Evanna is was literally created just to be a vampire baby-maker! Why are there no good, well-rounded female characters that actually have some purpose to the story?

Diversity

Evanna is a woman who is introduced to the reader. She is strong and powerful but the way her existence is explained is a bit problematic. And there’s honestly not all that much of her in the book to be seen. Other than that, no other diverse characters come to mind. 

Overall

If I had to describe Hunters of the Dark with one word, it would probably be “forced”. The plot is forced forward by Mr. Tiny. The writing feels forced. This books just wasn’t enjoyable to me. This is another bridge book and there are already too many in this series for me to be sympathetic towards it. 

Here is a link to my notes.