Rating: 5/5

Complete 5 Golden Stars

things have changed...

it's not simple anymore, not simple right and wrong, not games.
it's deeper and darker.
characters getting mature &amp; wiser.

it might have Spoilers for the Previous books

after the last moment fiasco, things has changed, Pendragon was going to the next territory, the one his friend had not come back from, the one St. Dane might be there, plotting.
the most bizarre territory of all, Eelong.

On the other hand, in Second Earth, Mark &amp; Courtney faced their new responsibilities to help Bobby. and they discovered something that caused them to do the forbidden, the thing Bobby insisted not to do, but what can they do? it's critical to let someone know. There is no other way.

from now on, the parts in the middle is not just an ordinary Second Earth linkers between Bobby's adventure.

each page filling with thrills, shocking information about the territory, constant dangers, unexpected bitter truths, adventurous events (for readers!) and Fun! (because it's Bobby, of course! just by using the right choice of words &amp; comparisons he could make me laugh even when he was shocked, feeling dumb, acting dumb, being out of his mind, clueless or when the situation was not funny at all. he just can put his emotions into the right words, not just fun, I can also feel when he was angry or desperate or frustrated.)
&amp; beside the normal territory business, there are problems that made Bobby seriously feel the burden as a Lead Traveler. the choice between what is right and what is necessary. (which might sound the same to you, but believe me, when you read this one, you see it's really really not.)
that's what Saint Dane do, bending the truths &amp; his intentions buried deep down.

plus strange new characters
Excited &amp; happy cat! my sweet little Boon (well, not so little...)
&amp; another badass female character. (tho she has anger issues, but I can't blame her, it's reasonable.)

pleasant, thrilling, fascinating &amp; quick read. I couldn't put it down, not even in my rereads &amp; I didn't realize the pass of the time while reading it.