Rating: 2/5

Ummm. My first critique is on the last chapter. This book is on how to have a clean home, yes? But then the last chapter is all of the sudden a random assortment of bad, good, unbiblical, and unexpected marriage advice. One of the sisters got divorced shortly after her "organization journey", and tells her story and her reasons why. I'm not going to sit her and say she was wrong for getting divorced, because it sounds like there might have been some emotional abuse situations involved. But she doesn't actually say that, so I'm not going to say I support that decision either. Here are some quotes.
"I got married out of need. I needed someone to take care of me, someone I could lean on. I had very few opinions of my own."
"Don't get hung up on the spiritual meaning of the marriage ceremony if your reasons for getting married weren't spiritual." 
"When I came face to face with what I was doing with my life, I realized I was compromising. I was being less than I could be, and I knew my capacity for happiness and success was far greater than I could express in the situation I had gotten myself into."

So, anyway. I don't feel the need to talk about that more. My biggest problem is that I didn't care. This is a book on a method of organizing your home and schedule, not a discussion on divorce and marriage. (The other sister went on to talk about her husband, and how their marriage had shifted over the years since they got married, etc. Irrelevant.)

Others may have found this section interesting or meaningful or helpful. I thought it was sad and out of place and distracting. 

That said! The organization tips! Obviously, lots of them are out of date. They advise keeping addresses and birthdays and Christmas lists in your "card box", which is unnecessary with today's technology of calendars and contacts and list apps. I like the idea of a physical card system, mostly for helping kids learn good habits.

She did discuss having a "weekly schedule", where you have one day for heavy cleaning, one day for errands, one day "off", etc. I think that was my favorite idea and the only one I'll be putting in place in my life for now. Eventually I'd like to have a list of what chores get done on heavy cleaning days, etc. So I may use their chore lists in the back as a resource, but I also am not into the card system idea. Rubs me the wrong way. I want to have a system of some kind, cause I think it will make my life transitions easier, to a bigger house, to kids, etc. But this one is not for me.