Rating: 3/5

I saw the movie Gigi - it was made in the late 50s.

 There was this total gush of praise that flowed from the orifices of the critics :

"Gigi is a charming entertainment that can stand on its own two legs. It is not only a charming comprehension of the spicy confection of Colette, but it is also a lovely and lyrical enlargement upon that story's flavored mood and atmosphere"

"...Skillful casting, performance and presentation have endowed realism to the sum total . . . Director Minnelli's good taste in keeping it in bounds and the general sound judgment of all concerned . . . distinguishes this Arthur Freed independent production."

And you remember it got like a billion Oscars. They had to get a truck it won so many.

So I read Colette's original short story to find out what the hell is going on here. Because in the movie the story is so amazingly creepy, most of the characters in it would, if they were transported to contemporary Britain, either be in care (Gigi) or in jail for grooming a child for sexual abuse (Gigi's aunt and mother) or be on the Sex Offenders Register (Gaston and probably Maurice "Tank Evven for Leedle Grrls" Chevalier). Dig it - the mother and the aunt are training Gigi to be a - what was the polite word - courtesan. What's one of those? It's a high class call girl you rent by the month or year. So for the whole movie the aunt and the mother are trying to improve Gigi's posture and attitude and female accomplishments and be a bit less hearty and gawky and more seductive and like practise oral sex techniques on asparagus so that she can get a better customer and hence a better price when the time comes to launch her on the market (16th birthday? probably). The whole concept is ghastly, but in 1958 Hollywood and its audiences didn't bat an eyelid. Not one eyelid! It was just those saucy French .. c'est chic n'est-ce pas? 
 (But you know, Hollywood likes on occasion to portray prostitution as an acceptable career choice for young women - check out Pretty Woman for instance.)

So another one which proves that they thought very differently in the past - in 19th century France, but also, in 1958 America.