Rating: 5/5

This is a MUST READ.

When I reviewed over the responses of the greatest minds to master the subject of grace, I found that every individual had to relate to it. No one was Simon nor no one was that Nazi soldier. With every individual’s limited viewing in the court that Wiesenthal has created, they had to relate to it to the best of their ability to decipher what Weisenthal should or should not have done. No one was omniscient. Everyone was tied to his or her limited human experiences and knowledge to answer Simon’s proposed question.

Given the thought-provoking situation that Weisenthal proposed, I was also a reader that jumped right away to define my limits on forgiveness. I think that was his intention. So, I related to it the best I could base on my circumstances and here is what I found:

Evil gives birth to evil. The classic example of the drunk father who hits the wife who hits the older son who hits the younger sister who kicks the dog. How about that bad day that left you spouseless, carless, jobless? I bet you wanted to kill something. By fighting fire with fire, we only have more fire. Gandhi puts it well: “An eye for an eye makes the whole world go blind.” 

Good (although this seems more and more rare) begets good. Remember the movie “Pay it forward?” How about the Starbucks customer who bought the drink for the guy behind him? Then that second guy happily bought for the third?...and etc. 

Now, ask yourself, which cycle do you want to be a part of? The abusive family? Or the people who just can’t give enough?” Of course, you are drawn to the good. Why? Because it is so damn beautiful. 
Beauty of forgiveness puts a stop and shames the hate. We all have felt it before: that overwhelming gratitude and that newfound willpower to never make the mistake ever again. 

I know all this talk is theoretical. I can’t say I would have the willpower to forgive nor if Simon should have forgiven.

But I know what I know: that the beauty of forgiveness has won and taken over me.