Rating: 4/5

I read this ahead of my first game at Camden Yards and after the pandemic deprived me of live baseball for nearly two years. Part architectural history, part celebration of baseball and Opening Day, and part defense of the chip-on-shoulder Baltimore psyche, Ballpark is an obvious passion project for Peter Richmond, detailing the logistics, emotions, and history of how Camden Yards revolutionized the way American ballparks are built.

We get the zoomed in picture of freshly cut grass, hot dogs scents, and general comradery of baseball, juxtaposed against the high-levels dealings of ownership, which more than once flirted with the idea of a DC team, architectural rivalries, and the positioning of a classic baseball stadium against the concrete ovals that were the industry standard (“no interaction with the surrounding neighborhood; no relation to city; no view of anything… the epitome of the modern profit machine”). 

The book is about the Orioles and its new ballpark, but it’s really about the city and the Orioles’ place in it: “Cal Ripken’s streak is now the Baltimore standard… It is a blue-collar record for a town without shout. It’s an X-Days-on-the-Job-without-an-Accident record… just low-profile dutifulness, which is as Baltimorean as you can get.”

We get a new view of stadium architecture that celebrates brick-laden exteriors and lacy steel gridwork in a shoutout to classics like Wrigley, while denouncing concrete. It’s probably way more than what one needs to know about architecture and stadium design, but Richmond does a good enough job to link these traits to the city and history of baseball, all with an excited passion that echoes a youthful exuberance, that one can forgive him for indulging. 

“Baseball has always belonged where American People gathered,” writes Richmond. “Baseball in cities has always mattered in America.” And with that theme in mind, Richmond paints Camden as remnant of a previous era, with its warehouse, asymmetry, and downtown location, and a look to the future: “Camden Yards is something more than a paeon to the old; it is old. The oldest ballpark in America, as well as its newest.”