Rating: 3/5

I stumbled upon this book at a rummage sale and was immediately intrigued. Having been involved with antiques and collectibles for the majority of my life, I had an awareness of Sotheby's and Christie's in the auction world from the various high profile sales they've made in the past 25 years. I've often yearned for a more "inside" look into their business and I thought this to be the perfect book to try and achieve that.

My expectations for this book were extremely reasonable. I had never read this author prior to my purchasing this book, and so I was oblivious to his style. But after giving the book a once-over at the rummage sale, I figured it to be worth my time.

I was partially correct. 

If I were to be grading this book just on the author's style, I would have given it one star. It proved to be extremely dry at times. In fact, finishing this book took me several months because it got to be such a dry read at times. I would find myself trudging through a section of stuffy British writing by the author, hopeful just to make it to the end of the chapter sooner than later. Upon arriving at the end of said chapter, I literally had to put the book down and leave it sit for weeks (or months) before finding the desire to resume reading it.

The book is well written however, as you would expect it to be. Just well written in a stuffy, dry style. It felt too pretentious, almost as if the author was making sport out of the use of his thesaurus. 

As for the content, I'd have to rate the book at 5 stars for that. The author does his job well....almost too well. 

My major gripe with the author's content was the unnecessary information he felt it necessary to include. When writing a book like this, that basically chronicles the 250+ year history of an institution like Sotheby's, only the relevant information should make the cut in the final manuscript. 

Why Mr. Lacey, his editor, or his publisher....thought it necessary or relevant to make mention of and discuss, the homosexual lifestyle of one or more Sotheby's employees...is beyond me. How someone's sexual preference and lifestyle is relevant to the business they are tasked with conducting, is a stretch of relevancy. It was never linked to key business decisions that were made in Sotheby's history, so why then...is it even brought up and discussed by the author?

Now granted, I tried to remind myself of how dated this book is (late 90's), and that the author is British himself. The 90's certainly were a more ignorant time in terms of LGBT views in society, and maybe the British audience (to which this book feels like it was written) would find amusement, or sport, in the author essentially "dishing" on the homosexual lifestyle of certain Sotheby's employees. But it was totally irrelevant and unnecessary for us to have to trudge though these sorts of things as the reader. (Unless of course, you're that stuffy, pompous, elitist type that finds amusement in diminishing people based on their orientation?)

Other than that, Mr. Lacey goes above and beyond my expectations for "insider information" on Sotheby's and their longstanding rivalry with Christie's. I certainly learned everything I had hoped to learn about their history and business dealings. My only regret was that this book was as dated as it was. It would have been intriguing to follow Sotheby's through the dot-com bubble bursting, and more recently...the housing bubble bursting. At $1.50 from a rummage sale, it certainly served it's purpose....though I'm glad I didn't pay cover price for it back when it was new.

So...all things considered....I'd have to rate this book right in the middle then at 3 stars. Not particularly good enough for me to keep, except maybe as a reference, but interesting enough that I will be loaning it out (or giving away) to a couple people who share my same curiosities for the Sotheby's/Christie's rivalry history.