Rating: 4/5

Silent weapons' of war equals Social Engineering! Mixed with Heroin, it necessarily enhances the Hegelian Dialectic

I most strongly recommend this outstanding wealth of information in order to positively ID specific persons or elements of the American medical establishment directly responsible for the abuse of other humans. Research into SCAD most strongly recommended with this publication. (jmd 1/10/2015)

I like the information this author has to offer even though a major piece of the puzzle is left in the closet, as exampled by author's initial comments noting the apperception for William Donovan and the beginnings of the OSS. The Doctor points out that it would be impossible to publish this kind of work in Russia if it hadn't been for the efforts of the CIA wining the Cold War, which is not reasonable to argue looking at this from his point of view. His story is similar to what I've read in a different publication I recommend:

Political Ponerology (A Science on the Nature of Evil Adjusted for Political Purposes)

Although I appreciate the author's perspective, as exampled by the outstanding observation regarding the relationship between France &amp; Vietnam, including the support for Ho Chi Minh by Chase Manhattan Bank all while pointing out the OSS trained 200 elite troops of Ho Chi Minh's army...that should have eventually resulted in free, non-Communist society after WWII all supported by Donovan as justification on why the Doctor is not a critic of the initial foundation/creation of the OSS/CIA, regretfully disappointing because there's no reference to the other French Connection as noted by Professor Alfred W. McCoy.

Additional information regarding William Donovan can be found in Scott, Peter Dale publication, American War Machine: Deep Politics, the CIA Global Drug Connection, and the Road to Afghanistan (War and Peace Library) Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers. Kindle Edition.

This specific diminution regarding the Golden Triangle is disturbingly absent throughout the whole publication. Additionally, the scope of Dr. Ross initial observations failed to point out OSS's creation was via the master British social engineering think tank Tavistock Institute, nor is there any details regarding Abraham, Simon, and Bernard Flexner sponsorship by the Rockefeller cartel that would eventually influence medical education/research away "from physiology towards pharmacology' in the early part of American history...disappointing, [but] recoverable, regarding the limited view this work presents because it IS an outstanding publication and a major part of my personal education and I most strongly recommend this.

For additional details regarding this expansive but mandatory aspect regarding the historical back ground of the CIA, the medical industry, drugs and social control, Georgetown Professor Carroll Quigley, Dr. Nancy Turner Banks, Robert Kirkconnell, Servando Gonzalez and McCoy are some of the most important authors I might use to gauge other books. If nothing else, one should observe the timing of the returning troops from Nam, all while Nixon's War on Drugs started the opening salvo against the American population requires detailed effort to recognize the relationship, including CIA's covert influence of USAID.

Tragedy &amp; Hope: A History of the World in Our Time
AIDS, Opium, Diamonds, and Empire
American Heart of Darkness: Volume I:The Transformation of the American Republic into a Pathocracy
Psychological Warfare and the New World Order: The Secret War Against the American People
The Politics of Heroin: CIA Complicity in the Global Drug Trade
JFK and the Unspeakable: Why He Died and Why It Matters

Just some of passages noted below on why I like this book and why I am recommending it, even though a critical part regarding the controlling factor (regarding the world wide drug operation and the CIA connection) is not discussed:

"The major goal of the Cold War mind control programs was to create dissociative symptoms and disorders, including full multiple personality disorder. The Manchurian Candidate66 is fact, not fiction, and was created by the CIA in the 1950's under BLUEBIRD and ARTICHOKE mind control programs. Experiments with LSD, sensory deprivation, electro-convulsive treatment, brain electrode implants and hypnosis were designed to create amnesia, depersonalization, changes in identity and altered states of consciousness. One purpose of The CIA Doctors: Human Rights Violations by American Psychiatrists is to prove that the creation of controlled dissociation was a major goal of mind control research. Other authors, who are not specialists in dissociation255-258, have failed to understand this fact. Multiple personality disorder is now classified by the American Psychiatric Association12 as dissociative identity disorder."

"The main purposes of this book are:
1. To document extensive human rights violations by American psychiatrists over the last 70 years.
2. To prove that these violations were pervasive, systematic and involved leading psychiatrists and medical schools.
3. To counter claims that the violations happened in an earlier time with different ethical standards - they violated the Hippocratic Oath and the Nuremberg Code.
4. To call for a systematic review of these violations by government and the profession of psychiatry."

"My focus in The CIA Doctors: Human Rights Violations by American Psychiatrists is on psychiatry and the dissociative disorders. My intent is to prove that the Manchurian Candidate is real, and to set the Manchurian Candidate programs in a historical and clinical context. The CIA Doctors documents extensive human rights violations by psychiatrists in North America in the second half of the twentieth century. Many thousands of prisoners and mental patients were subjected to unethical mind control experiments by leading psychiatrists and medical schools. Organized academic psychiatry has never acknowledged this history. The network of mind control doctors involved in BLUEBIRD, ARTICHOKE, MKULTRA and other mind control programs has done a great deal of harm to the field of psychiatry and to psychiatric patients. My goal is to break the ugly silence."

Additional publications (including previously noted) I recommend to enhance this exceptional work by Dr.Colin A. Ross.

A History of Modern Psychology
Project MKULTRA, the CIA's program of research in behavioral modification: Joint hearing before the Select Committee on Intelligence and the ... Congress, first session, August 3, 1977
A Secret Order: Investigating the High Strangeness and Synchronicity in the JFK Assassination

Edited: One of the key elements I learned from this publication is noted below:

Paranormal experiments under STARGATE continued until 1984, and Army doctors were actively involved in LSD testing at least until the late 1970's. Still-classified CIA mind control programs were operational at least into the early 1970's. Subjects of LSD experiments included children as young as five years old, and brain electrodes were implanted in children as young as eleven years of age. Four of the CIA's MKULTRA Subprojects were on children, a fact that has not been publicly documented before.

Ross M.D., Colin A. (2011-10-01). The CIA Doctors: Human Rights Violations By American Psychiatrists (Kindle Locations 475-479). Greenleaf Book Group Press. Kindle Edition.