Rating: 2/5

You can't subtitle your book "The Monsters That Ruled The Planet Before Dinosaurs and How They Died In The Greatest Catastrophe In Earth's History" and then give readers a hundred pages of you wandering around looking at rocks. Actually, you can't subtitle your book that at all, because that is unwieldy as h*ck. And you certainly can't do it, then ignore the monsters.

Really, that subtitle is the book in a microcosm: Most of it doesn't need to be there, it promises more than it delivers, and it's awkwardly structured. For a book about the Permian-Triassic extinction, relatively little space is devoted to one of the worst ecological disasters in Earth's history. No, what actually matters is that Peter D. Ward went to South Africa, wasn't racist there, and looked at a bunch of rocks. And he will tell you about it all in prose purpler than a gymnast's bruise.

Gorgon follows Ward's search for the cause of the Permian extinction, buried in the rocks of the Karoo region of South Africa. The thing is, the cover copy leads you to believe it's about the gorgonopsids, a family of bizarre animals which met their end during that extinction event. That subtitle promises it. The cover has one of their skeletons. The book is even freaking named "gorgon". So I, for one, spent most of the book waiting for some glimpse into their biology, environment, possible behavior, and was rewarded only by page after page about strata in the Karoo. See, Gorgon is really about the extinction, but pretends otherwise for far too long. 

Also known as the Great Dying, the extinction itself is a fascinating topic. About 250 million years ago, life on Earth nearly came to an end. The end of the Permian period saw the loss of 96% of marine life, 70% of terrestrial vertebrates, and is (according to Wikipedia) the only mass extinction of insects. Nobody is quite sure why, though Ward mentions a number of theories and comes to his own conclusions involving, essentially, the planet rusting to death. When Gorgon focuses on this huge mystery, it's gripping, like a detective story where the victim is an entire world. But Ward can't keep his mind on this when there are more interesting things to talk about, like Peter D. Ward.

He really does not come off well, let's say. I find it's generally safe to say that the purpler the prose, the larger the ego: you really need massive self-confidence if you're gonna plunge your readers into a maze of adjectives. Which can be fine. But Ward isn't as good a writer as he thinks he is; he can't just say "the pizza had old vegetables"; he has to say, multiple times, that the vegetables were as ancient as [a different geological thing each time]. Like, dude, there's poetic writing full of memorable images, and then there's trying too hard.

He also spends far too long blathering about 1) South African politics, 2) the environment of the Karoo, 3) his marriage, and 4) how hot one of his colleagues is. It's clear Gorgon is partly just a chance for him to talk. I think all this is intended to give human touches to a book that has the potential to be quite dry, but it reads like: 1) I'm not racist, guys, like at all; 2) I read a travel book once; 3) honey I have to be gone all the time for Science Reasons; and 4) I'm a huge creep. (Seriously. He talks more about how beautiful his colleague is than he does about his own wife, in any capacity.) And when he's not bloviating about all that, he goes on and on about rocks when doing so adds nothing and, in fact, actively detracts from whatever he's trying to accomplish. I get that examining rocks is how we know anything about the ancient world, but every chance he gets he swoons over the colors and at one point ejaculates a stream of synonyms when he could just say "red".

The Permian extinction parts are great. But. The prose, the ego, the rocks, the leering: It's just—it's a lot to go through merely to get to his ~groundbreaking theory~, which takes up just a few pages right before the end. And he never even gets to the freaking gorgons.