Rating: 4/5

Fred Clumly is the chief of police in Batavia, NY, nearing retirement, when a strange bearded man, known only as the Sunlight Man ends up in one of his cells, accused only, for the time being, of painting LOVE across two lanes of traffic. But the Sunlight Man is not the harmless funnyman he appears to be. Who is the Sunlight Man, and what does he have in store for the inhabitants of Batavia, New York? The people of Batavia will never be the same, and an old and storied family, in particular, will be brought down.
 
While the novel is ostensibly about the battle of wills between Chief Clumly and the Sunlight Man, it is much more. It is a tale of clashing cultures, of the clash between "law and order" and anarchy. Is the Sunlight Man mad? He may be that. Is he some sort of mystical guru, capable of performing acts of real magic? Perhaps. 
 
This is a huge, expansive book -- in pages, in material, and in characters. And every character is deeply drawn out; no cardboard characters for John Gardner. Though published in 1972, "The Sunlight Dialogues" is as timely in its philosophical observations today as then. It's one of those books not easily digested. It is a must re-read book. 
 
"Nobody's life is perfect," he said. But there were reasons for that. Any life a man chooses, Clumly mused, betrays the life he failed to choose. And now it was no longer important, it was enough to know that it was so.
 
I've said it in other reviews of his work, but John Gardner deserves a better posthumous fate than what has befallen him. Nowadays, when I say John Gardner people think of the Gardner who writes pulp spy novels (at least I think that's what he writes, as I've never read them, though they are ubiquitous). John Gardner was a brilliant writer, in the ranks of Thomas Pynchon and Charles Dickens in my own pantheon of favorite authors. He's not an easy read, but you are rarely the same person you were before reading his work.

“Yes! Clumly had thought. There it was. Whatever it meant, spiritualistic trash for old ladies or the roaring secret of life and death, for a minute there Clumly had believed he wanted to know.
 
I do not want to reveal any spoilers, so this review is as short as the book is long. Enjoy.