Rating: 2/5

This book really disappointed me and I was surprised to see it rated so highly. I struggled to finish it. There are simply too many scenes (and especially conversations) that are repeated over and over again, and are furthermore simply variations on things that happened in previous books. I grew especially tired of the scenes of Madouc's resistance to her "parents" plans. They revealed nothing new about anybody's character and changed nothing. Frankly, I quickly grew tired of Madouc, who is a one-note character with no defining characteristics except a total lack of concern for anybody but herself. When she becomes interested in helping someone else, after spending the entire book disliking and being rude to everyone, it struck me as completely unbelievable. Why does she suddenly feel so much different about one person when she barely tolerates anyone else? Other characters are one-dimensional too--the cardboard cut-out evil king; the flawless hero and his son, who succeed at everything (boring), the self-centered queen (I found her interesting at first, but she experiences no character growth at all and so quickly becomes tiresome).
The worst part was that the last 40 pages turns into a gallop to the finish line where Vance essentially summarizes what should have been the plot of the last 200 pages of the book. After Casimir's plotting has lasted for 3 books and grown increasingly dull and tiresome, the final contest is resolved in less than a dozen pages. The conflict between the wizards is over before you know it. Literally enormous events are given no more than a paragraph's worth of attention.
Vance's editor should have told him to cut the first 300 pages down to 100 and find something more interesting for Madouc to do than simply defy and mouth off to everyone constantly (she does have one interesting adventure, but that is it).
Thinking about the whole series, I liked the first book best because the characters actually experienced loss, pain, and difficulties. There was tragedy, there were reversals of fortune--in short, there was tension about whether the main characters (all appealing people) would win out, and how. This tension was mostly missing in the second book, but at least the characters were still likable. Here I found irritating protagonists and very little drama.