Rating: 4/5

What a thoroughly satisfying California history book.

Because make no mistake, the "American West" alluded to in the book's title actually turns out to be UC Berkeley. 

At the turn of the last century, Annie Montague Alexander never met an animal she didn't want to kill, stuff and mount, three skills which she practiced with a personal fervor and turned to the cause of Science in founding UCB's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology and the University of California Museum of Paleontology. She and her partner, Louise Kellogg, were insatiable in their love of camping and killing every vertebrate they could get their hands on, so that natural scientists of the day could gain a better understanding of evolutionary biology. 

There's a great section in the book, which is largely reconstructed from Alexander's voluminous correspondence, where she proudly informs the zoology museum director that she and Louise have already killed 75 Alaskan birds for his approval. He writes back, somewhat tentatively (she was his boss after all) suggesting that maybe she'd bagged enough birds for one day, and Alexander responds by noting that the party is low on ammunition so please send more killing bullets at once. 

She seems to have been just that kind of person. 

She and Kellogg also founded a profitable asparagus farm on Grizzly Island near Suisan (which I had to look up as, despite being from that area the presence of an island full of asparagus completely escaped me) which formed one of my favorite parts of the book. The details of how they took completely wild land and turned it to for-profit agriculture AND still managed to hit the road most of the year on animal-whomping trips was fascinating. 

The epilogue notes that in 1991 the farm was taken over by the California Department of Fish and Game, who knocked down all the farm buildings and returned it to a marsh-like state. On the one hand I was saddened by the destruction of these historically relevant structures, but on the other hand, it was done in the name of conservation, and as the author notes, both women would have likely approved of the maneuver. Because rest assured that all the hunting and stuffing Alexander did she did largely because even in her lifetime she noticed the rapidity with which the environment was being trammeled as development overtook the state like some kind of incurable cancer. 

The story of Alexander and Kellogg's remarkable life together, as well as Alexander's firm, demanding hand in the shaping of UC Berkeley could well have been just another story of a busybody rich white woman dabbling in campus politics. But in Stein's hands, the historical significance of the women's work, the circumstances surrounding the founding and growth of the school and its impact on natural history and biology come to life, to the extent that I cried a little at the end. 

As did, no doubt, all the animals who wandered into Alexander's path.