Rating: 2/5

Golf is war. War is hell. Golf is hell? Would that the point of this novel was as simple as that transitive property! Sadly, it's not, and I was frustrated in my search for the author's elusive meaning.

The novel recounts a 36-hole golf match between Bobby Jones and Walter Hagen, devised to elevate Savannah out of it's 1931 Depression-era slump. The competition takes place on Krewe Island, a stone's throw from Skidaway, a piece of land demolished in a storm during 1938 - save for the 18th hole, aptly named "Valor", which survived the floods.

In additional to the two known champions, a third competitor is found in a local man, Junah, a decorated war hero who routinely seeks solace at the bottom of a bottle. Savannah born and bred, he will represent a city still smarting from the Confederacy's defeat in the Civil War. Accompanying him is his caddie, Bagger Vance, a black man who commands respect and stands equal in an era that would not likely allow it. He has mystical powers and control over Junah, which include getting his golfer out on the links absent a drying-out period. Who is this guy?

No spoilers here - I won't say how the match goes, but I'm sure most readers will not be surprised. The author has taken on the ambitious task of weaving philosophy into the game of golf, and, mysticism aside, there are some gems to be found. Most of the novel contains long and detailed passages about doglegs, bunkers, and scoops - if you play, you will likely understand and absorb those sections, with a clear image in your mind of how each of the holes, and the action, is laid, and played, out. If you don't play, you won't learn much here, and you may be frustrated having to search through the jargon for the kernels of wisdom Bagger bestows upon Junah and 10-year-old tag-along, Hardy.

This was saved from 1 star by the fact that, occasionally, glimpses of some deeper meaning could be seen through the Savannah storm clouds. Persevering, and locating them, could be as daunting a task as playing 36 holes in 100% humidity. If you love golf, go for it. If not, pick up a copy of The Iliad, where war is just war.