Rating: 5/5

If ever I had to have a crush on an actual English King, it might have been Henry V. It probably would have been in vain since he doesn't seem to have had much affection for anyone but who cares. The scandalous youth vanished some time before Henry IV died and when Henry V was crowned king, he showed the world.

Hal has become a stern but fair ruler who apparently didn't smile (or only slightly and not very often) and was a cunning politician who made sure England's treasury was refilled. But this play is not about the whole history of Henry V. Instead, we begin when his fleet sets out to France. You see, His Majesty (a term introduced by Richard II by the way) wanted to "grab the Turks by their beards" but conquering lands in France was a more pressing matter (and probably cheaper too, although the re-opening of the Hundred Years' War was costly enough). Right at the beginning the play deals with an assassination attempt that actually took place. 

Some of you might know the phrase "Once more unto the breach, dear friends..." - it's from this play. 

There are quite a few battles Henry has to fight, but none as remarkable as Agincourt that immortalized Henry V. The English were vastly outnumbered but Henry proved to be a fantastic fighter himself but also a brilliant strategist. The play also shows how the king, the night before the battle at Agincourt, walks amongst his soldiers to ensure their motivation (according to historical records, Henry V really did care about his people, the soldiers as much as the noblemen and even the poor). 

The battle is won and what does a happy victor do afterwards? Right, wooing a girl. In this case Catherine de Valois. The play funnily illustrates the difficulty of courtship even for a victorious king by playing the neither-spoke-the-other's-language card. Not very realistic but it was good fun.
Since Charles VI (the then French king) is quite weak, it doesn't take long until Henry V is proclaimed his heir. The play almost ends here, were it not for a sort of epilogue foreshadowing what will happen after Henry V's death (the loss of French territory and bad reign of his infant son).
More of that in my reviews about Henry VI (3 parts in total) however.

This is definitely my favourite of Shakespeare's histories (so far). Probably because Henry V is such a great character. The real-life king must have been a sight to behold. An impeccable knight with wonderful manners, very intelligent, stern but just, ... *swoons*
This play brings out the best im him, naturally, and only focuses on what went right in Henry's campaign in France - which was quite a lot, the number of territories he conquered is staggering! Too bad the end sort of diminished that (but only almost). As for the play itself: all is well that ends well. ;)