Rating: 2/5

Any long-running comic strip is bound to noticeably evolve so that early examples of the strip may surprise fans who discovered it later in its run. Jim Davis's Garfield is no exception. A much tubbier Garfield who got around on all fours debuted June 19, 1978, having not yet crossed paths with some important characters who would come to populate his world. By January 22, 1979—the last strip in Garfield at Large: His First Book—some evolution was already evident, but even in his earliest days Garfield was the coolest and fattest of cats. I could easily read a book of Garfield comics three times this long and want more, and you know a strip is doing some things right when readers say that.

 The first few panels introduce us to Garfield and his owner, cartoonist Jon Arbuckle. Garfield loves his food and sleep and won't apologize for it, as many of his misadventures show. The June 29 strip (page seven), about Jon not wanting Garfield to drink coffee because it might stunt his growth, is a funny one. July 13 (page thirteen) is a classic, with Garfield's expressed concern over energy conservation leading to a good punchline. The July 15 strip is a historic day: the first mention of lasagna, the food Garfield loves above any other. July 24 (page eighteen) is a vintage example of Garfield's sarcasm. August 8 (page twenty-four) is another landmark day as a man named Lyman moves in to Jon's house and brings his dog...named Odie. It's the first sighting of the rambunctious yellow canine who will turn into Garfield's celebrated frenemy. Lyman and Odie's arrival is the first extended storyline of Garfield at Large, which features few that last more than a day or two. Garfield and Odie's budding rivalry is captured in the August 13 Sunday strip (page twenty-six), where Garfield bemoans having to cohabit with a ruffian dog, all while he's beating up on poor, naive Odie. August 16 (page twenty-seven) is another laugh-out-loud example of Garfield's anti-Odie campaign, the punchline being his suggestion of the manner in which Lyman should discipline the dog. Odie gradually learns to hold his own against his feline housemate. An attempt by Jon to put Garfield on a diet has little effect on the cat's paunch. The October 14 strip (page fifty-two) proves Jim Davis is capable of writing with heart as well as humor. "Cats are nice to have when you're feeling lonely", Jon Arbuckle thinks as Garfield curls up on his lap. It is nice to have someone to just be with at the end of a hard day.

 Shenanigans ensue when Jon decides to have Garfield declawed. Is this the end of his days ripping up Jon's furniture for amusement? Garfield finds a teddy bear he scoffs at initially yet ends up loving, carrying "Pooky" everywhere (and I do mean everywhere), to Jon's chagrin. Garfield starts having "nap attacks", dropping into a dead sleep at inconvenient moments, but he isn't too stressed about being unexpectedly enveloped in one of his two favorite pastimes. The November 22 strip (page sixty-nine) about scrambled eggs "on chilly mornings" is hilarious, building to a sight gag. November 27 (page seventy-two) might be the funniest comic of this compilation, the introduction to a longer storyline about Garfield coming down with a head cold. After Jon experiments with bringing Garfield along grocery shopping and it doesn't work out, Odie turns the tables when Garfield lies in wait to prank the dog. Odie isn't devious; when he one-ups Garfield, it's usually by virtue of his own innocent spirit. As Garfield puts it, "How can you win against someone who doesn't even know the rules of the game?" Jon is unsuccessful trying to de-fur Garfield in a series of strips, punctuated by the December 14 (page seventy-nine) offering, a play on the fact that we see Garfield's thoughts and Jon Arbuckle can't. Mild festivity centers around Christmas, and December 25 (page eighty-four) brings a heartwarming message from Garfield directly to his readers. New Year's makes Garfield briefly consider adopting a healthier lifestyle, and being forced to wear a kitty sweater turns Garfield into...well, there's no better way to say it: a sourpuss. January 19 (page ninety-four) expresses a sweet sentiment, and January 20 (page ninety-five), a Sunday, is a contender for best strip of the book. Garfield's frantic attempt to avoid catching Odie's lice has consequences that are positively slapstick. Our favorite overweight cat ambles off into the sunset on the final page, until we pick up his next collection of comedic escapades. I hope the wait isn't long.

 I can think of few more relaxing ways to spend a weekend than kicking back with a book of Garfield funnies and letting the laughs roll over you. There's no drama or deep philosophy, just ninety-six pages of fun with a curmudgeonly feline, and you can count me in for that anytime. Most readers agree that Garfield reached its prime in the late 1980s, but the earliest days are enjoyable in their own right, and allow you to get in on the story from the beginning. Have a great time with Garfield at Large, fellow Jim Davis fans.