Rating: 4/5

The Camomile Lawn by Mary Wesley is a provocative novel that tells the story of five cousins during their annual holiday in a house by the sea. It is the summer of 1939, the last the cousins will share together as the world is on the edge of war. Each of the male couins will be called to duty, hence war and bombings carve their way into the stories. We first meet Aunt Helena and Uncle Richard before all the cousins arrive on the train from London, except Sophy (my favorite character). Sophy lives with her aunt and uncle, trying to be un-obtrusive as Aunt Helen doesn't care much for her, feeling her to be a burden. Upon her perch in the tree above the garden Sophy gives us a birds-eye view of her Aunt Helen relaxing in her chair, as Uncle Richard calls for tea. The author has a delicate hand in revealing her characters through their interactions rather than thrusting descriptions upon the reader. Aunt Helen often comes across as snobbish and cold, particularly in her disdain for her husband's complaints about his missing leg.
With the arrival of Oliver, Calypso, Walter and Polly we learn of the complicated attraction between Oliver and the gorgeous Calypso, and the tender bond that Sophy has with the much older Oliver. Sophy is the lonely cousin whose age distances her from the more mature group, and her hunger isto belong drives her story. Sophy's naivete is often exposed as she listens to the conversations of a sexual nature between her cousins. There is also an incident having to do with a game the cousins call The Terror Run upon the cliffs that Sophy is finally permitted to participate in but becomes her misfortune when something happens to traumatize her.
Other characters come into play in the novel, particularly the Jewish refugees. In the story, the rectors wife doesn't believe Hitler is doing such horrible things to the Jews. Such horrors unimaginable to someone with a kind heart. It is a true account of the thinking of the times, an innocence to horrors. The rector also has twin sons that have always been a part of the group of cousins. 
There was a comfortable life for the upper middle class that the war changed. Women didn't have to do things for themselves as they had maids, etc. It was also before children and women were bombarded with sexual images, and such frank talk wasn't always understood by innocent ears. We see this come into play quite a bit, not to say some of the characters aren't randy, just that a woman or a child wasn't as knowledgeable with the terms nor the act itself. It also plays strange because there is so much sex between this cast of characters, everyone using there sexuality for different purposes.
Because Wesley was a more 'mature' writer in her 70's, the characters in their old age are far more authentic than most writer's can achieve in creating. Perspective that comes in one's declining years is vital to The Camomile Lawn, the rehashing of one's youthful time of life gives much more insight into the how and whys of the choices some of the characters made. I enjoyed the novel to the very end, and while this is a quiet novel, there is so very much going on.
The character's are all charming and infuriating, and the author doesn't push any opinions on the reader. It is an account of a certain period of time, a true picture of what people felt and thought, whether it was prejudiced or not. Characters without the thought filter that modern people apply to their comments is vital to this authentic depiction. Wonderful!