Rating: 4/5

Recently I found a copy of this book in a local community lending library on one of my daily walks during isolation. It was in the original French,a little worn and dated to the late seventies. I had not read Zola before and had not heard of this novel except for a passing review on GR.

Noted for his gritty realism, Zola paints a vivid-harsh life of the worker society of Paris in 1860-70s. They worked long and tough days, drank it away in bars, and seem to barely survive. The title refers to a nearby bar called Assommoir, which translate to “knock out” or a place to get wasted. The novel lives up to its name.

Gervaise, a young mother of two, looks for a job in a local laundry service when her husband Lantier decides to walk away from their marriage. A local roofer, Coupeau asks her to marry him, and although she is hesitant, she does. They have a daughter, Nana. 

Gervaise starts her own laundry business and seems to thrive in her long work days. Then one day Coupeau has an accident, cannot work and falls into alcoholism. Gervaise throws a lavish party and starts to live beyond their means, and one day, their debts are called in. So starts a very slow and painful destruction into poverty and alcohol.

On the back cover of the book, a critic called the book pornographic. He is alluding to the ménage a trois that forms when Lantier, her former husband returns. He becomes best friends with Coupeau. He also rekindles their old relationship. Coupeau drinks and Lantier sleeps with his wife. Shocking.

But for me the real pornography is the food descriptions. There are two scenes where Zola describes feasts that truly are truly sizzling in their accounts. First, the wedding of Coupeau and Gervaise but it really overflows with the party she through complete with roast goose, side of pork, mouth watering potatoes, peas, salad, and a dessert of cheeses and strawberries. Ooh la la. Food porn at its best! 

And of course the big revelation is that their daughter Nana becomes a dancer in the famed, and naughty Folies show. She dumps her cruel parents for her new life entertaining men. This follows in the famous Zola book, Nana. 

This book was number seventh in a series of twenty books that Zola wrote describing the lives of Parisians in the 1800s. For me it was a tough read (except for the food scenes). One could see how tough their circumstances were. In some ways, they wanted to emulate those with money but often there abilities were limited, or like this couple, debt crippled them. Ah sadly, not much has changed.

Very much a very good read and I must say I am very tempted to find the next book, almost to carry on his fine writing style. Well worth it!