Rating: 4/5

I Hate English is a realistic fiction about Mei Mei, a child who recently immigrated from China. When introduced to her, her disdain towards moving is clear. A strong theme in the story is one's attachment to their culture and that by adapting to another, they will lose traces of their original culture. In this story, the main component is language. At school, she refuses to speak or write in English; instead, she writes in Chinese and thinks in Chinese. A constant phrase that appears in I Hate English is that she does things in Chinese.

Through the story, we find various attachments that Mei Mei holds close to her heart - her relatives and friends back in China, for instance, and spending time with them. At the learning center, she shows a gifted ability in arithmetic, but does not engage when it comes to speaking English. In her imagination, she does not envision herself speaking in English or spending time with English-speaking people. Instead, she finds comfort with people who speak Chinese and possess a familiarity she feels that she lost by moving, establishing a sympathetic and identified role as the story's protagonist.

This is a common struggle that students learning English find, especially when having left their country. Fears of assimilating and becoming a hard part of another culture seems as though they are abandoning their original culture and who they are. When in actuality, through integration, a confident self of who they are, and being allowed to convey that can maintain their original identity and also establish in a new steady role in an unfamiliar society. Mei Mei, when hearing stories in English, translates the words into Chinese in her head - a common method bilingual students use. Mei Mei's conflict is widely relatable and her thinking in Chinese isn't criticized in the text; she is not forced to speak in English, either - she only does eventually speak in English on her own terms. 

Although with a bit of a pressing method, Mei Mei does speak about herself and her life back in China, as well as traits of her culture in English. Not only is she able to convey her culture to the teacher, but she does it in English, affirming she has command in English despite not speaking much. This leaves a strong indicator to the reader that one should not underestimate others; in spite of this indicator, the teacher had never doubted Mei Mei, which also sends another strong message. Finally, Mei Mei is able to speak in Chinese and English. Remarkably, the teacher does not ask for Mei Mei to talk about life exclusively in America; she listens, and Mei Mei is pleased.

The story is engaging, with a strong protagonist with emotions that strike out to the reader. Illustrations are relevantly on each page. Interestingly, the cover displays Mei Mei unhappy in her class, giving a strong visual hint to what the conflict would be. At the back cover, Mei Mei is smiling. Not only is language a prominent key point in the story, but visual nods are prominent through the story's use of illustrations and its characters' expressions.