Rating: 4/5

I read this book long ago, and just as with Calazzo's "The Marriage of Cadmus and Harmony", it made a lot more sense when I read it the second time. (Thus inspired, I will soon try Robert Graves' "The White Goddess" again.)

There is really no way to summarize this book, as Giorgio de Santillana wants to tease out how preliterate human beings viewed the universe. One of his basic assumptions (which is hard to argue with) is that a human being from 20,000 years ago had the potential to be just as intelligent as a human being today.

Given that premise, de Santillana uses ancient myths to uncover the archaic (for lack of a better word) mode of thought, remembering that the framework for any system was totally different than our literate one. For one thing, "Hamlet's Mill" doesn't claim to reveal a complete or even consistent system -- instead, it gives modern readers a glimpse of something wondrous strange.

"Hamlet's Mill," though, has precious little to do with Hamlet, except that he is related to Amlethus, a mythic figure who owned a powerful mill. That mill's wheel, as it turns out, is the turning of the stars in the sky, and its axle is, more or less, the axis that runs from the North Pole.

de Santillana spends a lot of time linking various myths to show that the idea of the great wheel in the sky as the arbiter, and even instigator, of events on earth was the basis of archaic thought. In fact, he says, one of the major differences between the archaic world view and ours is that the only measure used was that of time, and time was measured only by astronomical occurrences.

With the introduction of literacy and spatial measures, human beings conjoined space with time as the two primary means of dividing and understanding the universe, an undoubtedly richer and more standardized system. But de Santillana's reconstruction (whether wholly accurate or not) of an archaic mode of thought shows us that not only were ancient humans as capable as we are of devising a complex intellectual structure, but that, as the wheel of the stars continues to turn, with zodiacal age replacing zodiacal age, we too will be looked on from some distant future as hopelessly simple and barely worth of attention. 

Without mechanics, without a means to measure, without a language capable of grasping and communicating complex ideas, de Santillana claims that Hamlet's Mill was used as an explanatory device in many disparate, and occasionally contradictory ways. In other words, if an event needed explanation, some aspect of the wheel of the stars and its axis was called on: For example, the great flood (most likely the abrupt filling of the Black Sea basin some 8,000 years ago) was caused when a mythic figure pulled the axle of the wheel from its mooring, allowing the waters to escape.

Now we believe the great flood happened when the barrier between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea abruptly gave way many thousand years ago, but our confidence in the mechanical could turn out, when Hamlet's Mill has turned many more times, to be no more justified than the archaic world's belief that as above, so below.