Rating: 4/5

This is the story of a clinical psychologist’s one-year internship at the Massachusetts Commonwealth Mental Hospital, a state hospital with medical staff and teaching overseen by Harvard Medical School. The author, a would-be novelist (the flysheet says “He recently completed a novel,” and during his internship he ran a creative writing class for the mental patients), writes simply and well, describing the hospital pecking order, the nitty-gritty of hospital routine, and also the terrors and delights of working day-to-day with unpredictable psychotics. A “hurry-up” problem solver, Haas starts out by wanting to cure his patients instantly and is frustrated when he fails; by the end of his internship he’s willing to settle for interacting with them one human to another, like dealing empathically with someone from another culture whose language and ways he doesn’t fully understand. “I no longer want to cure him [his favorite patient, Mr. Plummer:]. First and finally, I want to accept him.” Curiously, one of Haas’s major influences was a college professor who specialized in Third World literature. “Especially important were his efforts to teach me to understand the subjective psychology of the people—their consciousness, their literature, their choices—whose experiences are completely different in all ways from mine. When I am with Mr. Plummer I often think about [that professor:], and I try to give [Plummer:] that same support.” And: “…we must begin to try and imagine the subjective psychological experiences of others when it is impossible to see ourselves in them. I think that this is what Mr. Plummer and I do for each other today.”
	There is a touching scene at the end of the book, when Haas meets with Mr. Plummer for the last time. Throughout the year Mr. Plummer has oscillated between megalomaniacal ranting (he has “special magical powers” or is a famous “specialist in pediatric surgery”) and utter silence, with only occasional, brief periods of lucidity. In the awkward final session, after Haas attempts a bit of chit-chat, Mr. Plummer suddenly says, “It’s hard when a reliable therapist leaves. We’ve grown to trust each other, and your leaving is like cutting a flower before it’s had a chance to blossom.” 
During the year Haas also works on his own hangups (he starts private therapy), especially his relationship with his father, also a clinical psychologist, and his anxiety about freely expressing himself. He points out how these hangups color his relationships with the widely diverse personalities of his patients and colleagues. 
	Some of the author’s observations:

	I believe that’s an important part of why the mentally ill are quarantined: to know that They are simply more vulnerable to the horrors of existence is intolerable because it means that the horrors, whether real or imagined, are familiar, and it is the reactions to them that vary most. The mentally ill realize this better than any of Us. So we separate Them in order not to be reminded of what We all know to be true: that the world is unsafe, unpredictable in how its cruelties are meted out, indiscriminate about its choice of victims. There is no right or wrong. There is no foundation, no canon of normalcy. Through no fault of their own, children and adolescents emerge as adults having experienced horrors within their families and within their societies and, as a result, they become mentally ill…. 

	My first task is to overcome my fear. [The patients’:] suffering orients them. Their compass is pain. Overwhelmed, they are unable to contain or understand their feelings adequately. As a result, their demons fill a room….

	We often admit to the in-patient unit mentally retarded adults who have decompensated and become psychotic under the stress of frightening experiences. When they become upset by something and don’t understand how the world works, their uncertainty increases to the point that they no longer know what is real and what they have imagined.

	Haas speaking to a colleague, a second-year resident in psychiatry: “…when I’m successful with a patient I feel like I’m betraying my dad somehow, like I’m letting him down by not acknowledging that he is the only one who can solve problems. It’s like this: whenever I do a good job, like diagnosing someone correctly, or getting a person involved in therapy, I feel like fucking up just so my dad can step in, rescue me, and take care of me. I think that without him taking care of me, I’ll be alone in the world. I mean he’ll be alone.”
	“Him or you?”
	“Him, him.”
	“That’s not your problem. Too bad for him.”

	…when I speak at these meetings [with the other interns and psychiatry residents:] I feel as if the staff looks at me like I’m not making sense. I feel inhibited by them, as if I am behaving inappropriately and only they know it. I feel that they condescend toward me because I am not like them. They act strictly psychological. They interpret behavior while I prefer to try and observe it. I am not as interested as they are in seeing art as sublimation, or love as object relations, or religion as metaphor, or madness as schizophrenia, or misery as depression. I am not as interested as they are in definitions of human behavior or in limits to place upon it. I don't share their convictions in theories about why people behave as they feel they must. I feel that they miss an appreciation for the magical, for the invisible, for the accidental. As James Wells [psychiatry resident:] has said to me about his distaste for rigid, orthodox psychoanalysts, “There are things in heaven and in earth that they have not dreamed of.” 

	The codes or signs used in schizophrenic language vary from person to person because one schizophrenic is like no other schizophrenic. The diagnosis describes only facets of a huge life. The great mistake is to assume that it describes everything about a human being, rather than a narrow set of expectations and observations, because each schizophrenic requires a different sort of treatment and a unique relationship with the therapist, rather than identical medication and psychotherapy.

	At the hospital, we were reined in. Working with the mentally ill does that. It is difficult to show feelings around institutionalized (or semi-institutionalized) people whose emotions are often strange and guarded—it’s like having a meal in front of someone who’s hungry and not offering anything to that person to eat.

	All year I tried to be like one of the psychiatrists. I parroted them. They are the ones in absolute authority within a psychiatric hospital. And if you want to succeed in their world it means having to be like them. They want to see someone recognizable when they look at me.
	But although there is a tremendous amount about the psychiatric model that I admire and seek to integrate genuinely into my work with patients, the process of integration ought to be a matter of choice rather than one of necessity. Because having to mimic psychiatry also means remaining uncritical of some things about it that are wrong—for example, the standard process of locking people up in order to protect them from acting suicidal or homicidal, or from being unable to take care of themselves, due to mental illness.
	Is there another way of making people less miserable?
	It is not until the internship ends that I am able to ask myself this most fundamental question.