Rating: 4/5

A Ship of the Line was the second book written by CS Forester in what would become his Hornblower series. It was commissioned in the wake of the success of the first Hornblower novel, The Happy Return (called Beat to Quarters in the US), which had originally been written as a standalone work. There is a perceptible element of the author feeling his way still. We see him easing towards the idea of a series of books (which was still an unusual concept in the 1930s), without yet fully committing. He achieves this via the interim step of what is effectively a ‘min-series’. A Ship of the Line will take Hornblower via a series of interlocking adventures to the low point of desperate defeat at the book’s conclusion. This becomes the starting point for his redemption and rise again in the following, twin book, called Flying Colours. The end of this second book has a resolution that could have ended a Hornblower trilogy. Fortunately for us, Forester was persuaded to continue.

The book is at heart a rollicking good swashbuckler, with enough nautical action to satisfy the most demanding fan. We also see the way that the author is developing his world. The character of Hornblower starts to emerge from the work-in-progress we saw in The Happy Return. Gone are some traits – like the throat clearing, while other parts are refined. The self-doubt that plagues him becomes a stronger element, together with his lack of confidence behind his assumed calm, determined exterior. He also has an almost autistic inability to form relationships with those around him, not least with Bush, his closest friend. Together it makes for a more interesting and believable hero than the traditional, faultless kind offered by some lesser writers. 

We also witness his flawed relationships with women. He finds himself trapped in a marriage to the frumpy Maria, a wife he neither respects nor loves. Instead he is obsessed by the socially and physically more desirable Lady Barbara, now married to his commanding officer. As readers our sympathy lies with the faultless Maria, who has lost two children to smallpox, is pregnant with his third, and still loves him unreservedly.

In summary it is a fun read, with an eternally interesting main character, and remains one of the founding books of the naval genre.