Rating: 2/5

This is one of those ' truth stranger than fiction' stories. Debora Jones Green has an IQ of 165, but her emotional IQ is that of a child. Because of her extremely high IQ, she is successful academically and sips through medical school easily; however, in practice she has difficulty relating to her patients. 
Debora Jones Green marries Mike Farrar in 1979. They met at the Truman Medical Vented in Kansas City when Michal was still in med school and Debora was a senior resident. They had three children between 1983 to 1988. 
In 1994, shortly after Mike asked Debora for a divorce, a fire destroyed their home in Kansas City, Missouri. Fortunately, the children and the dog were with Debora when the fire broke out. Mike and Debora reconciled and bought a huge mansion in Prairie Valley, Kansas.
The marraige began to unravel within six months. On a school trip to Peru, Mike was draw to another woman. When they returned to Kansas, he contacted Celeste and began to see her regularly. He told Debora he wanted a divorce. During this time Debora began poisoning him with ricin, which she got by grinding up castor beans. Mike became very ill and was in and out of the hospital eleven times in one year for life threatening operations and procedures. He came close to death several times.
On the night of October 24, 1995, a fire raged through the Farrar home where the three children lay sleeping at 12:15. Debora poured accelerant throughout the house and lit the fire trail. Two of her children died in the fire; one daughter managed to save herself by crawling out of a window and jumping to the ground. When her son came out on the terrace and asked if he should jump, Deborah told him to go back inside because she was getting help.
After a plea bargain, which took the death penalty off the table, Debora was sentenced to forty hard years in the penitentiary.

It was very difficult to believe that a mother and wife could actually do the things she was accused of doing by the prosecution. And how could a husband continue to live with a wife who verbally abused him in front of his children every day? The psychology of the murderer is discussed in detail, which was interesting to me. It was a very strange, interesting story, but parts of the book repeated itself, and that got a little boring.