Rating: 4/5

Reminiscences of a Stock Operator is the auto-biography of "Jesse Lauriston Livermore", a famous Wall Street speculator from 100 years ago. Livermore describes many of the tactics that he would use to drive prices, either up or down, and most importantly, how he would use the tape to understand prices.

Now that the markets are all fully imersed in the information age, a single speculator would be hard pressed to use the exact tactics that Livermore used 100 years ago, but the overall strategy and how the markets actually operate is surprisingly the same. Reading, you very rarely feel that the book was written 100 years ago --- it could have been 1 year ago.

I was amazed at the similarities between the tactics that Livermore describes using, and the tactics that George Soros describes in The Alchemy of Finance Reading the Mind of the Market. The parallels far exceed the divergences.

Livermore reminds us that, if you are going to engage in the markets, you should not listen to anyone. Most of the people are often wrong, as described in his favorite book Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds. When the bureaucrat, be he corporate or government, assures you that "nothing is wrong", then get your money and run. When the insiders announce nothing, but are buying --- then you should be buying.

The only way to get a stock price to move up is for people to buy it. The only way to move it down is for people to sell it. It's when you actually think about who is buying and who is selling what quantity in this batch and what quantity in total at what time --- that's where the real story is.

And there are some great speculators, like Soros and like Livermore that can just read the information available to everyone, but they are able to see the whole story --- or at least more of the story than the people around them.

Perhaps most importantly, the story really shows how empty the life of speculation is. Spending so much time and energy without changing anything, without creating anything. Considering that life is so short and time is so precious, the life of the speculator wouldn't be one of my first choices.