Rating: 5/5

What a great book. This is a book of four short stories all related to Pern. The short stories are "The Smallest Dragonboy", "The Girl Who Heard Dragons", "Runner of Pern" and "Ever the Twain". All four stories were different and very enjoyable.

The Smallest Dragonboy is about a boy, Keevan, that is going to be a candidate on the hatching ground. He is a small boy that grew up the Weyr and is picked on by his peers because of his size. As the hatching draws near the bullying becomes worse and there is talk about the younger boys not being allowed onto the hatching ground as candidates until they are older. His biggest bully ends up injuring him in the end with a head wound and a broken leg. He still hobbles his way to the hatching ground during the impression and impresses a bronze dragon. He is a great character full of heart and you are cheering for him all the way through. Even though he is a small boy, he has a huge heart and personality. This was a great story.

In The Girl Who Heard Dragons,Aramina can hear dragons and speak to them as well. She is with her family who is holdless after the tyranny of Faxx. Bandits are trying to use Aramina because of her talent of hearing dragons. With that, her family flees and is on the run from these bandits. With threadfall imminent, they are forced to find a cave to take cover in. There is an accident with her father and she ends up reaching out to the dragons that she sees and they hear her and respond. They save her father and move them to the cave so that they are safe from threadfall. All this time the Lord Holder for the area and the dragonriders are looking for the bandits that are after her. The bandits elude everyone and find Aramina who calls for the dragons. This is a heartwarming story with a lot of emotions that are misplaced due to fear. Everything works out in the end. Great story.

Runner of Pern is probably my favorite of the four stories. Runner of Pern is about runners, literally, people who run messages from one place to another. This is mostly about Tenna who is a new runner. She is from a family of runners and she is beginning her career as a runner. Runners use tracks that have been laid out by the runner services. They are narrow paths that are to only be used by runners. She is running one evening on a runner track to make a delivery when she hears something coming. She is pushed off of the runner track by a runner (beast/horse) and rider. She is pushed into a bush of thorns that can be very dangerous. She makes it to her destination where they see to her wounds. She finds out she was almost run over by one of the Lord Holder's sons. It takes several days for them to get all of the thorns out and for her to be on the mend. During this time, there is a gather. She promptly approaches the man that was pointed out to her as the one who ran her off the track and she punches him and knocks him out. She finds out that she has knocked out the wrong brother. She has knocked out his twin instead. This story is full of humor. I couldn't help but love Tenna's character and charm. She is a strong woman. There is laughter and romance. A fantastic story!

Ever The Twain is about a set of twins that are searched for the hatching that is to come. The boy has always had the dream of being a dragonrider. The sister is the one that is chosen during the search, but she refuses to go without her brother. This is a heartwarming story that was enjoyable as well. 

This set of short stories is a great addition to the Pern series.