Rating: 5/5

"To be or not to be that is the question:"

Is this the most famous line in Shakespeare? It is certainly a contender. The Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of Denmark is Shakespeare's longest and most ambitious play, taking over four hours to perform in its entirety. Written at some point between 1599 and 1602, it has such an extensive vocabulary and expressive range, that Shakespeare was emotionally drained afterwards, and was incapable of writing anything for two years. It was not only one of Shakespeare's most popular works during his lifetime, but it has been hugely influential, inspiring countless adaptations and retellings, and is still among his most-performed plays world-wide. People have joked that it is a series of quotations from end to end, and certainly maxims such as,

"Give thy thoughts no tongue"
"Be thou familiar but by no means vulgar"
"Neither a borrower nor a lender be"
"To thine own self be true"
"I must be cruel only to be kind" 
"Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all" 
"... it is a custom
More honoured in the breach 
than the observance"

have entered the English language so successfully, that people sometimes mistakenly think they are from a holy book. Many of the characters in Hamlet are inclined to philosophise. Here is Claudius, racked with guilt,
 
"My words fly up, my thoughts remain below. 
Words without thoughts never to heaven go."

But none more so than the eponymous character of Hamlet. His remark to the courtier Rosencrantz,

"For there is nothing either good or bad, 
but thinking makes it so"

is subjectivist. It has its philosophical basis in the Greek Sophists, who argued that nothing is real except in the mind of the individual. Therefore there is no absolute truth, only relative truth. Hamlet's most famous soliloquy, the "To be or not to be" speech, is a clear example of existentialism. Hamlet is considering "being" - or continuing in his life and therefore acting on his knowledge, as against "not being" - where he would not live any more, and therefore not take any action. Yet as all true philosophers are, Hamlet is both open-minded and sceptical. On seeing the ghost, he reassures his friend,

"There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, 
than are dreamt of in your philosophy."

In addition, Shakespeare has made this brilliant, perceptive young man, the most skilled of all the characters at rhetoric, frequently using metaphors, puns, and double meanings. Surprisingly, this style of language still works well in a modern theatre, and is also comparatively easy to understand in this play. Other phrases such as, 
 
"Frailty, thy name is woman!"
"Murder most foul"
"To sleep: perchance to dream"
"A little more than kin, a little less than kind"
"Sweets to the sweet"
"In my mind's eye" 

and many more, are present in our culture. They are common sayings, frequently "borrowed" by other authors to be the titles of their books and plays. Shakespeare's language can sometimes be difficult to understand for contemporary readers, as it uses highly elaborate and complex witty discourse. Yet such is the skill of our greatest playwright, that he has coined these timeless and memorable quips in this play. For, as wise Polonius says, 

"Brevity is the soul of wit."

There are many long speeches and soliloquies, but often it is these shorter phrases which have the most resonance. 
 
Shakespeare created the title role of Hamlet (as the play is usually referred to) for the leading tragic actor of the time, Richard Burbage, and the tradition of "wanting to play Hamlet" has remained the pinnacle of many actors' careers for 400 years. In modern times, some female actors have also expressed a desire to play the role - and a few now have.

Shakespeare rarely invented his stories, and the source material for this one was probably the legend of "Amleth", from the 13th century. This was later retold by François de Belleforest in the 16th century. There is also apparently an earlier Elizabethan play, known today as the "Ur-Hamlet", although it is no longer extant. The author of the "Ur-Hamlet" is not known, and may well have been Shakespeare himself.

The play starts with a supernatural episode, guaranteed to grip the audience. It is approaching midnight, a cold winter's night outside Elsinore, the royal castle in Denmark, where the play is to be set. With the very first words,

"Who's there?" 

a ghostly figure has appeared to the guards, while they are awaiting a relief patrol.

As the guards and the audience begin to anticipate more appearances by the ghost, we learn of the political situation through the discussion between the soldiers. There has been a long-standing feud between Denmark and Norway, a neighbouring country. The Norwegian prince, Fortinbras is expected to lead an invasion. This also neatly leads to an introduction of his counterpart, the title character and protagonist, Prince Hamlet of Denmark, whom the soldiers admire. Hamlet's father (who was also called Hamlet) has recently died, and his widowed mother, Gertrude, has married the deceased king's brother, Claudius, who immediately succeeded him to the throne. This is obviously an interesting topic of discussion, both in terms of both the domestic and the international political situation.

The action moves to within the castle, and a scene introducing the characters mentioned. We become instantly aware of the young Prince Hamlet's dislike of his uncle Claudius, 

"My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules" 

Indeed, he later refers to him as,

"that incestuous, that adulterate beast"

Hamlet seems confused, and consequently distanced from his mother, whom he views as having made an over-hasty marriage, 

"Frailty, thy name is woman! -
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she follow'd my poor father's body,
Like Niobe, all tears:"

... 

"within a month:
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!" 

Much later, Gertrude has begun to recognise her behaviour in Hamlet's dramatic representation, and objects,

"The lady doth protest too much, methinks"

but at this point she seems unaware of his judgement of her.

We are introduced to Hamlet's circle of friends, his good friend Horatio, his romantic interest, Ophelia, her wise father - and the Lord Chamberlain Polonius (source of many of the timeless quotations), and her brave brother Laertes. The soldiers have consulted Horatio about the apparition's strange resemblance to the old king, and the Prince Hamlet decides to investigate.

From now on, the play becomes increasingly tense, with thrills, madness, mayhem, suicide and murder at every turn. One of the greatest bloodbaths in the whole of Shakespeare is in this play. The ghost tells Hamlet,

  "the serpent that did sting thy father's life 
Now wears his crown"

"Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd:"

urging Hamlet to,

"Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder...
Murder most foul!"

"O, horrible! O, horrible!" most horrible!"

"Adieu, adieu, adieu! remember me."

Hamlet is mentally tortured by the knowledge of what the ghost has told him. He is driven to question the worth of his very existence, dissembling to many of his loved ones by assuming an air of madness. A genuine insanity takes hold of Ophelia, mainly because of Hamlet's behaviour and actions, particularly one which resulted in the wrong victim. He uses his brain to outwit the one he now knows to be the murderer,

"O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!"

"... the play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King."

and a remarkable piece of theatre, a play within a play, is the result. 

This is a favourite device of Shakespeare, a literary conceit in which one story is told during the action of another story. It is both enjoyable in its own terms, yet it also reveals traits of character in those watching - just as that in, for instance, "A Midsummer Night's Dream". The twist in this play, of course, is that such reactions are being searched for by one of the characters, who is watching the others like a hawk. This a nice self-referential touch. 

When Hamlet is banished, although he does not know the whole of the devilment in store for him, he turns circumstances to his advantage.

"Though this be madness, yet there is method in 't"

"with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love
May sweep to my revenge"

Yet he feels persecuted, and the audience sense that he is doomed. This is a tragedy, after all. And Hamlet himself seems to feel the omens,

"The time is out of joint - O cursed spite!
That ever I was born to set it right!"

There are twists and turns in the play which come as a shock to the audience, and critics have debated the interpretation of the events ever since. There is cold-blooded murder, desire, jealousy, ambition, and calculated revenge. There are complex ethical and philosophical issues which have had varying significance depending on the time the play is performed. 

In the early 17th century Jacobean drama, when themes of insanity and melancholy were fashionable, the play was very popular. By the middle of the 18th century, Gothic themes became popular, so audiences appreciated not only madness in the play, but also the mystical and ghostly elements of Hamlet. In the 19th century, Romanticism blossomed, and readers and audiences began to admire internal and individual conflicts, so the focus shifted to an interest in Hamlet's characters and internal mental struggles. This tradition has continued into the 20th century, and even today. 

A modern audience may have an even deeper psychological approach, and look at Hamlet's unconscious desires and motivations, which may not be merely the ones he expresses. Additionally, on each performance, or reading, a reader may understand different points about the play. Consider just a few paltry examples from the hundreds of questions the play raises; here are a few alternative interpretations to those which seem the more obvious ones: 

Was Gertrude actually "guilty" of anything? A respectable woman of this time would be classed either as a maid, a wife, or a widow. Whores were considered to be clearly unrespectable. Yet Hamlet perceived his mother as a whore because she did not remain faithful to his father, the king. But wasn't she a woman trapped by convention, in the tradition of marrying her brother-in-law, to protect the kingdom? Or were there baser desires, as Hamlet suspected? Or alternatively, was Hamlet disgusted by his mother's "incestuous" relationship with Claudius because he himself had Oedipal desires? 

What was the true relationship between Hamlet and Ophelia? Was she an innocent? Or could Ophelia's madness after her father's death also be given a Freudian interpretation. She clearly loved her father - but was this in all innocence as a daughter? Why was she apparently so completely overwhelmed by his death that this drove her insane? 

And why did Hamlet's disgust at his mother's behaviour lead him to lose faith in all women, so that he treated Ophelia as if she was being dishonest - and as if she too was a whore? Was Hamlet himself mad, suicidal, hormonal, confused, or psychotic? It is interesting that in a play which sees so much action, it is in the soliloquies that Shakespeare shows us Hamlet's motives and thoughts. Why did he seem so inconsistent? Is this to lead the audience astray? The play focuses on confusion and duality, in all things. Was he a true hero?

As with all classic works, there are myriad interpretations. None of the situations are simple; none of the characters one-sided. It is a play which can, and should, be read and watched over and over again.

"O, that this too too solid flesh would melt
Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!
Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on't! ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden,
That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
...
It is not nor it cannot come to good:
But break, my heart; for I must hold my tongue."

...

"To be, or not to be: that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep;
No more; and by a sleep to say we end
The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep;
To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause: there's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life;
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscover'd country from whose bourn
No traveller returns, puzzles the will..."