Rating: 5/5

For Muir's early life, see my review of Thousand Mile Walk; his Scottish father refusing to pay for Muir's university training (Wisconsin), he drops out and walks to the Gulf, sleeping outside, especially in cemeteries. A bit of that first book's in this collection.
 Muir liked reading Emerson, whom I often aloudread in my birdbook talks (particularly his verses, "The Titmouse,"* about a Chickadee's bravery in a winter storm, saying like Caesar, "Ve-ni vi-di vi-c(h)i." Years later in the Sierra Nevada, Emerson visited Muir with a host of protectors. Of all the people Muir had shown the Sierras in his first year there, "I found no-one half warm enough until Emerson came...He seemed as serene as a Sequoia, his head in the empyrean" (p.163) Muir wanted Emerson* to join him sleeping outside all night, as Muir did his whole life, but Emerson's handlers figured the old man wasn't up to it, "His party, full of indoor philosophy, failed to see the natural beauty...of my wild plan." A disappointment for Muir (age 33), and possibly for Emerson (68).

 In this volume you can see Muir's writing improved in his accounts of the Western mountains, his coming across bear with his St Bernard, Carlo, and shotgun, avoiding shooting. He'd know when there was a bear ahead since Carlo would not proceed ahead of him, his ears and tail down. Once he had not brought his gun. He made a sudden rush at the bear, a dozen yard away through the brush, but to his dismay, the bear did not run. (Possibly he had never encountered man, up on these heights.)
"I was afraid to run, and therefore, like the bear, held my ground...How long our strenuous interview lasted, I don't know..but in the slow fulness of time, he took his huge paws down off the log, and with magnificent deliberation turned and walked leisurely up the meadow...His bread is sure in all seasons,...tasting each in turn as if he had journeyed thousands of miles...to enjoy their varied productions"(131).
 Muir's great dog stories; a small black dog named for the Indian tribe he came from, Stickeen,
proves unexpected master of glacier-crevass hopping.
 Great account of canyons, even knowing someone is ten miles away.

* "To a Titmouse" is the addendum to my recent book, "Conversations with Birds: the Metaphysics of Bird and Human Communication." Emerson was interim minister at my New Bedford Unitarian Church in 1831, before the current castlelike stone edifice was built in 1838. We do boast a bust of Emerson in the R front of the Church, as well as a huge Tiffany mosaic behind the lectern--and a Flentrop organ.