Rating: 5/5

I love horror. I have loved horror since I was five years old, when my dad took me to see "Jaws 2" in the theater, and, as he recalled, I sat riveted on the edge of my seat through the whole movie. Years later, when I was eleven, ABC did a broadcast of Ridley Scott's "Alien" as their Sunday Night Movie, and my dad let me stay up and watch it. Despite it being supposedly edited for television, it scared the crap out of me and gave me nightmares for months. I couldn't watch it again until I was in high school. Needless to say, I loved it.

I know my dad looks like kind of an asshole with bad judgment in the above anecdote, but that's not my intention. (My dad was a smart, loving guy who, unfortunately, had a tendency to introduce his young children to wildly age-inappropriate movies. This is the guy who sat me down when I was twelve and showed me "Bachelor Party", saying that if I had any technical questions about it, ask mom. He considered this "The Talk". My mom did not find any of it funny, when she inevitably found out. True story.)

Actually, I guess I owe my dad a lot in terms of my love for horror. If it weren't for him, I probably would have never had the courage to read "It" when I was 13, which started me on a path of horror fiction and Stephen King, specifically.

The movie that started my love for horror: "Jaws 2", a 1978 film directed by Jeannot Szwarc, may not have been as good as the original Spielberg film, but it had everything a five-year-old needed to keep eyes glued to the screen.

I don't know when I purchased the paperback copy of "Danse Macabre". Stephen King's 1981 nonfiction treatise on why he loves horror was one of those books that I remember going back to constantly just for the sheer joy of finding a literary kindred spirit. I must have re-read it a dozen times throughout my teens. The copy I owned became so beat-up and dog-eared, it was practically falling apart. I still have it somewhere, packed away in a box somewhere in my basement.

"Danse Macabre" is an absolute must-read for fans of horror. It is King's long-winded but very eye-opening and humorous answer to the question that fans and interviewers constantly asked, and probably still ask: "Why do you write horror?"

For 464 pages, King gushes lovingly on his fifty-year encyclopedic knowledge of horror movies and TV shows and novels. Everything from "Earth Vs. the Flying Saucers" (which was apparently King's first real horror film, much like "Jaws 2" was to me) to "The Exorcist" to "Alien".

King attributes this 1956 sci-fi shocker to his love for horror. He makes the case that many films billed as "science fiction" were, like this one, horror films disguised as sci-fi, mainly because the "science" was mostly garbage and the affect on the viewers---namely, scaring the shit out of them---was the same.

King looks at the three most influential horror novels ever---Robert Louis Stevenson's "Strange Case of Dr. Jeckyll and Mr. Hyde", Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein" and Bram Stoker's "Dracula"---and how they've been the templates for almost every sci-fi/fantasy horror since.

His chapters on horror on radio and TV are relatively short, as he (rightly) claims that both mediums were not very friendly to horror fans. Radio comes out looking a little better, with Arch Oboler's "Lights Out" radio dramas. TV, however, for many years, was extremely timid about horror. Rod Serling's famous "Twilight Zone" was, according to King, the best exemplar of anything that came close to decent horror. He excoriates shows like "Kolchak: The Night Stalker" and "Dark Shadows" as junk food for horror fans---somewhat entertaining but totally without any nutritional value.

It's his chapter on "Horror Fiction" that King shines. The ten books that he highlights are wide-ranging in their contributions to the genre, but he makes the case that they are all brilliant and influential. The books are: Peter Straub's "Ghost Story", Ann Rivers Siddons's "The House Next Door", Harlan Ellison's "Strange Wine", Richard Matheson's "The Shrinking Man", Ray Bradbury's "Something Wicked This Way Comes", Jack Finney's "The Body Snatchers", Ira Levin's "Rosemary's Baby", Ramsey Campbell's "The Doll Who Ate His Mother", and James Herbert's "The Fog". I'm actually quite proud of the fact that I've read at least 50% of these books.

The book also features an appendix in which King lists his personal 100 Best horror novels ever written and the most influential horror movies ever produced. Both lists only involve books and films made until 1980, which is why I hope that he someday writes a follow-up book to this.