Rating: 5/5

I'm torn between giving this a 4 and a 5, but I'll round up because I think EVERYONE SHOULD READ THIS. 

Get A Financial Life is literally the textbook-that-reads-more-like-spark-notes to getting your finances in order as a young adult. Firstly, this book was released years ago, but just released an updated 2017 version so everything is 100% accurate (tho technically you can put $18500 into your 401k for 2018, up $500 from last year when this was released, but that's easily forgivable).

The first chapter is pretty much "I Need Help and I Need It Now" and it gives you a brief summary of everything in the book. Both so you can understand some of the steps this book can help you with and also get information to those people who don't have time to read, quickly. 

I'll admit, this book can be a bit dry, but it's finance, it's hard to make it super interesting, especially if you aren't in the best place financially and would rather make minimum payments and call it a day. BUT this book doesn't use extra words or try to make this more complicated than it needs to be. It breaks down common vocabulary words, the steps you need to take, how to take those steps, and it's unbiased in all the options it provides. The sections are clearly marked and you can skim or just head to the portions that apply to where you are at. There are tons of graphs and charts with examples so you can see how some of the topics covered would actually play out. Every chapter closes with an FAQ section (that's actually helpful) and a "financial cramming" page that sums up what was in the chapter. At the end of the book there is a ton of resources for "additional reading" if any of the chapters really grabbed ahold of your interest.

Some of the major topics it covers is Debt (student loans, car loans, credit card debt, etc), Renting vs Buying - and how to do both (there's a ton of stuff on mortgages too, which I wish I read sooner), Insurance (car, life, health), and Investing (401k, IRAs, Bonds/Mutual Funds/Index Funds, etc etc). There's a few other chapters in there that are also helpful (even one on Military Benefits which doesn't apply to me, but I've literally never seen that in a general finance book before), but these are the big dogs that people in their 20-30s probably are dealing with. 

I'm already past a few of these milestones, but I wish I read this 5 or 6 years ago, because I was a little late to the personal finance game. GIFT THIS TO ALL YOUR COLLEGE GRADUATES. But also maybe include some money, cause they read a lot in college already - give them some incentive, but also this book.