Rating: 2/5

Quite an entertaining book, but aside from a few interesting science facts and comic book history information, it doesn't tell us anything we didn't already know. The main premise of the book is to explain exactly why most superheroes are impossible. As readers, however, we already know they are impossible. We read comic books for the same reason we read novels: to be entertained. If we are looking for accurate science info, then we go elsewhere.

The thing that really bothered me is the debate the authors have between evolution and creationism. Rather than sticking to precise facts, the authors declare that evolution has been proven to be true time and time again. My question is, how? Have scientists succeeded in evolving any living organism into a completely different species? Certain aspects of natural selection can be seen in nature, it's true, but the actual evolving of any species into another different species has yet to be proven. When looking at the rock record, we never find any in between animal fossils, like a fish with legs or a half a lung. Instead we see fully formed complex animals suddenly appearing after older animals have gone suddenly extinct. Yet this little fact is left out of the book. 

Also, when discussing the creationist beliefs, all creationists are grouped together as those who believe the earth along with the entire universe was created 6,000 years ago. Unfortunately, this isn't true; it is an outdated view which few still accept. Most creationist scientists know the earth came into existence millions of years ago. The proof of that is right in the rock record. Also, no creation scientist believes that the entire universe came into existence along with the earth. People 400 years ago believed that. The authors' contempt for creationism and God was very apparent, and not at all as objective as they were about other subjects. The whole debate was completely out of place, and ruined the rest of the book for me. Save it for a book about evolution and creationism.

In the end, it would have been a better book if the authors stuck to facts, stuck to the original premise of the book, and did more research about certain subjects to ensure they were fully accurate. I would have also appreciated more history about comics and superheroes. It would also have been better if the size of the book wasn't so restricted, so that more comics could have been discussed. 

Give it a try if you like, but I can't recommend it.