I read this as a library book that has been in circulation since 1927. Seeing nearly 100 years of wear and readers’ marks was fascinating. 

As a whole, I have no clue how to rate this book. There were sections that were interesting and enlightening and humorous in turn. There is one passage about travel and home and rootlessness that is one of my favorite things I’ve read in a long time. 

There is also a lot here that is extraordinarily racist. I expected a fair amount of racism given the general premise — English man in the 1920s travelling around Asia — but wow was it racist. 

——

The section I loved: 

I have always felt a passion for personal free-dom. It is a passion which the profession of writing has enabled me to gratify. A writer is his own master, works when and where he will, and is paid by a quite impersonal entity, the public, with whom it is unnecessary for him to have any direct dealings whatever.

Professionally free, I have taken care not to encumber myself with the shackles that tie a man down to one particular plot of ground; I own nothing, nothing beyond a few books and the motor car which enables me to move from one encampment to another.

It is pleasant to be free, when one has enough to do and think about to prevent one's ever being bored, when one's work is agreeable and seems (pleasing illusion!) worth while, when one has a clear conception of what one desires to achieve and enough strength of mind to keep one, more or less undeviatingly, on the path that leads to this goal. It is pleasant to be free. But occasionally, I must confess, I regret the chains with which I have not loaded myself. In these moods I desire a house full of stuff, a plot of land with things growing on it; I feel that I should like to know one small place and its people intimately, that I should like to have known them for years, all my life. But one cannot be two incompatible things at the same time. If one desires freedom, one must sacrifice the advantages of being bound. It is, alas, only too obvious.