Rating: 5/5

Rating: 4.8 / 5

To anyone who has said that this book is heartbreakingly beautiful...

...I agree.

I'm reading through Lynn Kurland's de Piaget / MacLeod series in publication order, so this is book #3 for that, and basically, it's my favourite thing that I've read by this author so far, and the only one that doesn't have ridiculous elements in it. I'm thinking that this is because there are no supernatural / time travel elements involved, and, well, quite frankly, I works better that way.

It's just pure, raw emotion and love, and it. just. WORKS.

______________

Meet Gillian and Christopher: two individuals who each have their own scars in their own ways, and who don't expect to find love or healing, but just might in each others' arms. Gillian herself has been beaten and abused by her father since her childhood; and as for Christopher, well...he carries his own scars both physically due to his blindness, but especially emotionally. Kept apart, they make an unlikely pair; but together, they become each others' strength, and it just gets more and more heartening to see!

Ahem, but anyway, in terms of what I absolutely loved about this story, just as a reminder for myself, I'd say that the pacing and just how real everything felt was a perfect combo. Usually, I don't like for the buildup to the romance via route of distrust and pushing apart (instead of pulling together) to go on for TOO long (because my tender heart can only stand so much angst); but in THIS story, absolutely everything felt justified. Even if it did feel harsh at times, I couldn't help but feel that YES, it IS realistic for things to have happened in the way they did, because both Gillian and Christopher were just so justified in what they felt, including with fear and mistrust. No decision ever felt forced or out of nowhere, contrived or just for plot convenience. I believed EVERYTHING that was happening, and so it just tore at me more when they either had their sad moments or had tender, loving moments. I was really rooting for them from start to finish, and absolutely LOVED how they found each other and their happy ending.

No magic, no miraculous elements, nada. Just LOVE and pure feeling to get them through and together at the end.

*sigh romantically and cries happily for a bit*

And anyway, I'd like to give extra kudos to Christopher, which has inspired me to make up a new list of "heroes I love" for books. He'll be a honourable first entry. Basically, for anyone wondering why, what I especially loved about Christopher was how he didn't hold onto his pride unnecessarily in ways that were stupid or that kept him from making the right decisions. I've seen so many heroes in these types of roles where they keep up acting tough until AFTER a life-or-death situation has passed for their lady love, and only THEN or at the end of the book do they actually use the L-word to confess how they feel.

But, gents and especially ladies, hold on to your hats because this is NOT SO for Christopher! He's super strong and manly, but he doesn't feel it's beneath him to confess what he feels; he doesn't do it right away, but when he DOES, you just know that he means it, what the weight of those words is to him. Not only that, but when he fails, yes he's surly about whatever that failure might be; but, if it calls for despair and tears, by God, here's a hero whom the author is not afraid to make CRY!

For men out there, let me tell you this: it's not a weakness to see a man cry, not at all; in fact, there's something (in my view, always) so uniquely powerful about a man being strong enough to cry if ever a situation calls for it, that I can't help but think higher of a man who does cry in a terrible situation as opposed to a man who does not. And I don't mean over every little thing or weeping like a big baby over nothing; no, what I mean is the type of crying of despair, like Christopher does over his own perceived ineptitude due to his blindness, and how he feels that he'll never be good enough for Gillian because he's not a "whole man". There's this one scene where he even goes to one of the three wise women of the story, and asks her to take all that he has, if only she can give him sight--that's where the title of the story actually comes from, I think. It just tore at my heart, that entire scene, and I could just picture Christopher crying as he asked for that. Knowing what that meant in terms of how much he cared for Gillian as well was just beyond words.

_________

All in all, therefore, this story indeed is nothing short of beautiful, and definitely one that I'll be re-reading in all its heartwarming moments, for many years to come.