Rating: 5/5

Up until now, I've known Henry Clay almost primarily for his political activities. His participation in the Corrupt Bargain and in the Bank War are the most well-documented and known. Remini does, surprisingly, a good job describing these events despite his prior experience as a Jackson man. In fact, Remini has the same problem as he does in all his previous works: he takes Clay's side. 

When taken on its own, Henry Clay is a highly one-sided work that tries to explain away (most of) Clay's worst attributes and put him in the best of lights. When I think of this book in and of itself, it's pretty strange because you can see how obviously flawed the man is and just feel strange about how Remini speaks of things. 

However, when you take this book on top of the rest of Remini's works, it's perfect. This book serves as a pretty damning criticism of Jackson's administration and Van Buren's party tactics. It fits together with his earlier Jackson trilogy to make a more complete story about that man's problems. As well, having read many, many of Remini's other Age of Jackson works, I already know some of Remini's political problems with Clay. I know the opinions of Clay's enemies upon starting this book. 

One of the things I have learned to appreciate from Remini is the sass in his tone as he recounts and comments. John C. Calhoun, who at this point I believe is solidly in contention for the title of "worst American ever", appears several times in the book. At one point Clay lashes his magic voice out at Calhoun, lacing his words with arsenic, and Calhoun doesn't take it well. Remini says, "[Calhoun] would not abide personal attacks - not from anyone - and least of all from those (practically everybody) who could not match the excellence of his 'metaphysical thought processes.'" That "practically everybody" comment from Remini combined with the sheer pompousness of "metaphysical thought processes" quote from Calhoun makes for such a great, subtle jibe at the man. Remini also does a good job poking holes into things by showing evidence to contradict Clay's insistence on "good intentions" right after stating the good intention. 

I think this book is essential reading if you're going to be a Jacksonian era history buff. You can't escape reading Remini's Jackson trilogy, and this book is a perfect addition that places criticisms and lends thoughts from the other side of the story. Fantastic work.