Rating: 4/5

I am very glad a friend recommended this one to me! 

If you're into Faerie, Irish, Magic and love of land, then this is for you.

I had some issues with it which are minor, but for what it is ( a fantasy romance) it was excellent.

Super sticky sweet, strong heroine and decent plot. Too bad one has to make considerable leaps of faith time and again.

My issues (quick personal notes to myself):  If the hero was English and not Irish, wouldn't the heroine have noticed his accent?
I don't recall her ever picking the brooch back out of the fire after the H appears. I kept thinking "go get the brooch!." Yet it appears later as if she had. The antagonist (Lionel) was the most illogical character of them all. All his words and actions defied what any reasonable person in authority would have said and done. I'm not going to list them all, you read it and make that determination yourself. Fallon could have protested she wanted a proper wedding ceremony to get out of the forced one. The whole "I'm doing you a favor" and his logic behind it was irrational. I knew Hugh was Silver Hand right at the beginning. No brainer there. When considering who would hang for the crimes of Silver Hand, the author reasoned Hugh couldn't do it because Fallon would be in danger, yet having her husband take the rap, would do the same. We rarely see Hugh, which was a big tip off, and irrational IMHO. Going from you'll get an annulment so "stay pure" to loving the H like a brother when he had little to no contact with him. Also, the H goes to quickly from "I won't sleep with her" to taking her to bed. 

 I know I'm being nit picky, but there was just too many plot holes I wished were filled. The book had so much potential. The author could have taken this in so many directions, yet kept it simple and predictable. A tremendous amount of missed opportunities to take the book to a higher level.

My last gripe is that the author is too much in the head of the characters. If you get my meaning. Not enough showing and experiencing with actions and other senses outside the mental. Repetitive. Lack of a more substantial motivation. 

I'm not bashing the book, please don't misunderstand. I just came off reading a bunch of books by S. King who is a master of character psyche so I may be more brutal than normal. Not comparing so to speak but just noticing how a writer executes a 3-D character.

The good: Super sweet, great romance with honorable characters. Awesome comfort read.

No safety concerns whatsoever.