Rating: 3/5

This book was pretty good. It started out as a pamphlet and it shows, but it's still well put together. It was originally published in 1980 and updated off and on till this publication in 1991. At my LGBT group, I saw Young, Gay, &amp; Proud with the informational papers and small booklets. Even though the cover is ridiculous looking. Later I will scan it and if I can edit this post to add the link. To describe it: It's a white cover, in the background is a HUGE pink (scalene) triangle, an illustration of 7 (alternative looking of course) teenaged looking people. They are cartoons that are also illustrated throughout the book by Rupert Kinnard of, quote from book: "...gay African American superheroes known to fans across America as the Brown Bomber and Diva Touché Flambé." Overlayed on the background but not the people in purple caps are the words "Young gay &amp; Proud". 

I laughed at the book because of the cover, though I asked if I could borrow it because I thought it still might be interesting if anything else, and since it was written originally in the late 1970's (it started out as a pamphlet published in Melbourne, Australia in 1979). I am glad I did, it is actually a really good first book for someone who may be questioning or first coming out who is gay or lesbian (sadly trans* people don't get a mention. Then again given the title you expect this. I would include bisexuals in the list for who it is good for, but even though does mention them and that it's good too, it glides over them.) Given that it's outdated by 20 years, the information is still relevant and extremely progressive for the time it was written (even if it was a 1991 addition). The AIDS and possibly other STD information is understandably outdated, but otherwise this book aged very well I think. I would suggest if you are interested in reading non-fiction gay books with information and tips that is a fast read, to check out this book. You can probably get it for really cheap online too given it's age. If anything you might find a good tip or a personal story that helps. I read one from a lesbian who sounded a lot like me at one part, and kinda helped me feel less abnormal about my own questioning situation.