Rating: 5/5

"Amazing Journeys" is part of the New School of translations of Jules Verne that have come about since the 1990s. These new translations are not to just upgrade the nineteenth century English but also to overcome the fact that Verne was translated to appeal to juvenile audiences by the British and American publishers. The translator, Fredrick Paul Walter, is a member and former vice-president of North American Jules Verne Society which is dedicated to enshrining Verne in the Western Canon rather than the legacy of the Disney Company. 

The volume contains five novels: "Journey to the Center of the Earth", "From the Earth to the Moon", "Circling the Moon", 20,000 Leagues Under the Seas", and "Around the World in 80 Days". It is a collection of firsts full of humor, satire, science, and adventure. In "Journey", Verne invents the classic nutty-professor character, in "Earth to the Moon" he satirizes the military-industrial complex - particularly America's, in "Circling" the author creates a hair-raising and realistic adventure and pokes fun at American seriousness and French frivolity, in "20,000" Jules creates the first hard science fiction novel and literally explores the depths of misanthropy, and the volume concludes with "80" the forerunner of William Gibson's near future Bigend trilogy by covering the impact of infrastructure, globalization, and capitalism on the West and indigenous cultures - and its dehumanizing effects. 

Clearly Verne was a genius and exercises a variety of literary techniques to delivery a wealth of scientific knowledge while also generating entertaining action and surprisingly distinct characters who have very adult foibles. My only complaint about the translations is that much of the French feel I was hoping for is still missing even when the characters are actually French. This unfortunately makes you feel at times like you are watching a dubbed foreign film. However, it is very clear that Verne deserves his place in the Western Canon for more reasons than just inventing a genre but for both his vision and literary style. 

So grab the book and rediscover the extraordinaire!