Rating: 5/5

The first time I read this, I kept trying to imagine what it would have been like to survive in the wilds of Yellowstone before all the trappings of humanity had been added. Would I have made it out alive?

I just read this for a second time ... and I'm still awed by Everts' experiences. This edition includes an Introduction and an Afterword, both of which make Everts' text more meaningful. Everts himself wrote the 50 pages in the middle for publishing in Scribner's Monthly. He relates his experiences quite vividly.

He explains how he became separated from the group:
The forest was quite dark, and the trees so thick, that it was only by a slow process that I could get through them at all.
(Apparently the members of the party separated and found their own ways through the tangled mass of vegetation and fallen trees.)

He loses his horse:
Coming to an opening, from which I could see several vistas, I dismounted for the purpose of selecting one leading in the direction I had chosen, and leaving my horse unhitched, as had always been my custom, walked a few rods into the forest. ... My horse took fright, and I turned around in time to see him disappearing at full speed among the trees.

He didn't realize just how tragic the horse's disappearance really was. He writes ..
My blankets, gun, pistols, fishing tackle, matches—everything, except the clothing on my person, a couple of knives, and a small opera-glass were attached to the saddle.

While wandering for 37 days on foot, he survived primarily on a diet of thistle;
My attention was attracted to a small green plant of so lively a hue as to form a striking contrast with the deep pine foliage. For closer examination I pulled it up by the root, which was long and tapering, not unlike a radish. It was a thistle. I tasted it; it was palatable and nutritious. My appetite craved it, and the first meal in four days was made on thistle roots.
This thistle's common name is Evert's thistle. 

37 days in a wilderness is a long time, especially since he was separated from the group on Sept 9 and wasn't found until mid October.

I wish I'd known about this book when I went to Yellowstone with the kids. This would have been my choice to read aloud in the evenings.