Rating: 3/5

Re A Heart As Big As Texas - EG is back with more campy antics with an h honoring a promise to her now deceased grandmother and an H who is lovestruck and bossy with it. 

The book opens with the h digging a ditch for new water pipe on her ranch and the H and his girlfriend showing up on horseback to complain about the h's sheep going walkabout. The h explains that the sheep wouldn't be roaming if some horse rider hadn't left the gate open, and the H's girlfriend gets very defensive. (It is clear that the girlfriend left the gate open.) The H and h's relationship progresses rapidly with the H taking over the ditch digging, he has a trench digger at his newly purchased next door ranch and the girlfriend is getting snarky because the H isn't hanging all over her because he is flirting with the h.

Things get stranger when a sheriff's deputy shows up at the h's ranch with a search warrant. The h is suspected of smuggling - and as the story moves along, it turns out she is - but WHAT she is smuggling is a bit unusual and we don't find out until the end of the book. 

The H is a high priced, high powered lawyer and his girlfriend is a county prosecutor that the H's mother doesn't like. The H's mum wants him to get married, but she is all aboard in favor of the h and dumping the girlfriend. There is also a Guatemalan couple that act as the h's housekeeper and shepherd, and they have two little girls, who the H adores. The H soon becomes a permanent fixture around the h's ranch, doing things like seeding from a helicopter and making repairs that the h's ranch needs, but the h doesn't want. 

The h isn't sure about the H, for one he is pushing into her ranch life and because of her activities, she doesn't want anyone around and also because the H invites a whole lot of federal agents and officials to his new ranch and the h thinks there is all sorts of surveillance going on. The H's girlfriend is hounding the h too, she and the local sheriff's deputy keep serving warrants and harassing the h because the girlfriend thinks the h is a threat to her marrying the H and wants her gone. (She is right about the h being a danger, the H is massively interested and the girlfriend is looking bad in comparison.)

After some barbecues, a lot of adoration on both the h and H's part for the children, an outdoor picnic for indigent people, discussions on how many jalepenos to add to Tex-Mex barbecue sauce, some H and h roofie kissing and the h turning down the H's attempts at seduction because she is still the respectable lady her grandma raised her to be, the h sends her Guatemalan couple off late at night with their two girls. The H, who had blotted his copy book earlier by trying to seduce the h again- this time in his car, shows up one more time to plead his case for lurve clubbing.

The h wants to play chess instead and so when the sheriff's deputy arrives to arrest the h for smuggling, the H is on hand to tell both him and the girlfriend prosecutor to go jump. The deputy stopped the Guatemalan couple on the road and wanted to take the vehicle they were in apart to find the supposed smuggled contraband. The H gets all snarky lawyer on the deputy and the girlfriend and runs them both off for performing a search without a warrant. Then the H finds out that what he thought were two little girls were actually a boy and a girl and the whole story comes out. 

The h is smuggling orphan babies from the war torn area's of Central America to Canada via the US. There is a whole baby underground railroad where the babies are presented as children of various South and Central American couples and passed up the chain until they reach political asylum in Canada. The h promised her grandmother she would keep the railroad running until seven years had passed and she is almost done with the time limit of her promise. 

The H thinks her cause is a worthy one, but he tells her he can't keep her out of jail unless she marries him. The h doesn't want to be married for a cause or to keep the H from looking like a fool for being conned. That changes fast when the H admits he loves her madly and since the h has been moping from the start of the book after the H's first roofie kiss, she is quick to explain she loves the H back and they lurve it up in the afternoon in anticipation of the wedding for the big HEA.

This one was the usual EG campy whackiness. The baby smuggling was definitely different and while I don't approve, I also have to remind myself that nothing bad would ever happen to children in HPlandia as it is a different universe from this one. (Unless the child was a future HP h or H, of course.) The love story was pretty tame in the wake of trying to figure out just what the h was doing, but the H playing two women off against each other wasn't really my cuppa either, so we can call it a draw in the HP adventure stakes and move on to more enticing selections.