Rating: 1/5

Less than 1 star. Half a star tops because the mystery plot made me wants to keep reading. 

Betty and Hester Lovelace are sisters but could not be more different. Where Betty is shy, refined and devoted to her family's estate, Hester is loud, coarse and speaks her mind, betraying their blacksmith origins. When their mother married a Marquess, Betty adapted quickly to their new life. Now their parents are dead, the wicked cousin who tried to steal their estate is dead and their stepsister Jane and her husband are dead. Jane left behind a small boy, Simon, the new Marquess of Westerby, aged 6. Betty and Hester agree on their devotion to their nephew but Betty is more overprotective, fearing the misfortunes that befell their family were not accidents. Indeed, Mrs. Bentley wants revenge on the Westerbys for her husband's suicide. Her plan includes snaring a Duke or Marquess for her own two daughters.

When everyone heads to London for the Season, Betty wants to stay behind. She hates the falseness of society manners and isn't interested in balls or parties. While hiding behind a curtain, Betty makes the acquaintance of the Duke of Collingham and proceeds to snub his offer to dance. The Duke is confused, thinking perhaps she doesn't know who he is. When Betty reveals she is aware of his identity, he is outraged, shocked, confused. Who wouldn't want to dance with the Duke of Collingham? Well who needs this country miss anyway? Unfortunately, the Duke can't take his eyes or thoughts off Betty. As Betty comes to increasingly rely on the Duke for assistance, she comes to see beyond his pride and he gets to know her sweetness and quiet strength. How could he marry her with such a dreadful family?

This is an absolutely dreadful, potboiler romance from Marion Chesney. Her Regency novels are such fun and so well researched that I expected to enjoy this one. I should have read the reviews and saved myself the time. The plot hinges on the inheritance and according to the law, women don't inherit. Little Simon would be Lord Welbourne but not Lord Westerby and the Bentley women would lose Westerby anyway when James died, whether he commited suicide or not. It's a moot point because NOTHING about this story is realistic or appealing. The plot is a bizarre mashup of gothic mystery and a bawdy Pride and Prejudice. 

None of the characters are all that likable including Betty. There's a lack of communication between Betty and the Duke that led to the same misunderstanding over and over. Hester is too over the top and the opposite of Betty. The only character I had any sympathy for was Fanny. 

Content notes
casual mention of "oriental" eyes by the narrator and characters
lusty lovemaking
one scene involving food would lead Rob Reiner's mother to utter her famous catchphrase "I'll have what she's having." (Or in this case, "they")
violence that I did not expect

Do yourselves a favor and don't waste your time. I just skimmed a lot of this.