Rating: 5/5

At first glance, insulin discovery discovery is the perfect fairy tale story. A simple young country doctor who's scarred by the war is inspired in the middle of the night to set on his quest to discovering insulin. His simple background and average results certainly fit layman's picture of a brilliant transformation. We are all suckers for drama, writers most of all. That's where I compliment Michael Bliss's unbiased account of such -now I know, greatly paradoxical- story. Surprising and eye opening -literally, I kept ooh-ing and aah-ing as I read it- and definitely amusing with all the fuels between the dashing temperate Banting and the put-together cool-some macloed. Specially Banting's account of the story, funny indeed. 

As we all know, life is not that simple, or pretty for that matter. I always regarded Banting as a personal hero. His stroke of genius saved the lives of many. I still do, but now I know about his other humanly traits, his insecurities and in my opinion,somewhat justifiable, paranoia, his diminished social skills and lack of articulacy makes his story all the more malleable. This was no overnight strike of thunder. it was the "culmination" of other works and a "stumble" in the right direction fueled by Banting's faith and motivation. I'm shocked by his and Best's and how they persisted through such unwelcome results. Their inexperience not slowing them down, neither did Macleod's discouragements-who I think is over-credited by sharing the Nobel prize for his guidance which should've been more severe, but admittedly, harshly judged by Banting, but what do I know? But i sure love Bliss's impartial metaphors in this book as he described the dynamics of this troublesome group of researchers. JB Collip did refine insulin to a clinically usable form, but did he deserve as much credit as Banting did, when the Nobel prize was quartered? Best, it seems, was injured the most throughout this tug of war and complained only once. Banting may have been ignored initially which fueled his hatred for macloed, but then got his share of glory all right, a knighthood bestowed upon him, a WWD held annually in his birthday in his honor, so He got what was rightfully his. 

Patients' stories were the most inspiring of all. Elizabeth Evans Hughes who weighed less than 50 pounds before insulin at age 14, her cheerful optimistic demeanor sure was something to be marveled at. James Havens, Leonard Thompson and others,emaciated, all went through hell with the first rough patches and pulled through. They all had one thing in common, a mutual enemy. This gives off a sense of solidarity throughout history til this very day, i know that might sound silly but at least thats what I felt when I read their stories. 

The last chapter was a collection of whatever-happened-tos that left no knots untied and left me with no questions about any of the parties related to the discovery of insulin. Which reinforces my initial perception of Bliss as a masterful story teller who's background as a historian makes him an objective judge of events as he dissected this case of who did what and put this issue to rest once and for all. I swear at the middle of this book something I never thought I'd experience with a non-fiction, I kept thumping threw it and thrilled to to know the outcome of this story. So would you.