Rating: 4/5

"Words are tricky.

My mother had tried to teach me this. Once when I was persteringly insistent with my questions, she said, 'Everyone breathes in air, but it’s a wise person who knows when to use that air to speak and when to exhale in silence.' "

Queen of Dreams by Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni is about a young, rudderless woman raising a smart and innately aware young girl; a young woman clinging to her bitterness and to the fable that her ex-husband is the “bad guy” in every scenario; and a young woman finding her way as a painter and making a go of a tea shop (partnering with her best friend) in the swells of Berkeley, California.

An older woman, born in India, into poverty, is seen to have the gift and is taken by a loving “aunt” to the caves to be instructed in the ways of dream tellers. This same woman abandons that inheritance and gift to enjoy the love of a man and migrates with him to America. This is a woman who despairs upon realizing the cost of losing her gift, then becomes desperate and manages to reclaim a portion of her gift, only to be reminded on a daily basis of the consequences of that choice—for her husband and her daughter.

The young woman is Rakhi, the older woman her mother. We hear Rakhi’s story from her first person perspective as well as 3rd person, and we learn about her mother, who’s always been a frustrating enigma to her, through her journals, which provides the history of dream tellers, the education, the learning process and we read about the dreams themselves, sometimes just as stories, sometimes with interpretation. The journals also become more personal over time as Rakhi’s mother understands and sees more clearly the effects of her decisions.

The old world and the new. The life and difficulties of an immigrant. Old cultures,, ways, foods, and ancient beliefs alongside a world only 200+ years old. The children of said immigrants (Rakhi, Belle, Jespal) finding their way as natives, the first generation born in this new world, the only world they know, caught between respecting, learning, and embracing the ways of the old world and discarding it entirely, or walking the tightrope between the two.

Queen of Dreams is also a story of Rakhi as a fearful, impatient, controlling girl; a young woman in love; a new wife then new mother; and as an ex. Her lashing out at the ex (Sonny), her father, her mother, and even her daughter – how she does, then regrets it, yet can’t change her pattern – is part of the learning and growth of Rakhi’s story, though it can be tiresome and takes a leap of faith that Sonny’s undying love for her is founded on something genuine.

Divakaruni does very well creating the life of Rakhi as a child, how it was for her growing up with an elusive mother who she also adores and toward whom she is desperate for attention, love, and understanding. The author equally succeeds at unraveling the mother’s story, creating a real, multi-layered, 3-dimensional woman who’s life was a series of lucky strokes until she struck out on her own, and because of her own will and desires must live with the repercussions. Yet, she maintains her humanity and compassion despite her regrets and the weight of her failures.

The ending is a combination of well-done ambivalence and uncertainty (no clear cookie-cutter, happy ending) alongside story lines the reader is certain of, regarding their outcome, and perhaps a too-quick fix, eye-opening, revelatory experience for Rakhi. But for the most part, Queen of Dreams is a big story, with lots of stories, about stories, and the human beings who inhabit them, share them, and tell them. And, the surprise when people turn out to be not what you—for a lifetime—have thought them to be.

Queen of Dreams is grounded in the real world with a veil of the “other” as one finds with Toni Morrison’s novels. There are other realms, real magic that touches our world (for those few with the gift to see it), and also a real world-type magic in those around us, through the people we can touch, hug, aid, comfort, welcome, listen to, and love.