Rating: 5/5

5 STARS

  

  
    ”Seeking perfection, Ross …in life it’s dangerous, for it makes the less than perfect seem less than enough.”
  

Here I am yet again, at the end of another chapter in the life of Ross Poldark. Tears again flowing freely, lump in throat. I must say that this was the most painful book in the series so far. The title being very aptly named. 

  

  
    ”But one or two things have happened, Verity. Oh I know they are small things - small to set beside the great - and they are best forgot on both sides, and indeed many times are forgot. But now and then you do not have all the control of your feelings that you should have - and then thoughts and feelings surge up in you like - like and angry tide. And it is hard, sometimes it is hard to control the tide.”
  

But regardless of the pain, I am still hopelessly addicted to the series. I feel like I am living amongst these characters, sharing each an every emotion they experience. I can’t tell you how impressed I am with intensity of these books. I have to force myself to put them down sometimes. I have been neglecting my family, my job, and myself. Which of course is bad in real life… but spectacular to the reader. 

  
    Sometimes Demelza took out Hugh Armitage’s poems and read them over. Had ‘she’ inspired such passion?

She had heard people say that they didn’t want a future life, didn’t want to live again. This she could not understand. So far she had done so little, seen so little, She wanted and age, an icon of life to plumb it and savor it to the last drop.
  

  
    Their relationship at this moment seemed the most impossible of resolution that had ever been. Everything they did, said, thought, took place behind endless barriers of hurt pride and misunderstanding.
  

Keep in mind these books are written in sequence and must be read in order. If you are thinking of starting the books, there is a series on BBC, that premiered in 2015, that you may want to watch in companion. It encompasses the first two books, and is brilliantly done. I highly recommend. 

  
    ”Perhaps we must just go on living, and learning, Ross.” “And loving,” said Ross. “That most of all.”
  

Anyway. I don’t want to got into the plot much. There are just too many possible spoilers. Better to discover as your read. So for now, I’ll leave you with some visual treats and a few quotes from the book. 

  
    ”…It is only now that can ever be, at any one moment. And at this moment, now, we are alive… and together. We can’t ask more. There isn’t any more to ask.”
  

On to book 8.