Rating: 5/5

This is a gripping and tortuous insider account of how a combination of talent, organisation and improving resources arrived at anticipating German navy moves during the WW2. It inevitably largely focuses on the 6-year Battle of the Atlantic and the struggle against the U-Boats and occasional sorties of equally deadly battleships. The book precedes most of what has been written on Ultra, but usefully talks extensively of how the information gleaned was used. Vital convoys dangerously travelled between the USA and Britain at a rate of one every two days, and others to Russia. In a competition of wits and resources, the man in charge of U-boat tracking, Godfrey Winn, developed the ability to read Admiral Donitz’s mind. As the U-boat population grew to several hundred, half of which might be operational at any one time, and in part supported for fuel and armament by underwater ‘Milch Cows’, a centralised operations room underneath the Admiralty sifted through a combination of radar direction tracking, secret reports of departures from German naval bases, code-breaking from Bletchley Park, and information from the Canadians and Americans, in order to see the picture. By grouping often vague and sometimes contradictory pieces of information from different sources, German moves became increasingly visible and predictable, but the pressure was relentless and marred by as many failures as successes. It reached a climax in March 1943 when 95 ships were lost, one grouped convoy losing 21 ships out of 100 to a forty U-boat Wolf Pack. The hidden struggle between cryptanalysts at Bletchley Park and B. Dienst met a close shave when the Germans changed from 3 to 4 rotors on their Enigma machines in March 1943, but the outage was fortunately short-lived. Allied successes thereafter increased, and for a while Donitz even gave up attacking convoys. New developments included German acoustic torpedoes (derogatorily referred to as Gnats), ‘Foxer’ devices towed by Allied ships in order to counter them, pressure-sensitive (oyster) mines developed by both sides, and Allied 10 cm radar capable of spotting small objects on the surface, and in the later stages, German introduction of snorkels and high-speed submarines. By the end of 1943 less than a quarter of U-Boat commanders were expected to last a year, and over the entire war German submariners suffered 28,000 casualties out of an effective of 39,000. The war of attrition gradually favoured the Allies, the Americans created their 10th Fleet (an organisational move rather than materiel), Iceland and the Azores counted among important staging posts. Terrific reading.