Rating: 4/5

This is a great resource for anyone playing Space Quest 1-5. There wasn't a third edition published to cover SQ6. For each of the games, there is a novelized version in first-person format as well as a step-by-step guide to complete the game. There are also maps and point lists for each.

I enjoyed the novelized versions more than the ones included in The Official Guide to Roger Wilco's Space Adventures, as it captured the personality of Roger Wilco better. TOGTRWSA's Wilco was abrasive and cocky, but this didn't fit with the bumbling reluctant hero of the series. The biggest downside to the novelized version in this one was an overabundance of sexual humour. The Space Quest games included this at times, but not as much as the book. In the book, Roger is preoccupied with women anytime he gets a moment to think (read: fantasize). Yes, Beatrice is the romantic interest of the fifth game, so it makes sense to a point, but it feels like it's every second thought, even when they're not anywhere near each other.

The other downside to the novelized versions is that they're not always true to the games. They recount conversations and events that are different from what actually happens as you play the game. I'm not sure why largely irrelevant details are changed (e.g. the drinks that Flo and Droole order at the bar), but it can feel a bit jarring at times. The major details stay the same, but maybe we'll call these alterations a bit of artistic license.

The novelized versions may seem a bit off if you're playing the EGA version of SQ1, as the book covers the VGA version instead, but there are some helpful points where the walkthroughs provide the steps for both.

The game instructions are clear and easy to follow. I can't remember any problems when I had to turn to them. The maps are also helpful, particularly in some of the maze sections. A couple of them are kind of funny, as they cover such a small area in which there is no ability to head any other direction, but I can appreciate a completionist approach. The point list are organized well--I've seen some of these types of books with the actions in completely illogical order, so I was pleased to see that these are easy to follow as a reference if you're double-checking to ensure full points along the way.

While I'm sure you could get most of the information from the internet these days, I found it laid out well here, in a way preferably to many of the websites I've seen. It's a nice all-in-one resource, particularly if you're interested in reading the novel versions and seeing Roger's thoughts along the way.