Rating: 5/5

I loved this book! I have been on every diet and diet pill that I could find. I can lose weight but I can't stick with it long term. I started this 6 weeks ago and i love this way of eating. I feel great and have had excellent results. I have lost 27pounds in 6 weeks. I am almost completely off of my blood pressure medicine. No inflammation and pain. I have not had one migraine when I was averaging 8-10 per month previously. This is an amazing diet. I remember eating the first week and not really knowing what I was doing. I ate wings with ranch, cheeseburgers, tons of real food. Good food. I kept thinking this is not diet food and it's too good to be true. Once I stepped on that scale I couldn't believe my eyes. My doctor approves of this diet and is encouraging me to stick with it. She is monitoring my blood work as well to make sure my cholesterol , blood pressure, and blood sugar keep coming down without medication. My husband who has been a type 2 severe diabetic is almost off of insulin and is down 20 pounds as well. With results like these in 6 weeks I can't imagine how much better we will feel in 6 months or a year. Anyone who is in bad health and overweight should give this diet a try. 

 12 week update

So I have reviewed one other diet book as well that I really loved and I like to come back and give updates because lets face it most of us don't stick with a diet long term. I also like to look back myself and see where I was and how I was feeling at the time. So I hit my 12 week mark on this diet and by that point I had lost over 40 POUNDS! Almost no exercise and when I say almost I mean like I took 2 walks in 12 weeks of 1 mile each. I know I need to get better about exercise but with my job I have a wonky schedule and I am always finding excuses to avoid it. So 40 pds and I was in love with this doctor! We decided for Easter (if you read my review of The Doctor's Diet by Travis Stork you will notice that Easter was my downfall last year too)that we would take a trip to Disney World. I was going to be off plan for 13 days and anyone who knows low carb diets know that means a lot of water weight gain when you start eating carbs again. That's not counting the fat pounds you pack on. I ate everything big cheese burgers with a bun, huge sandwiches with bread, fries, and dessert was offered on our meal plan at lunch and dinner. That's not even counting the extra Mickey ears and Dole whips I consumed for snacks each day. After returning home I was terrified of my scale. I finally but reluctantly stepped on them the morning after our return and was pleasantly surprised that I had only gained 7 pds. I restarted Atkin's induction phase that morning and in 5 days have lost 6 of the 7 pds I gained on vacation. I assume most of this weight was water weight since it came off so easily. Now I'm on track and feeling great. This is definitely the best "diet" I have ever been on and I hope to move up the rungs through the phases and maintain on this diet for life. I love the food I eat on it. Cheeseburgers, wings, Tacos, Reuben casserole, steaks, tons of veggies, and even some low carb desserts. It's amazing and I have never eaten this well and felt full while losing weight. After review the other book that I mentioned and this one I will say that this is the way of eating for me but if you want to keep your carbs the Doctor's Diet is fantastic too. Both prove to provide amazing results. I believe this one allows for more calories and a ton more fat which leaves more varieties of foods. Both work! Both are healthy but you have to decide what's right for your body.

6 Month Update

From time to time I have people message me and ask if the diet is still working so I wanted to do a quick update. I have now been on Atkins for over 6 months and I am still going strong. I have now lost 51 pounds and it has become a way of life now. I have learned a ton about healthy nutrition and different ways of cooking and substituting healthier items so I can still have my favorite foods. I have stayed on phase one and will until I get within 20 pds of my goal. My husband has lost 40 pounds and his blood sugars are 70-110 all the time now . It has done amazing things for our family and with all of the commercial products from Atkins available we can still have sweet treats using their sugar free candies, meal bars, and shakes. This works people!