Rating: 5/5

This story relates an unsettling view of life through the eyes of nine year old Adrian, who has been sent to live with his grandmother because his mother can't, and his father won't look after him.
Adrian is a good boy who is no trouble at all to anyone, he is quiet and makes no fuss about anything, he just looks after himself.
Although he doesn't understand why his father is giving him away, he knows the reason, because he overheard the conversation with his grandmother and heard his father say it...and it makes him feel useless.
So far his little life journey has been less than promising.

It is the year 1977 and the news seems to be filled with only bad things, Adrian wonders why they don't say more about interesting things, the sort of things he thinks that people would like to hear about, like the sea monster that was found by fishermen.
Three good children who live in his neighborhood have disappeared whilst going to the shop for ice cream and it has shocked everyone, it is unreasonable and frightening and doesn't make any sense. Their broken mother and father keep appearing on the news too.

I could relate to so much of this story that it was spooky. Adrian's fear of quicksand and self combustion for one, were (incredibly) two of my own greatest fears as a very young child, the former due to parts of a black and white movie I saw on TV which I don't know the name of yet have never forgotten, and the latter due to an excessive amount of static electricity which always cursed me as a child convincing me that it was the reason why people spontaneously self combusted!
As a child I seriously thought my days were numbered living with such variables!
I can also relate to that era and found it a very convincing portrayal of life at that time in a suburban Australian home or landscape.

Sonya Hartnett has an amazing way of capturing the essence of those particularly ravenous demons that haunt and torture a child's days and nights.
Her descriptions are so lifelike as to almost feel like a memory, they are poignant and intense, the writing is beautiful.
This was a very moving story, I felt so sad for Adrian's lot in life, and his all too tiny footprint.

Brilliant writing by Sonya Hartnett and wonderfully sensitive narration by Humphrey Bower.
5★s