Rating: 1/5

Lauren offered herself up to save her father, and Nick took her up on the offer. Granted he had another thing in the works as well and he already knew how he would deal w/ her father. Lauren quickly tried to back pedal on that offer and that was irksome, but once the story showed that Nick planned on using her for a bit more than that my irk quickly reverted to him! He was constantly trying to work his own agenda in several situations and using Lauren to see it through. I found because of his lack of trust in Lauren and hidden deals I couldn’t trust him either. Nick didn’t help matters either with the volatile way he treated Lauren – that was not even forced seduction she called it what it was later because he attempts it several more times – and the things he said and the way he treated her made him less of an H in my book. 

I get that there is temptation and it is the way people handle it, but to have Nick talk like the OW was so awful, but he still wanted her….seemed more like another romance book that I read. Where the H loathes himself for wanting what he believes is the trashy h, but he just can’t help himself. There seemed to be a theme of: allowances have to be made and mistakes forgiven, but my gosh that is all that Lauren does for Nick all in the name of love! Why would she even love him either? He doesn’t sound like a great guy. The only thing that makes sense is that she is looking at the outer packaging and the impressive wick! But hey, Nick is very shallow and only seems concerned w/ her looks as well – don’t they know that beauty fades and dumb is forever? So perhaps it’s lust, and I’m not holding out much hope for more than that, especially given some of his closing comments to Lauren on the last page of this book. 

Not all that easy for him to turn away from other women they don’t make it easy he says it was guilt as much as anything that made him loose control at the villa after he and OW in a clench. Nice huh? He has no excuses she was there the moon was out and she looked very inviting – not promising – o then he says he may look may feel tempted but as far as will go as he loves L when when did he fall in love w/ L after he made out w/ OW?

He says he has always been the one in charge of the time and place not easy to accept a different order – this is after his clench w/ OW so could one construe that he was in charge of that as well? Tells her another time that she takes so much at face value and that things aren’t always what they seem. This comment wasn’t explored more and could be taken different ways: perhaps he is really in love w/ the OW and Lauren can’t see that thinking that he is so greats, blah, blah, blah; or perhaps that he really loves Lauren but this darn OW is just so darn cute and he can’t resist because he doesn’t know where he stands w/ Lauren, etc. 

I also didn’t like the way he was caught up on the ex. He tried to finagle it as a pride thing, but it didn’t read that way IMHO. He wanted to show her up and he talked like she wasn’t that great anyway, but he just had to get one up on her – seemed a bit childish. If OW was a woman that any man could have for the right amount of money then why would Nick jeopardize his r/s w/ Lauren for that? He also told Lauren that the OW always did attract him and probably always would until she loses her looks – so despite her character he still wants her?! Lauren tells Nick that she doesn’t want him to come to her from the OW that she won’t deal w/ that 

 he does and she KNOWS it, but she still takes him 

I think in the end Lauren settled for Nick and as long as she doesn’t see what he is getting up to then it never happened. Frankly, I’m not convinced that Nick didn’t hear her father and her talking about what kind of life she should lead either. Nick seems clever enough to know what to sell to Lauren to get his way, and I wouldn’t be surprised if he didn’t eavesdrop on that conversation either.