Rating: 3/5

Pharaoh's Daughter is a young adult novel by Julius Lester (2000). The premise of this modern midrash is that when baby Moshe (called Mosis here) was adopted by Pharaoh's daughter (Exodus 2:1-10), the baby's unnamed sister was not Miriam but another sister, who doesn't appear in the Torah's list of Moshe's relatives because she ended up staying in Egypt. The Torah here refers to the sister as "ha-almah" (the girl), so Lester names her Almah. The first half of the book is narrated by Almah, and the second half is narrated fifteen years later by Mosis. He has grown up in the palace of Grandfather (Pharaoh Rameses II), and has been raised by three mothers. Yes, it's complicated:

(1) Ima is Yocheved, his birth mother. She is Habiru (Hebrew) and hates the Khemetians (Egyptians).
(2) Mother is Batya, his adoptive mother. She is Pharaoh's daughter but has embraced the religion of the Habiru to worship Ya (Hashem) exclusively.
(3) Almah is Mosis's oldest sister, who has helped raise him. Moving in the opposite direction of Batya, she has embraced Khemetian religion to become a priestess of the goddesses (!).

Not surprisingly, Mosis has an identity crisis – is he Habiru or Khemetian? The book's second half revolves around the violent incident that forces him to flee Egypt (Exodus 2:11-15). I'm leaving out the details, but I'll just mention that Kakemour (whom Mosis kills) is an important supporting character in the book, as is Asetnefret (Pharaoh's wife, who hates the Habiru and pressures Pharaoh to be tough on them).

Lester, who died in 2018, was a black professor of Afro-American studies for many years at UMass Amherst. Among other things, he wrote lots of books and converted to (liberal) Judaism. He explains in the Author's Note that he wanted to portray the relationship of the Egyptians and Hebrews as more complex than the way it's presented in the Torah, in light of what (we think) we know about ancient Egypt.

I'm not a big fan of historical fiction, but I thought this book was well done. And it gets points for being relatively short – even with the glossary, it's only 180 pages.