Rating: 5/5

I seem to read this book about once every fifteen years – the first time being around the age of fifteen, the second sometime in my thirties and the third now. I suppose it would be something of a minor miracle if I read it three more times in my life. With a lot of the books we read as adolescents, there is a tendency to “grow out” of them and find that they have lost something in the interim. With this book, it seems to have taken thirty years for me to “grow into” it. It’s just possible that I’ve finally reached the point where I won’t get much more out of future readings.

It is a fantasy set at a time “when the world was young,” in an indeterminate but temperate region of earth with a few relatively new cities and empires beginning to flourish. Delany takes advantage of the period to turn certain assumptions about the past on their heads: especially male dominance and compulsory heterosexuality, both of which are completely dispensed with. He creates matriarchal cultures and his main character is a gay mining slave turned warrior. He manages to make this seem perfectly normal to all his characters, creating the suggestion that later cultures suppressed the memory of this very different time in the service of creating a history that would endorse their view. A page I marked has a very interesting take on a kind of primitive inversion of penis-envy, which seems to be a deliberate mockery of much of Freud.

At the time he wrote this, Delany, like much of the academic English-studying world, was fascinated by Semiotics and Derrida, which is demonstrated most transparently in the “Appendix” by a scholar claiming to analyze the ancient text on which the novel is based (this is also fiction). If you have little or no interest in how those theories might affect literature, or disagree with them outright, it is possible you will find this novel infuriating. For me, it’s part of what I meant about “growing into” it. Only now am I conversant enough with the theory to really “get” what Delany was doing here. Previously it had a sort of mystical quality, it struck me as brilliant and innovative, but I didn’t fully understand it. Now, it’s a bit more obvious, less mysterious, and falls more into the “clever not brilliant” side of things. I still enjoy it greatly, but it’s easier to imagine sitting down with a cup of tea and talking about it with Delany, as opposed to lying at his feet in adoration.