Rating: 3/5

I wouldn’t want to be a medieval wife 

Well I don’t want to be any sort of wife, but that’s beside the point! What I’m trying to say is that medieval womanhood wasn’t a good form. This wife was forced to marry at twelve years of age, twelve years of age, and since then has married five times; thus, she considers herself somewhat of an authority on marriage. And who can argue, she clearly has more experience than most:

Middle-English Version 
"Experience, though noon auctoritee
Were in this world, were right ynogh to me
To speke of wo that is in mariage;
For, lordynges, sith I twelf yeer was of age,—
Y-thonked be God, that is eterne on lyve!
Housbondes at chirchė dore I have had fyve;
For I so oftė have y-wedded bee;
And alle were worthy men in hir degree."

Modernised Translation
"Experience, though no authority
Were in this world, were good enough for me,
To speak of woe that is in all marriage;
For, masters, since I was twelve years of age,
Thanks be to God who is forever alive,
Of husbands at church door have I had five;
For men so many times have married me;
And all were worthy men in their degree."

  

Her experience becomes her weapon; her sexual potency becomes a means for control. But, she has also been subjected to endless sermons of scripture and churchly didacticism, so she tries to use it to her advantage. And in this Chaucer provides a critique of the church. Almost everything the wife utters about religion is completely false: it is what she has been told by conniving churchman who wish to wield their authority for personal advantage. They twist the words of their bible to form their own patriarchal creed. They are the worse kind of churchman because they exploit their power and position of trust. 

So when the wife innocently repeats such babble, it’s rather humorous. She becomes a pseudo-feminist as she refutes her society, but, ultimately, she continues to contribute to it. Admittedly, she doesn’t have much choice. She is a rather singular voice after all. She conforms to the idea of what the church saw as debased and immoral. Rather ironic isn’t it? What she needed to do was become something more potent, and really show the churchmen how manipulative they can be. 

This is a good piece of literature, I always enjoy reading Chaucer; however, this edition has modernised the language. It has provided a translation. So, in reality, it doesn’t actually feel like Chaucer any more at all. For me this is a bad move, I like to read Chaucer in its original form with all its old spellings and archaic language even if it is difficult in places to follow. That’s part of the experience. I used an original quote at the start to demonstrate this. I don’t recommend this edition at all. At the very least, try an edition that has both versions. An original one you can read and a modern one for point of reference. 

Penguin Little Black Classic- 28

 

The Little Black Classic Collection by penguin looks like it contains lots of hidden gems. I couldn’t help it; they looked so good that I went and bought them all. I shall post a short review after reading each one. No doubt it will take me several months to get through all of them! Hopefully I will find some classic authors, from across the ages, that I may not have come across had I not bought this collection.