Rating: 4/5

Lady Serena Carlow is the indulged daughter of an earl--though if that description makes you think she is pampered and petted, you'd be far off the mark. No, her father treated her like the son he never had, and she grew up as his companion and equal. Serena rides to hounds and hosts political parties and in general leads a free and public life. Her mannish ways are tolerated because of her elevated rank and the protection of her father, but her life has not been free of scandal: a few years before the story begins, she became engaged to the wealthy but irascible Marquis of Rotherham and then jilted him a few weeks before the wedding.

Now twenty-five years old, Lady Serena is mourning the sudden death of her beloved father and finding that her life has drastically changed. She must leave her home to make way for the new earl, and she finds herself in straitened circumstances (at least as long as she remains single) and unable to engage in her usual pursuits because of the mandatory period of mourning. To add to her difficulties, her father has made the jilted marquis her trustee and given him veto power over any marriage she hopes to make! Fortunately, she is able to make a home for the time being with her youthful stepmother, the sweet and timid Fanny. They settle for a time in Bath, and there the tale really gets under way.

Bath Tangle is one of Heyer's longer and more elaborate Regency novels, and on this reading I found myself admiring the structure of the plot and the setup of the characters. There are two possible heroes, and for a long time they are given almost equal weight. The relationships among the principal and even the secondary characters are often surprising. Many of them, while recognizable as Heyer types, have layers to their personalities that give the story depth and nuance. 

For me, however, these pleasures are marred by the heroine's angry nature. Heyer has several novels with angry heroines, and I have to be in a particular mood to enjoy them. In this case, Serena's quarrels with the marquis go so far into vituperation and insult that I have trouble seeing their relationship as salvageable. And there are Taming-of-the-Shrew overtones that make me distinctly uncomfortable--male leads can be cranky or sardonic in my book but never dictatorial! Among the pantheon of Heyer's angry heroines, Serena is a more complex character than Judith Taverner in Regency Buck but not as sympathetic as Deborah Grantham in Faro's Daughter. So while I admire the craft of this novel I can't love it.