Rating: 4/5

Paul begins in his usual notorious way, by trying to write fictitiously about Naipaul. Soon he gives up and reveals the identity of his character. That is the Paul one knows. 
But he dwells in on the life of the master so elaborately that one feels enamored of his work. So well written of the person he liked and followed in his writing. 
His infatuation with Naipaul's first wife is understandable. But he despises his second wife no doubt, who is a divorced Pakistani journalist.
He claims to understand the myth called Naipaul. But no. Naipaul surprises him all his life. 'Lots of libido' was the first comment Naipaul offered him on reading his poetry. And it was always like this. Paul claiming Naipaul for either making his career as a writer or being a guide of his literary life. 
But Paul was quite unlike Naipaul, in his writing and the life of a writer. But he is a prodigious protegee of the master. Paul had paid a rich tribute to Naipaul, by writing two books about his mentor. No greater tribute could have been paid.It is not important that the first one is out of print
So one likes both, Paul and Naipaul. 
The writing life is very lonely and grinding. It is heartening how both did survive and made it well too.
In the later part of the book though, Paul got deluded by the success of one of his travel books: that if he is a better writer than Naipaul. One never thought if it was ever the case. Even Salman Rushdie too is largely ignored by the master when they meet. Many people may think is was rightly done so by Naipaul.
But Paul is a decent writer. He worked harder all the way and produced many remarkable books like Naipaul, but they are mostly travel books. While writing fiction he falters right from the beginning. 
May be there is a memoir up his sleeve, about the life after his friendship with Naipaul was over. It was largely for antagonising his second wife
He is naughty, in this book too, for making a false start and then picking up, thankfully. Also one doubts his sexual escapades as fraudulent, in this book or in others.
The things Vidia does to fend away boredom and idleness of a writer's life are funny and heart-rending. He becomes immune to the strongest sneezing-powder and moves around with it up his nostrils in his house. May be it was the over use. 
Paul's own divorce too was sad. 
The dominating Naipaul always brought to tears his first wife Pat. And declined to take her to the ceremony of his knighthood. It was disappointing for a sick and dying wife.
The sad demise of Shiva, the brother of Vidia too is dealt with fairly. He was as talented as both, which Paul asserts needlessly otherwise. 
God bless these two unique writers of our time.
I read this book a couple of times after my son brought it from his library near our home. The last reading was at least three years back. I am amazed how often I recall the description of this book. This review too is based on those readings. A lot more I could have added to it, however.