Rating: 3/5

Oliver Goldsmith's 18th-century hit comedy of errors remains readable today, because it's timeless and funny. By timeless, I mean that its humor is far more reliant on dramatic irony than recognition of inapropos references to pop culture -- although this edition does an excellent job of annotating the few that appear -- to allow for skillful substitution to more contemporary settings.

A brief example of what I mean, from Act II (ostensibly scene 4, though the action has continued unabated in the same space with only conveniently-timed exits and entrances). Here we have a suitor trying to impress a dowager, enumerated annotations in this instance are mine and hidden behind the spoiler:HASTINGS: ...You amaze me! From your air and manner, I concluded you had been bred all your life either at Ranelagh, St. James's, or Tower Wharf.[1]

MRS. HARDCASTLE: O! sir, you're only pleased to say so. We country persons can have no manner at all. I'm in love with the town, and that serves to raise me above some of our neighbouring rustics; but who can have a manner, that has never seen the Pantheon, the Grotto Gardens, the Borough, and such places where the nobility chiefly resort?[2] All I can do is to enjoy London at second-hand. I take care to know every tete-a-tete from the Scandalous Magazine,[3] and have all the fashions, as they come out, in a letter from the two Miss Rickets of Crooked Lane.[4] Pray how do you like this head, Mr. Hastings?[5]

HASTINGS: Extremely elegant and dégagée, upon my word, madam. Your friseur is a Frenchman, I suppose?[6]

MRS. HARDCASTLE. I protest, I dressed it myself from a print in the Ladies' Memorandum-book for the last year.[7][1] Hastings is teasing, testing to see if Mrs. Hardcastle is sufficiently worldly to recognize a notorious red-light district pinned to the end of his list of London's architectural wonders.

[2] Hardcastle's turn now, only in her instance she mistakes a strip mall for one of London's tourist attractions.

[3] Here substitute "US magazine," or, for a real gasser, "Weekly World News" or "Teen Beat"

[4] Generic comic name for gossips on a typical rural byway: "from X and Y on RFD#6."

[5] "Head" here is wig, which should look flat-out ridiculous, of course

[6] This is another rube joke, but not necessarily one of Hastings', who is attempting flattery. For this to land, Hardcastle must pause significantly before her line until she makes up her mind to fake comprehension.

[7] She isn't lying. She really did try to copy it out of a picture from the Ladies Home Journal, and not even the latest issue at that. Perhaps funnier, "from a drawing that appeared in last years' 4-H club circular."

Despite this example, reference-laced or wit-based humor is rare in this play; the majority of the levity derives from the characterization (the fussy, dowager-fool, for example, as played off against straights or her wicked clown of a son) and the plot. This latter takes a while to set up, but the basic premise has two suitors traveling to the home of a country gentleman to woo his daughter and niece-ward, respectively, arriving under the misapprehension that the host (whom they haven't met) is but an upstart innkeeper. The rake slated for the daughter mistakes her for a barmaid, a good thing, considering that he would otherwise be psychologically incapable of conversation with her. The other couple face different, and more serious complications, but those are mere subplot. Can romance bloom despite the deception? Can it be sustained ere the error is o'erthrown? Such is the stuff that sustains interest in the work.

This is a nice edition in that it includes in addition to the aforementioned annotations, a biographical sketch of the playwright, the play's originally published reviews (mostly, if not entirely laudatory), period illustrations of stage settings and reference materials, and a short discussion of the plot innovations that set this comedy apart from others of its (albeit not Shakespeare's) time.