Rating: 5/5

I hadn't come across this book until I received it as a gift from a Goodreads friend, but I found it both a poignant and powerful read.

Set in rural Ireland over a lengthy period in the mid 20th century, it tells the story of the family of Moran, a man who fought in the War of Independence as the head of a flying column, but was left behind by the bureaucrats once the struggle was won, and who now farms in the west of Ireland.

From the earliest point in the narrative, we see that Moran's relationship with his family is a complex one. His eldest child, Luke, has already become estranged from his father, and his three daughters, Maggie, Mona and Sinead and son, Michael, live in the shadow of his moods. A widower early in life, his contraryness is very much in evidence throughout his 'courtship' of Rose, who on marrying him becomes a rock in the house of Great Meadow.

As the years pass, McGahern does a great job in conveying how rural life really doesn't change that much, and emphasises the rigid routine within the family, yet is able to chart each member's life journey, children of whom Moran is proud, yet more often than not, children who are effected by his actions in negative ways. Despite this, the overriding feeling is one of a tight knit group, with particularly the females in the family being devoted to their patriarch to the very end.

This is a short but amazingly rich and complex novel. There are many stories of Irish men of Moran's generation who struggle to express themselves emotionally, but none that I've come across that do so as successfully. As a reader, I felt both distaste at many of Morgan's actions, yet compassion as his love for his family was evident throughout. While Moran is an extreme case, I'd say that there are few people who read this novel who grew up in any part of Ireland who haven't seen some of his traits in their own father.

Definitely a book that I'd recommend to others, and a great way to start my 2015 reading year.