Rating: 3/5

Average rating: 3.65/5 stars, including the novel The Demon Breed. 

Overall I found Schmitz’s writing to be a bit juvenile. It still was fun, but it had a very surface-level atmosphere to all the stories, even the novel. Almost every single story had me begging for a little more depth in either characters, worldbuilding, plot, or themes.

That said, if you’re into big dumb action stories with (mostly) strong female protagonists, this is your guy. 

”The Searcher” - 4/5

Although written in 1966, this novella feels very modern. It stars a badass female protagonist and her equally cool male partner, both of whom are undercover agents aiming to shut down an illegal ring of smugglers. When the smugglers accidentally steal an object that summons an ancient alien being from the depths of space, the two agents must survive this monster as it lurks throughout the depot.

Written like a straight 80s action film, there’s not a lot to hate. It’s just a solid eighty pages. I wish there had been a little more tension, but I still enjoyed it as my first foray into James H. Schmitz’s world of The Hub.

”Grandpa” - 4/5

A young boy has to use his quick-thinking skills and resourcefulness to save his team from the alien life among an uncharted planet.

Another good—albeit shorter—story. The alien life that Schmitz creates feels so otherworldly. They’re unique and full of danger, requiring our protagonists to use their smarts to survive.

”Balanced Ecology” - 3.5/5

A fine story. Nothing amazing. A businessman wants to take over a finely balanced forest on a unique alien planet. He tries to force children—the heirs of aforementioned forest—to give him the rights so he can harvest all the valuable wood. 

The kids end up escaping and a deeper consciousness in the forest is revealed. . . 

Again, absolutely fine. Not good, not bad.

”A Nice Day for Screaming” - 3.5/5

A reporter for an intergalactic television station shows off mankind’s newest technology that allows them to go into Space Three, another dimension. Only there, they discover something. Or rather. Something discovers them!

The pacing was off on this one. Otherwise, I thought it was fine.

”The Winds of Time” - 5/5

The best short story this far. Full of tension, mystery, and twists, “The Winds of Time” would make a perfect space action thriller. 

When a captain’s ship is suddenly thrust into pseudospace, he has to figure out what happened and if his odd passenger may be the reason.

Definitely worth the read!

”The Machmen” - 2.5/5

Short with an ending that fizzles rather than booms. This one was kinda sloppy compared to the other stories in this collection thus far. Even the idea—that cyborgs wanna take over the galaxy—is a little too ham-fisted and clumsy.

It’s not offensively bad, but definitely a neutral one.

”The Other Likeness” - 3.5/5

Something like a spy story, but it doesn’t have enough time to really become something more before the truth behind the undercover mission is revealed.

”Attitudes” - 3/5

An alien tries to pull a fast one on the human Federation, but my guy didn’t even have a chance. 

Not bad, not great. Very whatever.

”Trouble Tide” - 3.5/5

A bunch of “sea beef”—basically genetically engineered hippopotamuses—go missing and it’s up to Nile and her friend to figure out what happened. The two eventually discover where they went, why they disappeared, and what’s responsible. 

And then they turn into mermaids.

Pulpy and wacky, this novella had a slow beginning that finished with a fun burst of energy. This is science fiction at its cheesiest, which isn’t bad. In fact, I felt the writing was good and the characters were fun. But cheesy SF is not necessarily my cup of tea.

The Demon Breed - 4/5

Unlike the rest of these, this is a novel. Most famously released as “An Ace Science Fiction Special”,The Demon Breed follows the main character from the last novella, Nile from the last novella. 

This felt a lot smoother than his other works, aside from ”The Winds of Time”. Perhaps that’s because Schmitz had more pages to explore with. Or maybe it was a more “out of the box” idea than his other stories in this collection.

From the very beginning, the main idea is funny and interesting: a warlike alien species was crushed by humanity 70 years ago. Rather than admit defeat, they believe humans are secretly super-powered. Now, they return to uncover the truth. Nile Etlund, a skilled, intelligent, but ordinary woman, must play along with their myth to outsmart them and save humanity from these little creatures. 

And she does. She completely demolishes them. It’s silly but played completely straight, which I loved. 

I think the highlight are the mutant otters that call Nile friend. Just fun imagery of them ripping around these little frog aliens. 

This isn’t a masterwork, but it is fun.