Rating: 2/5

When I started reading books and ended up losing some of my to-be-read, I always ask my friends for recommendation and usually they give me author's names. I begin collecting Danielle Steel's novels when I was in high school but never have the chance to open them or read them. Although I only read two of her works and I was amazed how fast I can finish her book but not contented in the end. So I keep searching for more authors and collect their works that I nearly forgot that I still have books in my to-be-read shelves.

So one of mislead authors on my shelf was Danielle Steel that hoping that I can garnish all her works this summer vacation and so far I only read one. I think there are books that you really enjoyed reading when you were young but when you get old your taste differ so do what I feel with her books. It was so disappointing that I find her works replication of her older novels and she just put some minor changes in the book. In the other hand, she deals with family problem, marriage, relationship and friendship.

For 18 years, Liz and Jack were happily married, both work as a lawyer defending families that are at stake. They have five sons and daughters that are nice and perfect. As if, they are living in a perfect world, everything is in order, neat, happy as if the world and their family is coordinated to each other. But one day, when one of their client's enemy visit and call Jack, everything got upside down. He was killed and shot in his office drifting blood on the floor, looking for help.

For Liz and the children, it was one of their worst nightmare and most unforgettable day of their lives. Living without their dad in a very young age and celebrating Christmas without him. Liz, must do her job as a mother and as a father for the children. At first it was hard for her to accomplish two person job and in the end, everything was in right condition. When her oldest son accident, another problem came and her life dug her soul seven deep under.

Then she met Bill, a neurologist and the doctor of his son that soon recovered. Her relationship with Bill is getting deeper and everything falls under his spell. Can her family accept Bill or her life will be another pages of miserable tale? For a mother and as a woman, she struggles to commit things for her children but this time her children should understand her needs to be happy woman, a mother and as a wife again.

It was an easy read, everything flows and it was like talking to a Grade one student or a kid narrating a short novel for you. The sentences are short and words that can be easily comprehend by the readers. An effortless but worth reading book, recommended for those people who are busy and looking for something heartwarming and to fall your tears again.

  

Does Hope Street really exist? I don't have any idea but looking at the book's cover the painted house and garden was a great example of a soft young female artist's work.

Rating - The House on Hope Street by Danielle Steel, 2 Sweets and another year of happiness! (I can still remember myself picking her books from booksale store and the cashier keep asking me questions, why I always buy Danielle Steel's books. Until now, I don't have the guts to answer her question. Well, I'm happy nobody know my secret why I bought her books besides reading them.)

Challenges:
Book #67 for 2011
Book #41 for Off the Shelf!