Rating: 3/5

This novel starts out slow and bad. I came very close to discontinuing my reading of it. If I had, I would have missed a real treat. It gets good in the middle. In fact, if I divide this very uneven novel into thirds I would give the first third two stars, the second third five stars, and the last third three and a half.

It is ostensibly a young adult novel and has those trappings: a teen protagonist who saves the day in front of mostly unbelieving adults, save for that one indispensable adult ally found in all YA fiction. Like most YA science fiction of the 1940s and 1950s era, it is actually better read by an adult audience, one that has to ignore the YA trappings to appreciate the merit of the story.

The first third of the novel is truly awful, and amateurishly written. I still can't believe an author as accomplished as Blish is would make the info dump he does telling the reader background information he wants the reader to know by having his protagonist read a news article to another character. Even worse, the dump is of information already known by the characters. Blish also throws every single character in the novel at us by name in the first few pages in dense, almost unreadable prose one has to read and then reread to keep the characters straight.

The first third is rounded out by having a girl reporter try to prove herself to unimpressed boys and an adult, two forms of pointless oppression. Yay girl power. Then the story at last gets moving. I won't spoil any of the middle third because it's so exciting and unexpected, except to say this was one of the most memorable aliens and first contact scenes I've seen in any science fiction. Pure magic!

It couldn't be sustained to the end as the book lets back down into its YA roots with boy protagonist again trying to prove himself and save the opportunities for other boys of the future. Yet, so strong is the middle third that it carries through even this slush to bring about a satisfying ending. I am looking forward to reading this book's sequel, Mission to the Heart Stars, in order to learn more about these fascinating aliens and their interactions with the people of future Earth.