Rating: 5/5

CHECKED OUT THE BOOK FROM MY PUBLIC LIBRARY.

APART OF THE GOODREADS 2011 READING CHALLENGE.

2ND REVIEW. 1ST REVIEW IS HERE.

Review/Rating:

5 out of 5

Maggie is running out of time. She has to pass her title of mentor to the Daughters of the Moon to the new successor. However, will the Atrox stop her before she can even tell the new heir?

I decided to do a better review of the Daughters of the Moon series by Lynne Ewing since my first ones weren’t done very well. This book is really a fast read, but since I really didn’t like this one, it took longer than the other two books.

This book is unlike the other books in the series, but it is like the one about Stanton. It gives information about Maggie, instead of telling you a mythology story. Though this book is another one of my favorites because it does something different from the other books, which makes it even more special.

Anyways, in this book, we continue to learn more about the Daughters of the Moon, Atrox, and what’s more, we get to learn more about Maggie’s past. For me, the plot was way more interesting than the other books because it takes place during ancient Greece (I think it was Greece) and you learn more about a side character. Also, it gives you more information on her role as the mentor of the Daughters of the Moon, Hector, and Chris. I loved the parts where it gave more information on them. :P

Anyways, the tone and dialogue still reminds me a lot of my teenage years and my high school, so the author did a really good job at writing the book in teenage words and their world. The descriptions are still very well done, and both of these things made the book go a little bit faster than most other young adult books. So, I really like this book from these points. Another thing I liked about this book is the mythology and history that is incorporated in it. Also, the character growth and their personalities are believable (for a supernatural book). As the books/series goes on, you get more information about the Daughters of the Moon and the Atrox, which is good because it won’t overload you with information with just one book.

This series is pretty good. Also, I loved this book because of the history and romance that it has, so go ahead and read this one. ;)