Rating: 2/5

This is an odd book. John Updike was something of an expert on the President before Lincoln; James Buchanan. He wrote a play about him and had intended to write a historical novel about him. Instead he shoved most of what he knew into this book. It is ostensibly about Alf Clayton a history lecturer. When the Northern New England Association of American Historians (NNEAAH) ask for memories and recollections of the Ford administration Clayton puts together all his notes about Buchanan, about whom he had been writing at the time and this takes up about half the book. Interspersed are Alf’s recollections about what he was doing at the time. Essentially this comprises of a series of sexual escapades. Alf is unfaithful to his wife (whom he dubs The Queen of Disorder) with his mistress Genevieve (whom he dubs The Perfect Wife), the wife of a colleague. He moves out and is then unfaithful (several times) to his mistress. His mistress finally sees sense and gives him the elbow and he returns to his wife. 
The historical part of the book has been criticized as being rather boring, but actually I found it the most interesting; mainly because I knew very little about Buchanan. This being Updike, there is a lot more going on! One of the Elephants in the room is Nabakov and more specifically Pale Fire. The structure is similar where a particular subject is an excuse for a more personal tour-de-force. However there is a joke at the centre in the form of the pay off; “the more I think about the Ford Administration, the more it seems I remember nothing” There are also several amusing pokes at deconstructionists and Derrida. 
However there is one thing you cannot get away from; and that is Updike’s extensive and somewhat detailed descriptions of Alf’s sexual exploits. I suppose I shouldn’t have been surprised given Updike’s past history. 
Several points occur;
1)	Some of the descriptions of sexual relationships would undoubtedly be contenders for the bad sex award
2)	Some of Alf’s attitudes towards women felt to be to be very unpleasant and demeaning. Describing someone you are making love to as a “witchy incubus” even in your head strikes me as deeply troubled at best or just nasty. Sentences like “Her wetness had become so extreme I kept slipping, like a man in smooth-soled boots on a mudbank” suggest to me that there is a total disconnection with the woman involved and almost an alienness and I feel there is an unspoken loathing there which I find disturbing. The question I then ask is whether this is Updike observing and satirising men, or is it what he really thinks. I am not sure, but I tend towards the latter. All the women in the book are sexual foils, not intellectual ones. There is no meeting of minds, just a meeting of bodies, which alienated this reader because the meeting of minds for me is primary and is inseparable and an integral part of the physical incarnation. 
3)	This is sex as a burden, almost like one of Marley’s chains, something inescapable because that’s what men have to do. It is a gloomy view of sexual relations with no sense or understanding of femininity. It felt to me deeply misogynistic. 
The whole contrivance doesn’t work, but the bits about Buchanan were at least informative.