Rating: 5/5

I love this book!

I was barely starting to read it and I was already amazed of how much I was enjoying the reading experience and how much I like the way how it was written.

Definitely I want to read other books by Charles Portis and I hope to do it in the near future.

I wasn't ignorant about the story due I remember that I watched the film with John Wayne at some moment and definitely I watched the recent remake with Jeff Bridges.

  I would not put a thief in my mouth to steal my brains.

I chose to read the book mainly on the basis that I want to include some westerns in my shelves and in that way to add this genre to my range of literary genres.

However, I never expected to get hooked in the way that I got, even with a story that basically I knew what happens. But the selection of words by the author and the mix of clever humor with hardboiled drama was a wonderful experience.

I read about the other books by Portis and I am glad to see that almost all get in the range of western-like stories and that they have that same combination of humor and drama.

I am sure that Portis can easily become one of my new favorite authors.

Charles Portis is a master creating characters, the young and determined Mattie Ross, the rude and bold "Rooster" Cogburn, and even LaBoeuf, that he didn't click to me on the recent film, I learned to understood the character here on the original novel.

And I can assure you that the rest of characters not matter how small their parts can be, they were quite well developed.

Something that I liked too, it's that since this is a story about vengeance, well, vengeance has its price, you can't expect to embrace that dark feeling and thinking that you will be able to get back to your life without changes and obviously without spoiling anything, you will realize what I mean, if you read this great book.

  You must pay for everything in this world one way and another. There is nothing free except the Grace of God. You cannot earn that or deserve it.

The title of the novel, True Grit is chosen in an excellent way resuming the heart and soul of the story.

Definitely one of the best western novels that you can read.

Highly recommended.