Rating: 3/5

Technology surrounds us everywhere, as I write this review there are two other laptops in the room, a television, a tablet, and a smart phone. If we leave this room and expand to the whole house you'll find three more TVs, another computer, another tablet, two other smart phones, a Blu-Ray player, a PlayStation 3 and 4, and three iPod's. This is the head-space that we live in now, a world so steeped in technology that it permeates our entire life and will only continue to do so as we relentlessly move forward. 

It is an advanced version of our world that Metrophage lives in, a world of virtual reality and pleasure, of instant gratification, of ultra violence, ultra drugs, augmented bodies, and a ruined government. It is a result of this tireless world building that elevates Metrophage beyond that of your average Science Fiction or Cyberpunk novel, but the world building alone cant make up for its short comings. 

I do want to stress that Mr. Kadrey has done an exceptional job crafting the world that Metrophage lives in. The governmental climate was very interesting, the history of The Committee and it's war on the drug trade in Los Angeles, the various drug lords, and all of the technology and inventions that Mr. Kadrey brings into the world. The biggest problem that this book has is its characters, outside of the main character, Johnny, no one really has much substance, they all seem to exist just to fill roles in the life of our protagonist. 

No one really gets enough time to develop because the plot is always moving, we see some really great outlines that get developed for our characters but they are never really fleshed out enough to make me care about them. In particular I didn't feel anything for the sense of longing that Johnny had over the two women in his life, we hear about the conflict they had with one another and their problems but none of it is explained why. I dont know why Johnny loves Sumi and Ice so much and I dont know why they need to be near one another, and these characterization issues are present among almost everyone in the novel except for the protagonist. 

The other problem is a lack of focus, Mr. Kadrey has so many plot threads running that I really dont understand what is going on sometimes. The novel starts out simply enough with Johnny being tasked to bring a drug lord in to the Committee, but then we hear about a group of aliens that have taken over the moon, a revolution to dethrone the Committee and release the death grip it has on Los Angeles, and it isn't until really far into the novel that the main conflict is even introduced. By the time that conflict comes to the forefront so much else is going on that it can be very hard to understand just what is presented in front of you and how it all fits together. 

Even as I write this review I'm not entirely sure what actually happened, how different groups fit together, and just how the conflict came to be. These are really glaring issues and the way the book ends gives me no actual resolution, it was just disappointing and made me feel terrible. Don't get me wrong, those kinds of endings can be fantastic, just look at Gone Girl for example. But the difference here is that Metrophage's ending is hollow, it has no real resolution of any kind, nothing was solved, nothing was gained, all that exists at the book's finale is loss seemingly for the sake of loss. 

I give this book three stars because the setting is amazing, and the things that fill it are incredible. My writing mentor once told me that a book is like a snow globe, the setting is the glass sphere, the buildings and politics and technology are the buildings, and the people are the statues inside. This snow globe is beautiful to look at but a rapture has happened, and someone has taken all of the people.