Rating: 4/5

David Guterson has obviously done his homework in depicting this appearance of the Virgin to a bedraggled, asthmatic teen-age mushroom gatherer in a soggy northwest rain forest. There have been numerous purporrted sightings of the Virgin throughout history, the two most famous ones occurring at Lourdes in France and at Fatima in Portugal. What North Fork, a depressed lumber town in the Pacific Northwest near where the sightings take place, has in common with the other sites is that they are all in a poor region. The people who live there lead hard, trapped lives and are looking for something better. They are eager to believe that Ann Holmes has really seen the Virgin. The Virgin of course bestows miraculous powers to people who are seeking various kind of "cures". 
	
The novel is as much about the "believers" as it is about Ann who is never too specific about what she has seen, except to say that she saw a luminous incandescent figure within a ball of light appear to her in the forest. Ann is a runaway, a victim of child abuse and rape,she has stolen, used drugs, experienced hallucinations. The Virgin's message to her is vague, asking people to answer Mother Mary's call through Christian service founded on Jesus. But there is also one specific request - a church should be built on the spot, one that "will be a beacon to unbelievers and bring them into the presence of God." 
	
Why would anyone believe this forlorn waif? For one thing, the bones of a long lost child are found in the forest and this is attributed to intercession on the part of the Virgin. She benefits from a smooth-talking friend, Carolyn, who builds a good case for the legitimacy of the Virgin sightings (and in the process siphons off donations for her own use). People are eager to believe these occurrences, in the United States as elsewhere, as evidenced by reporting of "visions" by such homegrown American women as Veronica Louken and Mary Ann Van Hoof ( I had never heard of these people, but googled them, and sure enough, they attracted large numbers of true believers). In this fictional work, the word gets out quickly, and religious pilgrims descend upon North Fork by the thousands, overwhelming the town's ability to organize and take care of the influx. 
	
A local priest is contacted , a young Father Collins, struggling with his own issues of faith and trying to manage his first assignment in North Fork. A older priest is sent from the bishop's office to investigate, and his jaded and skeptical approach clashes with Fr. Collins' more open mind about Ann's visions. Another key character is Tom Cross, a divorced, hard-drinking, out-of-work logger who feels guilty for accidentally maiming his son, now a paraplegic for life, and if ever there was person in need of a miracle, Tom is that person. 
	
Did the visions really take place? Did miraculous cures appear? Ann says she saw the Virgin, plenty of people claim that their maladies were cured, and in an ending that can either be viewed as cynical, "miraculous" in a peculiar faith-filled way, or a ambiguous combination of the two, Fr. Collins gets a new church built, the town revives financially due to the now steady flood of religious tourists, the con-artist friend makes a lot of money, Tom Cross undergoes a positive change of attitude. What more could you ask for from "Our Lady of the Forest?"