Rating: 4/5

This is quite a book... uh... the first I've ever read by John Updike. I didn't really know anything about him, but I was led here by some combination of having read so many other modern American authors - most recently, John Irving, of course.

So I read some of the various reviews, and I figured this really wouldn't be a very good place to start. It doesn't sound very interesting. And for a while, it isn't. And then every now and then, also for a while, it isn't very interesting again. But for some reason I quite enjoyed it. I don't want to say I really enjoyed it, because then I'd have to start thinking about bumping it up a star, and it's really too odd to be doing that. By odd I definitely don't mean in a mind-bending, feat-of-the-imagination kind of way. I mean in a kind of what the fuck was he thinking? kind of way.

Because this is two parallel stories. One is a kind of lengthy readers' letters submission to a pornographic magazine for academics, while the other is a highly fictionalised account of a US President, of whom I had literally never heard of prior to reading this book. Nor had I ever had the slightest interest of reading about him - or any other president for that matter. 

Now, it all comes together as one document, supposedly written by the character Alf Clayton, as he tries to relate his memories of the administration of President Gerald Ford to a local historical journal - which makes it kind of funny, because all he remembers from the Ford Administration are his marital problems and extra-marital liaisons - of which he includes hilarious and inappropriate details. Has he lost his fucking mind?

In tandem with that is the fact that he doesn't write about Ford at all - except in the last chapter to acknowledge that he really doesn't have any memories of the Ford Administration. What he does write about is James Buchanan. And it's very dry, quite difficult to follow (especially as the civil war approaches, and we're expected to remember the names of delegations and officials and god knows what else), and at times seems like an experiment in finding out how much boredom a pervert will tolerate in order to reach the next instance of smut. As the pervert in question, I can attest to the fact that quite a lot of boredom can be tolerated. However, I'm not a teenager anymore, and the smut doesn't have the effect on me that it might have done in my [let's say] formative years. 

"One of my memories of the Ford years is of a wet cunt nipping... at the small of my back as a naked woman settled herself astride my waist to give me an allegedly relaxing shoulder rub," is one example of the kind of reminiscences that had me wondering what this Clayton fella thought he was doing - and there's more, believe me, but I won't be quoting any more of it in my review. 

So beyond the odd plot, the unusual structure and the bizarre concept, there are one or two other things to take notice of. Firstly, we are confronted with the word "cunt" 6 times. This seems like rather a lot when you consider that half the book is a biography of an American president, and the word doesn't surface in those parts at all. However, the words "languor" and "languid" appear many more times. These though, I feel help to strengthen the impression that we are reading a work by a character called Alf Clayton, rather than one by John Updike - though it might be worth looking out for these words in other Updike novels (challenge accepted). For the record, I don't expect to find them as, if you follow my @readothusiast twitter account, you'll see that Updike introduced me to 21 very strange words in the course of the rest of the novel - 7 in the afterword, where he portrayed himself. Also of note is that one of these [new to me] words, aporia appeared 3 times itself.

There are also other weird things going on with grammar and form - the amusing notes to the editors, for example, which serve to remind you that Clayton hasn't lost his fucking mind after all - he's well aware of what he's writing and doesn't seem to think there's anything strange about it. Perhaps historical journals are full of the sexual escapades of the world's historians.

Then you've got things like some unfeasibly long sentences. To be fair, most of these occur at the beginning of the novel, as if it's an intentional device that Updike simply forgets to do as he becomes ensconced in his story. The king of these sentences is one that covers 70 lines and only comes to an end because there's a quotation in the passage that has a full stop in it.

Then there's a square bracket that opens and doesn't seem to close. Another square bracket opens, and then, 15 pages later, one of the square brackets closes. Is this deliberate? I think so.

Between pages 205 and 215 we have long passages in fucking French. I didn't bother trying to translate them too accurately, and after a while even skipped them altogether. I really hate that, though. I have to assume that you included it because you wanted me to read it. And if that's the case, you should have translated the fucker.

Oh yeah, also there was a footnote that contained a footnote, that contained a footnote, that contained a footnote, that contained another footnote. As I write this, you know, I'm wondering if I'm revealing spoilers here... because - and don't get me wrong - these grammatical foibles were some of the things I found most interesting, because I got a sense that they were all definitely deliberate, and it was such a weird thing to do.

Anyway, these things are not all. There are also some beautifully constructed sentences, many of which I marked out with post-it notes for when I wrote this review, but now, looking over them, and realising even more so, how beautiful they are, I don't want to ruin them for you by including them here. It's not that they'd be out of context. They transcend the context, I really just don't want to steal all of Updike's thunder.

I seem to have enjoyed this novel more than I was allowing. I'm going to look at the other reviews, to see if I can allow myself to give it 4 stars. 

Right, anyway, before I make that decision; this might be a difficult and at times very dry read - at others it might be hilariously sexual, and you might wonder what the fuck it's supposed to be. However, I can clearly see that John Updike is a writer of some skill and seriousness. I'm intrigued, and I want to read some more of his works. 

Yes, I think 4 stars is allowed.