Rating: 4/5

The “book” I read was the Bourne Trilogy, by Robert Ludlum, consisting of 3 stories, which all describe the same character and some of his “experiences”. This book overall, describes some of the missions of David Webb, or Jason Bourne, or Delta (he goes by several names). The story, to the author’s credit, disorients the reader slightly as to the story and what is going on. This is then connected to the muddled thoughts and mind of Webb. Webb (or Bourne) is shot, and thrown into the sea. He is then found without a memory, or anything but a number to a bank account. From there, he continued on to take millions (in US dollars) from an odd bank account, which is linked to a company based in New York called Treadstone 31. This then leads into a story in which a man starts with no sides and no one to turn to. He is alone, disoriented, and confused. He only has his mission as a personality, and the will to survive for some reason. Through this he pushes through adversity, pain, and learns parts of his past. 
This book, in my opinion, is the most complex and well written book I’ve ever read. Why? This book takes this character from a blank slate (due to him losing his memory) and allows the author to build him up from nothing. Allowing this helps the author to create the character as the story progresses, letting both his past life and things that were happening to him effect and change the character. This then creates a character which I almost feel as if I grew with, yet still leaves some unknowns and takes influence from his past life in an interesting and encaptivating character. The story, looking past the main character, uses several interesting settings which they explore fully, using every noted detail to influence the story. Such an instance is when one of the characters interacts with a random bystander, as he is attempting to scope out an area. The encounter goes as follows; “Pardon, monsieur!’ exclaimed the embarrassed hero of France, unconsciously slipping into his native tongue. ‘Je regrette - that is to say, it is I who must be excused.’
‘Oh?’ At his word the stranger’s eyes briefly widened, almost as if there were recognition in them quickly hidden. ‘Not at all.’
‘Pardon, we have met monsieur?’
‘I don’t believe so,’ replied the old man in the silly white cap. ‘But we’ve all heard the rumors. A great French hero is among the guests.’
‘Foolishness. The accidents of war when we were all much younger. My name is Fontaine. Jean Pierre Fontaine.’
‘Mines’s… Patrick. Brendan Patrick --’ …
‘Again the stranger seemed to be studying him, thought Fontaine, yet oddly enough avoiding any prolonged eye contact.’”
This seemingly random encounter was actually revealed to be the confirmation and monitoring of one of the main villain's men who was sent to kill Bourne’s wife and children in an attempt to break him. Similar to this, other details were added to the story which then showed up later in the book as an important turning point. This really tied together the story and helped to connect the somewhat disorienting plot from a mess of jigsaw pieces to start to a beautiful scene at the end of the book. Finally, as to the lore and plot of the story, it was well thought out with what originally seemed to be plot holes or random events being answered later in the story (similar to the event mentioned above), as well as having a well thought out lore and world which is slowly revealed as Jason gains back his memory to show a network of different people, organizations, world events, and many other things to shape the world in which the story takes place in. Overall, the only issue I encountered was that of the disorientation, as the plot was hard to piece together at times. However, this may have simply been my reading ability. This book was well written and thought out, as well as interesting and really pulled you into a new world.