Rating: 4/5

I have rather mixed feelings about this one. First of all, it's BY FAR the best of this four-book series, at least in terms of the male lead not being an utter and total asshole (I hope it's not a spoiler to say that he doesn't ever beat, rape, or berate his wife, and actually ACTS like he loves her) while the female lead is both clever and politically astute, not shrewish, and also doesn't do horrible things to her underlings. So that already sets the two characters head and shoulders above their counterparts in the other three books of the series.

HOWEVER ... the romance and the history sit rather awkwardly together, because much of the book is just a straight-up retelling of the end of Simon de Montfort's rule over England, from the perspective of those who are more or less bound to his enemies (Henry III and Prince Edward who will become Edward I.) So there are pages, and page, and pages, of the movement of armies etc., and while that's no bad thing, it's also not ... really a novel at this point? (For sure, Gellis doesn't have the skill of Dorothy Dunnett, who makes the politics as interesting as the other stuff, because we don't have reams of exposition.) I LOVE history, and historical fiction, but I prefer that my fiction have some fiction in it, rather than just being a retelling of historical events with no reference to the characters in the novels. 

Meanwhile, the romance "plot" such as it is, hinges on one of my least favorite tropes ever - people who just DON'T TALK TO EACH OTHER and stupid misunderstandings that continue to be perpetuated, and goddamn, just stop it, you two!! Because I really did like Alphonse AND Barbara, but I was also super annoyed with both of them until the last two chapters of the book, which were great.

Oh, and the third dimension is the increasingly awkward erotic scenes because they just seem shoehorned in there to show us that Barbara and Alphonse desire and love each other, but ... by the 10th one, it would have sufficed to just say they had some fun sexy times, because the scenes aren't particularly erotic, and they just don't gel with the long paragraphs of actual history so this book ends up as a weird hybrid.

HOWEVER ... I do still really like Gellis's much less unrealistic-than-most-historical-romance-novels (I'm looking at you, all those books with "Highland ..." in their title!) view of history, and Barbara and Alphonse are both quite charming and I liked some of the secondary characters, so I'm glad I kept reading through to the end of the series. I may even try some of her others.