Rating: 5/5

“Oh! but he was a tight-fisted hand at the grindstone, Scrooge! a squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous old sinner! Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck out generous fire, secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an oyster. The cold within him froze his old features, nipped his pointed nose, shriveled his cheek, stiffened his gait, made his eyes red, his thin lips blue, and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice. A frosty rime was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry chin. He carried his own low temperature always about with him; he iced his office in the dog-days; and didn’t thaw it one degree at Christmas…”
-	Charles Dickens, A Christmas Carol

Charles Dickens’s A Christmas Carol is probably the most perfect story I have ever read. Not the best, mind you, and not even my favorite. But in its sublime unity of theme and execution, its graceful symmetries and memorable moments, it is tough to beat. It has been said that A Christmas Carol is the most adapted written work in the English language, and it seems a likely claim, having inspired countless movies, television specials, musicals, and theatrical productions. It is a testament to the essential worthiness of the source material that Dickens’s classic is so readily adaptable in so many mediums, and works just as well when interpreted by Mr. Magoo or Muppets or George C. Scott. 

A Christmas Carol has long since transcended its status as a mere novella, and has become symbolic of Christmas itself. More than most books you come across, it is a mood as much as anything. In approximately one-hundred pages – depending on which of the nine-thousand editions you choose – you are confronted with a chilling protagonist who, over the course of five compact acts, will have his certainties challenged, his illusions shattered, and his heart changed. 

All of this seems trite and melodramatic in summary; in practice, it is pure magic, a precious gem that waits to be reread each year, and each year just as good as the last. 

*** 

You probably already know this, but A Christmas Carol tells the tale of an aging miser named Ebenezer Scrooge. He works in a counting-house with his poor, put-upon clerk Bob Cratchit. Once upon a time, Scrooge had a partner, Jacob Marley, but when the novella opens, Marley has been dead seven years, though Scrooge seems barely to notice. 

Until, that is, Marley appears to him as a ghost, bearing a warning. 

“It is required of every man,” the Ghost returned, “that the spirit within him should walk abroad among his fellow-men, and travel far and wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned to do so after death. It is doomed to wander through the world…and witness what it cannot share, but might have shared on earth, and turned to happiness!”

Marley himself is one of the condemned, as greedy and avaricious as his old partner, and now bearing a “ponderous chain” corresponding to his selfish life. He informs Scrooge that his own chain is even larger, yet there is the possibility of escape. This lifeline is comprised of three separate ghosts – Christmas Past, Christmas Present, and Christmas Yet to Come – who will visit him on three separate nights. 

Though Scrooge is a bit hesitant of this deal, he is ultimately given little choice on the matter, and those three visits comprise the unforgettable spine of this book. 

***

Dickens wrote some doorstoppers in his life. Big, shaggy, serialized novels like Bleak House and David Copperfield, filled with digression and convoluted plot-twists. A Christmas Carol is exceptionally different. It is lean and clean and fast. Dickens may have struggled during the writing, but the finished product bears no sign of it. A Christmas Carol hits every mark with assuredness. To read it is to feel like Dickens knew exactly what he was doing with every sentence, even if that was not actually how it happened. 

No matter what else you think about Dickens – and I find him to be strikingly hit-or-miss – the man knew how to create an indelible character. There isn’t much of a roster in A Christmas Carol, but everyone makes the best of their moment on stage. For the most part, this is Scrooge’s show, as he is the only one given even a hint of psychological depth or shading. But that’s okay, because Scrooge has become one of the most recognized figures in literature, if not in all of western pop culture. 

The supporting cast, including Cratchit, nephew Fred, and the ghosts themselves, are mostly foils for Scrooge. Still, Dickens presents them flawlessly, using them both to define Scrooge’s contours, and to land emotional blows. We may not know what makes Tiny Tim tick, but we sure aren’t going to forget him. 

*** 

The writing in A Christmas Carol just sparkles. At certain times, Dickens leans hard into the spooky, gothic-horror aspects. At others, he is playful and wry, with conversational exchanges that crackle and pop. Indeed, these two approaches are often combined to wonderful effect, as in Scrooge’s first meeting with Marley, which is both ominous and funny. One of the telling indicators of the prose – especially the dialogue – is that most adaptations simply transfer Dickens’s words wholesale, without making a change.

Dickens always had a finely honed social conscience, and that is on display here. Mostly, though, he keeps his touch light, without losing any impact. Only the Ghost of Christmas Present tends towards pedantry, and that’s only towards the end of his tour. Mostly, Dickens makes his points through highly-polished vignettes, such as Scrooge’s observations of the Cratchit family. 

*** 

The Christmas cynic says that the season is hypocritical, and that even those people who volunteer, give money, and donate food and gifts only do so once a year. 

The optimist says that maybe the Christmas spirit can be contagious, like a benign virus, and that the goodness of the season, or even just the day, can spread. 

The realist understands that most people – myself included – need a kick in the butt to give more, and to help more, and to be kinder. Even if that only happens for the roughly thirty-day period between Thanksgiving and Christmas Day, it’s at least something. It’s a start. 

That’s the lesson of A Christmas Carol. The Ghosts don’t change Scrooge; he changes himself. And as Dickens famously writes, he kept that going the rest of his days: “He became as good a friend, as good a master, and as good a man as the good old City knew, or any other good old city, town, or borough in the good old world.” 

Maybe we won’t undergo a late-December miracle, but maybe we can all be a little bit better, at least until March. 

***

“Timeless” is probably an overused adjective, yet A Christmas Carol has earned that sobriquet. It spoke to audiences in 1843, and continues to speak to us, almost one-hundred-and-eighty years later. Of course, it is not entirely unique or original. Dickens was obviously influenced by writers such as Washington Irving, whose own holiday stories he read, and by the emerging Christmas zeitgeist. Beyond that, I’m sure most cultures have a similar archetypal account of a rich man forced to transform his ways. 

Dickens’s accomplishment is in taking existing elements and fitting them into a seamless, endlessly satisfying structure, putting Scrooge through his paces so that his eventual redemption is earned, rather than forced. 

Also, he totally crushes the names. 

*** 

It is our reality as humans that most of our lives exist in what we can remember. After all, we have control only of the instant second, and already, that second is passing.

For me, Christmas is a marker of time. I have forgotten the vast majority of my days on earth, but can recall most of my Christmases. They are these brilliant nodes of recollection, as real now as they ever were: the Christmas I – like Ralphie Parker – got my first BB gun; the last Christmas I had with my grandparents, and the first one without; the Christmas after my parents divorced; the first Christmas I spent with my wife; the Christmas that occurred ten days after the birth of my first child. Most are sweet, some bittersweet, and all of them locked behind a door in my mind, waiting for the right key. 

That key comes in many forms: an ornament on my mom’s tree that has been reflecting light since the Great Depression; the smell of pine; the first few chords of Have Yourself A Merry Little Christmas. 

A Christmas Carol is part of that. It is a vessel, a vein to be tapped. Once opened, it unleashes a flood of visitors: not three spirits, but ten-thousand memories and one.