Rating: 4/5

A book calling for the de-medicalization of childbirth is even more revolutionary now than in 1976 when this book was first published in French and in 1984 when the first English edition appeared. The number and types of routine medical interventions that are standard hospital procedures have increased exponentially, and Dr. Michel Odent's call to re-examine the medical practices surrounding childbirth that can disrupt and complicate a normal birth is still valid. For historians of the natural childbirth movement, this book is the cornerstone of the pushback against the industrialization of birth. As Dr. Odent states on page 112, ". . . the movement toward birth without violence or gentle birth is irreversible. Any woman who has experienced the new climate, either as a mother or as a witness, will find the current atmosphere in most maternity unit today intolerable in the future."

ENTERING THE WORLD: THE DE-MEDICALIZATION OF CHILDBIRTH reads like a philosophical treatise. In it Dr. Odent describes how deeply moved he and the staff at his maternity ward were deeply moved by Dr. Frederick Leboyer's book Birth without Violence and implemented a nonviolent, non-medically invasive method of childbirth at the Pithiviers Hospital in France. Dr. Odent explains why birth without iatrogenic violence and without unnecessary medical inventions is crucial to childbirth for both mother and baby.

The crux of this argument is "Obstetricians have made great efforts to assimilate the applications of modern technology. They have allowed themselves to be overwhelmed and intoxicated by the technology and by their pride in themselves as technicians, forgetting that they must be more than technicians" (119 -- 120). When technology is seen as superior to nature, then unnecessary use of technology is bound to run rampant. When Dr. Odent mused, "Will the obstetrician of tomorrow be sitting in front of a computer terminal screen?" (30), I had to laugh. Now it's the nurses sitting in front of a computer screen at the nurses' station monitoring all the women in the maternity unit from a distance while the doctor is across town at his/her office monitoring his patients' labors on his smart phone while conducting business as usual. Dr. Odent was not kidding when he said, "The history of obstetrics sometimes looks like a catalogue of futile and dangerous exercises dreamt up to 'facilitate' labour" (121). Perhaps for the safety of all patients, it is time to call for the separation of ob-gyn into the two distinct practices of obstetrics and gynecology, which would allow obstetricians to focus exclusively on pregnant women and gynecologists to focus solely on all other women's reproductive health concerns.

This book is slightly out of date. While advocating waiting to cut the umbilical cord (a photograph of a woman bathing her own newborn with the cord still attached to her is included), Dr. Odent did discuss the medical concerns of this practice's safety. Although cutting the cord almost instantly after delivery is still standard practice in most hospitals, research has shown waiting until the placenta is delivered to cut the umbilical is perfectly safe and even has benefits due to that fact that up to a third of a child's blood still can still be in the cord and placenta at the time of birth. Dr. Odent also discusses waterbirth as being experimental, and it has long since become an established, albeit still considered eccentric, practice.

Dr. Odent's statement "Obstetricians have not realized that by concentrating more on the child, they would be working towards a reduction in neo-natal mortality and morbidity" is has proven incorrect. The pendulum has swung to the opposite extreme as doctors focus almost exclusively on the fetus's welling being out of fear of litigation, and mothers are treated by professionals in modern maternity care as potentially fatal barriers to the babies whom they are carrying rather than fully fledged human beings whose experience and emotions deserve to be taken into account. Mothers as well as their infants routinely experience medically perpetrated violence in childbirth. And sadly playing the dead baby card to get mothers to submit to a host of medical interventions has not improved the neo-natal mortality rates.

Medical students, midwives, and medical historians would enjoy this book slightly dated though it is. For mothers-to-be I would recommend the revised edition of Birth without Violence, Ina May Gaskin's Birth without Violence, and Active Birth : The New Approach to Giving Birth Naturally, which is based upon Dr. Odent's work.