Rating: 4/5

Penelope Lively’s children’s book taps into the rich vein of folkloric, low fantasy so brilliantly-realised by writers like Alan Garner, John Gordon and Susan Cooper. Although Lively doesn’t reach Garner’s imaginative heights here, at times this reminded me of his earlier novels, particularly The Owl Service: not just because both writers draw on ancient myth and legend to explore the interplay between past and present, but also the way they highlight the shifts in 70s’ England’s class system, charting oppositions between the rural middle-classes and a newly socially-mobile, working class in a manner that seems very revealing of that era’s social anxieties. So that, what’s on the surface, a straightforward, semi-magical adventure has added layers of meaning and cultural commentary; and her shared preoccupations with Garner and Cooper, meant I wasn’t surprised to discover that Lively’s story’s also been included in recent studies of the flowering of 70s' folk horror. 

The initial scenario here’s a familiar one, an urban child’s sent to the countryside to stay with a distracted, unobservant academic, giving them freedom to roam and uncover hints of something strange unfolding around them. Here it’s 11-year-old bookish introvert Lucy who’s spending the school holidays with her botanist aunt in an isolated, Somerset village. Lucy’s arrival coincides with preparations for a scheme, thought up by a new vicar as a potential tourist attraction, to revive an ancient pagan ceremony. It was performed in Hagworthy for hundreds of years but mysteriously abandoned in the early nineteenth century. A ritual that’s somehow connected to ideas of sacrifice, local legends of a fearsome, supernatural wild hunt and the resurgence of repressed primordial forces,

“The Dance began. Suddenly the clowning stopped. The two rows of figures skipped and swayed, faceless behind the masks, the antlers dipping and soaring above their heads, without grace but with a strange archaic dignity. For the moment, their individual personalities had vanished, merged in a collective activity that set them apart from the watchers at the edge of the field. They seemed to be alone in the dark stillness of the valley, beneath the lowering sky, alone and a thousand years old.”

I liked Lucy’s character, she’s fairly convincingly drawn and sympathetic but I can’t say the same for the depiction of Hagworthy’s villagers which seemed rudimentary and in imminent danger of tipping over into parody worthy of Cold Comfort Farm. The plot’s a little slow-moving but Lively compensates with her focus on atmosphere, increasingly tense and eerily foreboding as she carefully builds towards the time for the Dance’s final performance. I doubt this will be as memorable for me as much of Garner and Cooper’s output but I enjoyed the narrative's use of folklore; and I relished Lively’s imagery, her meticulous recreation of the wildlife, landscapes, sights and sounds of Somerset, sensitive and unsentimental, I found it tremendously evocative.

Rating: 3.5