Rating: 5/5

The True Believer seeks to explain the causes of mass movements and how political upheavals emerge predictably from psychological and sociological predispositions. It is broad, confident, and hugely insightful. Eric Hoffer wrote The True Believer in 1951, with World War II fresh in memory and other threats emerging around the world - and yet, his insights feel current and often frighteningly prescient (one cannot help but interpret his observations in the light of Trump's presidency: parallels others have drawn). And yet, Hoffer had no formal training: he was widely read and had an amazing mind for synthesis, but worked in restaurants and fields, and as a gold prospector and longshoreman, where he wrote his influential books. He came to prominence after Dwight Eisenhower hailed this volume in 1952, and was given the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Ronald Reagan in 1983.

Though a short book, The True Believer is dense and takes a while to parse. Hoffer speaks in absolutes: broad, sweeping statements that my mind immediately wants to challenge. He anticipates this, saying, "The reader is expected to quarrel with much that is said... he is likely to feel that much has been exaggerated and much ignored. But this is not an authoritative textbook. It is a book of thoughts, and it does not shy away from half-truths so long as they seem to hint at a new approach and help to formulate new questions." (p60) He's going for simplicity, and indeed - nuance would make this a much longer book. You're sure to find a few new vocabulary words in the process, too. There is also copious use of abstract language that forced me to stop after each sentence and apply the concepts to real-world situations to get a picture of what he's saying. For example, in a typical sentence: "We have seen that the acrid secretion of the frustrated mind, though composed chiefly of fear and ill will, acts yet as a marvelous slime to cement the embittered and disaffected into one compact whole." (p124) Another: "Contrary to what one would expect, propaganda becomes more fervent and importunate when it operates in conjunction with coercion than when it has to rely solely on its own effectiveness." (p106) Sometimes I'll have to re-read a sentence a few times to get a good feel for its meaning: "Oh yeah, that makes sense." Or, "Well, you already made that point just in the last paragraph." Or, "Wow, that's brilliant. I should highlight that."

There were many such passages, and if I had taken a highlighter to all the salient and highly quotable statements, it would be a brightly colored book indeed. I didn't, and so I'm struggling right now to jump straight to the best examples. Here's a few quotes from this Goodreads list:

"Hatred is the most accessible and comprehensive of all the unifying agents. Mass movements can rise and spread without belief in a god, but never without a belief in a devil."
"The quality of ideas seems to play a minor role in mass movement leadership. What counts is the arrogant gesture, the complete disregard of the opinion of others, the singlehanded defiance of the world."
"People with a sense of fulfillment think it is a good world and would like to conserve it as it is, while the frustrated favor radical change."
"The permanent misfits can find salvation only in a complete separation from the self; and they usually find it by losing themselves in the compact collectivity of a mass movement."
"Propaganda ... serves more to justify ourselves than to convince others; and the more reason we have to feel guilty, the more fervent our propaganda."

I did quarrel with some of what was said, thought of counter-examples here-and-there, and in some ways this book is simply a product of its time. One example: we hear constant refrains about "men of action" and "men of words" without a nod to the existence of women. Hoffer regularly cites Moses and the Exodus as examples, as if those actually happened. And yet, none of these criticisms should preclude anyone from wrestling and working their way through. It's a potent, thought-provoking book, and I'd recommend it simply for the internal dialog it prompts.