Rating: 5/5

look inside, young soldier. look inside your fellow soldier, see the nothing there, see the nothing that has been put there as a reason why, see the nothing that has become a something, a reason for being a reason for acting a reason for dying. look inside your own self, young soldier. see the slowly building anger, see the red. you can shape that anger, turn it into a weapon, make it a place you can live, make it a reason for moving forward. it is the heart of you.

  

Soldier of America! shine bright, and bring the radiant dawn of corporate-military interests to these little third world countries! neither you nor your masters really understand why you are there in the first place - but who cares? you are all serving greater interests! be the pawn in a long-game whose rules are long-forgotten!

  

out of the darkness, into more darkness; out of the jungle, into another. make a home there! America is just a memory now, a place you once were; you are much more at home in this personal heart of darkness, this jungle of the mind, this bubbling sludgy swamp of the soul. you make new friends in this new place. your friends will guide you - and you will guide them! there is so much to teach and so much to learn.

  

grow up and become a living weapon, little soldier. do your parents proud! destroy! burn the people, burn the land. take everything from them. who is "them" anyway? it gets so confusing in the thick of battle. everyone looks the same yet also different. and what is a "battle" anyway, when both sides share the same goal? the answer to that question: destroy both sides!

  

  

The narrative unwinds like a glistening, multi-colored snake, its coils taking the reader here and there, a sinuous adventure that moves from set-piece to set-piece, each part so differently hued from the prior part, all parts leading to one place: the head of the snake.

The prose astounds. Lucius Shepard was a genius. The images are so rich and so beautifully rendered, a wonderful horrible nightmare, so many images.

An attack of butterflies, swarming, covering every inch of them.

A downed helicopter, stuck in the trees. A computer voice that lives on, imagining itself to be God.

Shirtless pilots sunning themselves, black helmets never removed, helmets that allow them to see things far and near, into a person and into the future.

An Ant Hill full of little soldiers. An attack in the mist.

An entertainment for the masses: soldier versus panther. Alas, poor panther! It has no chance.

Gangs of children, victims and victimizers, playing by their own rules, creating their own rituals.

A barrio full of almost-zombies to be used as their masters see fit, living puppets hacking at each other when the need arises and slumping into pools of refuse and excrement while on standby.

A slaughter in a church. A much-needed slaughter. A holy slaughter!

Psychic powers: psychic puppet masters making the whole world their battleground, psychic soldiers and psychic revolutionaries... our psychic heroes, David and Debora:

  

you have a trait: Anger. she has a trait: Commitment. 

together you will inspire each other, feed off of each other, make each other stronger with each bout of lovemaking. your Anger and her Commitment will recharge and refuel - those traits are at the heart of both of you. recognize these traits, their power, and so be made whole. they will move you forward and they will give you love, passion, a way to connect with each other and a way to understand your own selves. and they will provide you with a mission: destroy the puppet masters, one by one. 

kill 'em all!

  

out of the jungle, into your own jungle. this Green Hell is but one room in this labyrinthine mansion; go through one door and another one will open. it is your memory palace; it is the whole wide world. follow this green path right back to your home. there you will kill and there you will forget. maybe?