Rating: 4/5

4 solid stars! I did not expect to enjoy this book so much! I thought I had read it all of such Mills &amp; Boon stories but this one managed to surprise me not once or twice but many times! If there had been more sexy times I'd give this full 5* LOL

Because of all the plot twists and surprises there will be spoilers so my advice is just read the book and not too many reviews!

So out of all the books in my TBR I read this because the blurb sure grabbed my attention! Hero swimming naked in the lake and seen by heroine? Sold!

Dizzy James' professional name was DC James. Her name itself was a mystery which was revealed to us right at the end. Check below for her real name under spoilers. But her nickname Dizzy was derived from her initials DC, which was what her father called her after he got over his disappointment of not having a son and realised the names his artist wife gave their daughter.

Her best chum Christi was due to inherit upon turning 21 but it seemed her guardian uncle was not quite ready to release the money to her till he's satisfied she's mature enough to inherit. One of his "conditions" was for her to stay with him for some time in his Lake District castle, and the poor little rich girl was bored out of her mind and thinking of murdering her fusty and dusty uncle! She concocted the crazy idea for Dizzy to come and act irresponsibly so that in contrast Christi would look so mature and good!

Uncle Zachariah was a hot hunk of a nerd, a history professor who wrote books. Being a much younger brother of Christi's archeologist father, he was only 35 so not at all the elderly professor Dizzy had imagined! She had hiked the miles from the train station to the castle when she saw a Greek god swimming and sunbathing in the nude at a lake. In fact when she was introduced to Uncle, and realised HE was her Greek god, she choked up so badly! Hilarious 😂 

Anyway Christi laid it on so thick, that Dizzy seemed a drifter doing nothing with her life and living off the generosity of friends. Even us readers wondered how she's surviving out of two bags travelling the world! Oh Zach thought Dizzy a loose girl cos he overheard Christi on the phone with Dizzy, who had let Henry sleep in her bed because he was lonely and had soulful brown eyes! But the joke was Henry was Christi's dog!

Anyway we slowly found out more about Dizzy's family background and her emotional baggage.

All's well that ends well and the sweet ending/ epilogue tied in very nicely with Dizzy's love for pilchards 😍😍

SPOILERS SPOILERS SPOILERS 

So many funny twists.

Knowing Zach liked to go "bird watching" every afternoon according to Christi, Dizzy decided to look for him at the lake to confess the truth of her parents' identities, who were rich and famous MP (father) and mother a famous artist that Zach collected.

As she approached the lake, he saw her and started walking towards her. At this point Dizzy was getting excited...but Zach emerged from the water in swimming trunks, albeit tiny sexy black ones LOL. Turned out he added two and two to get four, and realised she must have seen him swimming naked when she arrived at the castle! Since then he wisely put on trunks, while wondering when Dizzy would come find him again!

After the confession and Zach angrily chased Dizzy off, we found out Dizzy made a good living as a book cover illustrator! She specialised in romance novels and historical in particular. Her favourite author Claudia Laurence finally agreed to let Dizzy illustrate one of her covers, but heartbroken Dizzy could not bring herself to be excited. Christi had to dress her up and send her to her publisher in a taxi! Annnnnd surprise! Zach WAS Claudia Laurence, bestselling "hot historicals" author! Castles are expensive to buy and renovate, you know, so poor Zach had to have a secret career. This plot twist took me by surprise as I totally did not see it coming! Great job! I love how the author used the romance industry and write these characters in to give us a glimpse of how Dizzy and Zach worked.

By this point I was really wondering what DC stand for...if her mother was a flamboyant artist it could be something Degas Cézanne or what. Then I thought it could be some dramatic names like Desdemona Cleopatra!

I was close! DC stood for Delilah Cleopatra! LOL Even Zach was laughing when he recounted how Dizzy asked the vicar if he really had to read out her full real names for the wedding service!

And the sweet ending...right in the beginning we knew Dizzy loved pilchards, a sardine-like herring type fish. In the castle on her first night, she was caught by Zach raiding the larder for some because she was hungry and couldn't sleep. He immediately got suspicious and questioned if she was pregnant and craving! Haha! The following night, he saw light under her door and brought her hot milk and biscuits because he could not bring himself to open the pilchards LOL. That was when they shared their first hot kiss!

I so wanted to read their sexy times but other than a couple of hot kisses, we were only told they made beautiful love, no going into the bedroom with them.

And. We were told Dizzy was pregnant in the last scene, because she tried to eat pilchards at lunch and they made her nauseous! Love how all the little details tied in at the end!

Great story!

Copyrighted 1988.