Rating: 3/5

While I was reading this book I couldn't decide if I liked it or not. Now that I'm done reading this book, I still can't figure it out. This book is a tangled up combination of fantasy and romance. It's also a tangle of original ideas and well-aged cliches. If you don't figure out who the real bad guy is before the heroine - you probably also get surprised by the endings of Dr. Seuss books. Incidentally, I never found the Cat in the Hat to be a subversive so much as I found him to be a huge jerk. 

So somewhere between the werewolves (and again, I hope you get there before the heroine or...yikes) and the guy who enjoys running around naked, there's some good elements. The story moves at a good pace, the basic elements are pretty interesting . Werewolves are stalking a small town, and the only one who knows is cop named Jessie McQuade who doesn't believe in them. Also the werewolves were created by Nazis. That's right. The werewolves were created by Nazi scientists so that Hitler could have his own Nazi werewolf army. Not all of the people who made the change were appreciative.

When a hunter who seems to remember that story first hand shows up to help hunt down the wolves (which are supposedly carrying a dangerous new type of rabies virus), Jessie is forced to admit that something strange is going on, and the stranger is the only one she can trust. 

Meanwhile, she has lots of sex with the in touch with the earth, not at all cliche, walking naked through the forest Native American professor who has information on the werewolves that makes Jessie suspicious he might have a little firsthand knowledge of his own. He's really pretty irrelevant to the story. The information he provides could have been provided several other ways and honestly? The sex was pointless. I know this was billed as a paranormal romance, so I guess the sex was inevitable, but it really wasn't necessary or helpful to the plot. Also not really instructive to the plot were the constant references to Jessie's chest, which was apparently large and inconvenient right up until her naked new friend taught her to appreciate them. Seriously, like, every chapter "blah blah werewolves blah blah my chest is too big blah blah". 

The copy I had included a preview from the next book which...looked to be about on par with this one. In the end, however, Blue Moon kept me interested and entertained, so I'll probably keep an eye out for the sequels at the library. I'd love to see Handeland attempt a fantasy book that wasn't billed first and foremost as a romance. I enjoy well-written romance books, but in this case, the romance was the weak link and was a distraction to the readers and the characters.