Rating: 4/5

I found this to be a nice discussion of Taoism, worlds easier to extract meaning from than the Tao Te Ching, though not quite as clear as the Tao of Pooh. It has all the trappings of ancient philosophy: parables, dialogues, and very poor logical constructions (though, unlike in Plato, these are essentially irrelevant for Zhuangzi; the point is never expressed in logical terms, but rather by illustration in analogy and parable). 

The parables are somewhat repetitious, both in tone and in ideas, and sometimes parables are explicitly repeated in slightly altered form. They express three central ideas:

1. That Virtue (happiness, lack of suffering, contentment) is to be found in a middle way, which makes no pretense to glory, riches, or power, nor to asceticism or isolation. It advocates acceptance of your lot in life as the truest road to happiness.

2. That fate is the ultimate determinant of the life you live. You are given a body, a society, a mind, etc, which all conspire to make you who you are and make you do what you do. 

3. That all divisions of the world and experience into categories are fallacious and indeed the source of all discontent. This means that language and thought themselves are facetious and don't necessarily have anything to do with the objective universe, and that the only way to truly understand is to abandon all attempts to understand. 

These ideas are pretty damned nice for a philosopher who thought such a long time ago. They're not perfect, of course, but I'd say it is probably worth reading. Maybe not. I dunno. Definitely read the Tao of Pooh over Zhuangzi, I'd say, but maybe complement them with each other.

This translation has a nice straightforward character, in that the translator provides many footnotes that are up front about the fact that in many places he didn't really know what Zhuangzi was trying to say. This makes it easier to find the spots that aren't worth trying to parse, since he points them out as dubiously translated and maintained from the original. 

"Words exist because of meaning; once you've gotten the meaning, you can forget the words. Where can I find a man who has forgotten words so I can have a word with him?"