Rating: 4/5

Yes, I started this short “other series” from Rex Stout in the middle, although at the time, I only knew it was second in the series and not second or only three. This book has that alternate feeling to it. Maybe it’s because by 1940, Mr. Stout had already written 7 Nero Wolfe adventures and wanted to try something different. Maybe Tecumseh Fox was a character where the author could have some fun; free of the, and I use this word lightly, expectations, of his more famous fictional detective. 
Whatever the motivation, this book is a lot of fun and the plot moves right along. The character of Amy Duncan is quite likable and her actions quite believable. And the interplay between her, other characters, and Mr. Fox is amusing and engaging. There’s some great dialogue that probably went further in the early 1940s than it would today for its boldness but that doesn’t make it feel dated. The characters shine in “Bad for Business” and the underlying mystery is layered with complications and other twists that kept it ambitious right to the end. 
Some aspects of the novel, however, jarred in comparison to the characters and their lives. Tecumseh Fox does not have a great relationship with Inspector Damon of the New York Police Department. It’s very heated and often times feels like there’s hardly any respect between them. Inspector Japp, in comparison, respects Poirot’s intellect and sees him maybe not as an equal but certainly as an asset. Even more could be said for the respect and trust Inspector Lestrade has for Sherlock Holmes. In both of these examples, the private detectives are consultants working with or even for their respective local law enforcement agencies. Fox and Damon don’t like each other which while believable put some of Fox’s decisions into serious question in my mind. 
Tecumseh was taking some pretty large liberties as a civilian, and, dare I say, without going into too much detail of the events in the book, almost felt like he was a vigilante more than a private eye. Had his relationship with the police force (or the Inspector) been stronger, these actions could be viewed differently. 
I’ll be finding the other books in this short lived series. I am intrigued to read more adventures with Tecumseh Fox.