Rating: 5/5

Really loved this one. I would probably rate 4.5 but like to "upgrade" when I am leaning toward that. 
I purchased this book during my visit to St Augustine this past Spring at the "Oldest House" tour. Even though I used to live there ( more or less) I never really "toured" then so I decided to give it a try ( and have loved it ever since-- it's amazing what you don't know about where you live!) The tour guide for the Oldest House was fantastic and she recommended this book to give a more detailed "semi non fiction" background on the "Oldest House". 
What I got was much more. 
This story is based on an actual St Augustine resident during the mid/late 1700's. I know the author did a lot of research and it showed. Not only in the descriptions and story , the actual history and events happening at the time from the mouths of actual people in the city at that time... but most of all in the character Maria. 
It probably helps that I know the streets of St Augustine inside and out and I could probably give a tour myself.... so I could literally picture her daily paths in my head... but what an amazing job the author did with bringing it to life. 
I will give a warning that it is quite heartbreaking ... Maria "Mary" was a remarkable woman who when through unimaginable hardships and kept her strength and perservered no matter what. One of the most likeable characters I've read in quite some time. 

Anyone who is bothered by deeply religious themes might not care too much for the book-- or at least the ending-- I didn't realize when I read this it was actually considered "Christian Fiction". I'm not usually one who particularly scopes out books with highly religious themes (although I'm very open to it of course)-- but it worked absolutely beautifully here. 
Also-- it's brutally honest about how things were back then so some people may be offended by that as well. But keep in mind this is for the most part a true story-- only actually relationship/conversations are not completely accurate. 

I wish this author's other two "Florida Trilogy" books were readily available but apparently they are quite hard to find. Maybe on my next trip there in the fall/winter I'll look!