Rating: 5/5

Though this book is definitely dated, its core "values," if you will, are still pertinent in the 21st century. The title actually refers to a literally ugly American and not the image of a loud, boisterous, disrespectful American living abroad that it has come to mean today--something that I found really interesting, having heard the phrase "ugly American" thrown around in college by various professors. I stumbled upon this in a thrift store. It looks like it has never been read.

Even though the threat of Communism taking over the world is past us, we Americans are still tripping up over many of the advices that this book tries to put forth. Things such as: attempt to learn the language of another country if you plan on being there for a while, don't spend all your time hob-nobbing with other Americans, learn what it is like to live like a local and befriend them, etc.

Nowadays, it seems that the militarism so entrenched in the situations proposed in this fictional-but-somewhat-based-on-facts has given way to "voluntourism"--that awful word for the even more awful scourge of Americans going abroad with a core objective in mind ("I'm teaching the natives to grow corn!") and coming back with nothing but cute pictures with local children. Instead of sticking with other Americans (as we still do), we're encouraged to go out there and "become a native"--which is incredibly offensive.

I rated this so highly not because it was an amazing book, but because it is a meaningful one. One I shouldn't have had to discover after I graduated college, after I spent a year living in India. Perhaps the idiotic things my peers did while abroad would not have been had we been required to read this book, or at least certain sections of it.

The messages in this book are needed as long as Americans go abroad with the prime objective to "convert the savages," as long as Americans go abroad and return with nothing that they've learned other than "people are happier with less stuff," and as long as there are companies being run in such a way that while appealing to the heart of the average American, are in actuality ruining the country they are supposed to be benefiting. (Looking at you, Toms shoes.)