Rating: 5/5

First a bit of on-the-ground reporting from someone who has admittedly never touched a loaded firearm. There I was in August 2016, on a warm, clear day that would later turn to Biblical rain- as tends to happen in the south in summer. From the spot where Zapruder had stood, I watched a guy wait for the light to turn, then jog out to one of the Xs so his friend could take a picture; cars were already turning left from N Houston, and slowed down as the tourist sprinted back to the sidewalk. "You're gonna be the second person who died here", his friend called.

Someone has written, on the fence above the grassy knoll, "Bill Hicks was right about everything", and on the sixth floor of the former book depository, now museum, the glassed-in window is still as Hicks described: "They have it set up to look exactly like it did on that day; and it's really accurate, you know, because...Oswald's not in it. I'm talking painstaking detail..."

It’s true that you can’t get to the window, but you can look out the adjacent one and try to gauge the distance for yourself (for whatever that’s worth). As I did, I remembered a detail that had impressed me in Oliver Stone’s JFK; that if Oswald had been the shooter, it would have made a lot more sense for him to shoot Kennedy when the motorcade was on N Houston, a straight shot. 

The idea impressed me just a little less while standing at the window, only because I was able to see that the distance the motorcade would have traveled on N Houston is extremely short. As I watched the street, there couldn't have been more than five seconds between the time any slow-moving car turned right on N Houston from Main Street and then left on Elm. It's hard to imagine that even someone ready and waiting would have had time to take aim and fire. Also, as Mailer writes, It is a direct head-on shot with the target growing steadily in size…on the other hand, trained professionals are staring at the Book Depository windows from the lead car in the motorcade, and police on motorcycles are scouring the building with their eyes. A sniper’s instinct would probably pull him back into relative darkness… But Mailer begins about four years earlier, with Oswald's arrival in the USSR in October 1959 which has the effect of encouraging readers to temporarily forget what we know, or think we know, about Oswald, and to see him as the Soviets must have: inexplicable. And then we remember that he is inexplicable, that the ambiguities of his life have never really been resolved. In the early 90s, after the end of the Soviet Union, Mailer traveled to both Moscow and Minsk to read declassified KGB documents and to interview people who had known Oswald, 30 years earlier. There are some interesting anecdotes here; a former co-worker of Oswald’s, for example, remembers that they’d once gone rabbit hunting together; when a rabbit jumped out unexpectedly from a bush, Oswald became startled and shot into the air, missing the rabbit by a wide margin. Bill Hicks might have found that interesting. But then again, as Mailer puts it later, "Why should we ascribe any more consistency to a man with a gun...than we would expect from a professional basketball player whose accuracy often varies dramatically from night to night?" 

When Oswald arrived in the USSR, the KGB of course immediately suspected that he was an American agent. Just imagine- here was a former Marine radar operator who claimed to be a Marxist, although he demonstrated "only a superficial knowledge of Marxist-Leninist Theory." Upon being told that he would have to go back to the US, Oswald slashed one of his wrists in a suicide attempt that the doctors who treated him later expressed skepticism about (he only slashed one wrist, and the wound wasn’t deep enough to be fatal); but his subsequent hospitalization, coupled with the possibility that he was genuine, led to his being allowed to stay...under heavy surveillance, naturally. KGB agents were pretty bewildered, however; what kind of CIA man was this, after all? Did the Americans deliberately send over someone neurotic and unstable, to see how we would react? 

There are plenty of memorable "characters" here. I particularly enjoyed reading about the circumscribed lives of the KGB agents assigned to spend their days listening to Oswald and Marina's conversations, trying to figure out if Oswald knew more about Marxism than he was letting on, or if perhaps he understood Russian better than he seemed to. Later, there are two consular officers at the Soviet embassy in Mexico City who could have starred in a Cold War sitcom. They grow 'Mexican-style moustaches' and drink in the local cantina; when Oswald shows up in distress with a loaded gun, they're forced to miss their team's championship volleyball game against the local GRU officers. But Oswald's life also, had it ended differently, could have made a good Cold War sitcom, especially when he goes back to the US and the Americans, as is only natural, suspect that he’s been turned by the KGB; but why would they try to utilize such a clearly unstable person? What kind of KGB man was this, after all?

What kind of man was this? "Oswald owned all the properties that belong to a ghost", Mailer writes....ambition, deceit, a sense of mission, and the untold frustration of an abrupt death just as a long-held dream of personal prominence is about to unfold.His mother could have driven just about anyone to murder, or at least to eastern Europe, but in many ways he's pathetic. He's a narcissist, a burden to every person and agency he comes in contact with (the officers' volleyball team even lost to the GRU), and he physically abuses his wife, Marina. His political and ideological convictions seem to change on a dime, but it's always got to be something; an absolute conviction, a crusade. As Eric Hoffer wrote of his archetypal "true believer", "he is a homeless hitchhiker on the highways of the universe, thumbing a ride on any eternal cause that drives by. He cannot be convinced, only converted." He also seems to fit FBI profiler John Douglas's "assassin personality": the misfit whose alienation precedes any ideological conviction, who assigns himself a mission out of desperation. The most sympathetic person in the book has to be Marina, who left her family, friends and country to be with him. Who could ever have imagined the infamy? "What is left of what was once her beauty", Mailer writes, are her extraordinary eyes, blue as diamonds, and they blaze with light as if, in divine compensation for the dead weight of all that will not cease to haunt her, she has been granted a spark from the hour of an apocalypse others have not seen.And 30 years after her husband slept through his alarm (he almost always woke up before, and turned it off so as not to disturb her) and without telling her left his wedding ring in a cup on the dresser, she can't let it go. She wants to know Mailer’s opinion. Did Lee do it? 

Oswald’s being an assassin personality and generally unstable is not mutually exclusive with the idea that someone, or more than one person, tried to push him in the ‘right’ direction. It's even possible that his erratic personality would have made him an appealing candidate. "Of all government bureaucracies", Mailer writes, the CIA probably bears the greatest resemblance to an organism: that is, its analogical stomach, mind, lungs and limbs, while capable of communicating with each other, often need to do so no more than minimally- large parts of the CIA function almost entirely out of communication with other large parts. To assume that the CIA as a whole was interested in Oswald is to alienate oneself from understanding more likely possibilities. It is safer to assume that word-of-mouth concerning Oswald…made him a figure of interest to particular enclaves of the Agency who, by December of 1962, were no longer welcome in the Director’s office. Mailer goes on to note that the Mafia and the CIA had together made an agreement to assassinate Castro, “perhaps the most important and secret aspect” of what was called Operation Mongoose; Kennedy’s decision to cut back on Mongoose, a byproduct of his agreement with Khrushchev following the Cuban Missile Crisis, “…opened a schism in the CIA. Small groups of officers, feeling betrayed by the President’s new policy, began to function in concealed enclaves.” Unlike the monolithic conspiracy posited by the Oliver Stone film, Mailer suggests that it could have been a conspiracy hatched by a few members of one of these enclaves, or even people who successfully convinced Oswald that he would be working in some official or semi-official capacity.

But towards the end of the book, Mailer quotes from Oswald's notes:I wonder what would happen if someone would stand up and say he was utterly opposed not only to the governments, but to the people, to the entire land and complete foundation of his society."All the motivation for shooting Kennedy", Mailer writes, "is in that sentence." He said later in an interview that he thought Oswald “probably” did it (a different question from whether he did it alone). Why? "It was the logic of his life." 

This might not amount to much in a courtroom, but I think I know what Mailer meant. It seems to be true, on one hand, that Oswald expressed a degree of approval towards Kennedy, at times. It's also now fairly well-established that earlier in the year 1963, Oswald attempted to shoot retired General Edwin Walker- member of the John Birch Society, staunch anti-Communist, and extremely rightwing- who would seem to have been some distance away from Kennedy on the ideological spectrum. But it may not have mattered. Mailer tries to imagine Oswald's rationale:Kennedy had the ability to give hope to the American ethos…Kennedy was not, as American Presidents went, a bad President; therefore, he was too good. The world was in crisis and the social need was to create conditions for recognizing that there had to be a new kind of society…But even this contorted logic may have been justification for something that fell even shorter of great ideological or historical vision. "It is doubtful that Oswald wanted to debate such a question with himself", Mailer continues.He may well have possessed an instinct that told him he had to do something enormous and do it quickly, do it for his own physical well-being. The murderer kills in order to cure himself- which is why murder is properly repudiated. It is the most selfish of acts.