Rating: 4/5

Willy Muller is a truly horrible person. His wife died from a fall that may, or may not, have resulted from him shoving her. One of his daughters won’t talk to him, and the other one, also estranged, committed suicide. One of her last acts before ending her life was to send Willy 11 years of her journals, and he responds to the posthumous package with deep callousness. “She had succumbed to the sentimentalities of leave-taking,” he says. “Christ, isn’t life hard enough without that sort of hokey melodrama?”

Yet Willy’s very horribleness is part of what makes this novel so entertaining. He walks through the world in a haze of self-absorption, making mean-spirited observations about the people around him that are also quite funny.

He had a long arrow-nose and almost no lips—his mouth was just an unannounced slit in the final third of his face, like a muppet’s. 

Or

She was flushed and fat and she wore a big, peasant style dress that looked as if it had been blown on to her by chance during a violent storm. 

He doesn’t even spare himself from his own cruel wit.

I have grown obsessed with my withering body…My belly, oh God, my belly. I have noticed it swerving away, settling in a puddle of flesh at my side. In the mornings, I wake to find it lying next to me, gazing up at me, like an affectionate haggis. 

Willy’s curmudgeonly rantings might get too one-note if it weren’t for the novel’s other protagonist: his deceased daughter Sadie. As Willy reads her journals, we see someone as shiny and innocent as he is jaded. In later entries, she begins making the series of choices that will lead up to her suicide, and the tension between Sadie’s guileless optimism and the death that we know is coming gives the novel a lot of its momentum.

Zoe Heller is a powerful writer with a gift for creating unsympathetic characters moving toward imperfect redemption. Everything You Know is her first novel, and while it lacks the depth of her later work--Notes on a Scandal and The Believers—it’s a highly enjoyable read.