Rating: 5/5

There is so much to like about this book and a few things I could have done without. The plot was slow to develop, and it took some time for the characters to jell for me. The romance seemed to take forever to develop, and I was beginning to wonder if it would ever take off. The motive for making Regan a target was hidden until the very end. When Regan and Alec finally got together is was very hot and worth the wait. 

Regan Hamilton Madison is heiress to a hotel dynasty that her older brothers are only making grow by the week. Regan's interest in the family fortune is how much she can give away to worthy causes with the foundation she has established. She is happy in her life and when her friends convince her to attend a seminar given by the slick pseudo-psychologist, Dr, Lawrence Shields, she doesn't want to go, at first. But Sophie is convinced that Dr. Shields drove a poor woman to suicide, and she is determined to unmask him as a fraud. At the seminar as a cleansing exercise, they are instructed to write down the names of those people who if removed from their lives would make the world a better place. In other words, a Murder List. Regan misses tossing her list on the fire and when she leaves, she is confronted by a nasty looking dude and drops her folder. Soon after one of the names on her list turns up dead and she is scared for the others on the list.

After a busted sting operation Detective Alec Buchanan has one foot out the door of the Chicago Police Department. He has an offer from the FBI and is ready to take it. Three weeks and he is gone. When he informs his superiors, he is put on glorified babysitting duty. When Regan receives a graphic e-mail, it is no longer a case to be taken lightly and even though Alec has been told to stand down from the investigation, he just won't do that. But guarding the lovely Regan has its perks and Alec soon finds himself more than a little interested in Regan and she in him.

As the days tick by, Regan knows that the time for Alec to leave is coming close and she just doesn't want to let this opportunity go without exploring the thing that is between them, if only for one night. But a killer is waiting for the perfect opportunity, and he won't let this one go to waste.