Rating: 4/5

Muhammad Ali The Greatest: Review 

“Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee” was Muhammad Ali’s most famous quote. Ali was one of the greatest boxers to ever live. He “killed” other fighters with his punches, and left them with the feeling that they didn’t know how to fight by the end of the match.
Growing up in Harlem, but originally from Louisville, Kentucky, no one would ever know that this man would ever become “The Greatest” of them all.  “I’m not the greatest; I’m the double greatest”, Ali would say. “Not only do I knock ‘em out, I pick the round that I want to knock them out.”  Muhammad Ali bragged.
In the 1960 Summer Olympics, Cassius Clay (Muhammad Ali) won the gold medal in boxing. Throughout his life, Ali faced a lot of violence because his religion wouldn’t let him go into the army. Ali changed his name, due to the fact that he didn’t want to go into the army. After that he changed his religion and became a Muslim. He became a star but he had failed relationships, with his only child. 
I like this book about Ali, because it gives me a better understanding into his life, and gives more knowledge about sports history with African Americans. His courage to take on any challenge is what gets me interested. For example, there were many people who doubted Ali vs. Sonny Liston. Some people wanted him to lose not because they didn’t like him but because of what he stood for. When fight night came around Ali was ready to step foot back into the ring. Ali became an intimidator, and when the fight had started Ali used special skills against Sonny. He punched and moved each time. Sonny tried to punch Ali, but missed Ali. Sonny tried to get Ali against the ropes but Ali countered the attack and then bam! A huge down punch Ali landed on Liston that put him on his back. “Get up and fight, sucker!” Ali had won the fight, it was all over for Sonny. The one they had once doubted, was now back into BEAST mode.
Although this book has a lot of fighting, it is a very good read. If you want a good book that isn't too long and you like boxing, this book is for you. I recommend this book to all kinds of readers and ages.