Rating: 5/5

Today we hear a lot about "culture." Some examples are, "I'm into culture..." "I don't like the culture at work..." and "we need to respect other cultures..." Mostly these sentences only weakly arrive at what the anthropologist means by the term. For this reason, the book we have in hand here is R. Benedict's Patterns of Culture in the paperback edition published in 2005/following the original 1934 edition. Benedict provides expositions of three unique cultural phenomena: Zuni, Dobu, and Kwakiutl. 
Before visiting each location and making a few comments, it must be understood that it is a work such as this which has made typical white Americans self-conscious about "culture" and the unknown "other." Take this sentence, written by Louise Lamphere in the Foreword, "Deeply embedded in Benedict's analysis of other cultures is a critique of American society." Fine, I am a very severe critic of "American society," less so of "American culture." American culture is a unique blend of European and African influences with a dominant moral note. This makes the culture less about "white bread" and more about a type of striving, a striving to improve ourselves, even if that is misguided as in technical proficiency. 

1. Zuni: "The Zuni are a ceremonious people, a people who value sobriety and inoffensiveness above all other virtues." (p. 59) Oddly there is another sentence that makes sense and happens to be true: "The American people are a ceremonious people, a people who value sobriety and inoffensiveness above all other virtues." Our respect for the privacy of others is legendary. And teenagers cannot buy alcohol. 

2. Dobu: "Dobuans are noted for their dangerousness. They are said to be magicians who have a diabolic power and warriors who halt at no treachery...they are lawless and treacherous. Every man's hand is against every other man." (p. 131) Oddly there is another sentence that makes sense and happens to be true: "Americans are noted for their dangerousness. They are said to be magicians who have the forced nuclear power to yield devastating results on simple peoples...they are lawless and treacherous because they settle many of their problems with firearms. In America each is for himself and community involvement is for the most part weak because private property is considered sacred." 

3. Kwakiutl: "The Kwakiutl are a people of grand possessions comparatively speaking. They built up an ample supply of goods, inexhaustible, and obtained without excessive expenditure of labor...they kept up constant communication by means of seagoing vessels. They were adventurous...pushing in all directions..."(p. 174) Oddly there is another sentence that makes sense and happens to be true: "Americans are a people of abundant possessions, each attempting to secure his or her future through home ownership, shopping at large discount stores, and hoarding items in fear of instability...they also pressed their communications in all directions, making a global network and taking care of the business of others with more rational methods..." 

So, you see, "culture" while not making me reach for my pistol does cause me some discomfort.