Rating: 4/5

For reasons unknown, I have been reluctant to read the fiction of Paul Theroux. While most of his travel books have been very satisfying, the only fiction I attempted, 'The Stranger at the Palazzo d'Oro' left me cold. Perhaps it is because the places he visits, the characters he meets and the situations he encounters are stranger than any story.

Sir Vidia's Shadow starts out with a fictional story, but it had me hooked from the beginning and it became more compelling as the fictional beginning morphed into a semi autobiographical story of a friendship and the mentoring of a young writer by an older one.

I have always been interested in the craft of writing and the majority of the book, hung upon the true story of a long friendship and it's strange end, is really the story of Theroux's first steps and then growing confidence as a writer. Reading his travel books over the last few years enabled me to understand the back story as it were of Theroux's own life and provide some flesh to the bare bones of his 'other life' which is often only hinted at in the travel narratives. As presented in his travel writings, his life seemed carefree and one to be envied. The ability to wander for months at a time, with no apparent deadline or family cares seemed like the ideal lifestyle.

But everything has it's price and in Sir Vidia's Shadow, Theroux also provides a glimpse into his own, often troubled life. Like V.S. Naipul, the topic of the book, Theroux also reveals himself as a flawed individual, but, if his side of the story is to be believed, he is at least redeemed by his family life and his more generous attitude towards the need of a friendship. Naipul is portrayed as both money focused and totally self centered and absorbed.

However, what are shown as Naipul's flaws are also seen as the keys to his power as a writer and if anyone wants an understanding on what it is to be a writer, the solitary path that must be travelled, the single mindeness and determination, the often desperate struggle for cash and the rewards and fame that can sometimes be achieved, then this is the essential book.

If anyone wants to also reflect on friendship, their own approach to it and the perception it creates in others, then this is also the book.