Rating: 1/5

Very long commentary, but I think it is an example of this writer's progress and various genres and gender conventions:

uptoandincluding18: He finally backhanded her so she is thrown bruisingly against the wall (verbatim). I've anticipated this event with as much anticipation as she did her deflowerment, which still hasn't happened and won't take much space from the few pages that are left. Before he hit her they told each other they loved each other, which was necessary because Beverley was so talentless that she could not show that, ever, and had it happen in the summarised events that happened between scenes. Equally charmless was the handling of the servant boy, and by now it's clear there will never be any interaction between Beth and her father. Clarissa, whose story was written later and who made me anticipate the hitting, is seen as stupid and shallow here, another convention of all Regency romances of these times, just as Eleanore's marriage keeps shining more and more glowingly, with admonissions that Beth will have to work on hers to reach that happiness.
That's more a convention of historical romances like Woodiwiss, one that deadens the heart. How each heroine has to suffer mental and physical anguish all alone, the adults around her unapproachable or even laughingly forcing her into non-consentual relationships, and once that is over they are suddenly the most tender friends and allies. This sort of circle of friends scares me deeply and sickens me. Usually Regency is not so much used for the theme of possession, so I sense the reason for Beverley splitting her sagas in two periods here in the early works. Beth may briefly admit she will always fear blows from her husband from now on, but the focus is on how she sensibly accepts it and he regrets it - just as hypocritical (of the writer) as having Lucien threaten and bruise her repeatedly right up to the wedding, and then suddenly say he could never force a woman and be "gentle".

uptoandincluding 13: he is not getting any better, nor is my stomach ache. Around page 130 are two good observations how she's unhappy to look pretty when that only makes it obvious she can't be stunning, so would rather not be seen as having tried to do that - and his brutality and inability not to dominate and force her, the whip as something natural the man can't help but hold over the woman. All the author's add-ons about how Lucien is just as nervous and blabla sicken me more because he is not being forced by his own father to have sex and be the possession of someone else. Nicholas and Eleanor, also NEVER portrayed as actually loving in the other book, are of course here the epitome of perfect partnership and erotic romance *still sick thinking of how Beverley described their matings* and of course regret they came too late to help poor Elizabeth and bemoan the barbarism of the wedding, instead of doing much.
The other thing that Beverley claims now and in later books is that Beth runs around in rags and hobnobs with servants when she never SHOWED her do anything like that. Beverley has no grasp of the nobility /lowerclass aspects she says she spoke about.

Chapter 4-6: I hate that brutish asshole. He had seemed bad in glimpses in other books, which was always described as awesome, but I can sense more forced sex coming on, and he's such an unreasonable stupid chauvinist with not a single redeeming feature. Where Ludovic (Heyer) could not help but appeal in his wildness alternating with humour and genuine compassion, this Lucien (Beverley) is nothing but "most handsome", and his disgust and violent sexual and bodily threatening after the financial forcing by his father makes the "charming" French mother seem like the wife watching her daughter get abused *sickened rage*

Chapter 2-3. Despite the garish cover, on which a cross-eyed female adores a too-old man, the book started out ok. It was well-written, using the POV of various servants - but that was simply because Beverley followed Heyer wholesale, so much so that in this book, which is an amalgam of These Old Shades and Devil's Cub, the even called them the Duke and Marquis of Avon (Heyer's were the Duke and the Marquis of Andover).
Sadly they lack all the charm and edge of the original. A devil's cub shouldn't be big-muscled, blond and blue-eyed. Usually I'm fine with light heroes, but this rogue is not appealing or charming, and that I already know he will beat his wife worries me as much as Beverley's first novel with the awfully executed rape aftermath.
But I think Beverley means well; I hope she intended to be more rather than less emancipated, even if the first novel was awful. Here man and wife both have illegitimate children that now have to marry to make it all good, and the reason Duke didn't mount Duchess was he didn't want to be tempted to kill bastard if he got a real son, so hey, there is actual reason and thought behind the plot tanglements. 
Beverley's faible for 20 or more years of loveless suffering though annoys me, and I wish she had severed the ties to Heyer more, because inviting comparison to genuinely fascinating, genuinely dangerous characters that still are true to their partners makes Beverley's tamer, mistress-riddled men not seem more modern, just slightly unappealing.

ETA: it ends with the obligatory group adventure, where Beth, who had been abused for ages for briefly claiming to not be a virgin, is cheered on as she displays breasts and legs while pretending to be a prostitute - not just by the husband but also by her father :/

I would forgive her most of that if only Beverley had an inkling of affection, what I like to call love, or were able to show people falling in love.