Rating: 5/5

Act One. Scene Minus One.

A greasy spoon café on a Blasted Heath. Three Witches at a Table.

First Witch : It’s not warm, though, is it?

Second Witch : Cold it be and warm it bain’t –
This café could do with a coat of paint

Third Witch : I wish you wouldn’t do that all the time.

Second Witch : (To Waiter) Excuse me – what’s the soup of the day?

Waiter: Scotch broth.

Second Witch : What’s in it?

Waiter : Toad, that under cold stone
Days and nights has thirty-one
Swelter'd venom sleeping got,
Fillet of a fenny snake,
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
Lizard's leg and owlet's wing,
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witches' mummy, maw and gulf
Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,
Gall of goat, and slips of yew
Silver'd in the moon's eclipse,
Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Ditch-deliver'd by a drab.

Second Witch : I’ll just have the salad then.

First Witch : Now listen – we know what we’re going to say when we meet Macbeth and Banquo tomorrow but what if we run in to King Duncan? 

Third Witch : Okay, what about this – King thou be but not for long
Alas, O Dunc, it’s all gone wrong

First Witch : Wait – how about – You may be king but listen mate
We are the hags who know your fate
If you knew what we know Macbeth you’d hate
And by the way you should lose some weight

Second Witch : Yes, good! I hear they call him Dunkin’ Duncan at the palace.

Third Witch : What about if we run into Lady Macbeth?

First Witch : Well, she won’t be wandering round the battlefield will she? That’s not logical.

Third Witch : But sister weird and sister dear
This is a play by W Shakespeare
Great poet, philosopher and teacher
Logic ain’t the overriding feature

Second Witch : I’m going to do this one tomorrow – Hover through fog and filthy hair-

Third Witch : Hair? You should change that to air.

First Witch : The night draws on so must we run
But there’s time for some tea and an iced* bun

Second Witch : Macbeth hath not the greatest wit

Third Witch : But let’s agree he is quite fit.

Exeunt

*the stress is on the second syllable