Rating: 3/5

This was a very odd book. I enjoyed reading it, and certainly found myself interested in the action, but it felt very hollow. 

Fundamentally, the POV character is a cipher. There's very little personality that comes through, and no emotionality at all -- he seems to lack any kind of internality. Even when he's in fear of his life or in desperate circumstances, the narrative distance doesn't let you get inside his thoughts in any significant way. During the first third of the book, the action is significantly driven by an ethical stance he takes -- but there's no feeling behind it detectable on the page. He just says, over and over, that he has to do this. 

The other big void is the framework of the school. The main character is the first person from his hardscrabble planet to get into this highly exclusive school geared toward shaping future planetary leaders -- but he doesn't act like it. This partially ties in with the lack of internality and the remove of the narrative distance, but it also comes across in his presented words and actions. He doesn't come across as being particularly driven as a student, either to improve himself overall or to learn. He doesn't show much in the way of leadership skills. The story never delves into what it means to him to be the first Springworlder to attend this school, nor what he had to do to make it. If this is really the novel's equivalent of Oxford or Harvard, one would expect he had to make a serious effort to get in! But it never comes across. 

The story is based around a set of expeditions from the school to different planets, each of which is intended to shape the students' development and education. However, he spends these expeditions on decidedly non-educational pursuits, and the first one deliberately defying instructions. For a first-generation, first of his world student, he's decidedly blithe about risking his status as a student, as well as his life. Because of the focus on the expeditions and the narrator's disinterest in using them for education, the fact that he is a student and has a powerful school behind him also only serves as a convenient deus ex machina when he finds himself in over his head in his extracurricular pursuits. 

At the end of the day, the book is entertaining, but I found that the vagueness of the POV character's... well, character, made it less compelling than it otherwise might have been.