Rating: 2/5

Me &amp; Jim (&amp; John)

Ray Manzarek's "Light My Fire" is (of course) a very interesting read for all Doors fans. The book doesn't uncover much new information about it's main topic, Jim Morrison, but it certainly says a lot about Manzarek's psyche and how he wants to appear before the reader.

Everybody knows Manzarek as the cool, storytelling dude with the sixties slang, that talks like he's reading from a script, and it is also how this book is written - sort of, because the "beat generation style" of writing doesn't work that well for Manzarek. It's all too much and seems almost like a caricature - together with the intellectual namedropping. Throughout the book the same phrases are repeated over and over, for example the constant desciption of Morrison as "Dionysos". You get the feeling that the form, how he appears, is more important than the content. 

Manzarek obviously loves and worships Morrison, and there is some great first hand scenes of "the real" Jim Morrison, which you don't find in some of the other books. A funny scene is when a very drunk Manzarek is being carried home to his hotel room by Morrison, whom a very late and very hungover Manzarek sees in the hotel bar the next morning drinking. Morrisons self-destruction is something Manzarek has a bizarre explanation of: It is not Jim that can be a primitive, beer drinking redneck, it is his alter ego "Jimbo". One can say alcoholism is a form a schizophrenia, but Manzarek is taking it too far. He is also too far out when he is insinuating that Morrison faked his own death. 

People who think of Manzarek as this cool, laid back guy and protector of Morrison's legacy will definitely have a more differentiated view after reading this book. We get to see the "dark side" of him, which is not always pretty. Manzarek is not a person who reflects much (in contrast to Densmore in "Riders On The Storm") and his view of the world is very much "us and them" or black and white. He uses a lot of energy on "the idiots" and "fascists" like Oliver Stone, who just don't get it. All in all he comes off somewhat arrogant, which doesn't suit the self proclaimed fighter for love and freedom. It is also ironic that greed is not something he is ashamed of or at least try to hide. He decides to marry his wife to be, Dorothy, because he is advised to do so because it will save him a loadfull of royalty dollars in tax. Romantic, huh?

Most Doors fans know, that there has been a divide in the band between Krieger-Manzarek and Densmore, and it's probably in this light you have to read the constant Densmore bashing throughout the book. He is constantly made fun of and ridiculed, and the focus is almost as much on him as the lizard king! Densmore is described as a bitter and grumpy man - which is very much in contrast to others description of him (for example Sugerman's in "Wonderland Avenue"). A long passage describes how Morrison tries to convince Manzarek to get rid of Densmore, who refuses because "we're stuck on him". Throughout the book we are constantly assured, that Morrison never liked Densmore. True or not, it's not good style to bash a former bandmate like that. 

All in all the book gives an valuable insight in Manzarek's experiences with The Doors and Jim Morrison, but be prepared to have your view of Manzarek chanced.