Rating: 5/5

Almost exactly a century after the publication of 'Jekyll and Hyde', Oxford Classics twinned (appropriately) Robert Louis Stevenson's 1886 novella with the unfinished 'Weir of Hermiston' on which RLS was still working on the day he died in 1894. 

Emma Letley's useful introduction links the doubling narrative of the novella with the tensions that existed between RLS and his father and which are perhaps central to the imaginative development of the final unfinished 'Weir'. I am not so sure that this is the whole story but the introduction stands.

'Jekyll and Hyde' apparently emerged in part out of a dream. The story behind this is helpfully appended as 'A Chapter on Dreams' which follows another Appendix detailing how 'Weir' may have ended according to sources close to RLS. This remains speculative.

The mysteries of artistic creation will often remain mysteries but 'jekyll and Hyde' certainly captured the popular imagination. It has become one of the central horror texts that emerged out of the late nineteenth century alongside 'Dracula' and 'Dorian Gray'.

The tale shows all RLS' genius for evoking atmosphere and character although it is perhaps not quite as perfect as many of us would like. It was undoubtedly driven by the need to meet a deadline. There are weaknesses, such as a potion that is more alchemical than scientific, in conception.

Its world is one of mature upper middle class and prosperous batchelors with a nary a woman in sight. The key players are isolated and cautious men of different character who seem a little disconnected from the modern world like London, befogged and living in twilight.

The doubling may present itself as the beast coming out of the repressed civilised gentleman. It may arise out of the popular Darwinism embedding itself in the popular mind by the mid-1880s but it is also part of a longer tradition that preceded the crisis of belief of mid-century. 

The Gothic double is a trope that goes back to the eighteenth century. Although not top of mind today, German romanticism was interested in the idea. Dostoevsky authored 'The Double'. Poe's 'William Wilson' would influence the versions of 'The Student of Prague' in 1913, 1926 and 1935.

In RLS' hands (as will become clearer with the pairing of the novella with the 'Weir' text), the story becomes even darker because of the influence of a Scottish Calvinist ideology of original sin and predestination which seems to have lodged not as belief but as ever-present drag on the writer.

You make take a Catholic out of the Church but you cannot take the Church out of the man and so it is with Calvinism. RLS' life is one long distancing of the self from Calvinist Scotland through constant travel and immersion in more humane and easy-going approaches to human relations.

But if he distanced the person and the body from Scotland, Scotland and Scots people remained central to his imagination. He periodically recreated it in literary form and, although he rejected the austere Calvinism of the country, he certainly did not abandon Christianity. 

As his last work, 'Weir of Hermiston' (significantly written at the other end of the world from Edinburgh and the Scottish Borders in Samoa) is an imaginative reconstruction not of his own life but (indirectly) of his forebears, of the ideologies he was escaping from and perhaps still respected.

Although unfinished and perhaps in danger of heading for intense melodrama and perhaps needing some careful revision, 'Weir of Hermiston' is a remarkable evocation of the distinctive culture of Scotland in the Regency period.

RLS was a master of the Scottish historical novel. He mentions Sir Walter Scott more than once so we might see this as his attempt at a contribution to the canonical Great Scottish Novel, There are no compromises on border dialectic and the glossary at the end of the book is essential.

RLS might have been a loose part of the British Empire and he may have lodged happily in predominantly English literary culture and on the English South Coast but this novel is purely Scottish albeit without nationalist rancour. 

Young Archie Weir makes an error of judgement in his late teens in crossing the values of his imperious father, a man still to be admired for certain harsh qualities valued in the culture of the time. He is 'exiled' to the family estate amongst the dialect speaking rustics of the Border Country.

The underlying story of inappropriate love (by the social mores of the day), duty and passion is not so remarkable but the expression of it is. RLS' ability to enter into the complexity of emotional responses within a socially conservative society yet without judgement gives us a work of great merit.

Perhaps half or so of the proposed novel is extant. It feels almost finished where it is finished. This is not RLS' world or childhood (he was born in 1850) but a study of the world which made his world long before he was born, with its own mythos going back to the seventeenth century Covenanters.

This long history will almost certainly be something few English readers would be aware of, as much today as in the 1890s. A visit to the National Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh (a very fine museum) would correct that - Scotland is quite simply very different from England in how it came to be.

Letley points out how language is used in the novel. It is narrated in perfect urbane English but the dialogue shifts from an Anglicised Scottish implying modernity to a rough-hewn judicial Scottish in the mouth of the 'hanging judge' to raw and often difficult to comprehend rural dialect.

There are issues of class here but also of post-Jacobite cultural colonialism that would draw the young to the two big cities (with Glasgow clearly positioned as a future imperial city) and thence outwards to London and the wider Empire. Ending up in the Borders is thus a punishment of sorts for Archie.

The Borders (whether Scottish or English) had a violent lawless 'reiving' culture and its own standard of morality that had been put down by 'hanging judges' who were then respected for doing so. This original culture would also have been contributing to Appalachian culture around the time.

The Borders are being quietly 'civilised'. Archie Weir arrives at that point in history where it is transitioning from a culture of revenge to a culture of respectability and law. RLS devotes a whole chapter to telling the history of the key families to make the point in a rather heavy-handed way.

So where does the linkage with 'Jekyll and Hyde' enter the picture. Rather elliptically, I am afraid. The doubling lies in the characterisation and it is subtle. The shared tension in the two works is between being what you are and being a social animal in a sophisticated culture.

The two main characters other than Jekyll in the novella (Utterson and Enfield) are almost polar opposites in character, one sanguine and one melancholic, but both understand what is right and what is wrong. A third, Dr. Lanyon, is destroyed merely by knowing what he comes to know.

The three men are distant trusting associates and so would Jekyll be alongside them if he had not tested morality with his potion. The horror of the story (to contemporaries) is that, much as duty propels him to desist from his adventure, his pleasure in being Hyde is manifest.

It is interesting that, unlike in later movie adaptations, apart from one brutal incident involving the harming of a child and the murder of yet another very respectable gentleman, very little energy is spent on Hyde's criminal behaviour. Once shown as evil, the story moves on quickly.

The freedom to be evil is clearly a 'natural' state'. The power of the potion is like that of other drugs - to wipe away all the civilising constraints that hold men together in society. We do not know why Lanyon is shaken by what he uncovers but we guess that it is this discovery that evil is 'natural'.

'Weir of Hermiston' is also an exploration of desire and duty. The incoming tragedy lies in a young man not being in the least evil but puzzling out how to be dutiful when desire (to speak or love freely) creates complications just as a manipulative narcissist in Frank Innes, a false friend, emerges.

What RLS does which is very clever is to set the crisis in a socially conservative culture in transition. The excessive judicial rigidity of the 'hanging judge' (only doing his duty and not a monster except by our later cultural lights) and the social rigidities of 1810s Scotland force the issue.

It is worth comparing the social conservatism of this book with the contemporary conservatism of Jane Austen where we see how a more fluid and'civilised' English middle class society managed affairs. This can be nicely contrasted with the implicit 'sturm und drang' of moral order in Scotland. 

RLS never preaches (perhaps Calvinism inoculated him in this regard) but both books leave us with an uneasy feeling that not all is right with the world of duty just as we know what is right and what is wrong. Hyde's brutality seems something born out of the self-repression of isolated males.

Similarly, we ask why was Edinburgh society so insecure that it felt it had to offer a drastic exile to youthful indiscretions that amounted to little more than ill-advised opinions and why should not two young people whose social classes were just one notch different not connect in love?

This is the root of that conflict between desire and duty. The strictures in both cases may seem absurd - more even to us even than the English middle classes in the 1890s - but this was how society functioned and that was just that. 'Weir' has tragedy written into it before it happens.

Both books are connected through this theme of duty and desire where the observations of their working are left to the reader to make. This shows remarkable restraint on the part of the author. The stories just unfold and we are troubled. Neither tale has been perfected. Both are effective.