Rating: 5/5

“I hope you will go out and let stories, that is life, happen to you, and that you will work with these stories... water them with your blood and tears and your laughter till they bloom, till you yourself burst into bloom.”

Three times in my life this book found its way into my greedy little hands at a time when I needed it most. 

Every woman should own a copy of this book. 

Women Who Run With the Wolves is a collection of short stories/ fairytales interspersed with commentary by the author. It sounds weird, perhaps a little too academic, maybe even a bit of a literary wank.

It isn't. This book is the best "self help" book I have ever read. It takes really painful experiences, swallows them, then regurgitates them into metaphors and stories my heart could hear and respond to.

It's hard to talk about this book without getting into really personal details about why it means so much to me. I'll use an example I'm comfortable sharing. When I was in rehab for drug addiction I struggled terribly. I was isolated, I hated having every aspect of my life controlled by staff, and worst of all I wasn't sure I would succeed- when I thought about never using again I was filled with a yawning horror. 

This was the second time Running with Wolves found me in need of nourishment. I had been in rehab for a month or two when someone dropped in my lap and said they thought I might like it. I can't begin to describe how soothing it was. 

The stories in Leg traps, Cages, and Poisoned Bait such as the girl with the red shoes taught me how to accept who I was and what I would become if I kept chasing relief in all the wrong places. It dealt with addiction in a way that allowed me to sidle up to it and get used to the idea before facing it head on.

The Handless Maiden and The Girl with Golden Hair helped me acknowledge and honour the pain that had crippled me originally and led to my addiction. 

Sealskin/ Soulskin and La Llorona helped me to find myself again.

I have been clean and sober for six years. It would be an exaggeration to say this book is the reason why, but it did help enormously. 

This isn't a book to be deliberately read. It is a book that you stumble across, a book that a friend lends to you in a time of need. It's a book my hand brushes against when I'm reaching for another. I pull it out, flick through the pages and decide it is time to read it again. 

I'm not a religious person, I don't believe in god. But when I read this book I feel spiritually connected to the world. I feel some inkling of the wonder and awe others feel when they commune with their god. 

If you haven't read this book yet, put on your shelf. You might stumble across it again when you most need it.