Rating: 5/5

I switched gears, last month, and decided to read what was, at the time, a more contemporary offering of Winston Graham’s: MARNIE.

I realized, after reading it, what a nuanced and imaginative writer he truly was. 

When I resumed the series with WARLEGGAN, the 4th offering of his Poldark series, I was in for more good news: this was the best one yet.

I’m going to get a little crazy here.

I’m going to share with you that this story is 471 pages of non-stop derring-do. That’s right, I wrote derring-do!

Without giving any particular spoilers (I can’t stand spoilers in reviews), I couldn’t believe that Mr. Graham, right at the beginning of the book, kills off a beloved character in a scene that had this reader crying salty, sticky tears. What moxie!

Then, Mr. Graham has the cojones to inform us that another of our most beloved characters has actually committed rape. Yes, my friends, and all of you who love this series, it was rape, not as the BBC series depicted it, and if you didn’t catch that, I’d like you to refer to pages 365, 366, 448, and 460. 

So, a beloved character becomes a bit of a dubious one. 

As a reader: do you still feel as though you understand him? Did you find yourself making excuses for his behavior? Did you pause at this information, wonder: if he is capable of such a thing, then perhaps I am capable of something unsavory, too? 

After all, “the good things and the bad things go together in her.” (Or him).

Oh, and the bad guy, or the one who we readers perceive as the enemy has unexpected moments of redemption here. I won’t name names, but if you know this story, you know who I mean. 

What did Mr. Graham do there? Tossed us on our ears, making us realize that the Petulant, Royal-Pain-in-the-Horse’s-Ass really does love someone, after all, and, despite so much of his own ugly behavior, you find yourself having a hard time imagining him doing what the Hero did.

Oh, and my feelings about the woman in the equation turned 180 degrees, too. (Something that the BBC series wasn’t able to do for me).

As much as I enjoyed the first three entries of this series, I actually look at them now at almost a “warm-up.” Will this be the best offering of the 12? Maybe. I’m willing to find out.

For me, this was a perfect novel, even with the few unexpected typos I encountered in my edition. Yes: perfect. I wrote it, and I mean it.

Mr. Graham took great risks here, and I clenched my copy, felt agitated, restless, invested, overjoyed and aggrieved.