Rating: 3/5

Why I chose to read this book:
1. I bought my hardcopy at a thrift shop years ago since I really liked Ann Rule's book The Stranger Beside Me: Ted Bundy: The Shocking Inside Story; 
2. I've always been fascinated by forensic science; and,
3. April 2023 is my "True Crime Month".

Praises:
1. once again, Rule's diligent research, including interviews, is laid out in chronological order, from background information of the key players, to the actual tragic event(s), followed by pertinent investigations, the trial, and the eventual sentencing of the accused;
2. I always appreciate visual representation in true crime novels, so the inclusion of several pages of black and white photos helped me get a greater understanding of the people and settings involved; and,
3. Rule demonstrates why it is most imperative to take mental health issues seriously. Even though Dr. Michael Farrer (himself a victim of poisoning) tried to have his wife, Dr. Debora Green, committed for a mental evaluation and treatment, she checked herself out after only four days, hardly enough time to get serious help. One month later, she set their house on fire, killing two of their children in the process.

Niggle:
I often felt that Rule painted Dr. Michael Farrer in too sympathetic a light. Yes, living with his wife might have felt like "hell on earth", and being critically ill due to poisoning (which he initially never suspected) are horrible; still it seemed that too often he was written as an all-caring and involved father, although hints were given that this behavior towards his children wasn't always the case. Rule also seemed to excuse his (and his lover's) infidelity.

Overall Thoughts:
Occurring in Prairie Village, Kansas back in 1995, I've never heard of this horrific tragedy. This is a most comprehensive read about Dr. Debora Green and how she came to be convicted of murdering two of her children as well as poisoning her husband. It is interesting to note, that to this day, her one surviving child (now almost 40), still believes that her mother is innocent of all wrongdoing.

There are no winners.