Rating: 5/5

This was an entertaining and succinct story about the rescue of a nearly sunken Liberty ship that had a lot of interesting details about marine salvage and the state of hurricane forecasting and tracking in the late 1940s. 

My husband recommended this to me after I described Into the Raging Sea and Until the Sea Shall Free Them to him, and this book was a great contrast to those. It’s fascinating to compare the relatively rudimentary tracking tools available to the US in 1948 vs. those available in 2015, as well as how the general state of commercial shipping changed during those decades. The two men in charge of Foundation Maritime, the tugboat owners in this book, were both highly experienced in their field and were personally involved in solving complex problems with their ships. This is in stark contrast with the owners of the Marine Electric and the El Faro, the ships at issue in the other two books, who disclaimed responsibility at every turn and had no personal maritime experience. 

It was also interesting to compare the Leicester, the ailing Liberty ship in this book, with the Marine Electric, which was also built during WWII, because the Leicester survived multiple storms more powerful than the single storm that sank the Marine Electric. Although the two ships were different classes and had many design differences, their relative resilience helps illustrate some of the points made in Until the Sea Shall Free Them about the toll taken on the Marine Electric and her fellows by decades of poor maintenance and economically motivated modifications. 

I also enjoyed the contrast between the style of more recent nonfiction books I’ve read and this book, which is factual but includes plenty of embellishments that came from the involved mariners themselves, others who retold the story over time, or maybe the author himself. There are no footnotes here, no list of sources, no author’s note or afterword describing how the author put the story together, what he might have added, or what conclusion he draws from it. There’s just an entertaining narrative about something that happened, more or less. Reading it felt like listening to a storyteller, and it didn’t really matter that some of the minor details were probably untrue.