Rating: 5/5

applause, and my thanks to James for choosing to put this book back into print. Booyah! The five stars reflects my sheer enjoyment of this novel, and the fact that I did a serious, big-gasp double take at the ending which sent me right back into the book a second time. It may not be great literature, but hey, it's a LOT of fun. Prepare to suspend disbelief and to forget about anything you have to do for the duration. 

Another fine release from Valancourt, Requiem at Rogano is a novel that you may think you've read before as you get further into it, but trust me, that just isn't the case. While a number of authors in the 1970s produced something similar along these lines (I won't say but you'll know what I mean after reading it), this one stands on its own as something unique. As mentioned on the back-cover blurb, the reviewer from The Financial Times wrote about this novel that he can "recommend this to all who enjoy literate crime fiction," a sentiment I share. I'll also add that not only is it literate, but it is twisty to the point where every time I thought I had it all figured out, something happened that nixed my solution and sent me off in another direction entirely. The light bulb only went on in my head during the final moments of the story, just before the reveal. Now, I don't know about anyone else, but when a writer comes up with a mystery story that I can't solve, well, to me he or she has done his or her job, and has done it well. 

You can choose whether or not to read little I've offered in the way of plot (which really is nothing) -- click  here for yes or just read on for no. 

There is a LOT happening in this book that I'm leaving unsaid, because as I said a few days ago when talking about Uncle Silas, the less prospective readers know about this book going into it the better. While there are several reviews scattered here and there in the cyberworld, my advice would be to restrain yourselves from reading them until you've turned the last page. It is a mega-twisty book with a number of big surprises on the way to the ending, and trust me -- you don't want to know too much about it beforehand other than what you can glean from the back-cover blurb. Read spoilers at your peril -- I didn't and I'm very happy I didn't know anything beforehand to ruin the fun I had with this book. 

What I will say is that when I got to the end, I had to completely re-evaluate all that I'd just read. The conclusion was a downright shocker and so I went racing back through the novel a second time, at which point I discovered exactly how truly ingenious a book Requiem at Rogano really is and how well the author plied his craft here. I'll also say that to read it as simply a crime thriller is just wrong, on so many levels. 

Yow! What a fun book!!!!!