Rating: 3/5

"Sex in History" will teach you lots about the attitudes of different cultures towards sex and love, but keep an eye on the author. At one point, she cites some bigoted and faulty studies from who knows when claiming that certain indigenous people are dead ignorant about the purpose and mechanics of human reproduction. Then, to seal her argument, she references some young british lass who wrote in to a "Dear Abby" columnist asking whether, having had a mulatto child with a black lover, she would continue having mulatto babies with her new man, a whitey. Apparently indigenous ("primitive") people have nothing to be ashamed of in being ignorant of how babies come about because there is a white girl out there who is equally ignorant on the subject. There is no bigotry like that of a highly trained scientist.

This is an older book, from 1980, and as such, suffers from much outdated science. Humans females are not alone among primates experiencing orgasm; polygamy and monogamy are not the only two options worth considering in regard to our prehistoric ancestors-- they likely practiced polyamory like chimps and bonobos; and speaking of bonobos, much of the recent scholarship has drastically revised the way in which we understand ourselves by the discovery that we are equally close to bonobos as to chimps, genetically. To see what this book would be if it wasn't based on ages-old wives' tales, read "Sex at Dawn" by Christopher Ryan and Cacilda Jetha. Once one is open to dispose of many standard notions regarding human nature, the implications for everything we think we know are immense.

Off topic, but kind of related, yesterday I learned that cetaceans are among a group of animals including humans who possess culture. Humpback whales all sing the same, ever evolving song, even as they are migrating across the world separated by thousands of miles. Many or most or all cetaceans pass skills and vocalizations to their offspring and pod-mates. When captive, orcas are highly trainable, but they easily get bored with the tests required of them and have been known to purposely get every question wrong after getting them all right for dozens of tries in a row.

In one study, a trainer rewarded a dolphin for a certain behavior one day; the next day he stopped rewarding the dolphin for that behavior, but rewarded him for a different behavior instead. Every day, the trainer rewarded the dolphin when it performed some behavior, until after a week or two the dolphin ran out of its natural behaviors and was no longer rewarded. At this point, the dolphin "became despondent," and moped around until he performed a previously unseen-- novel-- behavior, for which he was rewarded. Thereafter, the dolphin continues to be rewarded, but now for novel behaviors only, at which point the dolphin got really excited and started performing novel and previously unseen behaviors in such a flurry that there was no way to keep track of them. The dolphin figured out that he was being rewarded for being creative. The study's author notes that it takes people about as long as it does dolphins to figure out that they are being rewarded for novel behaviors, at which point dolphins explode in a flurry of novel behaviors, while people are merely relieved.

How can we-- people-- be such amazing boors, confident that we are masters of the world even as we destroy it? If humans once prided themselves on their morality, aesthetics, and curiosity/ inventiveness (i don't know if we ever did), today we are obsessed almost exclusively with mercantile concerns, so far as i can tell. It's been a while since I've seen someone rewarded for making the world a more beautiful or humane place. Yet, no shortage of accolades awaits those who would figure out how to turn a profit. Good on 'em, let those who have get more. What bothers me is the fact that someone who makes their goal to make the world a better place, moment by moment, is shit out of luck once they are past adolescence. Not only is it highly unlikely that one can live this way in our society considering how brutal the task of surviving is these days, but should you somehow succeed at it, you will be thought of as insane by most people.