Rating: 5/5

WRITING THIS ARRICLE AS A MEDICAL DOCTOR WHO SEES THE CONSEQUENCES OF INSULIN RESISTANCE every day.

I work as a stroke doctor and most patients have low cholesterol.

Type 2 diabetes is the cause of cardiovascular disease.
Dyslipidaemia is a symptom of insulin resistance and statins make it worse.
Heart attack is caused by inflammation&amp; insulin resistance , not “cholesterol”
High BP is caused by insulin resistance not “salt”
Eating disorders, serious mental health issues like schizophrenia depression dementia bipolar epilepsy ADHD Autism can be put into remission with KETOGENIC DIET.

Five stars to Dr. Atkins for all the work he has done. 

This will save lives for whoever is smart enough to question government guidelines and authorities.

My journey is a complex one - as a doctor and a patient. I ate a low-fat, mostly vegan/vegetarian, whole-grain based diet my entire life, and was suffering from lots of symptoms, and some more serious health issues. Endometriosis, binge eating disorder, daily headaches, sick every few weeks, chronic constipation, IBS, acid reflux. Some of the issues were due to the amount of painkillers I was needing to take.

The fear of fat and calories turned into a full blown eating disorder, that I silently put up with for a decade. I thought that there was something wrong with me. 

But now I know that there was! My brain was not functioning properly, and I had insulin resistance because of the low-fat diet. My blood sugars were unstable and causing the cravings. LCHF is the least restrictive diet I have ever followed - food is delicious and satiating. I eat chicken wings, fatty beef burgers, lots of cheese, cream and butter. All my health issues are in full remission, and I am off all medications. I have gotten sick ONCE in the past 3 years. And I have lost weight!! The only reason I eat more carbs now is to gain weight back. 

I eat more than 3,000 calories a day, every day. I do a bit of fasting. I never feel hangry. If I’m going to die of a heart attack tomorrow I’m more than happy to - atleast I’m enjoying my life and not suffering anymore taking painkillers to survive. 

I cannot emphasize on how angry I am as a patient and as a doctor. At the system.

And now there’s a magic drug in the market where you pee out sugar, turning into ketosis. This prevents dementia, reverses plaques, treats heart failure &amp; dyslipidaemia. It INCREASES LDL cholesterol. (SGLT2inhibitors)

So I will probably continue researching LCHF, ketogenic diet , and cholesterol for the rest of my life. The amount of evidence on it is massive - I’ve seen patients reverse cancer, autoimmune diseases, angina, and all sorts of chronic “incurable” diseases.