Rating: 3/5

I don't usually go for "series" type books, especially in fantasy &amp; sci-fi, but this one was all right. In fact it could pretty easily stand alone as a single novel since it does tell a complete "story" in the sense that you see the characters develop. Continuing the story actually seems unnecessary to me, but I will probably read at least one more since my brother has already loaned me the next one. 

As I understand the background for this novel, the author's wife or girlfriend was very into Dungeons &amp; Dragons and told him she'd love to live the world her player character inhabits, and this novel was his effort to say "Bullshit you would, it would be dark as hell to live in a world that dangerous." So the story introduces a role-playing group, and while they are college students in the novel, frankly they play a bit like a bunch of middle school kids, arguing over treasure and trying to make their own characters the most powerful at the expense of the other players' characters. But then the players are sent into a fantasy world exactly like the one they've been playing and things get "interesting." They find themselves physically transformed into their characters, and they all feel a second personality -- that of the character they created -- battling for control of their minds. An incident on their arrival deprives them of the magic items and spell books they would have needed to make a journey to get themselves back to the real world. And so they are stuck relying on their wits and new-found abilities in a struggle to survive and make the journey anyway.

The characters get traumatized in various ways, being stabbed, enslaved, gang raped, and/or killed. (So although the cover of the paperback looks like a standard issue juvenile/YA fantasy in the vein of Piers Anthony, it does get a little dark.) But some of them also learn to become self-reliant, to take responsibility for others, and even aspire to heroism.

I assume the sequels (there seem to be at least five) continue their adventures as they attempt to improve the fantasy realm, which is portrayed as sort of a decadent Imperial Rome ruled by wizards and slavers. Yeah, I guess I'll read a few more.