Rating: 2/5

Back in 1997 I saw the film, "Junior's Groove," based on Virginia Hamilton's book, "The Planet of Junior Brown." I loved the movie. Loved it, loved it, loved it. It remains one of my all time favorite movies. When I saw the trailer for it I saw that it was about this kid who was a piano prodigy, practicing on a piano with the strings cut out. This is kind of what I used to do when I had to practice piano in the house and either the electricity was off or people were around: I would practice on a keyboard with the power off--I knew the notes and how to play, just didn't have any sound.

Well, the movie and the book are two almost completely different things--as most adaptions tend to be.

Why did I rank the book so much lower than the movie? I'll get to that later. The differences between the book and the movie are quite big. First of all, the movie contains a lot of characters that don't appear in the book, but these characters flesh out the story and fill in a lot of details about Junior Brown and his best friend, Buddy Clark. 
The book briefly goes into the past of Buddy Clark but the movie expands on his life a lot more. The movie even gives him a love interest in the part of a girl named Butter--a girl with a mysterious nightlife and who holds her affections at bay. 

One thing about the book and movie is that it illustrates Junior being great at piano. However, in the book you never get a chance to see or hear him play the piano--he only plays the silent piano with the cut-out strings. In the movie, multiple people talk about how great a piano player Junior really is. There's an introduction to a character named Sandra who works at her father's piano store. Junior goes into the piano store on occasion but is restricted to play any of the pianos. Junior goes to his piano lessons but his piano teacher is a bit nuts and won't let him play her piano. Junior goes home to practice on a piano but the strings are cut out. The book never actually lets you see Junior's playing ability affect his friends in such a way; the movie, however, let's you go the entire length of the film and then right at the end shows Junior playing a Chopin piece while his friends gather around and listen. It's an incredibly powerful scene that never appears in the book. 

The movie also has some of my other favorite scenes. There's a part where Buddy arranges for Sandra to come hang out with him, Junior and Butter. In that scene Junior talks about his relationship with Buddy and how Buddy never called him fat. It was an extremely sad scene as you get this sense that Junior is constantly picked on by people but Buddy is his friend for all the right reasons. Junior then goes on talking with Sandra and, almost out of no where, blurts out "I'm fat" to Sandra. She pauses and says, "I know." What was said is one thing, what was not said is that she knows he's fat but she's with him and hanging out with him anyway. She doesn't care that he's fat, she admires him for the beauty that he sees in people and his talent as a musician. 

The book mainly focuses on the relationship between Buddy and Junior as well as how they integrate their lives with Mr. Pool, a school janitor. It deals with "plants" that are basically youth shelters sponsored by elder members of the quasi-homeless society. I would love to rate this book higher but where it loses me is the philosophical corruption that is espoused as virtue.

The book goes on to claim that people should live for themselves--that's great, I agree with that. But then the planets support their youths by stealing--essentially living off of other people. The book concludes with the realization that we, as people, are interdependent, that we should live off of one another and beholden to each other. And, instead of bringing Junior to a medical facility where he can receive professional help, Buddy opts to remove him from advanced society and place him in an isolated group of homeless people...where he magically begins to overcome his mental problems. There's also parts where Buddy laments about how hard it was growing up in his neighborhood but goes on to say how he would run away from Protective Services, thus, thwarting the one opportunity he had at have a normal living environment. The book is just filled with backwards thinking and flawed logic. 

I still love the movie but the book is just another tool to promote the nonsensical idea that people can't exist for themselves alone.