Rating: 4/5

I won't paraphrase this book, but I'd like to comment on a few things that either disappointed or set my praise. :)

The heroine...

The heroine, Fiona, had a solid starting pitch; she was low birth, but very much aware of her aesthetic gifts and didn't mind inwardly sniping any bitch who disdained her &amp; sometimes pointblank, too. I'd much rather a heroine be cognizant of her personal tools of trade, than to be ignorant and get herself trampled over because 'good girls don't play games' and all that. Because let's face it; life is going to fuck you over either way; at least give it a round or two of its own.

While self aware to an extent, Fiona still made a lot of ridiculously asinine decisions that led to her ruin (mentally, for the most part), but kept surfacing hitherto. She was a self-admitted kept woman, and preferred that over working her skills in the hat-making and dress alteration business. I mean, both had its perks. A glamorous, although sometimes degrading lifestyle of being the upper crust's mistress, or a self-made woman with a business tilt and strong constitution; Fiona? Not so much.

All in all, I liked her. Her story was a very hard-to-chew tact, and I know the conflict of her good girl / bad girl / kept woman or self-empowered / potential kept me on the fence, but that's what she ultimately wanted. If she's willing to put her ass on the line as the bills need paid, who the hell am I to blame her for what kinda currency she pays with if it's victimless? She knew what she was doing after the gig was up.

The story.....

The backdrop of the story was circulating around a very oppressed secondary-third rate citizen status, but really really came across as hypocritical because, well, Fiona didn't even want to work, and the love interest who pursued her was a spokesman for the working class, BUT, he lived in luxury himself(and that ALWAYS bothers me), because, IMO, if you're going to preach humility and the evils of the rich, than you'd best be devoting your every luxury within reason, to the cause, y'know? It doesn't exonerate your richness, either. Why are some people considered acceptably rich? I don't see them donating their London townhouses, or gondola tours of Italy. It says to me that you believe your wealth is safe, if you point other the destitute towards other wealthy assholes, instead of your own wealth. Nice trick, but nope. If you want to help the poor, you're likely going to need to bankrupt yourself in the process; giving all you can, IMO. That's the real cause.

Another thing that stuck in my craw was that the mob rule acceptability level was really crazy. If violence was forwarded to the working class citizen, it was appalling and unprecedented, but if the mob rule destroyed at random, it wasn't their fault; it was just their oppression made them do it. They were victims to their own violence. Bullshit. Utter bullshit. Fuck that ideology. Fuck it real nice like. Even when the heroine was nearly accosted herself, the political love interest cried it off as " results of oppression." It's hard to see raping and pillaging as anything other than it is; nor will a message of oppression be heard through said carnage. Expecting an honest and fair wage is the pursuit of any free country. Using people like cattle has always been the route of any empowered people, but I detest violence being the result, unless it's in self-defense; at your doorstep, with a clear and visible opponent. It boggled me how the violence on either side was simply brushed off as commonplace in this setting. JFC. 

We get a lot of demonstration of the suffering of human beings, who'd do anything for a penny or leverage. Needless to say, it wasn't always rape in the Hellfire Club arranged orgies; it was easy to pay some farm girl to give up her goods for a few pennies for the entertainment of the jaded ton. Even the 'for the people' political leaders and radicals were hot on the mess.

After the heroine's spectacular meeting with the Hellfire Club, I really started helping her plan out her revenge. I had a mental treehouse with ballistics and spreadsheets of their every piss break, to hopefully exact the revenge on those jackals. Most of the time she wised up a great deal, but then she'd retract too. Ah, those girls who are the 'make the best of a bad situation' types; I can relate all too well! She gave as good as she got, although one particular injustice went without notice, and I suppose that was Payes' bodice ripping payoff; sometimes shitty people get away with a lot of shitty things. It's shitty.

The hero..

It's odd, but most of the males, good or professedly bad, were indistinguishable. The hero had a lot of good graces, as well as the Hellfire stoking bit, but in the end I think he arced out of that ass-shot temperament, without Fiona breaking his character into a good and honorable facade. 

Wrapping it up...

In the end, the heroine &amp; hero's rejoice of love left the story stuck in a kind of a rut for the last 25%, where pretty good guys died to facilitate the HEA, and it made for this embarrassing after-orgy dash to acquire lost underwear in a pile in the corner. 

All in all, to me the book can be summed up as: A lot of terrible people, sometimes doing good things. :D

3.5 stars