Rating: 4/5

I feel at a loss trying to review this book in 2026. It's still an important book, but its real significance is as a portrait of a hostile takeover in the music business in a level of detail that you will almost never see. Mike Appel had been a thorn in CBS's side from the day he shouted his way into John Hammond's office, so while the conflict between Appel, Springsteen, and Landau was real, it also seems some fires were stoked in CBS's interest. Bruce's success in some ways a testament to how difficult Mike was for CBS, since several key steps on the road to Born to Run (including the Time/Newsweek covers) were done against direct orders from CBS. Their new breakout star feuding with his old manager cause he wants a well connected rock critic producing him instead is such an easy recipe for enlarging their slice of the pie as soon as it comes out of the oven. Most of the business claims made in the rock press at the time are fully contradicted by the court documents that Eliot uses to great effect in this book. Appel certainly deserved better than the blackballing he was put through, so I'm glad this book gives him his dues and offers this unique view into the business side of showbiz.

As a biography of Springsteen this book is still not without merit. It suffers from being out of date, Marc Eliot did not have access to key texts like Peter Aimes Carlin's "Bruce" or Craig Statham's "Saint in the City" and it shows in some factual errors, but Eliot also illuminates a side of Bruce I haven't seen depicted elsewhere. Confident yet inarticulate, lashing out for reasons that are understandable but in ways that are hard to justify. I find him fundamentally sympathetic, a man who wanted to reach a wide audience without the trappings of The Biz who remains ignorant to the scale of the game even several years into playing it, but it's certainly uncomfortable at times. This book also features more about his romantic life than any other biography and I wish later scholars had built on it more. Bruce's treatment of women could be cruel in ways I never knew, but he's still batting well above the 70s Rock Star average, and there's a unique insight into how the Boss/Big Man dynamic developed you can only get by learning why Louis Lahav moved back to Israel when Born to Run released.

I find it entertaining how many of the reviews here accuse Eliot of bias, since his presence in this book is minimal. There are entire chapters where his prose is just a paragraph here and there stringing together lengthy excerpts from primary sources. It's over-representation of Appel's perspective is simply due to Springsteen et al's refusal to provide comment for the book, and given how much effort Eliot puts into compensating for that silence accusing him of bias is like complaining that a compilation of Roman Senate speeches is biased against Caesar.