Rating: 4/5

This will not be a very comprehensive review but just some thoughts on the book. Lady Ursula has been nursing her sick and difficult mother for five year until the mother finally dies. Ursula is more relieved than grieved since she can now move on with her life (she is 25) and decides to visit her only friend, India. On the way there, she sees someone at an inn whom she met when she came out about 6 or 7 years before and very much admired, although he doesn't remember her. Upon the continuation of the journey, she finds him after he suffers an accident and takes him to recuperate at her friend's house and they get to know each other. 

At first, I was afraid this would be one of those stories where a naïve/sheltered woman has had a tendre for someone all her life and goes on to being completely overcome by him. So I was very surprised when she shows herself to be very level headed and not at all desperately in love. This was a sensible person who maintained her cool while interacting and getting to know Lord Henry. What impressed me the most is that most of the characters were actually very nice. The other love interest was sweet and I felt sorry for him when Ursula dismissed him. I also appreciated the relationship between India and her husband, Robert. They had a beautiful partnership and he was very kind to Ursula. Another surprise was Ursula's brother. He felt awkward with her in the beginning of the book, and I thought he would be one of those who would complaint about her unmarried status and having to take care of her. However, he actually cared for Ursula and ended up having a stronger bond with her at the end of the book. Finally, Ursula and India's relationship was all one could want in a friendship (no jealousy or pettiness just a strong bond and lots of love).

The only "villains" of the story were Robert's cousin, who was certainly a piece of work and, in a different way, Robert's mom.  At first I thought the cousin would get away with a sort of happy ending (done intentionally by the author) but she does get her comeuppance. The mother gets put in her place as well. My main issues were that Lady Ursula and Lord Henry did not spend as much time together as I thought they should in order to develop their relationship and feelings and the ending, when they get together, was super short. It was sweet but it was not even a page long and subdued. I was hoping for stronger emotions and a bit more time with them. 

I was unsure if I would rate the book 3 or 4 stars but, ultimately, the strength of all the characters and their relationships elevated it to me (bonus points for a nice, non-rakish male protagonist).