Rating: 2/5

The blurb of this book really gave the whole story away, this is the story of how a weird white guy fell in love with a girl in a few minutes and was entirely too creepy about it. 

As someone who read and loved His Dark Materials, I can now say that Philip Pull an is such a special author in that he’s written some of the best and worst books I have ever read.

I genuinely had to google this book because at some point I thought it couldn’t be serious, it must be a satire of thriller tropes and teenage romance. If it was satirically written then it would probably be hilarious to me instead of cringe inducing. 

Pullman’s seemingly detached narrative voice is like a large sedative to what should be a THRILLING read given the subject matter. Pullman describes shocking scenes of sexual assault with what seemed to be a complete lack of emotional connection which could’ve been explained as the character herself feeling detached BUT it was similar to his lack lustre voice throughout the entire book.

The one scene where Pullman added some character to his narrative voice was such a clumsy sex scene that I had put the book down and walk away because the writing was god awful. He literally described her nipple as a small animal and went into a bizarre paragraph about lips and tongues which left me mildly repulsed. 

This book reminds me a little of Romeo and Juliet, not because it has any literary merit or rich language but because the “love” genuinely baffled me. Chris decides that he loves Jenny when they don’t even know each other’s last names. They lead each other to their doom through rash decisions and poor choices and there was no relationship (or character) building at all. 

The final nail in the coffin for me, was at Jenny’s death when Chris is despairing and distraught and then is described as feeling pain from the loss of “Jenny’s body” not her as a person BUT HER BODY. If Pullman was trying to say teenage boys ain’t shit in this book then he succeeded but I don’t think that was his intention. In fact I have no clue what he was trying to achieve through this book, who we were meant to like or root for, I didn’t like anyone, I didn’t like the book. 

Jenny deserved better than all of the men in her life including the author who wrote her into existence.