Rating: 5/5

It is a truth universally acknowledged that many people go through a lot of physical pain at some point or most of their lives. Some pain is definitely caused by well-defined physiological injuries. But in a surprisingly large fraction of cases, either the pain doesn't have an identifiable physiological cause (not necessarily injury), or the cause is often misidentified, so fixing it leaves the patient no better than before. The same physical phenomenon that supposedly caused the pain in one individual is perfectly benign in many others. Fixing the phenomenon (often at considerable expense) merely results in the pain blithely moving to a different spot. It is as though the individual is deliberately taunting the world by simulating an ailment, except that he is the one suffering the very real pain.

Sarno's theory of the Tension Myositis Syndrome (TMS) seems at first glance to be incredible indeed. The patient's mind is indeed causing the pain, and is cannily using plausible locations to site the pain, and is not above deviously moving the pain locus about even as surgical means are brought to bear on the initial pain spot! Why does this happen? Is the individual fooling the world? Or this elaborate self-deception? The people who've experienced this pain don't seem to be the personality type that shirks responsibility (assuming the pain is a ploy to evade duty), so there seems to be no motive for such dissimulation.

The TMS explanation makes more sense as you consider that the mind is a complicated construct of the brain (how can it be otherwise?) and that the modules of it that are felt by us to be the most immediate -- our sense of self, our consciousness --, for all their fascinating mystery, are only small parts, like instrument dials, of a much larger unconscious engine that we can only indirectly monitor, if at all. It is the unconscious that decides many things about our life without our (our self's) mediation, and indeed, being conscious of all its activities would be a hindrance to its smooth functioning. Unconscious emotions -- reactions to the world and to events, perhaps in the distant past -- can be raw and terrifying, and unlike conscious thought and emotions, cannot be rationally processed and pacified. TMS posits that the unconscious mind, since it does have access to body control, will use mild oxygen deprivation to create diversionary pain, to prevent the conscious expression of these unconscious "rages", which it deems much more dangerous than the physical pain.

The practical bright spot about this theory is that it proposes a solution: Because it is the mind (albeit the unconscious part of it) that is involved, we can tell our conscious mind about TMS, and the unconscious will realize the jig is up and stop using TMS. Strangely, this does not seem to mean that the repressed rages have to necessarily be unleashed (although Sarno mentions one case where they were, unintentionally, which of course also solves the problem by making hiding it a lost cause). Even more happily, Sarno claims that simply reading about the TMS process is often sufficient, and there is no need for real-time mediation with a TMS expert, as would be the case in standard psychotherapy.

I have had episodes of pain (that I didn't imagine) disappear after a few weeks on multiple occasions. I knew of TMS although I wasn't always consciously practicing any pain-mitigating mental strategy. I feel inclined to believe TMS was at play and thinking about it (as Sarno enjoins) helped counter it. But this is one person's anecdotal experience.

How much of the TMS theory can one legitimately believe? Sarno marshals an impressive amount of experimental data that he has collected over the years. The book is small. If you can read a couple hundred pages (or even just the first chapter), surely there is nothing to lose so you might as well try. Is it possibly a placebo? Sarno says addressing the physical symptoms of TMS is actually the real placebo, yielding only temporary solutions, whereas shutting off the mind's TMS strategy is the real solution. This sounds vaguely circular. There is also the seemingly religious exhortation that one has to be open to accepting TMS as valid for the solution to work. I.e., you gotta have faith!

But is it faith really? Considering that a large part of our mind is patently not under our conscious control, there is a good chance it's doing it's own thing. Some or even much of it is definitely for our benefit, but some of it is likely not. Skepticism, not faith, requires us to consider that the unconscious is not going to be uniformly beneficial. We unconsciously do un-beneficial things (no life is without regrets), and creating physical pain to hide unconscious anguish could well be one of them. And if reading a well-written 200-page book is the price for resolving pointless pain, what a very cheap price to pay!