Rating: 5/5

“When once, through the thousand unknown paths of creation, the human being is so far divided from God that his individuality is secured, it has become yet more needful that the crust gathered around him in the process should be broken; and the love between man and woman arising from a difference deep in the heart of God…is one of his most powerful forces for blasting the wall of separation, and first step towards the universal harmony of twain making one.”

~*~

Random Shakespeare reference!

Have you heard of the play called “Bright, Particular Star” by Ron Reed? It’s about GMD and his daughter Lilia.

Anyway, I found an easter egg from this text…

“A thousand times rather would she see the bright particular star blazing unreachable above her! What! would she carry it about, a cinder in her pocket? …he could be nothing to her nearer than the bright particular star.”

This phrase also appears in Weighed and Wanting. “What bright, particular star were you worshipping now?" 

~*~

In place of quoting the entire story, I’ll just leave some songs here…

Uplifted is the stone,
And all mankind arisen!
We men remain thine own,
And vanished is our prison!
What bitterest grief can stay
Before thy golden cup,
When earth and life give way,
And with our Lord we sup!

To the marriage Death doth call.
The maidens are not slack;
The lamps are burning all—
Of oil there is no lack.
Afar I hear the walking
Of thy great marriage throng!
And hark! the stars are talking
With human tone and tongue!

Courage! for life is hasting
To endless life away;
The inner fire, unwasting,
Transfigures our dull clay!
See the stars melting, sinking,
In life wine, golden bright!
We, of the splendour drinking,
Shall grow to stars of light.

Lost, lost are all our losses;
Love set for ever free;
The full life heaves and tosses
Like an eternal sea!
One endless living story!
One poem spread abroad!
And the sun of all our glory
Is the countenance of God.

🎶 

Rose o’ my hert,
Open yer leaves to the lampin’ mune;
Into the curls lat her keek an’ dert;
She’ll tak the colour but gi’e ye tune.

Buik o’ my brain,
Open yer neuks to the starry signs;
Lat the een o’ the holy luik an’ strain
An’ glimmer an’ score atween the lines.

Cup o’ my sowl,
Gowd an’ diamond an’ ruby cup,
Ye’re noucht ava but a toom dry bowl,
Till the wine o’ the kingdom fill ye up,

Conscience-glass,
Mirror the infinite all in thee;
Melt the bounded and make it pass
Into the tideless, shoreless sea.

World of my life,
Swing thee round thy sunny track;
Fire and wind and water and strife—
Carry them all to the glory back.