Rating: 4/5

The Dream of the Unified Field is a selection of Jorie Graham's poems from five collections, including: 
  Hybrids of Plants and of Ghosts
, 
  Erosion
, 
  The End of Beauty
, 
  Region of Unlikeness
, and 
  Materialism
...

From 
  Hybrids of Plants and of Ghosts
...

The slow overture of rain,
each drop breaking
without breaking into
the next, describes
the unrelenting, syncopated
mind. Not unlike
the hummingbirds
imagining their wings
to be their heart, and swallows 
believing the horizon
to be a line they lift
and drop. What is it
they cast for? The poplars,
advancing or retreating,
lose their statue
equally, and yet stand firm,
making arrangements
in order to become
imaginary. The city
draws the mind in streets, 
and streets compel it
from their intersections
where a little
belongs to no one. It is
what is driven through
all stationary portions
of the world, gravity's
stake in things. The leaves,
pressed against the dank
window of November
soil, remain unwelcome
till transformed, parts
of a puzzle unsolvable
till the edge give a bit
and soften. See how
then the picture becomes clear,
the mind entering the ground
more easily in pieces,
and all the richer for it.
- Mind, pg. 15-16

From 
  Erosion
...

How hard it is for the river here to re-enter
the sea, though it's most beautiful, of course, in the waste
of time where it's almost
turned back. Then
it's yoked
trussed. . . . The river
has been everywhere, imagine, dividing, discerning,
cutting deep into the parent rock,
scouring and scouring
its own bed.
Nothing is whole
where it has been. Nothing
remains unsaid.
Sometimes I'll come this far from home
merely to dip my fingers in this glittering, archaic
sea that renders everything
identical, flesh
where mind and body
blur. The seagull squeak, ill-fitting
hinges, the beach is thick
with shells. The tide
is always pulsing upward, inland, into the river's rapid
argument, pushing
with its insistent tragic waves - the living echo,
says my book, of some great storm far out at sea, too far
to be recalled by us
but transferred
whole onto this shore by waves, so that erosion
is its very face.
- Wanting a Child, pg. 35

From 
  The End of Beauty
...

1
The gesture like a fruit torn from a limb, torn swiftly.

2
The whole bough bending then springing back as if from sudden sight.

3
The rip in the fabric where the action begins, the opening of the narrow passage.

4
The passage along the arc of denouncement once the plot has begun, like a limb, the buds in it cinched and numbered,
outside the true story really, outside of improvisation,
moving along day by day into the sweet appointment.

5
But what else could they have done, these two, sick of beginning,
revolving in place like a thing seen,
dumb, blind, rooted in the eye that's watching,
ridden and ridden by that slowest of glances the passage of time
staring and staring until the entrails show.

6
Every now and then a quick rain for no reason,

7
a wind moving round all sides, a wind shaking the point of view out like the last bits of rain. . . .

8
So it was to have freedom she did it but like a secret thought.
A thought of him the light couldn't touch.
The light beating against it, the light flaying her thought of him, trying to break it.
Like a fruit that grows but only in the invisible.
The whole world of the given beating against this garden
where he walks slowly in the hands of freedom
noiselessly beating his steps against the soil.

9
But a secret grows, a secret wants to be given away.
For a long time it swells and stains its bearer with beauty.
It is what we see swelling forth making the shape we know a thing by.
The thing inside, the critique of the given.

[...]
- Self Portrait as the Gesture Between Them [Adam &amp; Eve], pg. 51-52/blockquote&gt;

From Region of Unlikeness...

Look she said this is not the distance
we wanted to stay at - We wanted to get
close, veryclose. But what
is the way in again? And is it

too late? She could hear the actions
rushing past - but they are on
another track. And in the silence,
or whatever it is that follows,

there was still the buzzing: motes, spores,
aftereffects and whatnot recalled the morning after.
Then the thickness you can't get past called waiting.

Then the you, whoever you are, peering down to see if it's done yet.
Then just the look on things of being looked-at.
Then just the look on things of being seen.
- Act III, Sc. 2, pg. 143

From Materialism...

Watching the river, each handfulof it closing over the next,
brown and swollen. Oaklimbs,
gnawed at by waterfilm, lifted, relifted, lapped-at by all day in
this dance of non-discovery. All things are
possible. Last year's leaves, coming unstuck from shore,
rippling suddenly again with the illusion,
and carried, twirling, shiny again and fat,
towards the quick throes of another tentative
conclusion, bobbing, circling in little suctions their stiff presence
on the surface compels. Nothing is virtual.
The long brown throat of it sucking up from some faraway melt.
Expression pouring forth, all content no meaning.
The force of it and the thingness of it identical.
Spit forth, licked up, snapped where the force
exceeds the weight, clickings, pockets.
A long sigh through the land, an exhalation.
I let the dog loose in the stretch. Crocus
appear in the gassy dank leaves. Many
earth gasses, rot gasses.
I take them in, breath at a time, I put my
breath back out
onto the scented immaterial. How the invisible
toils. I see it from here and then
I see it from here. Is there a new way of looking -
valences and little hooks - inevitabilities, proba-
bilities? It flaps and slaps. Is this body the one
I know as me? How private these words? And these? Can you
smell it, brown with little froths at the rot's lips,
meanwhiles and meanwhiles thawing then growing soggy then 
the filament where leaf-matter accrued round a
pattern, a law, slipping off, precariously, bit by bit,
and flicks, and swiftness suddenly more water than not.
The nature of goodness the mind exhales.
I see myself. I am a widening angle of
and nevertheless and this performance has rapidly -
nailing each point and then each next right point, inter-
locking, correct, correct again, each rightness snapping loose,
floating, hook in the air, swirling, seed-down,
quick - the evidence of the visual henceforth - and henceforth, loosening -
- Notes on the Reality of the Self, pg. 159-160