Rating: 5/5

I wanted to reread Heaven because the screen adaptation was scheduled to air last Saturday on Lifetime. So, I reread it and I want to tell you why this book is a MUST READ!

V.C. Andrews was one of my all time favorite authors until she died in 1986 and her family hired a ghostwriter, Andrew Neiderman, to finish some her WIPs. Decades later, in my opinion no one has written such genre-bending [Gothic/contemporary/suspense/thriller/mystery/horror], complex and dark, generational sagas filled with dysfunctional families, ugly secrets and forbidden love like V.C. Andrews.

Especially, I haven’t found anyone else that has written extreme poverty, adversities and hardships like her. The physical and emotional imagery is superb. You cannot only actually "see" the two-room shack in the hills of West Virginia too small for the family of nine, or hear and feel the howling wind filtering through the wood’s cracks, you can smell the shack, the dirty cloths and the fumes from the latrine because there is no running water or bathrooms, or smell the rotting food that you’ll have to eat if you don’t want to starve…. You can also really feel the pang of starvation in you stomach, the embarrassment of being “Of all the folks in the mountain shacks, the lowest, the scum of the hills”, the desperation of seeing your younger siblings starve to death, and the despair and fear of being hated, abused, neglected and ultimately abandoned by your parents.

If you want to connect with characters at unexpected levels and desperately root for them, even for the evilest of them, because of everything they have been put through… If you want to wince, gasp, hold your breath, cry… all the feels… you gotta read the Dollanganger and Casteel series!

Heaven is the first book of the Casteel series and even though I enjoyed the Dollanganger series overall more than the Casteel series, Heaven is may favorite of all V.C. Andrews’ books! I liked it even more than Flowers in the Attic, which I never thought possible!

Rereading Heaven was an even more amazing than reading it the first time because years later I had read more books and had more books to compare it with! And still… There are no books like V.C. Andrews’! Her books have been translated to nineteen languages and made into twelve film adaptations!

I PROMISE THIS IS GOOD STUFF PEOPLE! GOOD STUFF! YOU GOTTA READ THEM!