Rating: 3/5

Thanks to Netgalley I have been able to read three books by Amanda Scott that will soon be re released Border Bride is the third such book and I am thinking I saved the best for last. Each book was either the beginning or the ending of a series so of course had absolutely nothing to do with each other. So I treated them as stand alones. 

Border Bride takes place along the ever dangerous Scottish/English borders during Elizabeth I reign. In a way this is a unique period of history because it is really the beginning of the end of Scottish as a separate country. Elizabeth actually had Mary a queen of another sovereign nation, tried, convicted and beheaded for treason. Not of Scotland, the country that Mary claimed as queen but of England a foreign nation. Rather presumptuous of good Queen Bess if I do say so myself. I am not sure how aware you are of this particular time period but in my observation this was a period where court intrigue was at it's peak. Never sure who her allies were, Elizabeth managed an amazing political career. Not that this book had really anything to do with Elizabeth but I had to comment. On a totally separate tangent, England's three greatest rulers were Queens.. go figure.

Now back to this story..

Sir Adam Douglas is first and foremost Jaimie's man. He is a trusted and true servant to his king and one night while on an important mission he fell for a beautiful highland maid. Unaware of her innocence Adam arranges an assignation with her.. well he thinks he did. Unfortunately for him, the loverly girl wasn't quite aware of this. After figuring it out she locked him out.. not to be deterred he climbed in through her balcony.. Honestly still thinking the girl was interested.. Only to discover that she had other plans (like a metal pole to his head)

 Mary Kate MacPherson was a proud highland lass and as only the truly innocent can be arrogant with it. She honestly was unaware of the consequences of being a flirt. Fortunately she managed to escape her Uncle's party unscathed and hightailed it back to the highlands where she belonged. Only to have her father arrange for her marriage to none other than Sir Adam Douglas.Needless to say she was a bit peeved.

These were not perfect characters but in true to her style, Amanda Scott makes them true to their times. Adam was an arrogant prat for all I could see demanding obedience and proper behavior when he didn't offer it. His attitude caused a lot of the problems in their relationship and then refusing to understand Mary Kate's responses.

Mary Kate was not without her faults but I honestly believed she was in her rights.. 

The thing is I really liked this book. Or rather, I was compelled by it. There were times when the emotions were so high I literally had a knot in the pit of my stomach. I was just that upset. I wanted to walk away until that part of the story had happened and I could go catch up later (you know like a tv show). It was hard.. A Hard read.. there were times when I wanted to smack good old Adam upside the head and call him some less than proper names..

But still.. it captivated me... 

Shauni

This review is based on the ARC of Border Bride provided by netgalley and is scheduled to be re released on March 26, 2013

For more reviews by Shauni check out Tea and Book and
Bodice Rippers, Femme Fatales and Fantasy