Rating: 1/5

I had high hopes for Philip Jose Farmer. I have heard that his novel To Your Scattered Bodies Go is an all-time classic; so I was expecting something of avant-garde nature when I started this book.

Maybe my expectations were too high. This is fantasy masquerading as Science Fiction. IMO, there is nothing wrong in that, provided the story is enjoyable - I have never felt that to be good, a book has to be highbrow. My problem with the tome in question was that what started out as good fun became boring very fast. Like Brian W. Aldiss's Hothouse, this became an exercise in world building - only longer.

The story is very simple. The sun has burnt out: earth is near the end of its life. Whatever human beings are left are living as tribes (vaguely resembling Native Americans). Deyv (the main protagonist) has to go out into the frightening world to find a wife because he could not find any from his or neighbouring tribes. This is because his soul-egg (a spheroid which the tribespeople hang around their neck, and which is supposed to house their souls) did not match with that of any eligible female. On his travels, Deyv's soul-egg is stolen, and he embarks on a quest to recover it along with Vana, a woman from an alien tribe whose soul-egg also has been stolen. On the way they meet Sloosh, a tree-man who looks like a centaur made of leaves, and who joins their quest. The rest of the story is a journey through an alien landscape peopled by exotic creatures and locales, and an extremely predictable ending.

The exotic creatures are interesting (live ships which fly and boats which mate by firing pellets) and the world is interestingly alien, but soon the excitement begins to fade. Sloosh's never-ending lectures on the growth, decay and eventual predicted destruction of earth starts to sound like boring class-room sessions. It seems that the author has forgotten the dictum of "show, don't tell". Also, the prose is very simplistic (it's almost as though we are reading a synopsis) and the characterisation is almost non-existent. Towards the end, the author goes on an unnecessary killing spree and puts a violent end to many characters through silly mishaps - characters who had survived greater perils till then. It's as though he wanted to wipe the slate clean.

I honestly cannot recommend it to anyone.