Rating: 5/5

CONOR'S WAY is like a chocolate caramel candy bar. It is rich, gooey and messy at times. And like good chocolate, it can be addictive.

Set in Louisiana six years after the Civil War, it is a story that is steeped in history. Conor Branigan moved to America from Ireland trying to forget a tragic past. Olivia Maitland survived the war between the states but lost two brothers at Gettysburg. Her father died a short time later after he had an accident. She eventually became mother to three orphaned daughters of her closest friend when she passed away. The Civil War took a deep toll and her home is all the memories she has left of her family.

They meet each other for the first time when Conor is beaten and left for dead after a skirmish with a devious business owner. Olivia was heading to town to see if anyone had replied to her ad for a worker to assist her with her property. She spots Conor and takes him home to care for him. All along hoping he might be someone that will help her. 

Both people came from damaged backgrounds but it is what they have learned from their pasts that formed their personalities. Conor had been content with his superficial life. Or so he thought. Olivia worried deeply on how she was going to put food on the table and pay the bills until the peaches could be harvested. That same business owner that hurt Conor wants to buy Olivia's land so he can build a railroad; it is the only piece of property he needs for his plans to go forth. And he will do anything to get it.

Over the next few weeks, Olivia and her daughters become attached to Conor. Each in their own way. Conor does his darnedest in giving Olivia a hard time. And those same secondary characters give depth and flavor to the storyline without overwhelming the time spent between the hero and heroine.

Full of trust issues and emotion with dark moments, this historical romance is for the reader who enjoys imperfect characters and plenty of angst. The plot will push and pull at your soul. If anything else, you will never take for granted what war does to a person. I finished the book within two days but I am exhausted. In a good way.