Rating: 4/5

This is the novel that stays in the middle ground between Heinlein’s juveniles and his later work, like Stranger in a Strange Land. Together with Starship Troopers it was initially intended for a juvenile market but wasn’t accepted by editors. Even if it is not officially in the list of RAH juveniles (which ends with Have Spacesuit, Will Travel), we in Hugo &amp; Nebula Awards: Best Novels group decided to read them as a part of reading RAH juveniles. I’ve read and enjoyed it in translation more than 30 years ago and was happy to re-read it in its original form.

The novel is written as a diary of a teenage girl Podkayne (named after Martian Saint Podkayne who lived a very long time ago. Nobody actually knows whether the saint was male or female […] most Martians include “Podkayne” in their long lists of names (practically genealogies in synopsis) because of the tradition that anyone named for Saint Podkayne can call on him (or “her”—or “it”) in time of trouble.) – this already breaks three unwritten rules of the earlier juveniles:
-	It is written as a diary
-	It is written by a female
-	The only juvenile where protagonist’s age is explicitly stated ( Adolescent female: I’m eight plus a few months - this means eight Martian years or around 15+ Earth years)
In the opening chapter, teenage Marswoman (not Martian! Martians are another species) Podkayne ‘Poddy’ Fries introduces herself, her close-knit family (her dad is a history prof, her mom in an architect, her younger brother Clark is immoral genius), and her lifelong ambition to become a spaceship pilot ( Future pilot and someday commander of deep-space exploration parties.). She hoped for a family travel to Earth and other planets of the Solar system, but her hopes were destroyed when suddenly her family got newly born triplets (artificial births are the norm, and Fries haven’t planned to have those three now, but there was an error and voila!). The day is saved by her (Black! Another rarity for the early 1960s SF) Uncle Tom, who invites her and Clark to accompany him on an interplanetary diplomatic trip to Earth, with a stop on Venus.

Podkayne for me is one of Heinlein's most memorable protagonists, and definitely the most memorable female protagonist. She is both intelligent and naïve, confident without being infallible, and emotional and logical at the same time. At the same time, for present day reader, Podkayne has serious faults that highlights author’s problems (about which I found from The Pleasant Profession of Robert A. Heinlein) – namely, the fact that he and his wife wanted kids, but were unable to have them. So, Podkayne, who is ambitious and clearly sees a glass ceiling for her professional growth ( A woman who tackles engineering and undertakes to beat men at their own game might have had a fairly limited social life, wouldn’t you think? I must study this seriously . . . because it seems possible that much the same might happen to a female space pilot and it is no part of my Master Plan to become a soured old maid. […] It’s not easy for a girl to get accepted for pilot training—she has to be about four times as good as a male candidate—and every little bit helps. […] Dexter intends to be an explorer captain, just like me—only I didn’t quite admit that my plans for spacing included pilot and master; it is never well in dealing with a male to let him know that you think you can do whatever it is he can do best or wants to do most. ) but just give her a baby to change diapers and she melts… And her supersmart brother doesn’t help – for he is smarter than she is, outwits her every time. Her role is more to give him a moral compass, so in this she is secondary to his needs.

Finally, the novel has two endings (here come spoilers!): the author’s ending and the ending in the first publication. RAH wanted Podkayne to die tragically – this is to give a lifelong guilt to Clark, whose error led to it and give him at least a bit of morality. And also to highlight that Fries were bad parents, caring more about their careers than about their children (and once again, RAHs attitudes are shown in his letter to his agent: 
 Poddy’s death (it seems to me) is similarly indispensable to this story. The true tragedy in this story lies in the character of the mother [sic! Not parents!], the highly successful career woman who wouldn’t take time to raise her own kids—and thereby let her son grow up an infantile monster, no real part of the human race and indifferent to the wellbeing of others . . . until the death of his sister, under circumstances which lay on him a guilt he can never shake off, gives some prospect that he is now going to grow up.

So, this book is both progressive and outdated. I doubt modern readers will enjoy it, but I definitely did.