Rating: 3/5

Chester Himes remains one of the most overlooked American writers of the 20th century. This could be partly because he never quite fit easily into any category, at least until late in his career. He wrote about the black experience in America before and after World War II mostly, but his novels weren’t really “protest novels.” He didn’t seem to trust humanity—white or black—enough to write in a prescriptive or diagnostic way, and when he tried, the results were clunky. He was more like Kafka, seeing an irreconcilable absurdity at the heart of the human condition, something no WPA program or political dialectic was ever going to address.
He also made even the white liberals of his time uncomfortable by at least considering the salvific power of violence. Had the violence he flirted with been political, the intelligentsia could not have only condoned it, but encouraged it. But his kind was more personal, more that of a lapsed Catholic who remembered the blood in the Bible but forget the reason for all the shedding of the same. 

“Yesterday Will Make You Cry” is one of his most troubling, troubled, and frankly ballsy books. He wrote it from the perspective of a white con doing twenty years in an Ohio prison for an armed robbery. Publishers sabotaged the book from the first, however, refusing to accept an anti-essentialist argument, that a black person could write from the perspective of a white man. Such a thing—horror of horrors—might suggest a black man being capable of sympathy for a white man, instead of displaying the de rigeur outrage, which, in a weird way satisfied some sadomasochistic urge in the left-leaning soul. Himes’ good friend and photographer Carl Van Vechten noted this strange tendency in the phenomenon of “racial cabarets,” in which bourgeois whites showed up in theaters to be berated by black performers on stage. We still have not just vestiges of this, but highly profitable rackets based entirely on this dynamic, the only difference being that now white people like Robin DiAngelo get to cash in, too.
Himes, in “Yesterday Will Make You Cry,” is not interested in larger racial discourse. Instead he is interested in the intimate dynamic that develops between heterosexual men when long confinement pushes them toward situational homosexuality, which then occasionally and accidentally becomes love. He focuses on the travails of protagonist Jimmy Monroe as he struggles to adapt to doing a long bid in prison, fighting authority and making war against himself in incomprehensible and sudden outbursts of inexplicable rage. He has affairs with men—dealing with this forthrightly required a lot of taboo-breaking on Himes’ part—but they prove generally unsatisfactory.
At least, that is, until Jimmy meets Rico. This is by far the best part of the novel, being not just compelling but sometimes transcendent, as powerful and real a romance as any I’ve ever encountered in print. It reminded me quite a bit of Genet, when he was at the peak of his powers. The problem, though, is that this relationship is only introduced well into the third act of the book. And while the initial publishers may have botched the job and underestimated Himes by changing his protag’s race, they did good work in their general edit. Here most of the stuff that’s been reintegrated into the body of the text slows things down. Granted, the pace of life in prison is glacially slow—especially for those doing long bids—but part of the challenge of writing about prison is to convey the boringness of it without actually being boring oneself. “Cast the First Stone” (the original version) did that. This “improved and unexpurgated version,” alas, does not.
Maybe Himes would have liked it more, but a writer is hardly ever the best judge of their work. 
Besides which, the restoration is all for naught, since it’s gainsaid by the cover, which features a perp walk of several black men. What’s the point of restoring the race of the protagonist in the book if your art department is just going to muddle the issue by featuring black rather than white (or least mixed race) suspects in a lineup?
The answer is probably crass commercialism, something better suited to Holloway House than Old School books. “Hey,” some guy with a cigar wagging in his mouth might have said, “Himes is black, so let’s put some black guys on the cover. Maybe it will even sneak its way onto the ‘urban’ shelf with the K’wan bestsellers.”
The best thing about this book, in fact, is probably the intro by legendary filmmaker Melvin Van Peebles. That, and the stretch of the novel that takes place after Rico enters the picture. That part makes it almost worth it for the casual reader, and definitely worth it for the Himes aficionado. I won’t soon forget it, and that’s gotta be worth something. Lastly, it’s a rare realistic look at life in prison before that B.C. / A.D schism that prison writer Edward Bunker talked about. In other words, MLK had not yet been assassinated, and white and black convicts could not only exist together in (relative) peace, but hard segregation was not a daily fact, or explicit race riots an inevitable given, as they are now, especially in California prisons where it’s not a question of “if,” but “when” the dormant volcano blows again.