Rating: 1/5

I really wanted to like this book, as much of the other Graham that I have read I have liked. It is highly possible that I just didn't get it, or didn't spend enough time with it. It would be very hard for me to summarize this book or analyze it, so I'm instead going to go on a tangent about the subset of contemporary poetry that is, oh, indeterminate/opaque/uninterested with meaning as a primary vehicle by which to experience the poem.

So. I was taught to write with the goal of clarity. I was taught to analyze poems from probably a Symbolist perspective--meaning is there, and it's up to you, as a reader/critic, to find those meanings and articulate them. So my education has perhaps primed me with the desire to write with an attempt to communicate, and to see as "right" those poets who do attempt to communicate. Sounds basic, no? Cue my surprise when, as a wee poet in her early twenties in New York, I learned that there is a large segment of poets whose main goal is not communication. I never took a class on Modernism or Postmodernism during college, so I was not really up-to-speed with the whole "let's fragment meaning cuz that's fun" school (yes, I'm being glib). I just thought it was silly, and irritating, and pointless. The world is confusing enough, and if our writers--those with the ability and desire to articulate, and to touch others with the "human pang"--refuse to illuminate, elucidate, and empathize, then they are enacting a self-indulgent aesthetic that serves to alienate people, not bring them together.

After my first year of my MFA program, I am not so quick to jump on poets who lurve to obscure meaning. I have a higher tolerance; nay, I can even express an appreciation for the different goals of poets (in other words, I can appreciate that my poetic goals don't have to be everybody else's poetic goals). However, there is still part of me that strongly reacts to an anti-communicative poetic stance. Why withhold so much? Who or what does it serve when your poetry is total sheen, or wordless vibe, or a tapestry made entirely of glimpses? I do wonder at the proliferation of this kind of poetry. Don't we, as writers, have some sort of responsibility to welcome others onto our page? I think maybe we do. Or I think that maybe I want to. The world is lonely enough without our poets kicking us out of their creative universes.

Tant (tangent plus rant) over.