Rating: 3/5

A train stopped at midnight in the snow. 
A dead body found in a compartment. 
Twelve stab wounds leave no doubt it was murder. 
And Hercule Poirot, tasked with solving the crime, is certain the culprit is a passenger on the Orient Express. 

The first clue that Murder on the Orient express will be a laborious read arrives shortly after the murder victim is discovered. Among the clues is a scrap of paper which reads 
   “– member little Daisy Armstrong.”
 From this clue, Poirot leaps to an illogical conclusion that serves as the foundation for the remainder of the book. 

The message on the scrap of paper leads Poirot to assert that the murder victim is a man named Cassetti who is wanted for the murder of an innocent girl named Daisy Armstrong. This connection makes about as much sense as finding a scrap of paper that reads, “– member Ms. J.K. Rowling” and assuming the person it belonged to is the long-lost fourth child of the world-renowned author. Poirot makes the connection between the scrap of paper and the murder victim with unbearable convenience. 

Equally baffling is Poirot’s assertion that the murderer could not have exited through the open train window because there are no footprints in the snow. Is it so unfathomable that the murderer might have gone out the window and sidled along the train or even climbed atop it? Such oversights leave readers to wonder if Christie intends to misdirect her audience or if her leading man isn’t as bright as he first appears. 

Poirot dismisses probable explanations, clings to his illogical assumption about the murder victim, and proceeds to investigate the crime by interviewing every passenger on the train in a designated room. He regales each passenger with his outlandish conclusion, stating it as stone-cold fact, and observes their reactions. Reading through the same set of questions over and over again is a wearisome act, one that grows more tiresome when one remembers that characters could very well be lying, making the entire exercise feel like wasted time. 

When this repetitive process finally concludes, Poirot then interviews every passenger again while digging through their luggage in their individual compartments. Couldn’t he have interviewed them in their compartments to begin with? Was it necessary to drag out this process? 

After Poirot completes his lengthy interview process, he regales his audience with the solution to the mystery. Those hoping to solve the case themselves will be sorely disappointed, as Poirot’s ability to pinpoint the murderer is dependent on information that’s unavailable to the reader, and the answer to who stabbed the victim borders on absurd. However, despite the improbability of the reveal, Christie’s book leaves a lasting impression because of the uncomfortable questions it raises about justice. 

Murder on the Orient Express is a tedious read that reaches an unlikely, albeit unexpected, conclusion – one that lingers because of its themes.