Rating: 4/5

The variety of arguments made this an all-round good series of lectures/essays to read if you're interested in the messy world of interpretation.

Eco unsurprisingly had the most logical and sensical argument, in that interpretation is vast but not infinite. And he conveyed it well too. No pretentious vocabulary; clear and coherent.
I can't say the same about Rorty — both about his argument and ostentatious tone. His idea that people should enjoy literary texts without having to worry about digging deeper may at first seem like a comforting one, but it essentially denounces literature as a legitimate discipline. This of course rubbed me the wrong way. Though he did mention a few points that I personally would find useful when interpreting a text (the difference between a methodical and an emotional reading etc.).
I actually quite liked what Culler had to say. He touches on the issues with Pragmatism in relation with literature, something I appreciated after having read Rorty's lecture. I found myself agreeing with what he had to say — believing that to not restrict interpretations allows for them to cultivate the best insights into literature and language. However I think this principle can still be applied with Eco's argument while ensuring logic is maintained.
Finally there is Brook-Rose's lecture on palimpsest history. While reading I questioned whether the argument that was being made was focusing on interpretation as much as it should be. She essentially was stating how texts are closely linked with history, but how texts alternate history and its events to offer new perspectives and ideas. In terms of fictional texts, a lot of them just don't involve much history; they instead perhaps focus on the characters, or some other aspect, with no time period of when the story is set in mind. So it's confusing as to how the reader could apply her argument when interpreting a text.

What I did gain out of these lectures outweighed what I didn't — based on that logic, this was an overall good book. I think it would be worth checking it out, particularly Eco's lectures, as there is some valuable stuff if you are interested in gaining clarity on the perplexity of interpretation.