Rating: 4/5

Some books look like a romance, read like a romance, sell like a romance, but can be so much more.

This book was my very first foray into the works of Marion Chesney, the beginning of a long and devoted readership, and one of my very first Regency romances. At the time, I was maybe in the fifth grade, and the old-fashioned hardback cover and its curlique scripted title drew me in. I read it. I didn't understand it. In fact, I didn't think much of the author.

Years later, Marion Chesney is my go-to author when I'm in a bad mood. Her writing is succinct, evocative, and, best of all, prolific. Naturally, as is the case with all prolific writers, their average rating isn't as high as a writer that is a one-shot wonder.

This book, to be honest, doesn't work that well as a romance. The character of the hero, Harry, is kind of a puzzle, and the heroine also isn't much of a heroine. But as is the case with many of Chesney's later historicals, this book reads more like a satire of the romance genre.

Deirdre is considered the "brains" of the family, but from her actions, she does one stupid, headstrong thing after another. Her "wit," such as it is, comprises mainly of impertinent comebacks, much in the way of the rebellious teenager. Actually, she yearns for romance, and finds it in the form of the first single man she meets that pays attention to her, who also is a scoundrel of the highest order (which you know from previous books in the series, but is also alluded to in this book). Very soon, she starts thinking that their relationship was a true "meeting of the mind," because he was able to converse with her on such weighty, intelligent subjects as she had always desired and which were forbidden to young girls. One such subject is the Battle of Waterloo, on which the scoundrel (Guy Wentwater) is able to speak at great length. 

When Deirdre meets Harry, because of his fashionable appearance and his purposefully vacant look, she condemns him as a dummy. She looks down on him because he is unable to talk about "intelligent" topics, to which he replies languidly that the only people who want to talk about war are people who have never had to fight in war. She thinks he's not only a dummy but also a coward as well.

Herein lies Marion Chesney's genius. A lot of reviewers criticize her writing as lacking that deep characterization that flesh out people. However, I think her portrayal of human nature is exceptionally accurate. And in fact, she has stated in an interview once that love "in real life is not the way it's portrayed in novels." So, in some of her books, I feel she cleverly masks her satirical outlook by glossing the book in a veneer of "romance."

Back to the book. There is a vein of arrogance and idealistic stupidity that flows in young girls, but particularly in intelligent girls. By intelligent, I mean the girls who think too much and, moreover, take pride in the fact that they think too much, not realizing that truly intelligent people are not debating the banality of everyday things. It's worse when this self-awareness is paired with idealism and romanticism. Deirdre is one such example, and I think this book runs parallel with Pride and Prejudice with Lizzy's character. Both pride themselves on being good judges of character and having a higher mind than common, materialistic, mercenary goals. Ergo, the man who is in good standing and accepted by society must be a jackass. The man, on the other hand, who was a villain and loudly proclaims to all of his repentance -- that man is a true hero.

This is a folly that actually many intelligent girls fall victim to, in thinking that a reformed man is better than the man who is just there, boring, staid, respectable. But in real life, it seldom works like this. The man who's there chatting up a storm of pretty words and flattering conversation is usually not the saint that he presents himself to be. Alas for girls who always fall prey to verbal assurances and can't see beneath silent actions.

Does this book rank that highly as a romance? No, I don't think so. But I never thought Pride and Prejudice was particularly effective as a romance either. But on character, and youthful idealism, and a lot on growing up and learning that actions speak louder than words, this book is quite effective.