Rating: 3/5

I really like the aim and purpose of this book, but it got rote and repetitive. The author attempted to break it up into themes and motifs, but she didn't curate or paraphrase the stories, so a story from one chapter just blended into the story from another.

While I came at this book wanting to feel...reaffirmed, I didn't quite get that. Some of this was due to differences that are no fault of the author's, while others may have been more so.

On the downside, the author tended to gravitate towards stories that were more similar to her own. There was an overwhelming number of stories about women who grew up hating their ethnicity, who married a Caucasian, and who ended up in the Bay Area. Even most of the women who could tell stories about growing up outside of California ended up in the Bay Area.

The author described growing up with a strong sense of self-hatred because of her ethnicity, and I don't know if that affected the stories she highlighted in the book. I felt as if the book was more about catharsis and self-affirmation for her rather than a holistic view of the lived experiences of Asian American women.

Now, all of this may have been due to the time. Published in 1998, this book reflects Asian American women whose parents came here on very different terms than the current second-generation Asian Americans. A lot of stories from Japanese women were affected by being interned or having parents who were interned. Many women had moms who were essentially mail-order or arranged brides, and while some of that is still true, I think it is less common with today's 2nd gen Asian Americans.

Personally, I feel as if the largest gap is due to technological advances since this book was published. The internet, for me at least, strongly shaped how I identify. Being able to find sites such as Asian Avenue connected me with a wider network of Asian Americans across North America, making the feelings of racism and isolation less prevalent. Additionally, watching YouTube videos, a place where Asian American independent artists have a strong presence, also reaffirms my lived experiences and makes me able to laugh at my situation and feel more normalized, something that many of the women whose stories were shared in this book didn't have.

Overall, still a great book, but not 5 stars for me personally because it doesn't strike as personal of a chord as I was looking for. Not really the author's fault. Maybe partially.