Rating: 4/5

When I wrote my first totally inadequate review of this book, my friend, Shy Lyn (who won't post comments but sends me her thoughts by e-mails wrote this):

(Read with a Southern accent...) 
What do you do with a kangaroo 
Who jumps in your window 
Sits on your bed and says 
"I never sleep in wrinkled sheets. 
So change them now and make them smooth 
And fluff up the pillow, if you please." 
What do you do? 
You throw him out 
That's what you do 
Get out of my bed, you kangaroo!" 

What do you do when you go to the bathroom to brush your teeth 
But hangin' there where your towel should be, 
Brushing his teeth like he owns the place... 

We love that book! As you can tell, I've read it so many times in the past I pretty well have it memorized. Although it has been a long time. HOWEVER - now that Orion is old enough, I'll have to find it again and read it to him. And The Bad Child Book of Beasts and one of Andrew's favorites: 

Let's Marry, Said the Cherry 
Why me, said the pea? 
Cause your sweet, said the beet. 
Say you will, said the dill 
Think it over, said the clover 
Don't rush, said the squash 

and so forth. His favorite line was (with the gestures included) "Who knows, said the rose?" 

That's when I knew what I'd written in this review was totally inadequate, not to mention I'd given a very shoddy reading of this incredible book! Oh dear! So, in order to rectify the situation, I have bumped my rating up a whole star and I promise the next time I get the chance to read this to my friend, Mamie, I will attempt to do a Dixie accent. Failing that, I'll at least try to put a little more spirit, life and/or humor into the read! 

Thanks, Lyn, for the tip! A good book can be totally mucked up by a poor reader! Yikes! booklady beware!

Just one thing Lyn, have you ever thought about an Aussie accent? Ya know, kangaroos and all...

Dec. 5, 2023 update: I had totally forgotten about this book but found our copy of it in the attic yesterday. I was going to add it in when I discovered this old review from back in 2008 when I had read it to a friend's daughter. I don't remember reading it to our daughters... 😟 But I am looking forward to reading it to grandchildren! ❤️