Rating: 4/5

Un-put-down-able! What captivating writing! 

The book  River Mother  opens at Rio Minho with Kelithe deep in her daydream as she washes laundry. She’s so deep in her daydreams that she did not see her son Timothy leave his cot under the tree to walk into the river. She gets shaken from her daydreaming by women trying to save her son Timothy who ended up drowning in the river. Kelithe is unable to process what happened, this is not the first time she’s left him sleeping, how did she not see him leave his cot, how is her son dead? 

Rio Minho runs through the community of Steadfast, word gets around about the downing and the fact that Kelithe mother Sonja who left her over fifteen years ago is finally ready to send for her. The women of steadfast community believes Kelithe stood there and watched her son drowned because she wanted to go to the US with her mother. With everyone in the community screaming “murder” along with cries for justice, Kelithe is unable to process or even tell her side of the story. Her month ends up flying home for the funeral, after years of being away and begins to wonder if her daughter really did that to her grandson. 

I found River Mother on my mother’s book shelf, how she has a book I have never read is beyond me. I read this book in less than a day because I HAD to know what happened. This is Donna Hemans debut novel and having read her second book  Tea By The Sea  I can definitely see how great a writer she is. Donna brings to life a community that feels left behind, women in the community who feel cheated of out their dreams and a death that leads to the breaking point of everyone. 

If you love a book that explores mother-daughter relationships, then this one is perfect. It is deeply moving, angering, tender while not being one-dimensional. You actually feel for all the characters involved. It is also a book that doesn’t leave you alone after you’ve finished reading it. 
What an amazing book, please add to your reading list!