Rating: 3/5

3.5

Those who have read the first two books in the 'Hap &amp; Leonard' series - and have become new fast-fans - may not agree with my take on installment #3. They may not notice much that's amiss in terms of the direction Lansdale goes with it. Part of me would agree with them. 

~ and part of me doesn't. Mainly because, as the novel moves into its final third, it starts feeling (to me, at least) lethargic. At first, I couldn't pinpoint why I was feeling that way. But then I looked back on something I suggested in my review of 'Mucho Mojo'. 

With this series, there appears to be a staple element of scenes that go over-the-top. Such scenes can be tricky for a writer; he may not always know when he has pushed credulity too far, even if we're still reminding ourselves as readers that 'It's just fiction, so relax.'

I had an easier time of it in the first two books. Yeah, the envelope was pushed here and there but I still didn't feel distracted when that happened - nor did I feel either book going off the rails. But I felt that through the last 3rd of 'The Two-Bear Mambo' (best title in the series so far). 

I didn't particularly buy into where the plot ultimately leads, much less its execution. But it's not just that. Leonard is here (finally) given (something of) a love interest - and I didn't really buy that either. ~ not the way it's depicted. ... There's a major supporting character who, oddly, gets short shrift just as he's ignited. ... One other main annoyance: This story has a lot of rain. A. Lot. Of. Rain. Somehow it feels like it never stops raining... which often makes the progression of things sluggish. Understandably so, but still, like I said, lethargic. 

I had much less trouble - almost none, in fact, with the earlier 2/3 of the story - even though the protracted set-up is a particularly-slow burn. A real plus-factor here is that 'TT-BM' contains some of Lansdale's juiciest, most authentic-sounding dialogue - and, as usual, he can be relied upon for pithy description.:
  The woman was sixty-ish, attractive in an "I've been hit by a truck" kind of way.
Moreover, the author here is typically sharp with race relations.:
  "Words like dick cause her consternation."
"Ah," I said.
"Consternation," Leonard said. "That's a big word for a police officer, ain't it?"
"Maybe," said Officer Reynolds, placing the file on top of the cabinet. "I also have a few nice phrases. Like, 'The nigra died slowly and painfully after a methodical beating.'"
All told, though, 'TT-BM' kept me more at a distance. I was pulled-in, but only until I wasn't. Won't stop me from continuing with #4, however. From the looks of it, Lansdale could have a few new, slick moves.