Rating: 5/5

This slender volume, which I first read in 2010, consists of three short stories about Brother Cadfael, and they thus finish the bedtime reading I have been doing for the last few months. These stories, as the twenty books in the series, are neat little mysteries, not always about murder, but ones that Cadfael, with his knowledge of the world and of his fellow man, is quite able to solve.

The first story is set in 1120, when Cadfael, a Welsh man-at-arms, is returning to England from the Continent. He and a clerk are asked to remain with their master for a few days, until a suit at law that he has against the Abbey of Saint Peter and Saint Paul at Shrewsbury comes to pass. Cadfael knows Shrewsbury well, having lived there at one time in his youth, and he is lucky, as he did not take passage from Normandy on the White Ship. The clerk with Cadfael turns out to have once been a monk; he had been given to his Abbey at Evesham at the age of five, and left at the age of fifteen to go out into the world; he and Cadfael discuss the fact that now he is ready to go home. In the course of the story, in which he solves a kidnapping and determines who tried to kill his master, he considers what to do with the rest of his life. The second and third stories are set in Shrewsbury, with Cadfael now a Monk; the first one is set in 1135, and concerns the gift, and then the theft, of silver candlesticks, and the second, set in the 1140s, concerns the attempted murder of the man collecting the Abbey rents, and the theft of those rents. 

And so I am done with Brother Cadfael, and leave him to finish out his life at the Abbey, while I turn to another series of books to read at bedtime.
------------------------------------------------
1st Recorded Reading: August 16th, 2010

This is a book that is not in the series of Brother Cadfael mysteries, as it is not a novel; it is a book that contains three separate stories about Brother Cadfael. As such, it is a wonderful little book; one can never have too much of Brother Cadfael, and I am sorry that the author, Ellis Peters (the pen name of Edith Pargeter, English fiction author and translator works from the Czech language into English) died in 1995, a year after the publication of the last mystery in the series.

The first story in the collection, A Light on the Road to Woodstock, is set in the autumn of 1120; not-yet-Brother Cadfael ap Meilyr ap Dafydd, in his early fifties, has just returned from being a man at arms in the war waged by Henry I of England to secure the union of England with Normandy; before that, he was in the First Crusade to the Holy Land, and had lived for several years in the Holy Land and in Syria as a sailor. He is now in the service of a nobleman, Roger Mauduit, who asks Cadfael and another man (a former Benedictine monk) to remain with him until he gets a suit settled that he has with the Abbey of Shrewsbury.

The second story, The Price of Light, is set at the Abbey in 1135. It is Christmastide, and a nobleman, Hamo FitzHamon of Lidyate, a harsh, brutal, alcoholic man, has reached a certain age, and has decided to get right with God not by reforming his life, but by giving the Abbey a magnificent pair of silver candlesticks. He arrives at the Abbey with his retinue, and the candlesticks are with ceremony installed at the high altar on Christmas Eve; however, the next day, they turn up missing, and Brother Cadfael learns what has happened to them, and decides according to his lights how to best deal with the situation.

Eye Witness, the third story in the collection, is set again at the Abbey in 1139, or (chronologically) between the third and the fourth books in the regular series. It is time for the rents to be collected on all of the numerous Abbey properties in the Foregate and in Shrewsbury, and Master William Rede, the chief steward of Brother Matthew the Cellarer of the abbey, is put out that Brother Anselm, Brother Matthew’s clerk, has fallen ill just at the time when the rent rolls are being made ready for the collection. He does allow, though, that young Brother Jabob, just four months into his novitiate, is an able clerk, though apparently too willing to see good in everyone and everything, even disreputable peddlers such as Warin Harefoot, who is living in the common guesthouse of the Abbey for a time. Brother Eutropius is also employed under Brother Matthew, and has been in the Abbey just two months; but nothing is known of him, as he is of mature age, taciturn, and keeps himself apart from the other brothers. The mystery in this book occurs when William Rede goes out to collect the rents, and is knocked over the head, robbed of the rents, and tossed into the river, with only the fortuitous presence of Madog of the Dead Book fishing on the river at the time saving him from drowning. Naturally, Brother Cadfael is able to uncover who did this dastardly deed.

I very much enjoyed this short story collection; would that there was more Brother Cadfael material for me to read!