Rating: 2/5

I had read about Simone Weil and how she was considered this great mystic in the Catholic church.
I'm not much into mysticism, but I read some of her writings and was intrigued.

Although she grew up in a household of agnostic Jews, she had a heart for the disadvantaged and the oppressed, giving up her upper middle class privilege and working with laborers. Working under the same conditions as them she developed tuberculosis. She refused treatment which led to her early demise. 

She had some sort of metaphysical experience where she encountered Christ, or believed to have done so. She left her Marxist organizations and became a kind of Church of One. 

In her letters she explains to the priest why she will not join the Catholic church. She says that the church was too exclusive and while others were excluded from the church she must remain on the outside as well. She did not believe that God's presence was in large numbers only small ones.

After reading her essays I arrive at the conclusion that she felt her relationship with God was intensely personal and there was simply no room for anyone else.

I also arrive at the conclusion that she did not believe that God reveals himself solely inside the Christian church but in all other religions, which would make her a Universalist.

On page 182 she says:

"The whole virtue of religious practices can be conceived of from the Buddhist tradition concerning the recitation of the name of the Lord...

...Religion is nothing else but this promise of God. Every religious practice, every rite, all liturgy is a form of the recitation of the name of the Lord and in principle should have a real virtue, the virtue of saving whoever devotes himself to performing it with desire."

She believes the Eucharist accomplishes this task as well as the Greek myths. She sees Christ in everything that is Beautiful. One would have to wonder at her definition of beauty considering how much rape and murder transpires in Greek Myth.

This is just the same old, "if you really believe in something, if you're really, really sincere, then it's true and will bring you close to God." Hogwash.

Weil mistakenly believed that her intense devotion and meditation would bring her to Christ but there is an element she ignores: her own sinful nature. On the one hand she goes on forever about her humility and unworthiness and yet definitely believes fervently that she has an ultra close connection to God.

She failed to understand that fallen man is separated from God by his sin that is only erased by the work of Jesus Christ by His dying on the cross and rising again three days later.

And if she had the intimate relationship with God she claimed, she would know that.