Rating: 3/5

Just ok, not emotionally entertaining enough. I liked some of the points made, but it could have been better.

I wasn’t pulled in to the characters. I didn’t see how they fell in love. There was a lot of emotional coldness and distance for a long time. She tried to make herself unattractive to him and then was hurt when he said he found her unattractive. She lied to him, making him think she had had many lovers and that his touch bored her. When he touched her breast, she said to him “must you make such a meal of it? Can’t you just get on with it?” Her intention was to make him dislike her so much that he would somehow get them out of the arranged marriage. (But he did not have that power.) So all this did was to create the problem of disgust and distaste in his mind. Words said can never be undone. Then for most of the book, she wants to tell him the truth, that she is a nervous virgin, but she keeps chickening out. When they are alone, he is so cold that she can’t bring herself to be truthful. This wasn’t fun.

In romance, I like to see a couple fall in love emotionally. This did not have that. Instead the couple gets along intellectually. They find a common interest in books and ideas, and that grows their relationship. I didn’t see emotional desire, so it wasn’t as fulfilling. All of a sudden she announces to herself I’m in love with him. That didn’t feel right. My thoughts were when did that happen? Where are those chapters? He did the same thing.

I liked the idea of addressing the topic of abuse. A man hits his wife in anger, then she forgave him and knew he would never do it again. It’s such a serious and emotionally complex subject. I would have liked more depth with that part of the story. The way it’s done here is just kind of lightly thrown in. It’s not really part of either character.

The one sex scene was kind of dull.

There are a few secondary stories that added some interest: Blanche the former mistress, the Company of Rogues Lucian’s mischievous friends, and Sparro/Robin the street urchin taken in by Lucien.

DATA:
Story length: 347 pages. Swearing language: mild, including religious swear words. Sexual language: none to mild. Number of sex scenes: 1 ½. Estimated number of sex scene pages: 6. Setting: 1815 England. Copyright: 1992. Genre: regency romance.