Rating: 2/5

I wanted to read this because I learned while watching Jeopardy that it was influential in Alaska achieving statehood. However, I found it hard to get into and mostly a slog. Picked up some interesting tidbits about life in Alaska, and the forces at play at the time they were trying to become a state. Not much of a real gripping plot line, though.

Close to the end, though, there was one major speech by Thor Storm, that really got my attention! It was sadly surprising that although it was written in 1958, it sounds like to could have been written today. Had to copy it down and share it here --

"It will soon be finished unless a miracle happens. I believe in miracles. Perhaps it will come from the women. If women ever realize their power and true strength they will govern the world, there will be another matriarchy. We have reached a depth of degradation such as the world has never known. Millions and billions of people are working like dumb slaves to pay for weapons which will destroy them. Every nation is armed against every other nation. Every country's economic stability is based on the destructive apparatus of war. War is a business greater then the steel business greater than the foolish automobile business greater than commerce food clothes education health life itself. War is Death and we bend our necks to it and our backs to it, slaves. Men in the courts of law and decent women in the schoolrooms try to combat with words or with punishment the gangs of children all over the world, boys and girls, armed with knives and clubs and bottles and small guns and bits of metal, fighting against each other. But the example is a world -- the entire planet Earth -- one huge gangland in a race to be armed with weapons deadlier than the mind of man has ever before dreamed of in its most hideous nightmares. Men in uniform and in neat tailored suits and men in turbans and robes and even in feathers and clubs, meet and discuss this, solemnly, but not reasonably. They say they do not want this, you want it, we do not want this, you want it, each to the other, pointing, like that famous old cartoon of that brilliant cartoonist, Nast. Nast. I learned of him when I was a very young man in Norway, it was he who introduced the cartoon donkey for the Democratic party so many years ago, and the elephant for the Republican, and tiger symbol for Tammany Hall. Perhaps it could be as simple as that. Another Nast. Another Jesus, with a resurrrection of the spirit. Clear-eyed simple men of good will. Now the greatest minds in the world, the magnificent brains of the scientists and the minds of inverntors and of men of business and of teachers and politicians and writers and rulers and manual workers are conentrated on creating more and more deadly instruments of war. They insist that these are not instruments of war -- they are instruments to prevent and forestall war. As well place a box of matches and stick of dynamite in the hands of a child to keep him quiet. This is childish, this is madness, this isn't proper behavior for Man, the highest form of animal life, the one creature endowed with the thing called the spirit." He rose with effort. "I must be maundering a little, I find I do occasionally, now." He walked through the room as though no one were there. "What a lovely world. The loveliest. We've had it, a gift, for million million years, and now we're throwing it away. A pity." He went to the doorway, almost blindly. "Alaska, the arsenal. It should be free."