Rating: 3/5

I recently reread this book and enjoyed it much more this time than I did when I read it before, so I was surprised at the amount of bad reviews it got. 

To be honest, you really have to be a Marion Chesney fan to read her romances. They're not the usual sort of romance wherein the angst goes on for days without end, with the heroine staring at herself in the mirror, beating on her breast, and crying out "woe is me!" Her plots are fast-paced and ever forward-propelling. A lot of people will think that her characters don't seem to be fully fleshed out in their motivations, or what there is of their motivations is pretty cut and dry. I think all those criticisms are valid, but there are few enough authors who DO write like Marion Chesney that her writing style--always combined with extremely detailed historical factoids--are is a little rare gem. Might I also remind people that everyone loves Jane Austen, but she didn't imbue her characters with an overabundance of internal commentary either--and that was just how it went. I suppose if you only live to a maximum of 40-50 years of age, you don't spend most of that time bemoaning the fates.

What I appreciated about Marion Chesney is that even though this book is old, it has Chesney's usual feminist commentary of the times. The thing about Marion Chesney is that she doesn't take any of her characters too seriously and whenever I read her books, I think to myself that I really like Marion Chesney because she's so clear-eyed about people and her humour is sometimes so tongue-in-cheek that it's delightful.

This book was a comment on the age that Chesney thought she was writing, and Henrietta was someone who aspired to work and work hard for her living. I really felt for her, because she was the only person who propelled the scheme ever onward. To me, it wasn't outside the realm of impossibility for a woman who eschewed men and marriage to be taken in by a rich, handsome man. They say it's as easy to fall in love with a poor man, but I disagree. It's actually easier to fall in love with a rich man, and for someone like Henrietta who had to push and scrape to get anywhere in the world--it would have been difficult for her to resist in today's world, much less two hundred years ago. Someone who was willing (even to fake) being nice to her and give her gifts that she needed (ice cream machine)--it would have taken a heart of stone to resist. 

Maybe I've read too many historical novels, because I do appreciate books that leave a lot unsaid so that the readers can formulate these thoughts and feelings for themselves. That's not to say that this type is better, but it's just something I personally prefer. If you are the sort of person who always wants a sequel or who always wants a book written, but from the male's point of view, this kind of book is not for you.