Rating: 4/5

When you live to be 90, you will end up seeing a lot of life and losing a lot during it. I came to this novel, a former school text in Canada, rather late in life, but I am glad I did, for it paints a picture of this country’s evolution from the late 19th to the mid 20th century from a woman’s perspective, and reveals the frightening aspects of growing old and insignificant.

Hagar Shipley is an unforgettable character; feisty, cruel, unrelenting and deathly honest. She loves her wastrel younger son but not her dull older one who looks after her well into his sixties. She deserts her husband, Bram, a not-too-successful farmer 14 years her senior, and only comes back to visit when he is dying. She in turn has had fate deal wicked blows to her: losing her mother at birth, her siblings during childhood; her storekeeper father leaves his estate to the town and not to his only surviving daughter, Hagar. Her biggest loss is that of her younger son, John, a tragedy that “transformed her into stone.” The stone angel is found in the Shipley family graveyard, and is a metaphor for Hagar’s transformation through grief and loss into this unbreakable, unreachable person.

The novel alternates between Hagar in her ninetieth year, seeking to escape from being consigned to a nursing home by her older son Marvin and his wife Doris who are running out of energy to care for her, and her random memories of her past. The story lines converge briefly when she is contemplating escape, in the present story, from the house she shares with Marvin and Doris, and in the former story, from Bram. The deterioration of her health and her mind is brilliantly drawn for her narrative starts to have gaps and becomes increasingly unreliable as the novel progresses, until she is finally consigned to a hospital after contracting pneumonia from running away unprotected. Her hospital stay is also well drawn and one gets a vivid picture of hospital wards in the 1950’s— thank God there has been more technological progress today! And it is in hospital that Hagar, the stone angel, makes her way back, by accepting some truths about herself, making amends for her recalcitrance, giving people credit for what they have done, and reaching beyond herself to help others.

I can understand why this was a seminal novel in the 1960’s in Canada. The writing is frank and does not pull any punches, even though the prose is poetic where warranted. The book throws the spotlight on a woman’s world, when much of the literature of the day was of the masculine perspective. The subject of aging and the challenges that it presents is thrust into our faces, and with our aging population, this book retains its currency today. What is sad however, is that although we have progressed technologically in the last half century since this novel was written, a woman in Hagar’s position may not be further ahead today as she was then—we still haven’t cracked the code on preserving the dignity of older people as they lose physical and mental capacity, although we have a host of pharmaceutical drugs to keep their hearts beating.