Rating: 1/5

This review is of “Love Me with Fury” by Janelle Taylor.

The book begins in April 1812, Liverpool, England. It is here that Lord Charles Hampton and his daughter, Lady Alexandria, the heroine of the book, are conducting one of their frequent arguments. Among the subjects they are arguing about: Charles wishes Alex to go to visit her Uncle Henry Cowling in America (Alex does not hold America in high regard). They also argue over Alex’s making all of the suitors Charles parades before her cry off. Charles wants Alex married for various reasons, some of which she doesn’t know about. After the argument, Alex goes to her favorite swimming hole to swim. For the first time, she does so in the nude. It would turn out to be a fateful decision.

Stephen Spencer Farrington, a.k.a. Joshua Steele, the hero of the book, comes upon Alex and they have dubious consent sex, which can be effectively called rape. (Alex is asleep when Stephen starts having sex with her. She never fully gives her consent for the act that occurs). Afterward, Alex beans Stephen with a rock.

After losing her innocence, Alex decides to go to America. She decides to return to England when reports of war are imminent. She never makes it on this trip. Alex is accosted and nearly raped by the captain of the ship she’s on; she is saved from this by “Justin”. While on his ship, Alex and “Justin” spend most of their time arguing or making love. When she overhears “Justin” plan to sell her to a brothel if she doesn’t reveal her secrets to him, Alex escapes back to Henry, in Philadelphia, where she discovers she’s pregnant. 

Henry connives with others to see Alex married by proxy and returned to England, where Alex gives birth to a son and discovers she is married-to Stephen/Joshua! When they both learn this, more arguing and recriminations occur. Finally, the truth is revealed, Alex forgives Stephen-now known as Spence-for all of his actions, and they have their Happily Ever After.

Upside: I finished it.

Downside: I’m a big Janelle Taylor fan, but this book was dreck from beginning to end. 

I REALLY didn’t like how Alex and Spencer met. The scene is basically a “she asked for it” scene, and it can be rightly classified as rape, which is a big turn-off for me in any romance novel. From there, things go steadily downhill. 

Mrs. Taylor may have viewed the actions of Alex and Stephen as “witty repartee’” but I saw it as two whiny, neurotic people constantly arguing with each other, which is not attractive to me, and made both Alex and Stephen thoroughly unlikeable. There is no depth to the characters-Mrs. Taylor never explains why a Lord of the Realm would do the things Stephen does, and when she tries to, the explanations are flimsy at best, clumsy at worst.

Sex: Alex and Stephen have sex multiple times. Most of which are full of enough purple prose to make Prince and the Minnesota Vikings happy. The scenes are not erotic nor exciting.

Violence: One of the ways “Joshua” gets information from other ship captains is the threat of castration. He threatens one with this act, who gives up the information; when one doesn’t, Joshua does castrate him. During one of their many arguments, Alex hits Joshua, who hits her back. Lots of shipboard violence involving ships being attacked and sank, most of this is not graphic.

Bottom Line: Most of Mrs. Taylor’s books are landlocked. Perhaps this book should have been as well.