Rating: 5/5

If not for goodreads I might never have read this extraordinary book, despite its acknowledged status as a classic. But only a fool would ignore the recommendations of readers as smart as Montambeau, Jason Pettus, and my good friend  Ben Harrison, and I'm not a complete idiot. So this past weekend I finally sat down to read Winesburg, Ohio, curious to see if it could possibly meet expectations.

God, I loved this book! In the two dozen or so linked vignettes that make up his account of the small town of Winesburg, Anderson gives voice to the lonely, the dispossessed, to those, whose own emotional inarticulacy has made them outsiders in their own town. In the book he uses the term "grotesques" to refer to his characters, a term I found unfortunate, because these people are no more grotesque than you or I. Each of us, at one point or another in our lives, has surely suffered from the same inability to communicate that affects the characters in Winesburg; each of us has experienced the status of being an outsider, felt that there is nobody else on the planet that speaks the same language as we do. There is a universal recognizability to the characters of Winesburg that contributes greatly to the book's emotional power.

Some readers react negatively to what they perceive as an overwhelmingly negative tone throughout the book. I think this is a fundamental misreading. Although Anderson's portrayal of small-town America as it changes from an agrarian to an industrial society is undoubtedly dark, it is by no means hopeless. By allowing his surrogate, the young reporter George Willard, to pass on the stories of the lonely denizens of Winesburg, he is affirming the importance of the stories, and of their protagonists. There is a sweetness in the telling of these stories that is reminiscent of Carson McCullers in "The Ballad of the Sad Cafe" or "The Member of the Wedding".

I think the reason I react so strongly to the stories in Winesburg, Ohio is partly because I can identify with the outsider status of many of the protagonists. Not so much in my current life (though there are those occasional days), but there was that first year in high school, without a doubt the most miserable year of my entire life. Having skipped several grades in primary school, grown up in a household where my title of golden boy was unquestioned, I was completely unprepared for the jungle of a boys' boarding school in which I was two years younger than all of my classmates. That first year was Lord of the Flies brutal, completely miserable, and probably the most formative of my life. Two important lessons I took away from it were confidence in my own ability to survive a tough situation, and - crucially - the capacity for empathy. If you've ever suffered as an outsider, I think there are two ways it can turn out - the resentment can turn inward and fester, or - more positively - the experience leaves you with a life-long ability to empathize with those in an outsider role. Ultimately, there is a compassion at the center of Winesburg, Ohio that is anything but pessimistic, and that gives these stories their extraordinary power.

Winesburg, Ohio completely earns its status as a classic. If you haven't already read it, I urge you to do so. Soon.