Rating: 3/5

The ancient Greeks treated tragedy and comedy as separate genres. But this Greek drama is a hybrid. Tragedy on the large and small canvas; comedy from individual characters. Such contrasts can strengthen one's reaction to both extremes, but for me, this particular book might have worked better if de Bernières had focused primarily on one or the other.

I see its charm. This is a feelgood book, filled with bucolic delights, entertaining Characters (borderline caricatures and slapstick), and saccharine sun. But they are contrasted with war, loss, and the pragmatics of making do. Humour, love, and music soften the graphically portrayed toll of war and tectonics.

Some of the writing is beautiful, and some of it is funny. I was captivated by the opening paragraph and loved the first chapter. But I was bored by the second chapter, and nervous when I started the third. The final, near contemporary, chapters were simultaneously predictable and implausible. It’s as if de Bernières wanted a happy(ish) ending, but not a happy middle, and went to ludicrous lengths to achieve it.

That patchy experience, with many different voices, styles, and genres, was repeated throughout: a bitty book, hence a bitty review. Like a visitor to the island, I ambled from beautiful beaches to rocky outcrops, along smooth pavements and disintegrating paths, from mountains to fields, from tourist towns to ancient villages, ever unsure of what I would encounter next. Maybe the rose-tinted hues of sangria would have helped. 

I think this is probably an objective 4*, but my experience ranged from 2* to 4*, averaging 3*. 
 
The Distorting Lenses of History and Ideology
 
“History repeats itself, first as tragedy, and then again as tragedy.”
 
More… (no plot spoilers). 
Cephallonia was settled so long ago that a veil blurs the boundary between myth and history. It is sometimes claimed as the home of Odysseus, and today, the enormous ancient olive trees have an air of “patient omniscience”.
 
The backdrop is a detailed history of the Italian and then German occupation in WW2, including international geopolitics and detailed battle tactics. Not my thing. Fortunately, de Bernières tells the story from local perspectives, as well as that of global victors.
 
Italian soldier, Carlo Guercio, believes history should be “the anecdotes of the little people” (he himself is physically huge). Dr Iannis is little in the grand scheme of things, but a figure of towering importance in his village. He spends many years writing a detailed history of the island, but is frustrated that his own passion makes objectivity impossible, creating “not so much a history as a lament. Or a tirade.” And then history “happens before my very eyes”. Later, his daughter, Pelagia, continues his work, putting her own spin on things.
 
Many characters are deeply conscious of their roots. But the atrocities of war, driven by persuasive demagogues touting totalitarian ideologies (communist and fascist) transform minds, hearts, loyalties, and lives forever.

People are separated from their heritage, their future, their families, and even their sanity. If you believe strongly enough in your cause, “Death is not an enemy, but a brother”, whether to embrace for its own sake, or to save others.

In the final chapters, capitalism, tourism, and hedonism herald further transformation for those on the island. 

 
Love of All Kinds at its Heart
 
“Love delayed is lust augmented.”
“Love itself is what is left over when being in love has burned away… But sometimes the petals fall away and the roots have not entwined.”

More… (no plot spoilers). 
Love is at the heart of this story. It has a big heart, and central to it all is the widowed Doctor Iannis and his daughter Pelagia (seventeen at the start). I loved them both, and their “gentle idyll with its mock contretemps, its tranquil routines, and its congenial eccentricities”.
 
There is young love, old love, a love triangle, parent-child love, love for a stranger’s child, unrequited taboo love, love across other boundaries (“a dark secret that everybody knew”), love for animals (Psipsina, the pine marten, and Pelagia’s goat – shades of Gerald Durrell), love of country, and love of music (opera in the latrine, and the eponymous mandolin). 
 
Antonio Corelli is musician more than soldier. He plays his mandolin with “nightingales in his fingers” and “a symphony of expressions was passing over his face”. Pelagia realises music is “an emotion and intellectual Odyssey”. There is a whole chapter where he muses on his instrument being a metaphor for the woman he loves.
 
The hopeful message is that however hard life is, love for someone, or something, makes it bearable - as long as that love is not for excessive food or drink, or for a dangerous ideology. 

 
L’Omosessuale
 
“I am mentioned almost nowhere, but where I find myself, I find myself condemned.”

More… (no plot spoilers). 
Several early chapters explore the inner agony of a man’s secret love for a straight man. These are powerful, painful passages. 

Later, it felt like more of an occasional, external, but nevertheless crucial plot point. It was just one of the ways the unpredictable variability of style, tone, and content unbalanced me. 
 
•	“I am a foreigner within my own nation, an alien in my own race. I am as detested as cancer.”
•	“To me the company of a woman is painful because it reminds me of what I am not.”
•	“A guilty man wishes only to be understood, because to be understood is to appear to be forgiven… No one knows that I am guilty [gay], and nonetheless I wish to be understood.”

 
The Changing Role of Women
 
The story stretches from 1941 to 1993, a period of great social change on the island, especially for women. 

More… (no plot spoilers). 
At the start, the doctor has almost scandalously progressive ideas, so Pelagia is educated, independently minded, and won’t get a dowry. This, at a time when marriage is likely to be “childbirth and relentless work”, with “no freedom until widowhood… when the community would turn against her”. 

Yet in middle age, Pelagia finds herself disapproving of how Antonia juggles career and motherhood. There is no answer to having it all.

 
Excusing Evil?
 
There’s a chapter titled “The Good Nazi”. 

More… (no plot spoilers). 
It’s easy to label people and events in binary terms, but simplification masks uncomfortable truths. A strength of this book is the conflict created in the reader’s mind by the compassion used when portraying those who commit unspeakable acts. 

Günter Weber and others are seen, in part, as a victims of circumstance or gullibility, “maddened and broken by his own dutiful atrocities”, or finding redemption through sacrifice. 
 
Perhaps this generosity reflects the islanders’ tradition of being “hospitable even to those who do not merit it”. They ridicule, prank, inconvenience, and try to exploit the Italian invaders (the Germans, not so much), wary of being thought collaborators, but mostly coming to mutual, somewhat uneasy acceptance. 

They grudgingly feed the hand that bites them:
“This is Cephallonian meat pie… except that thanks to your people, it doesn’t have any meat in it.”

 
Sesquipedalian Vocabulary
 
How can anyone be “hyperbolically bisexual”?!

More… (no plot spoilers). 
I love rich and unusual words, but at times, especially in the first quarter, de Bernières was over-generous with his profusion of obscure, and sometimes invented words, mostly via the delightful, multi-lingual doctor: stalagmitic, prestidigitation, effulgent, iatric mystique, eleusinian, iconostasis, stertoriously, corybantic, sternutatory, for example.

 
Satirising a Demagogue
 
A leaflet trashing Mussolini is anonymously written, printed, and distributed on the island. I read it in the final days of the US election of 2016, and finished my review the day Donald J Trump was declared President Elect - a man whose candidacy was first treated as comedy, but now feels more like tragedy:
 
More… (no plot spoilers). 
•	He “believes his own propaganda”. 
•	Something “is not true, even though everyone who knew Him in those days remembers it perfectly”. 
•	He “diverted funds… for His own election campaign”. 
•	“He has pretended to be a Catholic.” 
•	He gerrymanders, appoints only sycophants, oppresses minorities, and approves of torture. 
•	“He has assumed infallibility and encouraged the people to carry His image in marches, as though He were saint.” 
•	“He agreed completely with the last person he spoke to.” 
•	“Everything in his speeches is contradicted somewhere by another speech.” 
•	But “the speeches of a lunatic are treated as sacred texts”.

 
National(istic) Stereotypes
 
The first batch were mildly amusing and the style was reminiscent of Yes, Prime Minister, for example: Hacker: Don't tell me about the press. I know exactly who reads the papers: the Daily Mirror is read by people who think they run the country; The Guardian is read by people who think they ought to run the country; The Times is read by people who actually do run the country; the Daily Mail is read by the wives of the people who run the country; the Financial Times is read by people who own the country; The Morning Star is read by people who think the country ought to be run by another country; and The Daily Telegraph is read by people who think it is.
Sir Humphrey: Prime Minister, what about the people who read The Sun?
Bernard: Sun readers don't care who runs the country, as long as she's got big tits.
.
But as they kept coming, they lost their sheen. 

More… (no plot spoilers). 
The well-travelled and well-read doctor opines:
 
“Germany is taking everything, the Italians are playing the fool, the French have run away, the Belgians have been overrun whilst they were looking the other way, the Poles have been charging tanks with cavalry, the Americans have been playing baseball, the British have been drinking tea and adjusting their monocles, the Russians have been sitting on their hands except when voting unanimously to do whatever they are told.”
 
“Italians always act without thinking… A German plans a month in advance what his bowel movements will be… and the British plan everything in retrospect, so it always looks as though everything occurred as they intended. The French plan everything whilst appearing to be having a party, and the Spanish… well, God knows.”
 
An unnamed narrator observes 1953:

“Great Britain was less wealthy than it is now, but it was also less complacent, and considerably less useless. It had a sense of humanitarian responsibility and a myth of its own importance that was quixotically true and universally accepted merely because it believed in it… It had not yet acquired the schoolboy habit of for waiting months for permission from Washington before it clambered out of its post-imperial bed, put on its boots, made a sugary cup of tea, and ventured through the door.”
 
And near the end, a teenage boy compares girls:

“Italian girls were best, and English girls were useless unless inebriated. German girls were technicians, Spanish girls uncontrollable and melodramatic, and French girls were so vain you had to pretend to be in love with them from the start.”

 
Enchanting Isle - Quotes
 
“An island so immense in antiquity that the very rocks themselves exhale nostalgia and the red earth lies stupefied not only by the sun, but by the impossible weight of memory.”
 
More… (no plot spoilers). 
Since ancient times, “the island had been a prodigy of wonders” with “a saint unique to itself, and it was as if his numinous power was too great and too effulgent to be contained within himself.”
 
The Acqui Division “surrendered to its charms, had sunk back into its cushions, closed its eyes and become enclosed in a gentle dream. We forgot to be soldiers.”

“Mountains… ringed to infinity by the churning masses of the sea.”
 
 
Other Quotes
 
“A gibbous moon slid filaments of eerie silver light through the slats of the shutters.”

More… (no plot spoilers). 

•	“The extreme vestal chastity of this light.”

•	“Short of words even in his inner speech… a prodigy of slow endurance.” (Alekos, an old goat herd.)

•	An “anthropomorphised promissory note.” (Father Arsenios.)

•	“The innumerable smiles of the waves”, by Aeschylus, “who obviously never went to sea in the winter”. 

•	“It is impossible to escape those monsters that devour us from the inner depths.” The only solution is to wrestle with them, or ignore them.

•	“Symmetry is only a property of dead things” and buildings. “Symmetry is for God, not for us.”

•	“The Morse code of virgin light glancing after the perpetual motion of the waters.”

•	“Unravelling wool that had kinked and interwound upon itself in an attempt to resume the knotted configurations of its former state. Pelagia did not understand why wool should be nostalgic in this way.”

•	“They became lovers in the old-fashioned sense” (chaste, but planning for the future).

•	“His mouth working wordlessly like an improvident fish that a wave has tossed unsuspectingly on a spit of sand.”

•	Tanks “perspiring with the inhuman smell of oil and heated steel.”

•	“A night that was made sepulchral by the attenuated and dancing shadows of trees and men that were cast out by the leaping orange pyres.”

•	“The ancient olive… made obeisance to the ground and split cleanly… before springing upright and shaking its branches like a palsied Nazarene.”

•	“I am my own ghost… I have been eaten up like bread… All my happiness was smoke.”

•	“A man who smelled of exactly the correct admixture of virility and aftershave.”

•	“The silent and deserted remains of the little houses that had all the appearance of regret and loneliness.”

 

Why I read this
In accordance with comment #25: here, I read this and Kevin read Galapagos. 

Image source for tragedy/comedy masks:
http://aguera.com.br/wp-content/uploa...