Rating: 3/5

Huh. This certainly didn't age well, did it?

And I get it. You can't really judge an old ass play by today's moral standards.
Except you kind of can.

 

So. Kate is kind of a screechy bitch who doesn't want to get married. Her father (idiotically) proclaims that he won't allow his younger daughter, Bianca, who is beautiful &amp; chill, to get married until someone takes Kate off of his hands.
Along comes Petruchio, who doesn't give a shit how awful Kate is as a human being, he just wants her fat dowry. 

 

Meanwhile, there's this whole side story about the suitors who are fighting over Bianca.
It includes Shakespeare's prerequisite switcheroo of two people who each pretend to be the other, ushering in hijinks that could only happen back in the days before the internet &amp; photo IDs.
Lucentio: Hey, I've got an idea, Tranio! Let's go 10 miles down the road, and I'll pretend to be a Latin tutor so I can get close to the hot chick. Then you pretend to be me and work on her daddy!
Tranio: Fantastic idea, boss! Can't think of a thing that could go wrong!

Of course, Bianca isn't the shrew, so this really isn't about her or the idiots who love her for her docile beauty. This is about Kate. 
Poor, feisty, doomed Kate.

 

I know this is supposed to be a comedy, but Petruchio is fucking awful. Just the worst. He kind of tricks Kate's dad into thinking that Kate actually wants him, makes a complete ass of himself at the wedding, and then drags his new bride off for a honeymoon on the Isle of Stockholm Syndrome. 

At which point, Petruchio doesn't allow Kate to eat or sleep until she becomes so hungry and woozy she agrees with whatever nonsensical thing comes out of his mouth.
TA-DA! HE WINS! 
Kate is no longer a shrew.
She comes when he calls, destroys articles of clothing she likes when he tells her they are ugly, and even gives an impassioned speech to the other (less biddable) wives - scolding them for not being grateful &amp; obedient to their lord and masters. 
I may or may not have thrown up a bit during that part. &lt;--I'll let you decide

 

It all ends blissfully with Petruchio getting patted on the back by the other men whilst on his way to get laid. Those other poor saps are now looking at their wives sideways, because thanks to a lack of zzz's and nutrients, Petruchio now has the most subservient woman of them all.
Huzzah!
And don't we all love a good Happily Ever After?

Best part is that this is a play within a play. 
Yes, this adorable story is actually being acted out to benefit an assy practical joke. 
At the beginning of the story, there's this lord who runs across a drunk hobo. Ok. He's actually a tinkerer, but anytime you fall asleep outside due to alcohol, I say it's hoboesque enough to earn you the label.
Anyway. I guess because this rich Renaissance frat boy didn't have anything better to do, so he decided to it would be hi-larious to get this guy they found in the ditch to believe he's a crazy nobleman who only thinks he's a boozy bum. The lord and his servants then go through some elaborate shit to pull off the world's most tasteless prank, including having his page dress up like a noblewoman and make out with this guy. 
I just...
What the fuck, Shakespeare?!

I listened to this as the full-cast audio version, which I absolutely recommend as a lot of fun.