Rating: 1/5

So many things wrong with this story! First and foremost, I HATE having my intelligence insulted! I'm supposed to believe that an 18-year-old fresh from school, (the h, when the story starts) could without any connections get a prestigious job as an executive secretary and travel all over the world with her real estate boss, in on all his business/property deals, and later also has time to be an amateur archaeologist who travels to Rome on digs?

OH, COME ON!!!!

That being said, the whole story is just way too over-the-top! The h had so many toxic people in her life, it bordered on the ridiculous! We'll start with the H, the young Greek man she meets while in Greece with her boss (having business with his uncle), who falls for her within days, asks her to marry him and - at 26 - should have realized that at 18 and being a modern English girl, not a traditional Greek one, she would not be ready for that, despite his good looks and the money he'd one day inherit. She said she didn't want to ever get married (with good reason, considering her family) and if he had any sense at all, he would have considered that time might make the difference and be patient. Instead, his pride was wounded, and he later became determined to change her mind, took off for England, only to find she had married a rich old man! Assuming she was a gold digger, he started hating her, got married ASAP strictly for a son and heir, didn't know his wife was a 304, lived only for his little son (sure it was his???), divorced his faithless wife, who found she was terminally ill and drove her car over a cliff, taking the boy with her! After that, he determined to have revenge on the h, because if she had married him, none of this would have happened!

Melodrama to the extreme! I once read an HP book where the h, thinking the H had abandoned her, married a guy on the rebound who turned out to be a creep that made her miserable, and she later determined to get revenge on the H because, had he never left her she never would have married that guy, and so on. I thought it was DUMB then and I think it's DUMB now! Instead of blaming someone else for your bad choices, take some accountability and put the blame where it belongs, on yourself! The fact that the H was so foolish that he married someone he hardly knew and made a terrible mistake wasn't the h's fault!

(A sad reflection on modern society: screw up your life bigtime and blame everyone else for it, never poor little you! No wonder the world's falling apart.)

As for other characters, it's a real Loser Fest! The h's father is a crummy crap pile who lies, cheats on his wife, gambles their money away, and always expects to be forgiven, and always does the same things again! And her dim bulb of a mother keeps forgiving the jerk, and each time he hurts her, cries, faints, gets weak spells, and acts like something out of a bad Victorian novel! When this spineless nincompoop kicks the bucket, it's like "good riddance", and in no time at all, the hubby she loved so much found another woman and made a new life for himself, without giving her (or the h) another thought! Meanwhile the h had sacrificed herself by marrying a horrible, horny old man who paid her father's gambling debts and (lucky for her) got hit by a lorry and croaked right after the ceremony, so she never had to do the deed with him (and a ton of Viagra, I'll bet)!

Even worse, dear old dad told the H (when he came looking for her) that she married a rich old guy and since this was only a short time after the H had proposed, he really grew to hate her!

Then, there's her older sister, whose marriage went kaput, which put her in misery mode for a long time and was the reason (along with her parents' joke of a relationship) the h didn't want to get married. Big sister never came around much, until she decided she wanted to start her own business and looked to kid sister to finance it, with the money she inherited when the old guy croaked without making a will. The h gives it to her and determines to give the rest away to charity, but for some reason, when the story continues seven years after this whole mess, she still hasn't gotten around to that, which tells you something.

There's also her boss, who could easily be crowned "King Creep" because despite being a notorious womanizer, he puts on an "I want to settle down" act and keeps proposing to the h, hoping to get his hands on that money so he can recover from bad investments he made. That having failed, he takes her to Greece on business, accepts money from his business associate (the H, who invited them to his island home) and abandons the h there, to be a prisoner of the man who once loved and now hates her! The H informs her that she's trapped and the only way she can escape is by marrying him and giving him a son to make up for the one he lost, then he'll let her go and he'll keep their child!

The melodrama just keeps coming!!!

After this you get the usual stuff: forced seduction, declarations of hate from the h (despite orgasms), the H claiming he despises her as well, but adores her body, the h refusing to admit she adores his body as well, the H talking about her first marriage like she was a gold-digger and assuming the joke was on her and she didn't get the money, the h having too much pride to tell him the truth, either about the marriage or the money, the h determined to escape, the H triumphant that there is no escape, on and on and on.

Naturally, the h will find a means to escape and (also naturally) another man (or in this case, two) is involved. One is a neighbor's nephew who she has coffee dates with, who unwittingly helps by posting a letter to her sister (which for convoluted reasons doesn't arrive for months) since he doesn't know the details of her forced marriage (but suspects something). The other is the H's unscrupulous servant, eager for money and a chance to start a business and agrees to get her a boat ride off the island in exchange for a valuable antique bracelet (more about that later). Both attempts go awry, and soon (big surprise) the h finds herself going from hate to love, though pride won't let her admit this, so she'll confess to lust, pity, compassion, indifference (as he'll no longer believe hatred) but never love, until he says he loves her, and with his going on about sex, fun in bed, wanting a son and then she can leave, etc., there's fat chance of that.

There's also fat chance of anyone believing these two could ever have a HEA, since when they're not arguing or getting naked, there's little emotion between them. Even when he talks more in depth about the tragic death of his son, it came off more like two people passing the time of day, not caring if they ever see each other again.

The ending was so contrived you want to shake your head and say, "Oh please, come up with something better than this!"

To me, the best part of the book was when the h, along with two archaeological students who live on the island, dig up a long hidden burial site (hence the valuable bracelet) and make plans for further diggings and research, which she planned to talk to the H about. Yet when that (finally) happened, it all fell flat. The whole thing was left hanging. I would have thought she'd offer to use the money she got from the dead old coot to finance everything herself, but I guess this never occurred to her, more's the pity.

This book would have worked so much better if time had gone by, they had gotten closer, and maybe she'd have fallen pregnant. (Since that didn't happen and there was no birth control involved, I'm thinking there was a problem somewhere.) Then, just when it looked like they'd be a real couple in a happy marriage, her sister gets her letter (that she'd forgotten about by then), a "rescue" is underway, he thinks she still planned to leave, and more trouble begins. It's better than the lame story we get here.

I should have written these books!

BTW: the whole mess could have been avoided if both had realized at first what the h knew in hindsight: that had they met a few years later, she'd have been more mature and probably would have accepted his proposal. They should have agreed to put the marriage thing on hold for a time, at 18 and 26 there was no rush. At 22 and 30 they could have walked down the aisle to wedded bliss, more's the pity.