Rating: 3/5

According to the quotations on the back cover of the 1983 Ballantine paperback, The New York Times hailed John Gardner as "a major American writer whose promise...seems unlimited". The work itself, The Sunlight Dialogues has also been praised by Time as "A compassionate portrait of America in the uneasy 60's" and "A novel in the grand line of American fiction...a superb literary achievement" by The Boston Globe. Although it isone of his better known works, Gardner remains best known for Grendel, a retelling of the Beowulf legend from the point of view of the monster.

Since his death in 1982 few seem to remember and much less read John Gardner. He died in 1982 near his home in Pensyllvania, in a tragic accident: he lost control over his motorcycle and hit the dirt shoulder. He was just 49 years old, and his novel Mickelsson's Ghosts which was published that year became his last. His fiancee stated that he had been drinking the night before the accident, and the autopsy revealed a a blood alcohol level of 0,075 - just shy of the legal limit for driving at 0,080. Tragedy ended John Gardner's life, but in a way also began it - as a boy he rode a tractor and ploughed the fields, while his younger brother Gilbert sat in the rear on the cultipacker. Gilbert fell, and John turned to see his brother being crushed under the wheels of the cultipacker. Both boys knew that Gilbert should never have been riding in the back, but everybody agreed that John could never have stopped in time to prevent his death. At that time, John was only twelve years old. After this incident he would not work on the tractor again; he would park it in the field, sit under its shade and write novels.

The Sunlight Dialogues is a long and meandering work, originally published in 1972. It is set in Batavia, a town in Western New York, a place which the author knows well because he was born and grew up there. The novel features an extensive cast of characters, with a list and family trees provided at the beginning. The novel osciliates around two distinct personalities - chief police officer Fred Clumly, and a nameless vargrant who requests to be called "The Sunlight Man". Batavia police has arrested The Sunlight Man for writing the word "LOVE" across the highway, and suspect him for murder; he escapes from the town jail, but keeps confronting Clumly and talking to him. The men contrasts their views and stances on a variety of issues. Sunlight Man's vargrancy is contrasted with Clumly's traditionalism and prejudices - since he has a beard and looks like a hippy he must be from California, a place which Clumly detests. Sunlight speaks in parables, and shows fluency in almost every field of knowledge, from history to mythology; his presence affects the whole town, which provides for a myriad of side stories and subplots devoted to the characters provided in the beginning.

Gardner makes a formidable effort into creating individual characters and a vividly detailed setting as a stage for their interactions, and pursuing the undercurrents which run through the society of Batavia. Still, the novel is very much set in the time it was published - it attempts to reflects the uneasy time the country was going through then. In 2012 it feels dated, and the disturbing effect it once had on its readers is mostly gone; it feels largely provocative, and unnecesarrily so. The writing is obviously polished and well-crafted - yet the novel lacks the aspect of timelesness, something which would detach it from the chain of the period it was written in and allowed to stand on its own. The story is creative enough but takes way too long to get anywhere; the character of The Sunlight Man is compelling, but as a whole it does not quite work. Still, it managed to make me interested in the author's other works, and remember him, his life and work.

For those interested, here is the beginning of The Sunlight Dialogues read by John Gardner's son, Joel.
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/st...