Rating: 3/5

I've been on an older fantasy kick -- stuff from my younger days or a bit before. I don't really know how to explain it, but there's a particular feel a lot of it has. There's a sort of particular delight about the world building that tends to be more concise because the books were usually shorter back then. (not that I dislike an epic fantasy tome that details the world almost to the point of exhaustion when I'm in the mood for that) There's a love for the outcast protagonist that acknowledges that they aren't accepted by everyone -- but they do end up in a found family. The writing can be beautiful but, as with the world building, can only go on so long. I dunno. It's immersive, yet the length and the style of the time period seems to mean that there will be more gaps to fill in with my own imagination and logic leaps. I don't know that I'm explaining this well at all, but there is definitely a feel and I've been reveling in it. The recent McKillip and Jones novels I read were perfect. Then I came to this Tepper...

It WAS a fascinating book and I do think I will read more because I want to know what happens (also, I own the whole fist trilogy and one book in a later trilogy). But wow, it started off with one of my least favorite tropes -- one I'd forgotten was more common back then. So, this is first chapter stuff, but we almost immediately begin with an adult teacher having a sexual relationship with his fifteen year old student. Now, icked out as I was, I did try and make some excuses. The whole thing is referencing the all-male boarding school experience. There was even a throwaway line about how the main character is being bullied because he didn't want to sleep with another student. The place feels a bit medieval, so maybe people are considered adults at fifteen...? But no, events show that the older man is definitely a predatory, pedo villain. Sigh. There isn't a single well-adjusted adult gay character referenced in the book and the protagonist, despite his gross relationship, is apparently so innocent that he doesn't seem to really know what sex is, though people keep explaining that he will be interested in women some day.

Yes, I realize it was a product of its time, but since I'm not writing an academic paper about the book, I can judge it against the things I can read today that don't have gross tropes so tightly woven into the plot.

Other than that, the protagonist is kind of a boring blank slate, so it's a good thing the people around him and the world is a whole lot more interesting. The book also really could have used a glossary. Even just a list of what the powers are.

I guess this makes it sound like I hated it since I've only complained so far. Without the homophobic feeling stuff this would have been a solid four star read. The game rule stuff was fun, learning about the powers and land was fascinating, the beginnings of the twist were engaging... And, this is Tepper, so there was definitely going to be a Message in the plot, but this is a pretty short novel so that didn't take over the narrative as much as it sometimes does in her longer works.