Rating: 5/5

I didn't plan to read the "later" Foundation books because most attempts to reinvigorate an early, highly successful series (and except for "Lord of the Rings," no original series of the '50s and '60s was as successful as the Foundation trilogy) usually leave you somewhat embarrassed for the author.

Not here. Rather than trying to reanimate the sword-and-hoopla of much of 1950s SF, Asimov writes us a 450-page logical argument. You might think that would be enough to give Socrates a headache, but, as the master storyteller he always was, Asimov keeps you hanging on every unexpected but perfectly reasoned turn of plot.

By "logical argument" I mean a warring of intensely bright minds trying to one-up each other's motivations and uncover the structure behind a constantly reorganizing viewpoint of political and social organization. 

Roughly 200 years after the original stories, the Foundation has taken peaceful control of nearly half the galaxy's million colonized worlds. The Foundation believes that the secretive Second Foundation has been exterminated, but we (of course) know that it still lurks on the former Empire home world of Trantor, controlling the unfolding fate of the galaxy through subtle but benevolent mind-tuning. 

There's no need to list more facts, because this is not a fact-based novel. It's a constantly unfolding and interfolding of ideas through the truly deft use of mind games. And it works only because Asimov created superb characters who speak to each other not in didactic paragraphs but in a genuine attempt to explain the situation to each other. We, the readers, are but eavesdroppers.

One thing from the original series remains the same, and it's always seemed both silly and endearing to me. Despite the fact that the galaxy is home to a quintillion human beings (or, one royal shitload squared), their fate always hangs on tiny a handful of isolated minds, who meet two or three at a time out behind some planet where any two spaceships can always conveniently find each other, like neighborhood rudeboys dreaming up a heist in the parking lot of the Pep Boys' warehouse.