Rating: 4/5

The Cheese and the Worms is a ground breaking exposé into the field of microhistory and remains a foundational work for historians today. Ginzberg used the story of Menocchio, a sixteenth century miller who was twice prosecuted and ultimately condemned by the inquisition for holding and preaching egregiously heretical beliefs. As a miller and a literate man, Menocchio had a greater exposure to people and ideas than the average peasant-farmer, and apparently also a keen intellect which he used to ponder the world, and the Catholic church’s teachings. Ginzberg uses his story to attempt to reveal what ideas were floating around in the general peasant population concerning the reformation and Catholic and protestant doctrine. The tale Ginzberg weaves has tantalizing possibilities, but it suffers from two general flaws. The most grave of which is that he clearly had too much information for a concise paper, but far too little evidence for a satisfying monograph. What information Ginzburg mined from the inquisition records was reduced, reused, and recycled to the point where the reader finds himself continually double checking his page to make sure he isn’t re-reading. Furthermore, making 62 chapters out of 128 pages seems to be little more than the classic and transparent undergraduate technique to fill space. In his defense, the lack of pages comes not from a lack of research, but from a limited information pool – it seems that too many documents have been lost to time. Ginzberg also patents what has become the downfall of microhistories by writing up to chapter 61 on just Menocchio, and then in the next to last chapter attempting to explain (unconvincingly) how this single man illustrates a sampling of the greater picture. He attempted to bolster his claim by introducing a new character (also a miller), but quite frankly it just doesn’t cut it. In this case, Ginzberg’s claim seems particularly odd as he built so much of his argument on the fact that Menocchio was not representative of the average peasant as he was clearly someone who thought for himself, collating authored passages with his own distinctive observations and whimsical notions. While this technique of microhistory is certainly an interesting approach to doing history, I remain as of yet unconvinced that it is a wholly viable method because of the problems it creates for historians when they arrive at the end of the book and find themselves forced to justify their musings by answering the ever-crucial “so what?” factor. When Ginzberg found himself in this said predicament, his resolution was to grasp at straws and attempt to make broad claims for which his work did not lay the proper foundation to support. That said, as the first in its field, and as a highly intriguing study about a most interesting man, the work merits reading and re-reading – once for content and a second for technique.