Rating: 2/5

2.5 stars.

I was recommended this book a long time ago and only recently did I just decide to pick it up on abebooks.com for a cheap price so I could read it! Unfortunately I got an ex library copy which I don't love too much but that has nothing to do with my rating here or on abebooks.

Anyway, about the book. It does start out a bit slow with the two main children, Sean and Annie, still at home with their sick dying mother. There is hardly any food, they are extremely poor, and are only barely getting by. It's not until the two kids meet an unexpected friend and get the chance to go to America where their father went (he was trying to work and buy land so they could start over in life with a better future) when the story picks up a little. They live through a shipwreck, crosses America in a wagon, and meets all sorts of people on the way, both good and bad. (Or if it's Little Luke, he's wholesome) 

I did find that the adventures they went through were light reads, so nothing scary or dark. Sometimes the things the characters did or the way the plot twisted seemed a bit unrealistic to me, or something would happen just the right way so nearly everything worked out. 
I was disappointed that Fiddler  didn't make it through the shipwreck since he was really nice and I liked him immediately.

The twist of gold, also known as the torc, was kind of strange. It was the last possession the children brought along with them and though they lost it tons of times (being stolen, etc) it always seemed to come back around to them. There is a little bit of superstition involved with it as sometimes the characters say that if the right owners have it with them, they have good luck, and if they stole it, they'll have bad luck. To me this was a little weird and I thought the adventure parts of crossing America or the ship was more interesting to read.

Content:
Language: some dam* and h*ll, and one man says ni**er twice to another man
Sexy Stuff/Romance: N/A
Violence: A shipwreck, guns are pointed but never shot, one man is bound hand and foot, and some characters are abandoned in the desert while on the wagon trail. Little to no detail at all.
Other: Lots of references to Catholicism. The book makes everyone Catholic which is a little unrealistic.