Rating: 5/5

The sonnets of William Shakespeare make for a reading experience that is at once similar to and different from the experience of reading the plays. On the one hand, there is the same endlessly inventive, wonderfully evocative use of figurative language; one revels in the vivid figures of speech, the insights into human character, the catholicity of Shakespeare’s poetic imagination, whether one is reading a sonnet or a play. And yet, on the other hand, in a sonnet all those Shakespearean gifts are not tethered to a story, or to stage directions, or to the demands of the Elizabethan theatre generally. Some readers find the sonnets to be a purer expression of Shakespeare’s poetic ethic; others miss the dramatic context within which the plays situate the poetry. For me, the sonnets are neither better nor worse than the plays: they are interestingly different, and that interesting difference is enough for me.

Shakespeare’s Sonnets were published in quarto form in 1609 – or, to put it another way, probably between two of Shakespeare’s late romance plays: Pericles, Prince of Tyre (1608) and Cymbeline, King of Britain (1610). As editors Louis B. Wright and Virginia A. LaMar point out in the Folger Library edition of the Sonnets that I have before me, there is much speculation regarding the circumstances under which the Sonnets were written and the person(s) for whom they may have been written.

On the back cover of this edition is a miniature of William Herbert, 3rd Earl of Pembroke, whom Wright and LaMar describe as “a leading candidate for the friend and patron of Shakespeare to whom many of the sonnets were addressed” – though the editors hasten to add that “no concrete proof exists for this identification.” There is good reason for the editors to be thus cautious – for as Wright and LaMar point out in a helpful foreword, there is a great deal of unhelpful and probably unprovable speculation regarding the person(s) who may have inspired the sonnets.

All that speculation is understandable, as some of the poems offer what seem like tantalizing hints of some sort of personal tie between the historical William Shakespeare and these 154 poems that were published in 1609, as when Sonnet 57 ends with this rhyming couplet: “So true a fool is love that in your Will,/Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.” The capitalization of “Will” inevitably brings the identity and personality of the real-life Shakespeare to mind.

For my part, I find such speculation pointless. We all know that Elizabethan patrons often asked writers to compose on a particular theme, or in a particular way, or for a particular person. If the Earl of Pembroke, or some other patron, had contracted with William Shakespeare for the composition and publishing of these poems, then it does not necessarily follow that the poems reflect some deep feeling or life experience on Shakespeare’s part. After all, Shakespeare never killed his wife or stepfather, or divided a kingdom into three parts, or (as far as we know) communed with witches regarding how to seize power – yet he wrote Othello, Hamlet, King Lear, and Macbeth.

Perhaps a better way to think about the sonnets, rather, is to draw an analogy with what one gets in an album of popular music: the early, pre-Rubber Soul Beatles, for example, or the Temptations – or, in more modern times, Beyoncé or Taylor Swift. Most (though not necessarily all) of the songs will be about love – the joy of new love, the pain of love lost, the melancholy and angst of remembering a love from long ago. So it is, I would argue, with Shakespeare’s sonnets. They provide a look at all sorts of sides of love.

Structurally, the sonnets are what are known as Petrarchan sonnets – 14-line poems, written in iambic pentameter (five beats to a line, with the beat falling on the second syllable. The rhyme scheme is ab ab cd cd ef ef gg. An initlal four-line stanza introduces an idea; the next two stanzas unfold different dimensions of that idea; the rhyming couplet that concludes the poem offers a final twist that gives the reader something to think about. The challenge for the poet is, within the rigidity of this format, to keep coming up with something new to say, and to do so with language that will remain poetic and memorable. Shakespeare, unsurprisingly, is more than equal to that challenge.

Some of the most famous of the sonnets demonstrate Shakespeare’s artistic purpose of illuminating all sorts of sides of love. Sonnet 18 overflows with the joy of new and blooming love – “Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?/Thou art more lovely and more temperate” – and does so in such a memorable manner that the makers of the film Shakespeare in Love (1998) show a young William Shakespeare (played by Joseph Fiennes) so very much in love that he takes a break from writing Romeo and Juliet so he can pen just this sonnet for his beloved, Lady Viola de Lesseps (played by Gwyneth Paltrow). 

It is an anachronism, of course – a good sixteen years separated the first performance of Romeo and Juliet and the publication of the Sonnets – but the point is made. Sonnet 18, all by itself, is one of the greatest and most memorable love poems ever written; and, like many of the sonnets, it emphasizes the power of the poet’s art to make the poet’s beloved immortal, long after the passage of time takes away both physical beauty and life itself (“So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,/So long lives this, and this gives life to thee”).

That same theme is emphasized in works like Sonnet 55, which begins by stating that “Not marble nor the gilded monuments/Of princes shall outlive this pow’rful rhyme”. A statue, the speaker says, is no sure way to immortalize the beauty of one’s beloved: “When wasteful war shall statues overturn,/And broils root out the work of masonry,/Nor Mars his sword nor war’s quick fire shall burn/The living record of your memory.” A statue can be destroyed in a war like those that brought about the catastrophic fall of Rome or Constantinople; a poem, which can be preserved in memory, and can be written down and published over and over again, is more lasting.

Sonnet 73 takes on a decidedly more melancholy frame of mind, as Shakespeare writes that “That time of year thou may’st in me behold/When ruined leaves, or few, or none, do hang/Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,/Bare ruined choirs where once the sweet birds sang.” The speaker is an older person, at some point in the autumn of his life; and metaphors of sunset, or of a fire expiring in its own ashes, reinforce the speaker’s awareness of his own mortality. The speaker concludes by telling his beloved, “This thou perceiv’st, which makes thy love more strong,/To love that well which thou must leave ere long.”

Shakespeare was 45 years old in 1609, and was living in a time when the average life expectancy was 42 years. He retired to his hometown of Stratford-upon-Avon four years after publishing the Sonnets, and was dead within three years after retiring, at the age of 52. No doubt such considerations of mortality were much on his mind when he composed this sonnet.

Sometimes, the speaker of a sonnet feels bound, against his own better instincts, by the sheer power of his physical passion for the beloved. The speaker of Sonnet 151 laments that “I do betray/My nobler part to my gross body’s treason”, and many who read this poem will no doubt remember a time when they felt passionately drawn to someone they knew was not really the right person for them, and might even be bad for them. At other times, the love expressed in a sonnet will be a true union of compatible hearts and spirits and souls, as in Sonnet 116 (“Let me not to the marriage of true minds/Admit impediments”).

I liked watching Shakespeare make fun of those contemporaries who resorted to cliched similes about their beloved having eyes like the sun and lips as red as coral: Sonnet 130 begins, “My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;/Coral is far more red than her lips’ red”. After proceeding through a veritable catalogue of poetic cliches of the time, the speaker of this sonnet concludes, “And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare/As any she belied with false compare.”

It is interesting to contemplate the depth of the sonnets’ influence on the culture of the Western world generally. When I read Sonnet 30’s opening invocation of times when “to the invocation of sweet silent thought/I summon up remembrance of things past”, I thought, perhaps inevitably, of Marcel Proust’s seven-volume novel À la recherche du temps perdu (1913-27). The title would translate literally as In Search of Lost Time, and yet the first English translation bore the title Remembrance of Things Past. Shakespeare would have found that a fun bit of irony, I think.

As mentioned earlier in this review, I am not really concerned with who the sonnets might “really” have been for or about; what matters to me, rather, is their beauty and their resonance as arguably the greatest love poems ever written. Who are the sonnets for? Who are they about? I will tell you. They are for you. They are about you. They are for and about all of us, now and forever.