Rating: 5/5

The book's name might be misleading. The vocal history and shamans traditions are covered very scarcely in the book. The historical overview is informative and not overwhelming. We learn that Siberia was first "discovered" by Russian explorer/pirate Yermak in the 16th century. Becoming the land of opportunity, "Russian Wild West", Siberia remained largely unexplored and forgotten region due to cold and vast territory. Colonialism was there too but had the Russian taste. The economy of Siberia travel made some local clans very powerful: Buryaty, for example, demanded "a dwarf to look at" and "a monk who has been to Jerusalem" from the Russian tzar, he considered and had to explain himself for missing dwarf. So most of the tribes remained largely independent in some way or the other throughout 19th century. Still, they followed the sad path of an indigenous culture close to a colonial empire: sadly dying off from smallpox and trading vodka, people were dying out. Some of them were hunting prisoners escaped from Russian camps. They all were a kaleidoscope of traditions, some were quite bizarre. Some did not have a "family" notion (Engels sponsored an expedition to prove his theories), some used "penis" as we use "dear" today, etc. There even was some questionable progress in soviet times, the ministry of the north, Bogoras, etc. But these all vanishes in Stalin Gulag time. 
Anna Reid is a meticulous scientist who loves the subject. She did a tremendous amount of fieldwork for this book, she travelled all across Siberia to find the remnant of the civilizations. And from here reality creeps into the book, changing the subject. She finds and depicts in a beautiful language ruins of the Soviet Union, poverty, alcoholism. The only shaman that she finds honestly admits that it's not the best times and all shamans are dead, but he hopes that shamanism will come back again. This and other sad and cordial scenes from Siberia, honest people on ruins of the Empire whose culture is dead and vanished and they are forgotten creates the foundation of the book. 

I think this is very important work, eye-witness report of culture that is brilliant, bizarre and unlike any else and quickly vanishing.