Rating: 5/5

I really enjoyed this book. It feels like finding a hidden treasure when I discover a great book written long ago that I've never heard of. I struggled for a while with the style of the prose, but the story was gripping and I couldn't put it down. I was also impressed with the integrity of the protagonist and the value she placed on her role as a mother. The story is a tribute to mothers of every generation, I think, and the sacrifices they make for their children.

Note: I got my copy from interlibrary loan at our state university and it is a first edition. The original owner (in 1929) pasted a newspaper clipping on the inside front cover. I thought it should be shared here. Unfortunately, the clipping doesn't show the name of the newspaper or when it was published. 

"A PIONEER MOTHER: In her new novel, "A Lantern in her Hand," published by Appleton, Bess Streeter Aldrich says she has told many of the stories of the pioneers and the early days on the prairies which she heard from her parents. In describing how she came to write this novel, Mrs. Aldrich says "My parents, having come into Iowa before their marriage, were always full of the experiences of those early days, and so I was steeped in an atmosphere of reminiscences of river floods, storms, drought, ox-team trails, log cabins and snow drifting onto beds. Once in later years after I had begun to write and my mother was a very old lady, I remarked to her how sorry I was that she endured such a hard life when she was young. She looked at me with an odd sort of an expression and said, 'Save your pity. We had the best time in the world.' Suddenly it seemed to me that I would like to catch a little of that spirit in a story sometime--that I wanted to write some day a pioneer mother who, although she endured all the hardships of those days, was sustained through it all by courage and love and a sense of humor. I think I would have written "A Lantern in Her Hand" if I had known a single copy would not be sold. It is my bit to honor the pioneer mother."