Rating: 4/5

How do you translate comedy that is more than 25 centuries old? With ease apparently, Lysistrata, first performed way back in 411 BC is just as funny now as it must have been for the ancient Greeks! It was while holidaying in the Peloponnese that it occurred to me to brush up on the ancient Greek classics. A good decision since it really contextualised all the history I was literally walking over every day.

The play commences in 431–404 BC with the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta. Almost all the men are engaged in what seems to be an interminable conflict. It is Athenian woman, Lysistrata who decides on an unusual course of action to bring the war to an end and restore peace – she calls on women from all the warring states to refuse their men sex until peace is achieved! As you can imagine, this may have been a measure welcomed by many women, but generally unpopular with the gents…

There is much debate between the women leading this movement and the men in power, and the dialogue is very witty and funny as justifications for and arguments against are bantered back and forth. Aristophanes is known primarily as a comedian and the play is certainly amusing, though the underlying message is quite sombre: there are very few solutions to war. In reality the Peloponnesian War has been raging for twenty years by the time the play was first staged, and it still wasn’t over. The powerhouse that had been Athens was effectively reduced to a pile of rubble and Sparta emerged as the new seat of power. Albeit at a massive cost to life. It equally raises pertinent questions about the traditional roles of women in society and highlights gender inequality - the fact that the women know that the most effective tool to curb men's behaviour is through their bodies clearly underlines that not much has changed in terms of gender bias over the centuries!

An exceptional (and timely) read for me. The ancient Greeks never cease to amaze me with their skills and knowledge in just about everything. Make sure you read a well translated copy.