Rating: 4/5

Autobiographical diary. Book One covers 15 years (954-968), Book Two three years (969-971) and Book Three also three years (972-974). Probably written from 971 onwards.

This was a very special book to read. It is amazing to think that it was written as long ago as 971. And how complicated life was in Japan back then. You had to communicate by way of cryptic poems and there was an elaborate, totally incomprehensible system of forbidden directions, punishments, defilements, penances and pilgrimages. The author of this book had to content herself with being a subsidiary wife and had to condone of her husband's relationships with other (8) women and his having children with them. The author spends much of her life waiting for her husband (the Prince, Fujwara Kaneie) to have some time to spare for her. They do have a son together (Michitsuna) and he is very important to his mother. The author would very much have liked to have more children, but for some reason this doesnot come about. As the author and her husband become ever more estranged from each other and the author gets very lonely, she decides to adopt one of her husband's daughters by another woman, but even at her very young age she is courted by Tonori (the Kami), one of her husband's brothers (!). the story itself doesnot amount to much and sort of peters out at the end. Life in Japan at that time was very much centered around the seasonal changes and things to do with nature and the weather. Furthermore, the people were very much driven by their religion (Buddhism and Shintoism), hence all the penances and pilgrimages and art was very important to them, esp. calligraphy and poetry. The translation is by Edward Seidensticker. Mr. Seidensticker provides us with a great many footnotes and background information (in the introduction), but he very often says that he isnot sure about the translation (Japanese is a very difficult language), so the story might be completely different from the one rendered here! Even so, I greatly enjoyed reading it, especially after having visited Japan myself last December.