Rating: 2/5

I dropped the book after reading more than 300 pages of it, which is not something I do often. It was, however, in turns frustrating and boring, and - after Gaugamela - I couldn't even bring myself to care if and how Alexander defeats Porus. [Spoiler alert: Alexander died without ever losing a battle.] When I say the book was boring, however, I don't mean boring in the sense of ponderous, verbose or over-descriptive. On the contrary, "The Virtues of War" was awfully concise. To the point of being superficial. But more on that later.

Here are the reasons I think "The Virtues of War" fails both as a historical account and as a fictional novel.

1. Alexander the Great. When you hear that name, what do you think of? I won't even bother guessing. The name's so famous that you could associate it with practically anything, from actual historical events to kitchen aprons. But if you've read anything about the man, you will not be able to suspend your disbelief at his characterization in this book for long. Pressfield's Alexander is a humble, benevolent, unassuming guy whose ambitions don't go beyond good soldering and who - as he'll tell you on the very first pages of the book - ascribes his success entirely to the men he's leading. Yeah, that sounds exactly like the man who believed himself to be (the son of) a god, forced his lifelong companions to prostrate themselves before him, burned down Persepolis after getting drunk at a feast and may or may not have murdered his own father. Pressfield's Alexander doesn't seem to suffer from megalomania, paranoia or delusions of grandeur, is strictly heterosexual (bordering on asexual, actually... yes, we're still talking about Alexander the Great) and loves people (in a platonic way) more than Jesus Christ (allegedly) does.

I can't say I'm too impressed by this version of Alexander but, in the end, it wasn't what made me drop the book. Let's continue to...

2. The rest of the characters. Or lack thereof. Yes, there were some names thrown around. Some of the names even said some words. Some of the names even did some things that could be considered heroic. But, in the end, that's all the names were. Names. No characterization of anyone whatsoever, beyond psychical descriptions (even those were sparse) and accounts of martial prowess. I can't say the characters are two-dimensional because that implies that they have some dimensions and are not just names repeated often on a page. Pressfield is so economic in his characterization that the reader is left not caring what happens to any of the names at all.

3. Failing number three is, surprisingly for anyone familiar with Steven Pressfield, his description of war. I don't mean that it is poorly described. In fact, it's anything but. Military strategy and battle descriptions are the one aspect where this books shines. The battles are engaging and brilliantly written (though not on Conn Iggulden's level of vivid detail, clarity and suspension). Why do I consider this aspect to also be a failing of the book, then? Simple. I cannot suffer the glorification of war apparent in both this book and "Gates of Fire" (although, to be fair, GfF did try to show the horrors of war as well as its 'virtues'). War is not purifying. It is not virtuous. It is not the most noble of human inventions... I usually love nothing better than trying to acquire the mindsets of different people as I read the books they've written - it's refreshing to look at the world from perspectives other than my own. The mindset of the soldiers in this book is something I never wish to acquire. It's the mindset of the brainwashed patriot and the religious zealot.

4. Finally, the world and how lazily it's depicted. Everything is black or white. Steven Pressfield is very careful to make the distinction between West and East. You see, the West was so much more civilized than the East, even in ancient times. Let's completely forget that the entire social system of the West (always capital 'W' in Steven Pressfield's book) is based upon slavery. Let's forget that the Western world at that time has just gone through the Peloponnesian war that has torn Greece apart. Let's forget that the beautiful democracies and monarchies we see in the big cities anywhere - west, north, south or east - rely upon ninety percent of the population working in the fields and never leaving the farms until death or sickness or war do them apart. But forget all this. Think, instead, of how horrible the East (always capital 'E') is - with its empires and kings and oppressed farmers. Pressfield actually has Alexander talk to a Persian farmer (in a manner that is not entirely clear, seeing as Alexander doesn't speak Persian and the farmer certainly doesn't speak Greek) and feeling pity because of the tyranny and oppression the man has to endure. He then proceeds to be disgusted by the corrupted aristocracy of the East and the fact that no man in the East can advance his station. This, coming from a character that's supposed to have been brought up in a culture where slavery is accepted, his father is a famous conqueror and he himself is a prince who inherits his position by right of birth. I doubt that the author is intentionally trying to paint Alexander as horribly lacking in self-awareness, so I can't say I'm impressed with this portrayal of the Persian empire. Life was difficult for anyone not born in a city - in Greece, in Persia, in Egypt, everywhere

I will leave just two quotes below:

"This is the East. On the right hand, one beholds opulence beyond imagination; on the left, destitution that beggars description. The long-suffering of the peasantry approaches the holy. Their carriage and bearing possess a dignity unmatched even by kings of the West. But it is the dignity of a stone, weathering centuries, not of a man, descended of heaven."

"In the East there exists no objective standard of achievement, no impartial measure by which a man may establish or advance his station. He cannot 'get ahead.' He cannot 'succeed.' It is not like the egalitarianism of your army, Alexander, which provides an unbiased arena, within which a poor man may make his fortune and a rich man prove worthy of his fame. Here no man exists, save in subordination to another."

Two stars.