Rating: 1/5

An anti-Harry Potter Book
23 July 2011

	As I was scanning through my document which contains backups of all of my commentaries I discovered that this one contained only a really short paragraph which, well, explains the book, but doesn't actually tease out the themes. The paragraph is as follows: A pretty one sided look at the Harry Potter Series. Everything that he criticises the books about can be said about Star Wars, but I have never heard anybody write a book attacking those movies.

	It's true, isn't it? I've seen countless of books, articles, and heard sermons as to why Harry Potter is evil and Christians should stay away from it, but nobody has ever mentioned Star Wars (and guess what, Abanes' does not mention Star Wars either, though he does mention Lord of the Rings and the Narnia Chronicles). Mind you when I said a 'pretty on sided look' I should have really said 'an incredibly one sided look' at the Harry Potter books.

	Okay, I myself am not really interested in the Harry Potter books and have only ever read one of them. I might read others if I have time, but they are not high on my reading list. There are lots of books out there and Harry Potter is not really one that seems to grab my attention. Anyway, I have seen all of the movies, and while they say that the book does tend to be better than the movie, the movies of this series are good enough for me, and the only reason that I ended up seeing them is because my brother loves Harry Potter (and we don't see him rushing off and joining a Wicca Cult).

	I guess what this book demonstrates is the wilful ignorance that most fundamentalist Christians seem to display and to me this is one of the reasons people are put off of Christianity. For instance, he tells the story of a man that was abused as a child and then got involved in Wicca for comfort. However when he began to feel uncomfortable, he tried to get out but nobody within the church was willing to help him, so he become more involved and ended up getting executed for a triple murder. Arbanes basically blames Dungeons and Dragons for this when if you read over this story again we discover that this man reached out to the church for help and was rejected. To me this sounds as if Abanes has such a rosey coloured view of the church that nobody, especially the leadership, can ever be blamed for the inevitable results of their sinful actions.

	I suspect that this has something to do with to do with the biblical teaching of sin. If we sin then we can only hold ourselves accountable and we cannot lay the blame upon anybody else. Well, that is partially true, and anybody who uses phrases like 'the Devil made me do it' is washing their hands of self responsibility. I am a big believer in being responsible for one's own actions. However we tend to forget one of the statements that Jesus made 'if you lead one of those little one's to sin, then it is better for you to have a millstone tied around your neck and thrown into the sea.' Namely, what Jesus is saying here is that while we are responsible for our own sins, we also need to be very careful on how we relate to others. This is not just a question of tempting somebody to, say, take drugs, this is refusing to support, comfort, or help somebody who is in trouble. Many people walk away from Christianity simply because there is a lack of support within the church, and when I say lack of support, I generally suggest that the members of the church spend more time condemning than they do forgiving.

	There is also another example of a Christian author targeting a popular product and suggesting that this is the cause of what is wrong with society, and that if they do not make a stand against it then society is only going to collapse. It was not all that long ago when people who took a stand against the church for its false teachings were burnt at the stake, but now this church, who was once persecuted, is doing the persecuting. To me it is an aspect of fear, a fear of the unknown, a fear of what is popular, and especially a fear of change. Yes, Jesus does talk about the road less travelled, and not doing things because everybody else is doing it, but I don't think that necessarily refers reading the Harry Potter books.

	Talking about popularity: what about going along with the church (and I am not talking about the universal catholic church here, but the church of which you are a member) simply because everybody else goes along with the church, or the church tells you to do it? Take gay marriage for an instance. The church tells you that it is wrong and that homosexuality is a sin: does that mean that you should agree with what they are saying without actually questioning it? Does that also mean that you should condemn homosexuals because they tell you to? How about making a stand against such bigoted and one sided views? The problem is that the church can hold a huge amount of power, and to speak out against such things can find you being alienated from the church – that is until you repent. Then who are you repenting to, are you repenting to God or are you repenting to man? If you are repenting to man then the problem is that you are putting yourself under the power of that man. If you have sinned against another man, then sure, go and apologise, however if you have sinned against God, repent to God, not to man, because it is your relationship with God that needs restoring, and by repenting to God you are not putting yourself under the power of this one particular man.