Rating: 5/5

WOW, this is my first Madeleine Brent novel and I was very impressed. Every page was entertaining and the plot never got boring. I have to say, sometimes, the past events from the heroine's life were repeated to much.

This is the story of Jemimah Lowley, a young English woman who lives in Kabul with her parents, as the place gets attacked in Afghanistan's massacre of the British in 1879.
She is smuggled out of Kabul by a loyal servant but gets kidnapped by some Indians and sold to a savage brutal Afghan pacha as a wife. The pacha has been unable to have children and was told by a shaman in the village he needs an European wife to conceive a child.

Jemimah suffers a great deal and after some months, is discarded from the pachas bed, because she was unable to have a child. She is left being a kitchen servant and afterwards taken in by Sandru , the local doctor. She works with him as a nurse and he teaches her french and greek. He is an European army doctor taken prisoner by the Afghans some decades earlier.
Living in decrepit conditions, Jemimah has a better life as with the pacha until she finds out she will be sold to another brutal violent king ,as payment for the pacha's new wife.

She decides to try to run away and Sandru helps her escape with a traveling peddler Kassim.
It then follows a long and perilous journey to Herat, from were Jemimah can hope to return to England and her home in Witchwood Hall, her family mansion.

I will not go any further for not spoiling to much of the story. She has a perilous journey to Herat and arrives home to discover an unpleasant surprise. She meets another man there, who helps her out (she helps him first actually) and she tries to regain her name and family estate, lost in her absence.

There are two very different heroes in this story. I understood and liked them both, though honestly said, I preferred one more. Jemimah will fall in love with one of them (from other reviews not everyone is satisfied with her pick) and receive her happy ending after all the heartbreak and sorrow she goes through in her life. 
I wish both of the main male characters would have received their happy ending though.One of them has a very tough,sorrowfull life...

I definitely recommend this book, it is well written and full of twists and turns I didn't expect.