Rating: 4/5

Long-time trapper and mountain man Barnaby Skye is experiencing anything but domestic tranquility these days. It’s summer, and he is attending the annual famous rendezvous wherein the mountain men gather to drink, trade, and party. He paid for three jugs of trader whiskey, and he spends a good bit of the time at the rendezvous roaring drunk. His Crow tribe wife, Mary Quill, named Victoria by Skye, has had enough. She’s prepared to abandon Skye and return to her ancestral home. Coincidentally, the fur company for whom he works wants him to do some business with Victorias people. He figures he has the best of both worlds; she gets to go home for the winter; he gets to (figuratively speaking) deduct the trip as a business expense.

On their first day out, they run into a group of Pawnee Indians which steal their horses and all their possessions. Angry, Skye vows to get back all his belongings. She disagrees, insisting they can walk to her people if necessary. But the loss wounded his pride, and he’s not letting go that easily. Despite all kinds of bluster, he fails to retrieve his possessions, and in ignominy, they walk to the home of Victoria’s people. The closer they draw to the place, the happier she grows and the more depressed he becomes. The longer they remain with the people, his wife distances herself from him and the Crow tribe ignores him. By chapter seven, you’re feeling sorry for Skye. It’s not a situation you usually find him in if you read the series.

 But things worsen for the erstwhile couple. Victoria accompanies her flashy mulatto new husband, and Skye leaves the village in ignominy only to become essentially a prisoner to a rival fur company.

Wheeler’s books are unfailingly thought-provoking. He must have been a keen observer of people and life when he was among us. His books reflect that. They are far deeper and more thoughtful than a superficial Zane Gray western, and they’re far less formulaic. You see the development of these characters and the ways in which their circumstances change them for the better. He is adept at showing you how Victoria and Skye change as a result of their separate but simultaneous captivity. I’ve jumped around through this series and not read it consecutively. But I’ve enjoyed every experience I’ve had with this author, and this was no exception.