Rating: 2/5

Read in Japanese　あの日、パリの街で (MIRA文庫) 

Brianne (18 years old) &amp; Pierce (37 years old)
Brianne's father has passed away, and her mother remarried a rich man Kurt Browler for money. Kurt wants to have Brianne marry his business partner Savon? to solidify the business deal.

Pierce hasn't gone over his dead wife, Margo. He doesn't want to remarry or fall in love with any other woman after 10 years of marriage and after 2 years since her death.

Brianne is young and upbeat, but Pierce can't let go of Margo. He married Brianne to protect her from her step father's evil plans, but cannot get over feeling like he was betraying Margo.

The trouble involved middle eastern countries, oil fields, and US. Brianne gets pregnant and finally Pierce realizes that he loves her and wants to be with her and her child. Took a whole book to realize that. Frustrating because Pierce was so not over with Margo.

Same pattern asn Wyoming Fierce. Hereo who isn't over the previous woman/marriage, a young heroine who has a bad family members.

Book description

A casual flirtation between an 18-year-old girl and a wealthy man twice her age leads to love and danger in this engaging but not entirely plausible thriller by popular romance author Palmer (The Rawhide Man). Brianne Martin's nefarious wheeler-dealer of a stepfather sends her to study in Paris, where she falls for widowed oilman Pierce Hutton. In the process of Pierce trying to protect Brianne from his undercover activities and Brianne trying to seduce Pierce, they both get caught up in Middle Eastern shenanigans that might?if Pierce and his allies didn't turn out to have near-superhero abilities?lead to WWIII. This is definitely thriller-lite (the supposedly tough-guy hero refers to "a hush-hush mission"), however, and Palmer manages to fracture her few French phrases (for example, femme du nuit instead of de la nuit). The dialogue is charming, the characters likable and the sex sizzling, and the roller-coaster emotions between hero and heroine will give Palmer's many fans an enjoyable ride.(less)