Rating: 1/5

It's taken me many, many years to figure out my problem with Niven's work, but in my defense, it was hard to get around the visibility he had in the SF world when I was younger. So much of what he does should appeal to me: a style very much in line with Analog authors of the 80s; a preoccupation with engineering-style problems in a far-future setting; the great fun of the Ringworld concept itself; and lots of lots of imaginative high-tech devices. I really should love the Known Space books.

But I don't. And it's because what Niven proceeds to do with it all is to tell stories that are profoundly dull and uninteresting. Much like the first book, this really should have been a long essay in a 1980 issue of Analog, in which he shared all those letters he received from MIT students after the first book; reviewed their ideas about the structure and dynamics of the Ringworld; and then used them to try to make the numbers work. Everything good about this book would have been fully realized in an essay like that.

Instead, we once again get an interminable march across the Ringworld, with Louis and Chmeee dawdling about with various low- and medium-tech cultures instead of doing what their technology could have allowed them to do immediately: identify the very highest tech civilizations in evidence on Ringworld, go to them directly, and find the Repair Center as quickly as possible. Instead, we get interminable meandering across boring landscapes and cultural encounters that share many of the limitations of SF from the 80s not written by someone named LeGuin. The cultural insight here is limited to begin with, and then further undermined by male-centric assumptions about gender that makes books like this more tiresome to read with every passing year. The real problem, though, is that the story just isn't very interesting, and the payoff at the end isn't worth the trouble.

Despite Niven's lingering status in SF, there are better authors out there doing this kind of thing. Spend time with them instead.