Rating: 4/5

That was way more enjoyable than I expected 
This book is a BRICK. It's a thousand pages, written a hundred years ago about a painful time. I honestly did not expect to get through this, but wanted to see how far I could get.
It took me most of a week but I enjoyed it far more that Than I believed I would.
One of the delightful things about this book are the glimpses at a living breathing past. Past as today right now, peopled with young vibrant dreamers trying to make a life, seek a fortune, or fight for their beliefs. People in awe of the new technologies and well aware of how the world was changing around them. some with hope that it could be a better world, some with fear that these changes would make them irrelevant.
I'm stunned at all the similarities and historical parallels between then and now. How some folks are so terrified by the hope of greater equality, seeing it as a lost of imagined supremacy. How the moneyed interests set out on a deliberate campaign of lies &amp; misinformation aimed at the credulous whites to fight for a fortune they would never share in. Conspiracy theories, fear mongering, race baiting ,hysteria, appeals to masculinity, religion, and false patriotism led millions to ruin. And all for lies told by the few who would have made a smaller fortune if slavery were ended sooner. They knew it would end one day, but wished to push that day back for as long as they could. They cared no more for the white working classes than for the slaves. Less in many cases, but the poor &amp; workers did most of the dying. I see so many correlations between the confederates of then and the Neo-conservatives of now. But I digress.
This is not a hard book to read, or a struggle to maintain focus on. The writing is clear and oddly moving for being so spare. This book is occasionally laugh out loud funny when you realize what a dry wit Gen Sherman has as compared to his reputation as a monster. I'm well aware that General Sherman did spare some of the uglier truths but I have a better grasp of the scale and context for future reading. I'm glad I climbed this mountain of a book, the view was enlightening.