Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars.
A poetry collection of three rebel Zen poets of the Tang-era China – Han Shan, his sidekick Shih Te, and a late Tang poet Wang Fan-chih. These poems have their humor, realism, and an awareness of ethical, political, and spiritual topics (the last one Buddhism mixed with some Taoism and Confucianism). Wang’s poems are perhaps the most raw of the three, but then he/they lived in the unrest of a dying dynasty. At the end are notes from the translator, which can shed light on some translation choices and on the background. The translator also made the choices on what poems to include here, because not all of the poems in each poet’s collection was of good quality.

Sometimes from down below
I catch the flash of the stream’s flow.
Sometimes I sit like a stone on a cliff.
My heart is like the orphan cloud,
with nothing to lean on,
so far, so far away,
what of the world’s could sway it?
(Han Shan)

Wang Fan-shih’s poems were sealed away in a cave until early 20th century, so his poems were less known of the three here. First English translations of Han Shan’s poems appeared in 1958, by Gary Snyder (friend of Jack Kerouac). Han Shan and his sidekick are described as a pair of wandering, laughing monks who wrote their poems on bamboo, tress, rocks, building walls…

Cloudy mountains, fold on fold,
how many thousands of them?
Shady valley road runs deep,
all trace of man gone.
Green torrent’s pure clean flow,
no place more full of beauty:
and time, and time, birds sing,
my own heart’s harmony
(Shih Te)

All three are names used by various poets to hide behind. Han Shan is a place name, and at least two poets have used the name; Shih Te was used as the ‘disciple’ name for those who didn’t want to hide behind a great name – he and Wang have less poems here than Han Shan.

Wang Fan-shih is the most attached to realism of his time; the poverty, the suffering, the hunger, old soldiers coming home and not recognised because they left so young, etc. His sharp views on the rich and foolish ones are the most in-your-face, though the other two also have their moments.

Listen you, enjoy your time,
you really don’t have very long.
You were born just a moment ago,
in another moment you’ll be gone
(Wang Fan-shih)

I found Han Shan’s poems the most interesting, but also could appreciate the others’, especially Wang’s rawness (Shih’s was beautiful but not really standing out from the others). I gave this collection 3.5 stars, mainly because I wasn’t wowed, but it is still worth it for those interested in this era and these sort of poets.