Rating: 4/5

The Burning Plain (Henry Rios Mystery #6)
By Michael Nava
Open Road Integrated Media, 2013 (originally 1997)
Four stars.

Whew. “The Burning Plain” is Henry Rios’ journey into hell. It is taut, gripping, written with the same crisp prose and no-nonsense dialogue that characterizes the other books in this fantastic—important—series. It is brilliant. And it’s almost unrelentingly bleak. 

I thought the death of Josh Mandel was the low point of Henry’s life, but apparently that was just the gateway to his own emotional and psychological near-death experience. It is only the great storytelling and the vivid characterizations that saved this book from being a complete bummer. I love Michael Nava’s writing, because as someone of Nava’s own generation, these books have all resonated deeply with me. That said, this book felt like a slap in the face. 

Let me explain.

“Hell is other people.” The book opens with Henry fighting his late lover’s parents for custody of his corpse, a process that has taken months. It is an emotionally searing chapter that has almost nothing to do with the rest of the book, but sets the stage and the tone for the rest of the narrative. 

The settings of each of these books are always important, almost characters in the story. Los Angeles in this volume is depicted as an earthly avatar of hell, as suggested in the title:

“From the parched hills, the houses of the rich looked down upon a burning plain, where the metallic flash of sunlight in the windshields of a million cars was like the frantic signaling of souls.”

This image of a hot, desolate city is given a literary parallel in repeated references to the seventh circle of hell in Dante’s “Inferno:” 

“The seventh circle was a plain of burning sand. The souls of homosexuals are forced to run around the perimeter of the plain for eternity while a burning rain bakes them.” 

Even though Henry’s campy friend Richie quips: “…that doesn’t sound like hell to me. It sounds like Palm Springs,” it is a master stroke of literary stagecraft, building up the reader’s feeling of isolation and despair, even before the scope of the awfulness of the murder mystery is revealed. 

If there is an emotional theme in Nava’s sixth and penultimate installment in the Henry Rios odyssey, it is one of rage and hatred. The book fairly seethes with rage, including the rage of self-hatred, hatred of gay people, hatred of “the other.” And I’ll tell you, as a reader I was seething most of the way through it. Nava knows what he’s doing, and I’m a very susceptible reader. 

There are specific villains in this story, which builds like the “Night on Bald Mountain” scene in Walt Disney’s 1937 film “Fantasia,” in which Satan himself gloats over the evil world he rules. The real villain here is Hollywood—the company, the industry that rules Los Angeles and manipulates everyone in it from the studio moguls to the actor/waiter/hustlers on the street. The story is both byzantine and increasingly despairing as it moves forward. Henry, and the people he is working with, find themselves thwarted at every turn, and a feeling of powerlessness pervades the plot as it unspools toward a strangely unsatisfying finale. But don’t get me wrong, the dissatisfaction I felt at the end was purely intentional. Nava is a skilled manipulator, which is why one gets so caught up in this ugly story of power and anger and death.

I knocked a star off of my rating for this book; not because it’s not good, but because it left me so very unhappy. This is a cynical, gimlet-eyed view not just of Hollywood, but of gay people. The only remotely happy homosexual here is a lesbian district attorney, and she feels as beaten down as Henry does. I thought there was going to be a glimmer of hope toward the end, with a teenaged boy who flees his fundamentalist parents. But no. I’ll say no more, but note what the boy says to Henry: 

“I don’t want to be like you, either, Henry, some lonely, old man living in a dirty house.”

It is odd that the book feels like an indictment of gay people almost as much as it’s an indictment of Hollywood. Personally, I hate Hollywood, and my disgust grows greater with each added year on my life. While I can’t really disagree with what Henry sees and the author writes about gay folk—victims of hatred and oppression, including their own self-hatred and self-oppression, it is altogether too depressing, at the end of the day. 

So I knocked off a star because I felt I’d been slapped in the face by one of my own. 

I’ve already started the final book in the series: “Rag and Bone.” It’s made me cry twice in the first two chapters. Clearly, this will be Henry’s return to the light. His resurrection, if you will. I suspect Nava will get his fifth star back, in the end.