Rating: 4/5

Took me quite a while to get into this novel. That was my experience of No Name as well. In fact, that was my first and almost my last experience of Collins. I nearly gave up on it and then suddenly found the pages turning themselves as I was hurtled along. This grabbed hold of me eventually but its hurtling grip was never quite as strong as for No Name and nowhere near as strong as for The Moonstone or Woman in White. (Mind you those two are very bright stars in the firmament of Victorian Literature.)

This would be the Wilkie Collins that I would place on my reading list for a 19th Century Novel course. The elements are more open and there are a lot of them. This would make a great seminar novel for students who are beginning to build up their own maps of the landscape of English literature and its recurring features. You can cross reference this novel with Hardy, with Shakespeare, with Locke and Berkeley, with Dickens and they are just the names I've thought of while typing this sentence.

I strongly recommend the introduction to the Oxford World Classics edition. This essay by Catherine Peters covers everything (and more) that I might have to say about the novel. It does what I like in a review which is to make me think that my own thoughts, as I was reading the book, had some validity. The fact that I like it because I agree with it doesn't necessarily make it a good essay but it saves me the effort of writing a long review.

My usual rules for judging a book include:
Did I enjoy it? Yes, eventually
Would I read it again? Possibly
Did I believe it? Not really but then I don't think you are supposed to. This is the Silas Marner end of Victorian literature where storytelling means just that and embraces the whole culture. If Silas Marner is in some senses a re-telling of Rumplestiltskin (or Tom Tit Tot to give the story its English derivation) then Poor Miss Finch is Beauty and the Beast.
Is there more to it than just the story? (Apart from the dangerously pejorative word, 'just') I'd say an undoubted yes. This volume has enough to keep the literary philosophers happy for a seminar or two themselves.
Would I recommend it? To a fan of Dickens and Collins. Yes. To the student, see above. To the general reader unfamiliar with the works of Wilkie Collins I'd say read The Moonstone and (particularly) The Woman in White first.