Rating: 3/5

It must have been about forty years since I ‘read' any Nin. I say ‘read’ because I was a callow youth and was reading ‘Delta of Venus’ for the ‘dirty bits’ or as I might more kindly term it nowadays ‘sleaze’. That was my entire Nin experience until this book which I picked up (£2) because its index listed Harry and Caresse Crosby (Back Sun Press) next to Aleister Crowley as well as Bebe and Louis Barron (the composers of the music 'Forbidden Planet') and Jack ('On the Road’) Kerouac. What an odd mix I thought. Is she one of those people who act as ‘social glue’ linking everybody to everybody else? 

Now I know a lot more about her, and my feelings swing between sympathy for her obvious fucked-upness, irritation at her lying and a (somewhat begrudging) admiration for her principles of seeking imagination over ‘reality’ in her writing although bear in mind my opinion of the latter is by the osmosis of this book. 

Nin is now probably best known for her love-life (we’ll get to that) and her diaries which covered some fifty years and 200 volumes and which were revised/amended/censored as time went by. The latter also formed the basis of much of her fiction.

Fitch has seemingly accessed most of these in all their versions and thus reveals many facets of Nin’s life that were largely and deliberately hidden from her public. Nin saw her diaries as partly fictional and this is part of the biographical problem. What IS the truth? Fitch has conducted extensive interviews with many who knew her and seems to have pieced together enough to have a decent stab at it. It certainly made sense to me.

Nin was sexually abused by her father and she was separated from him when her mother left him to live in the US. The young Nin seemingly repressed this and instead sought to romanticise/emulate/please him so much so that she later had short-lived sexual relationship with him in her thirties. This is mind-boggling nowadays but at the time ideas around sexual abuse victims were scarcely conceived of, especially in Freudian analysis which was all the rage then. Nin would spend years in analysis, most notably with ex-Freud disciple Otto Rank who Nin also saw as a (hello!) father figure and would also have a sexual relationship with- doctor/patient professionalism also in short supply it seems. This is in addition to a husband (who she DIDN’T have sex with for at least a year after their marriage) alongside an ongoing relationship with Henry Miller who she WAS sleeping with along with a (possible) bi-curious situation with Miller's wife. It doesn't seem very liberated or fun, more exploitative and fucked-up.

Nin’s husband, who was very rich (and old enough to be a - hello!- father-figure) was (very probably) aware of all this and turned a blind eye. One has to question (Fitch doesn’t) what his own sexual life might have been at this time. He does seem to have been remarkably accommodating, especially in Nin’s later life when she becomes involved with another man and splits her life (and her friendships) between the east and west coasts of America. This is so successfully done that she can bigamously marry the other lover and few friends on either coast are aware of the secret. She often contemplates leaving her first husband but doesn’t because she gets a whopping allowance from him. Funny that.

The public is kept unaware of this and to them, she presents herself as an (independent) artist struggling on and writing her short stories and novels ‘baring her protagonist's souls' in a high modernist/symbolic manner which, for a while at least, gain little public recognition. However, she did gather some acolytes (often young gay men she could nurture/mother- funny that) who she would ruthlessly dump if they were too critical- funny that. But, for those she liked, she would be hugely supportive and loyal and do her best to promote and they in their turn would promote her. Much as I want to dislike Nin I cannot help but admire her for this.

It is too tedious for me to relate more of her history, google it, but I felt that she was both manipulated and later manipulator, the classic poacher turned gamekeeper, hence my ambivalence towards her. Equally, she is such a freak (she was loved by many of the hippy movement but she personally loathed them for their perceived dirtiness and loose morals) that I assume many of these people she became involved with must have had some sense of who they getting involved with.

The book held interest for me because of her links between Paris of the 20s and California of the 60s and Fitch does well in evoking this. Nin really did seem to have crossed paths with so many interesting people and Fitch does very well to cram them all in without it being just a list of names. For those with counter-cultural tastes, these include film-makers Kenneth Anger (she appears in his film ‘Inauguration of the Pleasure Dome’), Robert Wise, director of, among other things, ‘The Haunting’ to Antonin Artaud (who she might have had an affair with), Max Jacobson, the original ‘Dr. Feelgood’ who shot up celebrity patients with amphetamines and monkey gland extract, and Alan Ginsburg who she inspired to (sigh, not again!) take all his clothes off. I imagine to those of you who have a greater awareness of Nin's work this book will be excellent but even without it (as I am) I found a thought-provoking read and it definitely put a few new people on my cultural radar.