Rating: 5/5

What a joy to reread with fresh eyes and ears to see and hear Thoreau’s modern context 😊

“Men are not so much the keepers of herds. Herds are the keepers of men” ~Henry David Thoreau 

Amazes me how applicable Walden is today. Timeless in Thoreau’s observation of humanity. The years may be divergent, but the means and ways of people not so much. Enjoyable listen from Libby while painting Broadway in NYC on canvas.

Each time look for a new perspective or means of implementing something learned. This round of Walden laugh at the title update for modern readers which popped in my head. 

Something like, Common Sense Perspective for Insightful Living: chill at the pond podcast vibes … Hank D Thoreau’s indignant rants of modern iniquity. Political libertarian. Spiritual self actualized. Disdain for corporations and main stream media. If Russel Brand, Tucker Carlson, and Robert F Kennedy Jr were cloned for such a day as this 🤣🤣🤣

I’m not sharing this for a comment explosion of rants on someone in office or a policy blah blah. 

Laughing at how crazy it is that Thoreau’s rants on his world view can be pigeon holes into modern personality. 

At the moment while listening on Libby, painting downtown of my neighborhood or origin, NYC’s Broadway. Reminiscing growing up in the city, going upstate to the mountains, and chilling on beach across the street from my aunt and uncles on Long Island. 

The world has changed a lot in thirty years outwardly. Inside, the core of civilization remains the same. Ebbs and flows. Some views are timeless. As Mr. Thoreau’s view is, for me. 

Though, unexpected twist of hearing pieces of modern dialog within a 170 year old epic. 

The main take away that continues to draw me back once again is simplicity. Mindfulness. Nature. Solitude all equate to pieces of a greater good for oneself and the world. Doses like medicine make the heart grow fonder of oneself. Others. The world. 

Hoping if someone stumbles on this update you get a chuckle not an attitude. For the latter is the point to my share 😁

The former, when we can step back and chuckle at the silliness of the world is the moment we realize we are less ensnared within its web. 

Let’s take time to smell the literal roses of life. Trim the dead branches. Feed the roots of what we want. Know cloudy days and rain are followed by rainbows and sunshine. 

If you’re one of the readers of my reviews, thank you. Know, you are appreciated. Your time is valued. And, I’m glad we’re on this Goodreads journey together. 

If we hadn’t friended here, click the invite and I’ll happily look at your profile to know your interests in lit and accept. 

Joy to the world another book is done ~ #AskMissPatience 🥳

/\ update 2024

As a gift my son gave me $100 ’just because’.

I'd been eyeballing Annotated Waldens. Researched four available. 1970, 1992, 1995, and 2004. 

The first edition I’d found we're super pricey. Then, as fate would have it found an original first edition from 1970. In awesome condition with a dust cover for $18. 

Despite some copies being an exuberant amount managed to get all four copies for less than my gift and still some leftover to use for another present. 

Why go through all this for virtually the same book?

A review I'd read said in fact all three are different. The 1992 and 2004 are the same. Just a newer release. 

Each offers a different perspective. 

My goal in all this?

Being a geek about happiness and peace. Like Thoreau.

Finding the threads in life to be the best for the world and myself has been and will continue to be my greatest pleasure.

I endeavor to know Henry better. Learn from these scholars. And, create my own annotated version. Who knows, perhaps I'll be the fourth to release my notes published for everyone to dissect. 

What I'm especially happy about is having all the first editions together. 

If you are seeking a way of life that's happy, contented, without being complacent Walden is the timeless discovery that never grows weary of the truth for modern readers. 

2021 Update 👆🏼
2016👇🏼
Walden is the most EPIC read, by Henry David Thoreau.

Henry’s roadmap to sojourn a memoir gives hope to this "road less traveled" (Robert Frost) author (me). 

Discovering balance simplistically. Clearing the forest. A division between dreams and reality. Design the world I live in. 

As Ghandi said paraphrased, be the change I wish to see in the world.

How can we see truth? Amongst the myriad of things accumulated? With the space required to own? Separate from our experiencing the meaning of truth?

"Follow the yellow brick road", the heart encourages. "Tap your heels together. You're already home", the spirit frees. Exist here. 

Bring ‘it’ where ever we go. Yes, this is ‘it’. I’m taking YOU with me. How ‘bout that?

When turning fifty a few years ago blogged about living fifty, fabulous, and other F words, not grey: a memoir about balance and pace had given me a platform to experiencing life differently than anyone I knew personally. 

Creating a balance already lived by people like Thoreau. 

In a way this has shown me pace within myself. I no longer force ‘it’ to abide in worldly demands. 

Structuring the space required to create dreams into reality. 

There’s no secret. Just acceptance of resources. 

Using what the world provides from God to design a way to live philanthropically. 

Give myself wholly to what I’m doing. Never absent from the present moment. Focusing on what today offers. 

Traveling here. Home. The place exists within. 

Kind regards,
Patience Phillips