Rating: 4/5

There are lots of reasons for liking a poet. If you have so many they cancel each other out the instant you try and get them down on paper, it's a good sign you've struck gold. That, at least, is how I feel about the poems of Simon Armitage.

Elsewhere Armitage says that he's interested in poems that can tell a story, and in poems that want to crack the chemical equation for language, the self, etc. He likes both, but, given the choice, he'd rather have the former. No member of the difficult crowd, this lad. That commitment has helped to give England one its most quotable poets since Larkin. The best of Armitage's lines weld themselves to the underside of memory:

'I said no, no, no, no, no, no, no. OK, come on then.'

'Here's how they rated him when they looked back.
Sometimes he did this, sometimes he did that.'

'Because the worm won't know your make of bone from mine'

'its gashed, rhinoceros, sea-lion skin
nursing a gallon of rain in its gut'

'And left unsaid some things he should have spoken,
about the heart, where it hurt exactly, and how often'.

He commands range, narrative power; he has a sturdy, ironic sense of humour underlying his no-nonsense approach to life. He doesn't think that the stuff of ordinary life is somehow unfit for poetry. Sometimes his pre-emptive sense of irony - what Sean O'Brien has called his 'I speak your one-liner' mode - can drain the blood from otherwise fine poems - as in the last line of 'It Ain't What You Do It's What It Does to You'. Perhaps this is what some people mean when they call Armitage's poems unfeeling.

I don't agree. In his most moving poems (nearly always about love), Armitage silences his inner smart-aleck and trusts what springs from feeling. I wished some more poems in this vein had been included from his first collection, such as 'The Dykes', 'The Night Shift' and 'Somewhere Along the Line.' They would have been preferable to slighter pieces like 'And You Know What Thought Did', or all of 'The Whole of the Sky' pieces from Cloudcuckooland.

My favourites are listed below.

Poem 
Kid
Great Sporting Moments: The Treble
The Two of Us
To Poverty
Lines Thought to Have Been Written on the Eve of the Execution of a Warrant for His Arrest
'I am very bothered when I think...'
I Say I Say I Say
Goalkeeper with a Cigarette
The Tyre
'Somewhere in the state of Colorado...' 
To His Lost Lover (for many Armitage's best poem).

This is a superb, if ever-so-slightly uneven, selection from one of England's most enjoyable living poets.