Rating: 3/5

Whoa, Jessica was actually NOT completely awful in this one. I'm sure she'll get back to being a massive bitch very soon, but this was a nice respite.

I actually found this one a little better than most of the others so far. As someone who hates motorcycles and has never and would never get on one, I appreciated the Wakefield family for recognizing the death machines for what they are. I particularly liked that Jessica, instead of being her usual bratty rebel self, was adamantly opposed to motorcycles after the trauma of losing their cousin in an accident. And I actually thought the way Todd and Liz discuss the issue when he gets his bike was reasonable and somewhat realistic. He doesn't want to give it up but he won't pressure her to ride it, and she doesn't want him to have it but she doesn't want to tell him what to do with his life.

I do wish the plot wasn't quite as heavy-handed, with Liz ending up in a coma after an accident the one and only time she finally relents and gets on the bike. I mean, come on. I think it would've been stronger if maybe halfway through the book, she says she wants to give it a try, and maybe they do a few secret rides and she gets a little more reckless as it goes on, and THEN the accident happens. But I suppose in a roughly 130 page book, you don't have a lot of room for nuance. I like that it ends on the cliffhanger, and I remember from childhood the plot of the next book and how I asked my mom back then if it was actually possible for such a thing to happen. She told me I'd have to ask the doctor at my next check-up. (Listen, we didn't have the internet back then, kids.) 

My main gripe with this one is the scenes involving the teacher, Mr. Collins, when he's letting Liz use him as a sounding board/counselor/relationship advice oracle. It just felt…inappropriate. Like, he doesn't do anything wrong, but a young handsome male teacher really should not be sitting alone with a teenage female student discussing her love life. It kind of felt like the opening chapters to a My Dark Vanessa type of book. He should have realized right away this was not the type of conversation he should be having and directed her to a female teacher or guidance counselor.

But I liked this one well enough, and I hope we get at least a couple more books before Jessica goes back to being the literal worst.