Rating: 4/5

By way of full-disclosure, I have read most or all of Ellis Peters’ Brother Cadfael novels when they were first available. But that was long ago and far away in my memory. I picked up this one by chance and reading it was an opportunity to again explore a period of turmoil in English history when the land had not been long conquered by the Normans and royal succession was being fought-over by King Stephen and Empress Matilda. This, to my mind, is one of the best of the series.

Ellis Peters, a pen-name, created Brother Cadfael, who after a life as a Crusader, has retired to a Benedictine abbey adjacent to Shrewsbury, a significant town on the Welsh border. Not only was the country in civil war, but the borders of England were in frequent turmoil from both the Scots and the Welsh.

Peters enjoys exploring the moral and religious dilemmas posed by events in and around the abbey. In this story, there is a lull in the conflicts and the Benedictines are able to conduct their annual trade fair from which they derive much of the revenue to support the abbey and its functions. The town was in the year previous severely damaged by the war and a number its citizens lost their lives. The town fathers wish that the abbey share a portion of its revenue to help with those repairs. The abbot has heard their plea and refused based on a previously negotiated agreement with Shrewsbury. 

As the fair begins, there is the death of a prominent merchant from Bristol. As the fair proceeds, there are other deaths. Is there a connection among them? Who will be the next? What should be the responsibilities of citizens, sheriff, monks, abbot, merchants and visitors? All of this is fit for exploration.

If I recall other Cadfael novels correctly, this is one of the minority that does not involve much in the way of internal abbey procedures and politics. The new abbot gives Cadfael responsibility for protecting the abbey’s reputation by making inquiries into the death of the merchant and keeping him informed. This gives him freedom to wander beyond the walls of the abbey while taking time, when possible, to keep his personal responsibilities as the abbey’s chief herbalist. Since this isn’t the first of these chronological tales, those who are reading them in order will find familiar characters including monks, merchants and the assistant sheriff, Hugh Beringar, and his wife Aline.

The plot is intricate and the sins are frequent and subtle. Though it is possible to guess the villain early, the “why” and the extent of villainy plays out only in the latter part of the book. 
There is young love and mature love on display. We see most things through Cadfael’s well-honed eyes. As an investigator he applies his knowledge of life and relationships as much as his ability to spot physical clues. We also learn a bit more about his time as a crusader and his “home town” in Wales.

I am interested in the history of this period, so I am impressed at how well Peters integrates this with her story. Plot elements dovetail and she brings history down to its effects on the common man and the remote town. Having read, appreciated and reviewed Mortimer’s The Time Travelers Guide to Medieval England, I am further impressed with the details that Peters includes and makes part of an enriched story. She gives a real “feel” to the place and time.