Interestingly, this anthology starts out with one of the best poets I've read so far, Tu Fu, so that everything else that comes after his poetry doesn't quite live up to the pace set in the beginning. There are still some good non Tu Fu poems here, the themes are repetitive and the quality of the work ranges from writer to writer as would be expected in an anthology. 

I'm not sure about Kenneth Rexroth's ability as a Chinese translator, and he honestly states that there was no particular method to translating, some poems being “freer” and others “literal”. Also some of the poems were unavailable to him in Chinese and so he translated them from the French texts he found. I had previously read his translation of Chinese women poets some months ago which I wasn't necessarily moved by, good poems here and there but nothing that's remained with me since,  another more knowledgeable reviewer who understands the language brings legitimate questions to his capability. https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...
I will say though, despite the inefficiencies that may exist the Tu Fu poems shine through spectacularly as is the case with great literature that usually even defies errors in translation. Some of my favourite poems:

From Tu Fu
“JADE FLOWER PALACE
The stream swirls. The wind moans in
The pines. Grey rats scurry over
Broken tiles. What prince, long ago, 
Built this palace, standing in
Ruins beside the cliffs? There are
Green ghost fires in the black rooms.
The shattered pavements are all 
Washed away. Ten thousand organ
Pipes whistle and roar. The storm 
Scatters the red autumn leaves.
His dancing girls are yellow dust.
Their painted cheeks have crumbled
Away. His gold chariots 
And courtiers are gone. Only
A stony horse is left of his 
Glory. I sit on the grass and
Start a poem, but the pathos of
It overcomes me. The future 
Slips imperceptibly away.
Who can say what the years will bring?”

“FAREWELL ONCE MORE
TO MY FRIEND YEN AT FENG CHI STATION
Here we part.
You go off in the distance,
And once more the forested mountains
Are empty, unfriendly. 
What holiday will see us
Drunk together again?
Last night we walked
Arm in arm in the moonlight,
Singing sentimental ballads
Along the banks of the river.
Your honor outlasted three emperors.
I go back to my lonely house by the river,
Mute, friendless, feeding the crumbling years.”

Reading these poems I had the same feeling I did when I read Sappho, Ono no Komachi, Izumi Shikubi, and other poets whose writings have reached us despite a chasm millennia deep. That human beings in different places throughout the world have looked at the same moon and stars (the ones that haven't died off since then at least), and nature, for thousands of years struck with the same feelings of yearning and longing, and that probably, if there are more millennia left for humanity, although it currently seems rather bleak and that this won't happen given the destructive path we're in, some people will look to the skies and will be moved in the same way, and some wonderful literature might even come out of it as was the case with these poets.