Rating: 4/5

Henry V completes the transformation of Prince Hal, (Shakespeare’s protagonists from both  Henry IV, Part One, and Henry IV, Part Two) from dissolute prince to sober warrior king. Preceding Henry’s first appearance on stage, the Archbishop of Canterbury marvels at his transformation and at his kingly virtues:

Hear him but reason in divinity and all admiring with an inward wish you would desire the king were made a prelate. Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs you would say it had been all in all his study. List his discourse of war and you shall hear a fearful battle rendered you in music. Turn him to any course of policy the Gordian Knot of it he will unloose familiar as his garter.

Do you hear in that effusive praise a slightly desperate attempt to wipe out the specter of the king’s all too recent roguish youth? It strikes me as a nervous attempt to deeply bury the recent past. I believe this was Shakespeare’s intent. 

In the following scenes, Shakespeare reminds us why Canterbury was so anxious to bury the past under copious praise. An ambassador from the French Dauphin presents King Henry with a gift of tennis balls — a clear taunt and insult, referencing the king’s recent frivolous youth, and showing that France held him in contempt. Henry was equal to the challenge, returning the serve of the contemptuous gift with wit and gravity:

When we have matched our rackets to these balls we will, in France, by God’s grace, play a set that shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard. Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler that all the courts of France will be disturbed with chases. And we understand him well, how he comes o’er us with our wilder days, not measuring what use we made of them.

Shortly after this tennis ball exchange (my favorite scene in the play) Shakespeare uses another device to emphasize that the king’s wild youth is behind him. At the Boar’s Head Inn, Mistress Quickly relates to the crowd her final parting with Sir John Falstaff at his deathbed. The great rogue has died, and with him the memory of the king’s roguish youth, and all has happened fittingly offstage, no need to view the corpse, thank you very much. 

Henry V is best remembered as a great martial play, displaying Henry’s prowess at war as he prevails in his French campaigns. Henry is given great, stirring martial speeches that have transcended the stage and entered the common usage:

Once more unto the breach, dear friends

and

We few, we happy few, we band of brothers

Yet behind the glorious bluster of this play celebrating English arms and English power, Shakespeare is subtly reminding us of how fleeting, how transitory fame and glory are. Not only does he nudge us to remember that this great, victorious king was not long before a dissolute, roguish youth, but he hints at the dark days that lie just ahead. When Henry speaks of the warlike son that he will produce to follow him, both we and Shakespeare’s original audience known that Henry’s son will be the weak, ineffective Henry VI who will lose France forever, lose his own throne, and nearly destroy England by provoking the War of the Roses through his weakness. Yes, Shakespeare seems to say, there is glory. Go ahead and cheer for this moment. But don’t forget that it is only a moment.