Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars
I am surprised that this book and Emecheta are not better known. She was born in Nigeria, but lost her parents young. She moved to Britain when she was sixteen to marry and had five children very quickly. She left her husband as a result of domestic abuse and brought up her children on her own whilst working and doing a degree. She also began to write, about her experiences and about racism. 
This novel is set in Nigeria and tells the story of Ogbanje Ojebeta, a young girl with two older brothers. When their parents die in an epidemic one of her brothers sells her into slavery into the household of Ma Palanga, a cloth merchant and family relative. The plot is linear and tells the story well. On the death of Ma Palanga, Ogbanje Ojebeta is a young woman. She decides to run away from her situation back to her homeland area. There she lives with her relatives until a man called Jacob meets her and decides he wants to marry her, she agrees and she marries. It transpires that the price her brother received for selling her into slavery. Her husband pays this and the book ends:
“Ojebeta now a woman of thirty-five was changing masters.”
A wry comment on the nature of marriage for women. The story is set in the early years of the twentieth century and during the novel the reader sees the increasing influence of the colonial power and the encroachment of Christianity, which is seen as something to be tried; some of its rituals to be absorbed into daily life. Ojebeta is caught up in a cycle of oppression and is at the mercy of male master:
“All her life a woman always belonged to some male. At birth you were owned by your people, and when you were sold you belonged to a new master, when you grew up your new master who had paid something for you would control you. It was a known fact that although Ma Palagada was the one who had bought them, they ultimately belonged to Pa Palagada, and whatever he said or ordered would hold.”
For Nigerian women, the implication is that freedom is fleeting and becoming independent form one master leads to enslavement to another. The slavery here is of the domestic variety, but physical and sexual abuse are common:
“I was bending down sweeping the floor when he came up behind me and jumped on me. He pulled at the small breasts I had then. I was not all developed. It hurts so, I screamed. Do you know what he did? He slapped me hard on both sides of my face. ”
The women here are the ones enslaved and the whole provides a powerful argument for emancipation, not only of women, but also of children. All that aside Ojebeta is a strong and likeable protagonist, the novel well written and easy to read.