Rating: 2/5

I’m standing at the little free library in the park, sorting through dusty cookbooks and yellowed children’s books, namely titles like The Baby-Sitters Club and Easy Crock Pot Recipes. In the midst of these selections, I find Orson Scott Card’s Treasure Box, Divine Secrets of the Ya-Ya Sisterhood by Rebecca Wells, and Neal Shusterman’s The Shadow Club. I usually take one, but I quickly snatch all three. It’s amazing what people will throw or give away (depending on your perspective). The giver leaves a piece of himself. I've often found initials on the books, and I wonder what that book meant and why the owner decided to carry on. Every time I visit a little free library, or find a new one, I’m reminded that real people have owned these books. They have cried or laughed over the pages, and now they are giving a priceless gift back to me, then I can choose my own book to give away to continue the community.

I chose The Shadow Club because I loved Unwind and his Skinjacker Trilogy. Shusterman's writing has so much depth, and he wisely weaves science fiction with reality. Each book is so intriguing and refreshingly new. With this in mind, I had to read The Shadow Club. Published in 1988, this is one of his first books. His writing has vastly improved since this particular novel. Throughout reading it, I couldn't help but think I've read or watched something like this before, which was a shame because his books are typically clever. Perhaps the plot and its characters were just too simple, so it was fundamentally underwhelming. 

It begins with Jared, a teenager who has lived under the shadow of Austin ever since he could remember. Both sprinters, Austin has constantly mocked Jared for not being good enough. Jared passively deals with it, until he talks to his best friend/girlfriend Cheryl. Cheryl herself has lived under the shadow of her cousin who performs, dances, and sings just a bit better than her. Their anger fuels the Shadow Club. Together, they find people like them: a jock, a nerd, a band geek. You get the picture. The Shadow Club starts with harmless pranks, like putting slime in a trumpet and hiding a spider in a sweater. Of course, these pranks spiral out of control and their secrecy is tried when multiple people get injured, including Austin, who can no longer run, and the school is set on fire. The club is blamed, so their relationships are tested. There are certainly a few lessons to be learned about relationships, but this book wasn't very satisfying because everything seemed to escalate too quickly. The characters were all stereotypical, and all but Cheryl and Jared were left undeveloped. However, I liked its pacing and breezed through it in two hours. If you’re going to read Shusterman, I wholeheartedly recommend Unwind.