Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars. I was excited to get a title in our Romance History Project that isn't contemporary or historical. In this science fiction romance, there are two types of humans living in space: Harmonics (telepaths) and Wolves. Cidra was raised by Harmonics but didn't inherit the telepathic ability and greatly desires it. She wants to head to a different planet where she can research and look for a relic that might give her that ability and convinces Teague, a space postman, to let her hitch a ride. It could be a great premise but it lacked in the delivery. Cidra is a naive Mary Sue to Teague's grumpy sexist. The consent was about what you'd expect for a book published in 1986. I was more surprised by how pro-capitalist and appropriative it was. It has a conservative sensibility in many ways. Will Cidra and Teague be happy together? Meh. I wouldn't put money on it. (That's about all I learned from Teague's love of playing a gambling game.)

Sweet Starfire is considered to be the first futuristic romance published by a mainstream publisher. Upon researching further, it turns out that's not entirely true. Krentz was inspired to write futuristic romance after reading  Restoree by Anne McCaffrey (p. 1967) after college, which she ascribes as the first futuristic romantic suspense. I'm very interested in reading that someday to see what inspired JAK. Per a source in Wikipedia (linked below), The Devil to Pay, published in 1985, by the pen name Stephanie James was about an FMC who wrote science fiction. The reader feedback was positive enough that Krentz decided to write Sweet Starfire.

This is the first book in Lost Colony series. While being a "romance first" is touted as a wondrous accomplishment, Krentz says the First Colony series tanked her career. She wasn't offered another contract after the third book in the trilogy. This led to her pivoting to writing historical romance under the name Amanda Quick. Times have changed, as has the market, and she's now able to write science fiction again, this time under the name Jayne Castle. 

Krentz is a prolific author with a plethora of pen names. Her first novel came out in 1979 and she wrote 55 category romances before Sweet Starfire, which was her first single title. Krentz is also notable for having edited and contributed to Dangerous Men and Adventurous Women: Romance Writers on the Appeal of the Romance. 

While it was fun to try an early romance from a different subgenre, this didn't turn out to be very memorable or enjoyable. It was simply...fine.

Further Reading:
The Seattle Times:  The writing life of best-selling author Jayne Ann Krentz: ‘Like juggling chainsaws’  by Melinda Bargreen (January 6, 2019)

Seattle Post-Intelligencer:  Jayne Ann Krentz is the reigning NW queen of popular romance  by John Marshall (March 4, 2002)

Writer's Digest:  Jayne Castle’s 3 Rules of World Building  by Jayne Ann Krentz (November 17, 2021)

Romantic Times Book Reviews:  Travel Back to the Future as Warner reissues two extraordinary novels by Jayne Ann Krentz  by Tara Gelsomino (November 2002)

Writer at Play:  Interview with author, Jayne Ann Krentz (Part 2)  (December 21, 2018)

Entertainment Weekly:  Jayne Ann Krentz explains her craft by Alexandra Jacobs (July 19, 1996)

The Joys of Binge Reading Episode 205: Jayne Ann Krentz – International Best Selling Mysteries  (February 8, 2022)

Fated Mates:  S04.18: Jayne Ann Krentz: Trailblazer (January 5, 2022)

Meyer Lane's Short Attention Span Press:  Surviving in the Writing Biz by Jayne Ann Krentz (January 20, 2013)

Reddit:  I'm Jayne Ann Krentz. Ask Me Anything  (May 17, 2022)

Wikipedia:  Sweet Starfire (accessed February 4, 2025)

Smart Bitches Trashy Books:  Sweet Starfire by Jayne Ann Krentz (April 18, 2016) 

All About Romance:  Sweet Starfire by Jayne Ann Krentz (January 29, 1999)

Characters: Cidra is an archivist, vegetarian, and virgin. Teague is a space postman with scarred hands. He has a pet rock rug named Fred. This is set in the Stanza Nine System on planets Lovelady and Renaissance. 

Content notes: threat of rape (thwarted), off page attempted rape (FMC knocked out attacker), FMC said she would have died by suicide rather than be raped, MMC gropes FMC's breast during her sleep (nonconsensual), murder, attempted murder, physical assault, monster attack, bar fight, attempted home invastion, attempted robbery, TBI (from Screamer), laceration, infected wound, vegetarian FMC has to eat meat for the first time (no other food available), vomit, hunting, butchering, animal death, animal sacrifice, insects, ghosts, sexism, gambling, internalized ableism over not being a Harmonic, past death of MMC's brother (spaceship crash) and parents (mining accident), unsafe sex practices (no condom for penetrative sex without discussion of STI and pregnancy prevention; unclear what birth control options exist in this world), dubious consent, on page sex, alcohol, inebriation, excessive drinking, hangover, gendered euphemisms for genitalia, anti-fat bias, gender essentialism, ableist language, hyperbolic language around suicide

*Buddy read with Charlotte, Hannah, and Vicky. 

RHP ranking, so far:
Whitney, My Love (4 stars)
Maurice (4 stars)
Loyal in All (3.5 stars)
The Moon-Spinners (3 stars)
Sweet Starfire (2.5 stars)
Gaywyck (2.5 stars)
Loving Her (2 stars)
Playing the Odds (1.5 stars)
The Black Lyon (1 star)
No Quarter Asked (1 star)
Regency Buck (1 star)
The Sheik (1 star)
The Flame and the Flower (1 star)
The Lord Won’t Mind (1 star)