Rating: 5/5

This book is in line with such works as the works by Homer and the Aeneid. As a child I heard a few tales of the Knights of the Round table but I didn't realize how tragic the ending of these tales was going to be. Really a great book and definitely glad I picked it up for a dollar at library. What a steel!

As I try to write this review I am just so sad.. Like really sad. I just finished so the emotions are still strong.

I think the tales give a very interesting insight to the culture that was medieval Europe. It's a very weird mix of two very different influences that have found a weird and precarious balance. On the one hand you have the Barbarian nobles who are the descendants of those who overthrew Rome and probably some Norse blood in their too. An extremely warlike people. And then on the other hand you have the restraining influence of Christianity that has pretty much failed to fully pacify the barbarians and has compromised on setting limits to the violence. 

So you have knights you decide to look for adventure and make a name for themselves and they only have to ride down the road a mile or two and they happen upon another knight and before they can determine if they even know the other knight they both gallop full speed towards each other with spears lowered and slam into each other. It's really wild. These guys are just wild. Also heroic. They have to be suffering from some serious CTE and a massive list of other disorders with how much brain damage they accrue. You can tell too because there is very little cleverness displayed throughout these tales.

For instance Lancelot loses his mind and takes off naked through the forest so some of his friends go looking for him. They are looking for two years when they hear about a night with a weird name who just defeated 500 knights. When they ask about the knight the damsel says they found him mad running naked through the forest. When his friends encounter Lancelot do they ask "hey man is that you?" No! One of them gets into a massive fight with Lancelot for two hours before it comes to light!! hahahah

I am not trying to detract from these stories. I say this lovingly. And what happened above was probably for dramatic effect but still. I highly enjoyed reading these tales and they are pretty awesome I just some find some aspects rather amusing but also enlightening.

PS I think we should bring back jousting as a professional sport. I think this is probably the greatest sport ever devised of by man. I don't think we are ready for that thought hahahah