Rating: 4/5

I’m thrilled to say that, overall, I adored this book!

I thought Fanny was a fascinating character, as she is unlike many of Jane Austen’s other heroines who are “obstinate and headstrong,” “clever and rich,” imaginative (to a fault)…etc. I also enjoyed that the reader gets the opportunity to follow Fanny’s character development from a young age, which is an opportunity we don’t get in Austen’s other novels. 
Fanny is meek and quiet but strong enough to stand by her morals and integrity, which is where (I believe) this story truly shines. 
Jane Austen’s explorations and discussions on class, education, and decency is done brilliantly! 

One of my favorite moments in the book is when Austen shows the stark contrast between the grand and genteel Mansfield Park in comparison to Fanny’s cramped and noisy parental home. It perfectly illustrates the result of two very different marriages, one advantageous and one not so advantageous. Getting an insight into what Fanny’s upbringing (from the age of 10) could have been was fascinating, because it completely changes her (and the reader’s) perspective on life at Mansfield Park, which (at that point in the novel) we have grown accustomed to. Like Fanny, I longed to return to Mansfield’s vast gardens, but I was also intrigued to explore more of “the city” (Portsmouth). Incase you forgot, the Thrush has gone out of the harbor. ;)

Unfortunately, I found the ending quite abrupt and surprisingly *un*romantic. I wish the reader could have seen a bit more emotional development between the two “romantic leads.” In truth, I think this is Austen’s least “romantic” novel, but that doesn’t tarnish my enjoyment of it in the least, because (as I said before) this story shines elsewhere. 

Overall, I truly loved this book!
I can’t believe I’ve officially read all of Jane Austen’s complete novels… *weeps bittersweet tears* 

Thankfully, my Jane Austen journey is far from over. I can’t wait to read her unfinished novels, juvenilia, and re-read her books for many years to come. 

Thank you, Jane!