Rating: 4/5

I had wanted to give a review on this back last year, but naturally the wave of the holidays have taken the room until now:

It comes as a shock to see that no other reviews have been given to this gem of a book in over 14+ years. Very alarming and speaks a whole lot of volumes (Pun not at all intended). Sure, other divorce-type books are usually ones for spouses looking on how to manage their finances, property, and dispute custody/schedulings over kids, but NOTHING much to give attention on HOW the children themselves are affected before, during, and obviously afterwards. It’s more involved the parents may or may not comprehend once they start separating.

There’s a whole lot that can be said about this book. Only I don’t have all the time in the world to dissect it completely, both my opinion and “life-hood” experience on the matter.
In general I believe, if it were possible, that every person on the planet should be informed on the subject of children being greatly afflicted by the ever growing divorce-epidemic. If it were [ever] properly done when it comes to foresight, the children would have much more time for a good future, and far less burdens that would no doubt impact on what they can grow up to become as a well-prepared individual that can write their mark on life (attend college/university, career, family, serve in the military, etc). But if given a fractured chance like caring more over financial, custody battles (ie “Who’s the better parent?” game) than putting greater emphasis on the kids’ emotional well being especially, is teaching them to become possibly insecure or less trusting of either parent to rely, to be the parent they [once] remember they were before the separation.
The law and its court system on divorce can never truly realize that even though they’ve done their part to “ensure” the change for spouses, and “protections” for their kids, there is none in justice when it comes to children’s now altered relationships with their parent’s now separate views of one another in their very observing eyes. Family life is now moved to something less than family unity and becomes like “your parents are strangers now” sort of outcome. Basically yes, you have a parent the kid will visit now and then, but the activity to hang out or spend the night or two at places done before, it’s not the same experience than it was when having a normal family life doing the same activity with either parent - It’s like it’s spoiled or ruined into “hanging out with a friend than a parent” and wish your mom or dad were here to enjoy it too, but can’t now because for whatever [un]explained reason and am simply forced to “make due”.
I’m not sure what it is about financial “insecurity” that fathers always seem to flip over backwards when it comes to child support. It’s more of the attitude out of it I wonder. Why are they so angry over it? Isn’t the concept of “No price should be between the health and safety of our child.” important? And when the kids become of legal age of 18, the father expresses a ridiculously exasperated relief that they are no longer meant to pay like it’s some college loan or paying off your car? Is the 18 year old supposed to say, “Sorry I was a financial burden to you?” “Sorry for existing?” “Sorry you’re stuck with me from 6 to 18?” Again, it’s the attitude more than the money, and don’t think it’s ever overlooked by the now-adult that’ll come right back in the face of the payer for giving off that impression. It’s made very easy to see where the priority lies, and takes down the self-worth much more quickly than financial aspects.

Think the first time I ever came across the definition of divorce, was probably when I was 11 watching a Dr. Phil episode giving advice on how to possibly split carefully, but at the same time they have two kids involved in their ping-pong arguments. After I asked my mom what it meant, I remember coming to a conclusion thinking then, “So these kids’ lives are ruined by it? They live with it and the parents are confused why they’re [still] angry? They’re hurt forever? How could the parents ignore them but listen to the law way more? The kids are miserable by seeing them being mad at each other, but still love them, why are the parents looking the other way? Why are they being so selfish over money? Don’t they care for them like mine does? If it happened to me with my parents, my life will stop because my mom will have to work with a very bad back from 3 back surgeries to take care of me till I’m old enough to get a job to provide too. It means I’ll take care of her no matter what. Dad and my life will have to wait for a very long time till she’s okay first.. I’ll need to be very very brave, and never choose who I love more, mom or dad. I love them both and nothing will ever change that no matter how mad they are at each other. Yea, that’s what I’d do.” I ate those words on a gold platter two years later.

When I first came across this book from a large non-profit organization visit a giant garages sale back around 2008, I had very huge doubt at first if there was going to be anything in the book that could sympathize or be considerate in the slightest whatsoever. Like maybe it would also be along the lines of, “Oh well the past is the past, the kids will understand and grow out (or dummy-sounding “get over it”) of those experiences eventually like fully-capable, functioning adults.” Despite those thoughts, I bought it anyway for whatever $2 it was worth, but then choose not to read it until recently. I’d be lying if I say nothing about it with each page I flip doesn’t make me cry because about 75% (which is 4-stars of the entire book) of most passages I highlighted screamed, “Yes that’s exactly what I’ve thought. I’ve tried telling either of them how damaging it is.” and kept going till the end. I can mostly relate to the characters like the caregiver-child (Lisa) &amp; the disabled-child (Billy) in the book - Growing up is a whole lot harder &amp; longer, and might have some catching up to do when it sours down in years or decades. 25% of the rest I can’t really relate to at all like getting into dangerous acts (drugs/alcohol/gambling) which I’ve always believed from the beginning of my family’s separation, “How does getting into it help improve my dilemma with my parents? It doesn’t. It’s more trouble than what’s already there, why bother to add more layers?” Even not being in relationships [yet], because I hardly thought it was a good idea to get into one for the time being, or even if I was in one, I’d wonder if my future boyfriend/fiance would be patient, understanding brave of how my life is altered by the dilemma, the now daughterly duty of caring for my mom and her home, but still be in a relationship despite those hardships. It’s if not I wouldn’t chase him down and make him stay with me as a “only chance for love” attempt. If one day though, marriage is yet I’d still love to have in my lifetime, because it truly is a wonderful thing for two people that mean much to one another like a special friendship that never ages - Having a child amplifies it even more of the union (that is to say that’s what I believe).
The only thing I’m curious about in the book was how the children’s faith in [any] religion is changed either not much or drastically (like become agnostic or atheist) during their lives in the study. I almost came close to losing mine when they split. I’m glad I kept my faith on my own. It’s one of the few reasons I realized then at the time, it’s something both the divorce &amp; my parents have no “control” over while everything else was, and just because I saw a change of faith in my parents doesn’t mean that it applies to me (before I got my confirmation as a Catholic) . If anything, it became much more important to me that I get closer in my faith and keep “my wits” about me in the long run of their separation while living with my mother and had visits with my father, because the altered lifestyle wasn’t going to be an easy one for sure, and I needed all of the prayers I can send like a 2nd family asking for help. Dialing back a bit, it’s concerning to take into consideration when children see wedded parents now becoming “single” it becomes a distortion to the meaning of family values, how religion goes and affects them in practice, and how wonderfully special it is, but now transformed or in another perspective “diminished” and wonder, “Oh so religion is not great anymore to them? Then maybe it’s fake for me too like it is to them.” and changes the children’s growing mind rather fast enough to possibly draw them away from possibly a now-adult child, to see religion on a different plane and miss out a rather spiritual closeness when times get rough. A hope on that front is that it’s never too late for a fallen of the faith after witnessing a family’s fracture to cause personal spiritual friction, to come back into the fold with a newer clarity that was once missed when last seen as wholesome. It’s open anytime and it’s a choice.

Divorce is not a fail-safe solution, that much can be made clear.
Depending on the situation, it’s a 50-50 chance of life for children depending on how the parent(s) points in the new direction as opposed to the previous course. By that I mean it can be made easy or extremely difficult trekking for either parent to prepare their children, while they are not together, learn about independent lifestyle, education on-&amp;-off campus, [getting into] relationships/marriage (it’s still a good thing, don’t stiff it based from past bad experience, and focus its good loving qualities so they can craft their own), good practice of religion (teach them to not lose hope and have them go into a moment of despair on their own, it will be a comfort if you take notice if you’re a religious person), work ethics (or contribution to society), discipline (don’t over coddle/spoil it takes away accountability), and financial responsibility (One example, don’t just buy gifts for kids to “buy their love” of one parent over the other that can’t or won’t. Please don’t, teaching financial self-entitlement or developing a sense of greed is just as bad.).
Above all, don’t speak out ill-will against each other. It’s a “tall order” for either parent, I get it. But take it from a daughter like myself, it would mean worlds [than you’ll ever know] to your kids if you tell them good stories and characteristics about what they liked about one another prior to getting married, not pointing out the all-out imperfections or “malice” at every turn. You really don’t want the kid to wonder about the half of themselves you tell of either parent be, “Wow, if my mom’s that’s selfish like dad said, am I selfish too?” or “Wow, my dad’s mean like mom said, it means I’m mean too.” What will that help the kid to “win” them to one side over the other? No, it will only teach a damaging sense of self-worth that only the “worst” flaws are measured and not highlighting the BEST of BOTH parents that can encourage what kind of individual they can be later on at 18+ years old ready for the world as their own.
Also, listen to what your kid has to say about either one of you, whether or not it’s more or less helpful in terms of feedback. They worry about you both. They love you both. Every minute, every day, every year, every holiday (with you or not in it). Tone down both hostility and animosity (maybe it might be worth it to you, but not at all to them because it’s garbage and more baggage for them to carry on their minds) and look for once at what your kids want from both of you - Just simply pay attention. If you do, they’ll sleep a bit better at night, and not wonder if they’re gonna lose where home is, if they can eat well, attend school, “Will they not yell at each other this time, can we have Christmas without a bad comment to ruin it and remember it, can we have parents that’ll listen? I love them.” It’s not really a lot to ask, and won’t cost a penny.

As mentioned, anyone should be reading this book either single or married, that has or not have kids should at least be made aware of its effects.
If there’d be a way to change the title of this book, it could be something like, “The Long-Term Consequences of Divorce”