Rating: 4/5

[extra star added after writing the review]

 The kind of comedy I do isn't like, going to change the world; but certain areas of society make me unhappy, and satirizing them – aside from being lucrative – provides a release for me. 

So far I've seen a lot of sad clowns, a few very scary ones, but this one is the angriest clown I've met so far. Lenny Bruce is supposed to be one of the greatest stand-up comedians ever, a big influence on some of my favorites (George Carlin and Richard Pryor), so I wanted to get familiarized with his style. I guess my mistake was in picking up the book instead of trying to find one of his videos. A lot of the personality and of the humour comes from the delivery, the body language, the timing, the accents and so on. What I got instead from the book was the anger, and very little of the funny bits.

 "He was a sweet, peaceful and beautiful man. We used to go sailing on the bay and Lenny would sit and write poetry about love and beauty – and about his own frustrations. I don't think he was a comedian, really, I think he was a preacher." 

His friends (Enrico Banducci in the quote above) and most of the people that actually met him speak very highly of Lenny Bruce, and, at the rational level, I very much agree with what he is trying to do. Lenny is a modern incarnation of that very important Medieval institution: The King's Jester, the only one at Court allowed to speak Truth to Power. A job that more often than not ended with his head on the chopping block.

Like the fabled jester, Lenny Bruce was unsatisfied with the politically correct style of jokes he came across when he started his stand-up comedian career. He also couldn't muscle his way in without an angle to separate him from his peers. So Lenny chose to be deliberately provocative on stage, to push the limits of what is acceptable to say and what is taboo.

 "Here's a rich church, and next door's poverty – so it's hypocracy." 

Midwest small town audiences were not really ready to have their religion, their politics and their sexual prejudices challenged in a very aggressive and profanity-laced manner. So they called the cops on Bruce, then tried to justify their meanness in terms of preserving public decency. That's the point I think where everybody agrees that Lenny Bruce suffered so that future comedians can do their skits without major interference from distressed Powers. And why we need to still be vigilant of these liberties against tyrants. Only last weekend (Feb 2019) such a tyrant asked for a satire show (SNL) to be shot down and destroyed because it dared to make fun of him.

There's even a short passage in the book that reads ominously prescient of the kind of empty, rambling, nonsense language used by politicians, especially of the orange variety:

 In this country, regardless of race, color or creed, the color has a right to know it becomes everyone's duty, the duty that has become the right of every man, woman and child, a child that one day will be proud of his heritage, a child that only in these perilous times, when a man-born menace, a horrible bomb, that can only disfigure and defame its creator,a horror, an evil, a bad, a lazy, a lethargic.
Lethargy and complacency we cannot fall into. We've got a bomb that can wipe out half the world! If necessary. And we will! To keep our standards, the strength that has come from American unity, that we alone will build for better schools and churches. 

&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&lt;

I have very strong opinions against people who toss F-bombs casually in normal conversations or routine daily activities, but Lenny Bruce is a special case. He has a license to cuss (he's the King's Jester, remember!), and more than enough reasons in his personal life to be angry about. I just wish I could say I found his skits funny. But I would be lying. Most of them are disjointed, rambling (heroin, maybe?) and the topics fairly limited to religion, sex and police abuses. These are the true sins of society that Lenny Bruce had often had to deal with in his personal life, the absurdities and the persecutions he needed release from through foul language and angry rants. Why? Hypocracy!

 'Because knowledge of syphilis is not an instruction to get it.' 

The hypocracy is on the rise today, and we probably need our Lenny Bruces more than ever. Priests and politicians who embrace abstinence-only education, deny science and have secret assignations in highway toilets. Censure of sex and cuss words, but not of explicit violence. Mass shootings and pro-gun lobbying. Police abuses and accommodating judges. All of these are issues Lenny Bruce discussed in his shows. And he got arrested for it.

I might occasionally disagree with the form he had chosen to present the issue, but not with the underlying message or with the need for exposure. Lenny used to argue his obscenity court cases in front of the audiences, often in terms of the First Amendment. In this, I am reminded of the movie 'The People vs Larry Flint.' Yes, it's important to have the right to annoy other people with words. Beating them up or blowing them to pieces because you disagree with them is a whole different matter, but words should be freely expressed.

 In fact, that's why we left England years ago – because we couldn't bitch about the church, the Anglican Church, we Protestants. And we had underground meetings. 
"I'm tired of this shit, let's go somewhere else, let's go to a different country where we can have our meetings and be Protestants. Let's go somewhere else so we can be disgusting. And do disgusting shows. No one can stop us – flaunt it in their faces." 

or, quoting a Supreme Court decision,

"And the words 'vulgar' and 'disgusting' shall not apply, since human liberties are at stake." 

Some people might say Lenny Bruce was asking for it, by being deliberately insulting and obscene, and they would not be very far off the mark. But the correct reaction is to not go to one of his shows instead of calling the cops to muzzle him. Or to go to one of his shows and actually trying to figure out what made him angry in the first place. But that's asking too much from bigots and racists

I may not read another of Lenny Bruce printed collections, but I am still interested in a live show.