Rating: 4/5

An offbeat Western to say the least, though definitely in line with my personal interests.

Redeye is a novel that explores the voices of various individuals that find themselves in Mumford Rock at the time of an archaeological discovery on Mesa Largo. The cast is large and every character gives their account of events with appropriate grammar and manner of speaking.

There is Cobb Pittman, a ruthless bounty hunter with a raw eye condition and a thirst for vengeance following the Mountain Meadows Massacre. He is accompanied by Redeye, a pitbull cross with an equally mean streak that Pittman struggles to keep under control. 

There is also Star Copeland, a young civilised Christian woman bombarded with proposals, and Bumpy Copeland, an adoptive cowboy son who is rough around the edges but quite innocent. Other significant characters include an idealistic Englishman named Andrew Collier, a dubious Mormon ferryman known as Bishop Thorpe, two ambitious idiotic businessman called Bill Blankenship and P.J. Copeland and two bickering Native Americans along for the ride, known as Mudfoot and Lobo. 

There is a lot going on in this novel, most of it absurd. There are exploding Chinamen, a mummified baby being nursed by a traumatised elderly matriarch, guides bickering in their mother tongue about who has the bigger appendage and a shootout on a tourist trail. One thing that strikes me most about Edgerton's approach to Redeye is how subtly he reveals the desperation in his White characters, colonial types revealed as ridiculous by their offhand dehumanisation and insane aspirations. While you can't root for all of these characters, there is a definite schadenfreude in reading about their various marches into disaster.

It has been a while since I read a book that used multiple first-person narration but it does work here. Edgerton has an ear for speech patterns and no two narrators sound exactly the same. Also he has clearly done his research into Mormonism in the West, which I found rather educational.

I enjoyed Redeye though most of the characters were fairly despicable. If you're drawn to Western tales that reveal the peculiar state of the Wild West, then this will likely amuse you as it did me.