"Business is a constant process of keeping your own guard up--in fact, it is the only way to do business--while encouraging others to lower theirs. Usually, the less formal the situation or venue, the more likely people will be to let their guards down. You will be surprised how much you can learn from a quasi-business or social-business situation" (17). 

"One of the best rules I know is when a crisis occurs or is in the process of occurring, don't react. Just
say you'd like to think about it. Make any excuse, but don't respond. Once you have analyzed the crisis
in terms of his potential for opportunity as well as potential for disaster, then you can respond" (58-59). 

"I would guess that more deals are blown because of lack of patience than for almost any other reason" (99). 

"A good salesman can take ten facts about a product and by stressing some and deemphasizing others create ten different impressions. That's what salesmanship really is: positioning the facts to get the desired results" (124). 

"Time itself--or the passing of it--can also be one of your most valuable negotiating allies. Anxiety and the desire to get a deal done breed hyperkinetic behavior. There is a natural tendency to speed up the negotiation process rather than slow it down. Force yourself to resist this urge, and take advantage of it in others" (152). 

"For me, getting the most out of my abilities is directly proportionate to getting the most out of my time. I take an aggressive attitude toward time, and I seek to control it rather than have it control me" (229). 

"I have been on the receiving end of many no's and I actually prefer an instant negative response to an excessively long, drawn-out maybe. Usually these end up wasting my time and come to the same conclusion anyway. 
A no is often better for everyone. It saves time on both sides, and it will give you a sense of satisfaction. The realization that you won't have to deal with it again can make you feel like you've really accomplished something" (231). 

"Business is a competition, and any high level, sophisticated competition is almost exclusively a head game. The inner game of business, as this could be called, is understanding the business paradox: the better you think you were doing, the greater should be your cause for concern; The more self-satisfied you are with your accomplishments, your past achievements, your right moves, the less you should be" (254).