Rating: 5/5

Duong Van Mai Elliott assembled in The Sacred Willow a detailed review of her extended family's experience of history of what is now the territory of a country we call Vietnam over more than a century. Although they were originally of modest origin, some of her ancestors rose to great power as Mandarins in the North and thrived during the colonial period, then experienced upheaval during the long years of war and political instability. As expected in a family of this size during such a tumultuous historic period, different relatives took different stances over the years, some collaborating with the French colonial powers, some others heading for the hills to fight with the Viet Minh. All of them went through hardship and, through a combination of privilege and sheer luck, few (if any? I lost track) encountered an early demise - unlike the 2 million Vietnamese who lost their lives to war during the same period. 

I was impressed with Elliott's lucidity throughout the account and by her ability to acknowledge the different sides of the story, despite her obvious perspective as a "middle class" Vietnamese. (I am not an expert with regards to Vietnamese demographics during the 20th century however I would guess that what she describes as "middle class" was actually a minority of the territory's residents. Top 10% perhaps would be a more accurate way to describe their socio-economic status.) 

This quote from chapter 15 which describes the American's withdrawal and subsequent fall of South Vietnam to Communist hands, struck me as particularly honest: "At that moment, the anti-communists appeared for what they were: a conglomeration of tightly knit families motivated solely by a hatred and fear of communism and held together only by the glue of American power. When that glue dissolved, the group disintegrated into its individual parts - families now concerned with saving themselves. They had never had a larger vision of what South Vietnam should be or why one should fight for it. My relatives were no different." 

As noted by some other Goodreaders, the book is a little long, and at times confusing, but I cannot imagine another way to do justice to the deep history interwoven with the lives of the Duong family. Elliott has a solid grasp of historic facts beyond the experiences of her relatives and does a masterful job of making a difficult and complex era accessible to the 21st-century reader. Impressive.