Rating: 5/5

The music-room in the Governor’s House at Port Mahon, a tall, handsome, pillared octagon, was filled with the triumphant first movement of Locatelli’s C major quartet. The players … were playing with passionate conviction as they mounted towards the penultimate crescendo, towards the tremendous pause and the deep, liberating final chord.

Thus the first sentence of Master and Commander; thus begins the grand series of historical novels penned by Patrick O’Brian over the last three decades of the last century.

 The author.

Patrick O’Brian (1914-2000) was born Richard Patrick Russ in Buckinghamshire, of an English physician of German descent, and an English woman of Irish descent. The eighth of nine children, he lost his mother at the age of four, and led “a fairly isolated childhood, limited by poverty.” He married his first wife in 1936, had two children, one of whom died young; worked as an ambulance driver in the second War, and possibly in intelligence of some sort; got divorced; in July ’45 married a second time (a woman whom he lived with happily until her death in 1998); and soon after changed his name to Patrick O’Brian. In the half-century plus that he and his second wife lived together, a few early years were spent in Wales, but mostly they lived in a Catalan town in the south of France. Besides the “Aubrey-Maturin” series of novels, O’Brian wrote several other fictional books, some collections of short stories, three non-fiction works (including books on Picasso and Joseph Banks), and translated works, by both Henri Charriere (the Papillon books) and by Simone de Beauvoir, into English.

But it is for the Aubrey-Maturin series that O’Brian is best known, and for which he will be long remembered. This was not always the case, however.

Master and Commander,the first book in the series, appeared in 1969, and in the years following, as additional books in the series appeared, they gained modest readership in both England and the U.S. Then in 1988 an editor at W.W. Norton, Starling Lawrence, discovered the novels and Norton began publishing them. They attracted more serious critics and reviewers, sales took off, and O’Brian spent the remainder of his days as a more public author (not so welcome, since he enjoyed his privacy) and also a much better remunerated one (more welcome, I presume). The last two years of his life, after his wife died, were a very difficult time for O’Brian, though he did continue to write. He died in Dublin.

 
The series. 

“Aubrey-Maturin” refers to the two main characters in the novels. There are twenty completed books in the series, which take place in chronological order. The first novel begins in 1800 at Port Mahon, on the island of Menorca in the Balearics. (The British had recaptured the island from France in 1798 and were using Port Mahon as a key naval base in the Mediterranean.) The twentieth novel takes place in 1815, after Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo, and thus is the only one of the series to not take place in the period of the Napoleonic Wars. This conflict provides the general historic backdrop as the novels progress - though in fact the internal chronology of the books is quite bizarre, due to the fact that O’Brian had no idea at the outset that twenty novels would be written, squeezed into a period of fifteen historic years which had mostly been used up by the sixth book. (See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aubrey%...) There is a final 21st novel, The Final Unfinished Voyage of Jack Aubrey, published in the U.S. under the title 21. This work was incomplete when O’Brian passed away in 2000.

The series is set in almost all the seas of the world: the Southern Ocean, the Mediterranean, the South Pacific, the Indian Ocean, the Atlantic, the waters around the China Sea; and on land too in all these areas, with adventures involving exploration, espionage, interaction with political as well as naval power. The ups and downs of the main character's careers, their love lives, their wins and losses in the game of life, all told brilliantly in the evolving history of the early nineteenth century.

O’Brian is a master of character, whose writing has actually been compared quite often to Jane Austen’s. Thus his historical novels are felt by many (including me) to transcend the genre and in so-doing approach the altar of classic literature.

Technical interlude.

  

O’Brian schooled himself in the most detailed knowledge of the ships of this age, not only of Great Britain’s but of many other nations; and in the arcane terms and methods which were used in sailing them. This is why each of the books has the illustration depicted above spread over two pages right up front. The reader needs this diagram to understand even partially something like the following:
As the wind came round on to the beam they set staysails and the fore-and-aft mainsail ... Now, with the studdingsails in, the chase - or the ghost of the chase, a pale blur showing now and then on the lifting swell - could be seen from the quarter-deck ...
A book, A Sea of Words, was published many years after the series started appearing. It contains a wealth of additional information about the ships, about sailing terms, and about many of the lands, political groups, animals, birds, and plants mentioned in the series. (This is only a mention, not an endorsement. I have looked at it briefly, but never tried using it while reading the novels.)

This book introduces the two main characters in the series: Jack Aubrey and Stephen Maturin, who become acquainted by chance when they both attend the chamber music concert at the Governor’s House.

Jack Aubrey is an officer of the Royal Navy, who has just been given his first command as Captain of His Majesty’s Sloop Sophie. Maturin is an Irish physician, whose background and activities (beyond medicine) are revealed piece by piece through the first few books.

Aubrey needs a ship’s surgeon, and Maturin is his man. Thus begins the saga. (I'm not bothering to offer any plot summary here - I don't really like them. If you want one, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Master_...)

The Sophie is a fictional counterpart of an actual ship in the Royal Navy, Speedy. Not only that, but some of Jack Aubrey’s exploits in the first few books of the series are similar to naval actions which a couple of the captains of Speedy achieved in her years around 1800. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HMS_Spe... . 

The characters. Aubrey is a relatively uncomplicated man, prone to making questionable judgments in his personal life, but supremely capable of making first rate decisions in his chosen line of work, that of commanding, sailing, navigating and fighting a warship in the age of sail.

Maturin is quite incapable of grasping the nuances of ships, sails, rigging - even of getting on and off ships when not firmly tied to land. But like Jack he is beyond “capable” in his chosen profession of surgical and medical care.

For much additional detail on these characters, see  Jack Aubrey and  Stephen Maturin. 

There is much humor in the series, but Jack and Steven have quite different takes on what is funny. Steven possesses a wry humor which sometimes goes quite over Jack’s head, whilst Jack’s punning and often ribald flings are received by Stephen with a studied and polite graciousness.

Stephen is a zoologist and botanist par excellence, who is particularly interested in ornithology. Throughout the series his delight at sighting unexpected or remarkable birds is a recurring motif. 

Despite their differences, Jack and Stephen share two traits which make their friendship a lasting one, and underpin the esteem which they feel for each other. The first, and perhaps less important, is their love of Baroque chamber music – not only listening to it, but playing it together, whenever an extra couple musicians happen to be on board. There is a CD called Musical Evenings with the Captain, containing pieces by Locatelli, Haydn, Handel, Boccherini and Leclair which are played by Aubrey, Maturin and guests in the novels. Quite good.

More important than the music, however, is their shared dedication to the men under their command or care. Aubrey and Maturin, so different outwardly, are inwardly motivated, when engaged in their professional duties, with doing right by these men, not with demonstrating their skills for personal glory. This is what makes the characters of the two so endearing, and inexorably pulls the reader from one book to the next.

Highly recommended to readers who like historical novels, and readers of series. Start with this one. It will certainly convince you one way of the other about all the rest of them (though I have seen opinions that the first book is not as exciting and finely wrought as some of the later entries).

By the way 

The movie of the same name, starring Russell Crowe, is made of pieces of several different novels in the series. It is mostly based on the tenth novel, not this one. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Master_a...