Rating: 1/5

There a two categories of romance novels that all readers do not wish to stumble across. One: when the hero is so arrogant, mean, conceited and controlling that you just want to bash his head in (usually because he is paired with a tstl heroine) - and two: when the heroine is so arrogant, mean, dumb, stubborn or whatever else (there's a much bigger range than for the hero) that you just want to bash her head into a wall repeatedly!

Abduction falls into the second category. Usually these books are a pain to the hero as well as to the reader. Thankfully I've not read much for this second category because somehow I cannot handle them! 

The heroine Marisa with the "unique" name and the "unique" eyes and the "unique" (read mentally unstable) personality attracts the hero on first sight. She gets married to him very quickly (as she constantly reminds us in her long and dull narrative) and regrets it. One day they have a bitter fight (one of many) where the hero slaps her hard and goes off and is next seen partying with another woman. Marisa sees this and "draws her own conclusions from that" I S2G and runs off leaving all her gifts from the hero behind.

Then she finds out she is pregnant and like a typical Harlequin bimbo who only cares for herself, does not tell the hero she is. Then one day while this symbol of beauty and calm (my foot!) is out shopping, she simply walks into a shop leaving her one-year-old Jamie outside the shop in his stroller...you know...out in the weather...unattended...simply outside on the pavement...not even INSIDE the shop??? Then when she comes back much to nobody's surprise but her own, she finds her son to be missing. Then she proceeds to act like a crazy person running around and finding a cop and telling him what happened. The cop, much to my surprise, is all okay about the fact that this "unique" eyed psycho just left her baby outside a shop while she was inside smiling and cheerful with the shopkeeper like your typical Harlequin heroine who seems to be able to smile at every man except the hero!

Anyway, then the policewoman naturally, because she is investigating things, asks about the father and how to contact him and this idiot keeps mum about the father. I mean why cooperate with the police trying to find your child, right? Much rather stick to your stupid silly excuses you made up to justify your leaving your husband without a word and then taking his child! Then Marisa gets all offended when the police thinks she's hiding something...gee Marisa, did you ever have a brain??

Next we find out that the police have spread the news about Marisa's missing baby in the press and Gabriel...the hero...puts in an appearance. After so much of dealing with Marisa alone I was happy to see Gabriel.

Then we get chapter after chapter of Marisa thinking everyone around her is somehow bad...the Dudleys, Gabriel himself, everyone she ever met...somehow all these people have some fatal flaw but she is the paragon of purity and niceness!! Even Jamie is portrayed as some kind of hard-nosed, stubborn-tempered spoiled brat. I think CL worked overtime trying to make Marisa look good to the readers but I could find nothing good about her after the initial few chapters - even though the entire book was in her long-winded and boring POV.

I promised myself I would read this book but every minute I spent over it was so painful that finally I compromised and breezed through by only focusing on the dialogues. But even then I found gems like Marisa telling Gabriel she can flirt with whoever she wants and he has no right to say anything...he is your HUSBAND?? You LEFT him and didn't tell him about his baby because you saw a photograph of him dancing with some other woman (never brought this topic back BTW...I was waiting for it to be explained away in typical Harlequin fashion but nope...we readers need to draw our own conclusions also it seems).

Marisa also was so worried about being treated like a possession by Gabriel (something I am not convinced he did) that she kept pushing him away because of that. She kept trying to set terms and order him around and for most of the book he did that.

Gabriel explains in one part that he thought Marisa was in great depression but instead of realizing that, he only thought of his own need to marry her and pushed her into a relationship despite knowing that she is also 15 years younger.

Gabriel also has his flaws but the way the heroine puts it, he is some devil whose only wish is to possess her and wipe away her identity...which she finally acquired after having Jamie and spending all her love and devotion on him? What kind of identity is that??

Basically, pardon the long rant but this book sucks. Avoid it if you can, please! This book made me think that the hero loves the heroine...but he shouldn't for his own mental peace. I mean we are even told that Jamie dislikes the hero! It also made me feel that the heroine was a complete moron who only cares about herself and her feelings to honestly bother about her HUSBAND or her son. She doesn't understand the concept of partnership, sharing, communication, trust, anything at all...and instead of blaming everyone around her she should blame herself for the way she is...and the way her relationships are handled by her!