Rating: 5/5

Of the four Stephen Jay Gould collections I've read, this may be the best one. The essays on positive publication bias (#10) and evolutionary stasis and punctuated equilibrium (#11) may be the best in the book. 

The title essay "Dinosaur in a Haystack" (#12) is a very interesting tale about how loathed Luis Alvarez's 1980 meteoric impact theory--with its link to the Cretaceous-Palogene extinction event that killed off all the dinosaurs and made way for the expansion of mammal life--was by paleontologists generally when it was first published. The reason for this stubbornness was a long standing belief in geologic gradualism first espoused by the great Lyell. Gould counts himself among the sceptics and its intriguing to get his account of the fall of this well established theory. He then moves onto a discussion of the Shoemaker-Levy 9 impacts on Jupiter in July 1995 and how this hammered home the Alvarez extinction theory, by then already confirmed by much earthly evidence. The thing about Gould is the way he can make the most recondite material not only understandable, but cogent. 

In "Left Snails and Right Minds" (#16) he runs down why pre-1700 conchologists printed their snail illustrations in mirror image. This seems abstruce at first but ultimately provides insight into how conventions among 16th century conchologists have changed over time. For science, as Gould tells us, is as much bound by cultural preconceptions and personal worldview now as it was then. "Dinomania" (#17) is fun because it's a real palentologist's review of what Steven Spielberg got wrong and right in his film version of Michael Crichton's Jurassic Park. For example:An amalgamated code of, say, 80 percent dinosaur DNA and 20 percent of frog DNA could never direct the embryological development of a functioning organism. This form of reductionism is simply silly . . . Moreover, frogs and dinosaurs are not even close evolutionary relatives, for their lines diverged in the Carboniferous period, more than 100 million years before the origin of dinosaurs. Jurassic Park's scientists should have used modern birds, the closest living kin to dinosaurs.

Another favorite essay is "The Most Unkindest Cut of All" (#24) in which Gould discusses his reading of the Wannsee Protocol which was inspired by the fiftieth anniversary of that document's promulgation by Adolph Eichmann in 1942. The perspective of a modern-day evolutionary biologist of conspicuous intellectual gifts who happened to be Jewish on the oft overlooked Part 2 of the protocol--with its horrible requirements for the treatment of so called half-Jews and quarter-Jews (Mischlinge)--I found riveting and fresh. 

A few of these essays, I can see now, will require a second reading. "Speaking of Snails and Scales" (#27), for example, combines observations from linguistics (with regard to Creole languages), multivariate statistical analysis of the snail genus Cerion, narrative conventions, and fractal geometry. Such wild discursiveness is what I've always found so thrilling in Gould, but this bucking bronco has left me a bit discombobulated. Oh well, it's late.