Rating: 4/5

I appreciate the thought-provoking nature of this book. I really like some aspects of "Grace Awakening", but had some disagreements with Swindoll as well. First of all, I enjoy Swindoll's writing style. His books are always simple and easy to understand, I'm sure even for a new Christian. I think it's great to dwell on the truths of grace. Where Swindoll shines is his explanation of grace as it relates to our relationship with God. There is nothing we can do to deserve salvation or to please God through our own abilities and actions. Everything we have, from our salvation to victory in Christian living, is a gift of God's grace. This book is a needed reminder that the Christian life isn't a checklist, it's a relationship with Christ.

Where I disagree with Swindoll is in his definition and explanation of what I would call interpersonal grace, grace as seen in relationships between believers. First, he uses the term "legalism" in describing those who believe that Christian should follow a checklist in order to please God and try to push their moral code onto others. Legalism, strictly speaking, refers to those who believe that good works are necessary for salvation. A better term might be "self-righteousness"; thinking that you are better than others because of the good things that you do. This is certainly a problem in many churches today. More concerning to me is this: Swindoll seems to say that grace in regards to other believers means letting them do whatever they want without even trying to advise or help them, that grace means that other people's actions are only between them and God and that we have no business judging OR trying to help them grow. He implies that grace means that we have to let people just grow at their own pace, and that it's not our business to be concerned with the actions of others at all. I agree that we should be very careful about judging others or comparing ourselves to others in our actions, but I believe that grace involves seeking the highest good of others. Sometimes this may involve rebuking or correcting, sometimes encouraging others. I think that grace is practical love, love at work. Treating others with grace means wanting what is best for others and helping them to grow closer to God.

On a separate note, there is an aspect of church life where accountability must be exercised. A church should show grace, but it also has other responsibilities like discipleship and even occasionally church discipline. Grace in a church certainly doesn't mean dumping all standards of Christian living.

I agree that in our relationship with God, we need to recognize our constant need for grace. In our dealings with others, we should show grace. But while that doesn't involve imposing a checklist of standards on other people, it may involve conversations that help people to think through these issues and deal with them personally.

I don't intend to convey a negative attitude about this book through this review. Taken as a whole, "Grace Awakening" is a valuable resource on the topic of grace. I enjoyed it and can recommend it, but with these reservations.