Rating: 4/5

"Sir Vidia's Shadow" is the sort of book Boswell might have written had he broken relations with Johnson while the great man was alive. Although in person the Nobel laureate Naipaul is very short and almost fragile (according to Theroux) he must have been in many ways a very large man to cast so great a shadow on so many people.
The story is easily told. In 1966 Theroux is a twentyish university lecturer living in Central and Eastern Africa who enjoys the sexual mores of the natives. He meets V. S. Naipaul, then in his mid-thirties, and his wife, Pat. Naipaul has benefitted from a shady foundation's grant and is supposed to teach at Theroux's university. The younger man quickly falls under the spell of the brilliant, imperious, often nasty Naipaul. These are the funniest chapters in the book. Perhaps the best anecdote is when Naipaul (who often refused to teach and to meet with either teachers or students) agreed to act as a judge in a literary competition, but insisted that there should be no first or second prizes, as he believed no entries would deserve such distinctions. Therefore, the prize should be called "Third Prize".

Theroux and Naipaul grow close as the former accompanies the latter on several trips, and benefits from Naipaul's fanatical commitment to writing. Naipaul is deeply aware of excellence in writing, although he is too prickly to acknowledge the influence of either living or deceased authors. He would have agreed with Homer's sentiment "I am self-taught". Afterwards, Naipaul moves to London, where he is joined by Theroux, and the gaps when they live on separate continents are bridged only by letters, as neither of them is used to communicating by phone (this is a nice touch). Eventually Theroux settles in England, and Naipaul introduces him to local lights such as Lady Antonia Fraser, Harold Pinter and Naipaul's younger brother Shiva (who makes a rather depressing character in this story). Naipaul is often inconsiderate to Theroux (he forces him to go to expensive restaurants and to pay the tab even though Theroux has no regular income, he ignores Theroux's wife and children, he dismisses his concerns) but Theroux accepts it as the price of being Vidia's friend. As both men grow in their writing vocation, and Theroux succeeds first as a travel writer and then as a novelist, there is still the unspoken assumption that he plays second fiddle to Vidia, a man who does not bear contradiction and who "cuts off" anyone who fails him even in trivial matters, such as punctuality. Vidia bullies all who have to deal with him, such as his wife, his editor, his fellow writers, his friends (of whom there are never too many, as Vidia is too thoughtless and blunt to give anyone much time to get close to him). However, according to this book, Theroux manages to remain his friend until his second marriage to a much younger Pakistani woman, Nadira.

The end, when it comes, is swift. Naipaul and Theroux take part in the book fair at Hay-on-Wye, at Theroux's insistence. Vidia is annoyed at the way the event progresses, but says nothing. Months later, Theroux finds out that books he inscribed to Vidia years before have come into the market, and assumes someone is cleaning house. He writes Vidia a fax telling him this, and receives back a demented response from the wife. He knows something is wrong when he cannot get in touch with Naipaul, but hopes against hope that it's only because Nadira wife is intercepting his messages. Eventually he runs into Vidia in London, and the older man cuts him off. When he tries to get an answer, Vidia just says that both of them would have to "take it on the chin and move on".

As Theroux moves away from Vidia's shadow he becomes increasingly critical of him both as a person and as a writer, and it seems he derives a certain pleasure from parading Naipaul's faults for everyone to see. This is not surprising. Their relationship lasted longer and was more intense than some marriages. Clearly, it is like one of those contorted love affairs when it ends, and the spurned lover (in this case Theroux) has to pick up the pieces.

The book is well written, well paced, and Theroux does not succumb to the temptation, which must have existed, of pre-dating his current feelings to infuse his earlier relationship with Naipaul. He lets the Nobel laureate take center stage. He comes across as dominating and dictatorial a man as Mao Ze Dong in Li Shui Zi's book, or Trujillo in Vargas Llosa's "The Feast of the Goat". He truly is a magnificent beast, one to which it is also dangerous to get too close. As Theroux says, Naipaul is not the writer as buddy, but the writer as priest.