Rating: 5/5

Because the road was steep and long,
And through a dark and lonely land,
God set upon my lips a song
And put a lantern in my hand.
 -- Joyce Kilmer

“A Lantern in Her Hand,” published in 1928, is good, old-fashioned storytelling at its best. Among other things for me, it was an island of tranquility that allowed me to temporarily escape today’s headlines and news stories, such as those about a once deliberative body, the U.S. Senate, in which one party had already made up its collective mind that it was going to vote for the president’s Supreme Court nominee, no matter who that might be, while the other party had already made up its collective mind that it was going to vote against that nominee, no matter who that might be.

So much for deliberation.
 
*****

The novel opens in 1854, when its protagonist, Abbie Mackenzie, is eight-years old. She and her family, headed by her widowed mother, are migrating from Illinois to Iowa. After the Civil War, Abbie marries Will Deal, and they soon move to Nebraska, and it is there that most of the story takes place.

Pioneer life was hard on men, but it was so much more difficult for women, and as a result it is a theme in many pioneer novels, including classics such as O.E. Rolvaag’s “Giants in the Earth,” an account of Norwegian immigrants in the Dakotas and Vilhelm Moberg’s Swedish settlers in his four books in his “The Emigrants” series, who eventually settle in Minnesota’s north woods. In those books the authors describe in graphic detail the hardships, loneliness, and despair experienced by pioneer women, and so did Beth Streeter Aldrich, though her book is a more optimistic account than the other two, especially “Giants in the Earth.”

“A Lantern in Her Hand” was Aldrich’s best-selling book and most critics agreed that it was also her best book. One critic described her “as a romantic idealist who wrote of rural life in a positive sense, valuing its warmth and generosity of spirit, yet who was honest enough to show that it was not perfect.” 

Rolvaag’s and Moberg’s women did not want to leave their homes because of the heartbreaking knowledge that they would never again see the family members they left behind, and Aldrich’s Abbie Deal was no exception. “Will’s eyes, full of the light of hope and courage, looked to the west. But Abbie’s, tear-misted, clung to the east.” And when they finally reached their destination where they would make their home on the Nebraska prairie, Abbie looked around and saw that “save for the little clump of natural growth near the wagons, there was still not a tree in sight, not a shrub nor brush, a human being nor any living thing, -- nothing but the coarse prairie grass.”

It could be a savage land, especially one in which to try to make a living as a farmer. The one constant factor in their favor was the rich, fertile, black soil; but at times that was not enough. Nature in that part of the world is not always an ally.

There are weeks when drifting snow and sullen sleet hold the Cedartown community in their bitter grasp. There are times when hot winds come out of the southwest and parch it with their feverish breath. There are monotonous droughts and periods of heavy rain; but between these onslaughts there are days so perfect, so filled with clover odors and rich, pungent smell of newly turned loam, so sumac-laden and apple-burdened, that to the prairie-born there are not others as lovely by mountain or lake or sea.

And there were harsh times when Abbie could not overcome her despair. One of the very worst episodes occurred while she was expecting her fourth child when a plague of grasshoppers stripped the grain in the fields and destroyed the vegetables in the garden. It threw her into such a state of depression that she cried out loud, “God … you ought to help …. We can’t do it alone. You ought to help!”

As I mentioned earlier, the book was a good escapist read for me, but I did not mean to infer that the story was a fantasy or a fairy tale. No, the life that these settlers lived was a hard one that they could not escape, but it also could be a rewarding one. And so the depression that descended on Abbie after the family was devastated by the loss of their crop and their garden did not last.

“It seemed odd to Abbie to have a baby again after ten years. Sometimes she said she was afraid she had forgotten how to care for one. But when she grew strong, it all came back to her. The Abbie Deals do not forget.” 

And thus her normally optimistic nature returned, and she “went happily about her work … courage her lode-star and love her guide, -- a song upon her lips and a lantern in her hand.”

*****

Some readers of this review will remember our mutual friend Kirk, who left us all too soon. Kirk had a virtual shelf that he labeled “Strong Women.” I thought that was a great idea.

I had read Wilma Dykeman’s classic novel, "The Tall Woman," a story about the struggles of a young pioneer woman living in the Appalachians in North Carolina, who had to first struggle to survive the Civil War, and then was forced to deal with that conflict’s uncertain aftermath. As a result, I decided to slightly alter Kirk’s idea and name my shelf “Tall Woman” as a way to honor both him and Wilma Dykeman.

To date, I have thirty-two books, both fiction and nonfiction, on that shelf, though I may have overlooked a few when I went back looking for those that I had read prior to creating the shelf.

I have written all of this to say that with “A Lantern in Her Hand,” we get two tall women for the price of one. The fictional Abbie Deal, of course, belongs on that shelf, but so does her creator.

 In 1909, Bess Streeter Aldrich (1881-1954), her husband, and infant daughter moved from Iowa to Elmwood, Nebraska. It was there that Aldrich first began to write when she could find some time in between caring for her growing family and her housework. Her first book, a short story collection, was published in 1924.

In 1925, her husband died as a result of a stroke, leaving Bess Aldrich with four children, the youngest four-years old and the oldest sixteen-years old. At the time of her husband’s death, she had published only two books, the aforementioned short story compilation and one novel. But from that point on, it was her writing that financially supported her family. She eventually published nearly 200 short stories and magazine articles, nine novels, one novella, and two short story collections.

 She became a popular writer and one of the highest paid magazine writers of her time. And it was her writing that made it possible for her four children to obtain college degrees. 

One can’t help but believe that there was a lot of Bess Streeter Aldrich in Abbie Mackenzie Deal.