Rating: 2/5

This could've been awesome, if the H hadn't spent 75% of the story filled with bitterness because his former fiancee, Felicity, married his dad since it's more impressive to be the rich Countess of Dalmore, instead of settling for his viscount son ( the H ). 

The H, Max ( Viscount Edgemore ), spent 4 years in the army, because he couldn't bear to remain in England and watch his dream girl cosy up to daddy. When Max returns from the continent, he goes to a London party, where Felicity begins flirting shamelessly with him. It's obvious that the little mattress wants to get laid, asap...

The H still thinks she's beautiful, but he's an honourable guy, who's not interested in daddy's used merchandise. Max is also aware that she might already be cheating on his father, since there are at least 2 men who seem to share an *interesting closeness* with her. 

That same night, the H wins some money from a young man named Roland. This moron is the heroine's brother. Roland can't even afford a Covent Garden whore, so he shouldn't have been gambling with anybody. The H accepted Roland's IOU vouchers, not believing that the country bumpkin youngster would ever turn up to pay. 

Roland does turn up the next day, bringing a golden perfume bottle to give as a pawn token, until he's able to pay in cash. Unfortunately, the scent bottle belongs to Abigail, the heroine. And, it's the only item she's inherited from her dead mother. Abigail can't afford to refill the bottle, but she treasures it for sentimental value. 

The spitfire heroine is ready for all out war, when her heirloom is taken and she bullies Roland's gambling partner/friend to escort her to the H's house, so she can get back the bottle. Abigail turns up when the H isn't fully awake and assumes that nobody is home, since there appears to be no servants. 

She doesn't realize that the H has yet to employ servants, since he's just returned from the continent. The impulsive Abigail climbs through an open window, when she spies the perfume bottle inside the room. The H hears the commotion, rushes in and catches her red handed. 

The H uses this to blackmail Abigail and her brother into helping him with a fake engagement. Abigail ( and her brother ) accompany the H to a house party, at his father's country estate. Abigail also agrees because the H promises to return her gold perfume bottle. The OW's immediately jealous but fakes the cordiality when she meets Abigail, because she's still convinced that she can lure the H into her bed. 

I would've given this a higher rating, if the romantic storyline between the MC's had been significant. The novel itself was entertaining, with quite a few hilarious scenes, but the MC's lacked chemistry and the OW was always at centre stage, plotting and trying to get the H into secluded corners so she could be alone with him. 

The OW wasn't even threatened by the heroine's presence because she thought the engagement was a sham and didn't think her husband ( the H's father ) would approve of his son marrying a country bumpkin like Abigail. It's only when the old man openly acknowledges his fondness for his future daughter in law, that the OW takes off the kid gloves and tells the heroine exactly what she thinks of her, in brutally insulting words...

The heroine didn't cower, just because this female cretin was her hostess; on the contrary, Abigail gave back as good as she got and this was a shocker to the infuriated OW. This OW was such a selfish, lying twat that she deserved far worse than a few choice words from the heroine. I almost wished the heroine had behaved in an unladylike or uncouth manner and opened up a can of whoopass on this entitled villainess - who got absolutely zero comeuppance !

Furthermore, if that's not bad enough, the wuss H waited too long to make his move on the heroine. The story would've been better if the H's father had died, so that he ( the H ) would've been the current Earl, since the OW would've been relegated to being just a dowager countess. 

Safety: This is a clean regency romance and there's no cheating, even though there's a former OW in the story. The H had never had a sexual relationship with the former OW, because she'd been a debutante when she dumped him to marry his father.