Rating: 4/5

I had so much fun reading this book! It was lighthearted and fun without being too fluffy. I had a lot of fun with the characters and can't wait to read the next book!

Calliope was such a great character. I swear, that girl wasn't afraid of anything. She was confident enough in her wits to boldly step into situations that had the potential to turn out badly for her. I never thought about it, but it would make sense that someone of her profession would need to be in close contact with members of the ton. How can you mock them if you don't even see them?

I had certain assumptions about this story when I read the summary. I thought that most of the book would revolve around Calliope trying to keep her true identity from James. Once again this author has turned my expectations on its ear! I was very pleased with how things ended up developing between them. 

I also really liked the little bits that were devoted to acting. I felt that the author portrayed Calliope's roles very well with how things were phrased. 

There were so many parts where I giggled to myself. The banter was fun, although it doesn't compare to her more recent offerings. I loved all the side characters we were introduced to! I wanted more of Stephen and more hints of Roth and a certain lady. Luckily I have their books on hand too.

One other thing that I really, really liked about the story: The situation with Salisbury. The resolution of it felt very realistic. Sometimes you don't get to tie everything up with a neat bow and make rainbows shoot through the sky. Sometimes people get shafted and there's no fix for them.

Now, on to the issues I had... 

There were a lot of side characters running around. I had trouble keeping some of them straight, especially when they were only referred to by their designation. Like "Mr." or "Sir" or even a title. It was just confusing a times.

The rhythm of the events had a slightly choppy feel to it. It just felt like things needed to be tightened up here and there, and even clarified sometimes.

I thought the class difference would have a bigger significance than it did. It was brought up, and it was an issue a little, but there didn't seem to be any real depth to the very real problem it would have presented. 

I felt that I didn't get to know James quite as well as I wanted to. He stayed brooding in the shadows a little bit too long for me. There was just this feel of something missing to both him and their relationship. I can't put my finger on it, but I could feel it nagging at me a bit as I read. 

But those few problems I had didn't make the read unenjoyable for me. I plan to keep this book and reread it at a later date. Now, on to Stephen's book! Yeah!