Rating: 5/5

First book of 2018 is here, and it is amazing. This is by far one of the best book i have ever read. 
I read the arabic translated version of this book, and it was translated flawlessly and beautifully. 
The book is so old, i expected it to have that classic way of writing, you know, i expected it to be difficult with lots of descriptive terms that i would not understand, but oh god, it flowed so smoothly, when i read it, i dived into a world that i did not want to be a part of, but i suddenly was, and it was just sad. I was so emotional over it, that i cried almost throughout the whole book. 
In this book, the writer described the lives of many jews in the past, the horrid horrid past of theirs. But when you think about it, the reality they lived, it’s not just connected to them, it’s the reality of a lot of other people, from different religions, and countries. 
Poverty is a disease, that does not know a religion, a gender, an age, a nationality, it can happen to you, to me, to anyone at some point of time. 
The writer described poverty in an honest and a raw manner. It did not conceal some facts, nothing at all, he just laid it all out there, and it was just plain sad to read.
I did not want anyone to suffer, but people did.
I did not want anyone’s dreams to shatter, but they did. 
I did not want anyone to die, but some have died. 
We don’t want a lot of things to happen, but they do anyway, because we just can’t help it. Poverty makes people do the unthinkable, people can resent something, because it’s against their traditions and beliefs, but they do it when there is no one else to help them, and they lost hope and can’t help themselves anymore. 
In poverty you can see an adult turns mad, a child turns into a monster, some friends survive, some others die. You can see a blooming flower die, even animals can’t make it, as they turn into skeletons and fight for a last breath for survival.
It is a sad reality of people in the past, people in the present, people in the future if help is not provided. 
I wish there was not any poor soul in the world, i wish and i wish, and i will keep on making those prayers and wishes so that one day, it will get better.