Rating: 5/5

This is my 2000th (yes, two thousandth) review to be posted on goodreads, which is pretty wild. When I signed up in 2012, I had no real intention of reviewing every book that I read, yet somehow have ever since. This habit has continued through some tough times, including a PhD and a pandemic. The reviews will continue until it stops being fun or I can no longer write them, I guess. Luckily, I am marking this milestone with an excellent book. Of course I'd heard of How to Lie With Statistics, but can't recall actually reading it before. When I saw a copy in a charity shop, I had to buy it because I'm a statistician. However I anticipated rather a quaint and outdated read, given that it was first published more than 70 years ago. I could not have been more wrong! If anything it's much more relevant and important in 2025, when bad statistics are thrown at us with a frequency unimaginable in the 1950s. The methods of wilful misinterpretation have not meaningfully changed, just their velocity and obtrusiveness. Algorithmic social media pushes content that is emotive rather than accurate. I want to press copies of this book upon, notably, my cousin who admits to keeping up with politics by 'doomscrolling on tiktok', my friend who claims to get all her news from instagram, and my parents who hate maths and consequently perpetuate the credulous Boomer stereotype. 

I don't think I've ever made this unqualified statement before: everyone should read this book. It's brief, funny, non-technical, and an incredible tool for media literacy. Huff provides an easy structure for thinking critically about any news report or social media post that quotes a statistic or includes a graph, table, or other data visualisation. My qualification for recommending it is that my day job consists of producing social statistics. When designing social research, my colleagues and I try to minimise known bias in the data we collect, but it cannot be entirely avoided. Every social statistic requires a source and caveats. How to Lie With Statistics is the clearest introductory manual I've ever read for what to look for if you don't have training in statistics. I knew the book was going to great from the first chapter:

The next time you learn from your reading that the average man (you hear a good deal about him these days, most of it faintly improbable) brushes his teeth 1.02 times a day - a figure I have just made up, but it may be as good as anyone else's - ask yourself a question. How can anyone have found out such a thing? Is a woman who has read countless advertisements that non-brushers are social offenders going to confess to a stranger that she does not brush her teeth regularly? The statistic may have meaning to one who wants to know only what people say about tooth-brushing but it does not tell a great deal about the frequency with which bristle is applied to incisor.

There are many social research topics that are very difficult to get accurate data on, because popular norms push answers in a particular direction. As Huff comments, sexual behaviour is a especially tricky case: 

A good deal of the sillier criticism of Dr Alfred Kinsey's well-known (if hardly well-read) report comes from taking normal to be equivalent to good, right, desirable. Dr Kinsey was accused of corrupting youth by giving them ideas and particularly by calling all sorts of popular but unapproved sexual practices normal. But he simply said that he found these activities to be usual, which is what normal means, and he did not stamp them with any seal of approval. Whether they were naughty or not did not come within what Dr Kinsey considered to be his province. So he ran up against something that has plagued many another observer: It is dangerous to mention any subject having high emotional content without hastily saying whether you are for or against it.

Similar problems arise when researching drug and alcohol consumption, gambling, or how people voted in the 2016 EU referendum. The latter question is often included in social attitudes surveys. Responses are particularly interesting because there is baseline data: we know what percentage of the electorate did not vote (28%), voted leave (37%), or voted remain (35%) in 2016. Yet when you ask people in a supposedly nationally representative survey how they voted, the answers look very different. I hypothesise that at least two things happening: remain voters have traits that make them more likely to respond to surveys and some respondents accidentally or deliberately misremember how they voted. Survey respondents seem especially reluctant to admit that they did not vote and/or few people who did not vote in the EU referendum are willing to respond to surveys of their social attitudes. Or any number of other things could be going on - the point is that we don't know and it's very difficult to find out.

Huff is really good on spurious accuracy, even calling out Karl Marx for it. I find this particularly trying in GDP figures. So the UK economy grew 0.1% in the last quarter, did it? What is the margin of error around that figure? If it's more than 0.1 percent, which is extremely likely given the many different potentially inaccurate measures feeding into GDP calculations, that 0.1% is nearly meaningless. The economy could have grown, shrunk, or remained the same size in the last quarter. It would be better to report the confidence interval, in other words the range within which there is high confidence the GDP figure falls within. Yet such intense political interest is placed on tiny percentage point changes in GDP that absolute accuracy gets tacitly assumed in media reporting. Don't even get my started on what GDP actually measures - there are other books conducting that critique (e.g. Growth Fetish). The way that GDP and other such measures are presented isn't a neutral matter but a choice:

There are often many ways of expressing any figure. You can, for instance, express exactly the same fact by calling it a one percent return on sales, a fifteen percent return on investment, a ten million dollar profit, an increase in profits of forty percent (compared with the 1965-9 average), or a decrease of sixty percent from last year. The method is to choose the one that sounds best for the purpose at hand and trust the few who read it will recognise how imperfectly it reflects the situation.

I was delighted when Huff took up a topic that particularly grinds my gears and comes up regularly in daily work. Even my fellow statisticians have on occasion been guilty of conflating percentage change with percentage point change. This sounds needlessly pedantic, but results in serious misunderstandings of how much a quantity has actually changed by. Say the rate of inflation changed from 2% to 4%. Inflation has risen by 2 percentage points, but the percentage change is 100% - the rate of inflation has doubled! Think about which way you'd report it if you were Prime Minister or leader of the opposition. Both are potentially useful ways of understanding the change, but they tell you different things. Other topics covered include different kinds of average (mean, median, mode) and lying with graphs, which has only become easier in the era of microsoft excel. I saw many tragic examples while marking student coursework. Please step away from the pie charts.

In summary, How to Lie With Statistics is entertaining, accessible, and invaluable. The examples are a fun historical snapshot of 1950s American culture, but every point Huff makes is still completely relevant today. Scroll any social media feed to find very similar case studies of sourceless statistics, generalisation from a small biased sample, emotive claims, misuse of averages, and dubious graphs. News websites are often guilty of this too, although the better ones provide at least the means to track down where data came from. In our internet-saturated age, critical thinking about statistics is an essential skill to avoid being constantly misinformed and this book is the best starting point that I know of. If it whets your appetite, here are a couple of other fun and informative recommendations: Statistics without Tears: An Introduction for Non-Mathematicians Rowntree, Derek and The Art of Statistics: Learning from Data. As a final plea, do not let data scientists or business analysts bamboozle you with numbers and graphics either. They're just rebranded statisticians, using the same techniques with the same limitations and the same capacity for misinterpretation, with an unwarranted level of extra confidence.