Rating: 5/5

Life During Wartime stands head and shoulders above any other work I've read in the military science fiction subgenre. It is not without its flaws, but it has an engaging setting, original structure, and actual insightful observations about both life and storytelling that I hadn't come across before. It is the best work of science fiction I've read in a long time, and perhaps the best book I've read in a long time period.

The strongest part of the novel is the first section, "R and R," which could work as a standalone novella but that also works as a great introduction to the characters and setting of this book. Protagonist David Mingolla has gotten some leave, which he takes with two fellow soldiers that he doesn't even like, since their habit of taking leave together is something Mingolla has identified as a key component of a ritual that he feels has kept him alive throughout the war thus far. In a brutal jungle war more than a little reminiscent of Vietnam, where they see men die left and right around them in a meaningless and unpredictable way, Mingolla and his companions have latched on to omens, rituals, and signs of hidden significance as the things that have kept them alive and that will be their salvation. The war itself features science fiction elements like advanced combat suits, futuristic drugs, and rival psychic operatives, but Shepard makes it all feel real, giving us characters that have been strained to the breaking point. From cursory internet research it appears that Shepard never served in the armed forces, but he writes an experience of war that resonated with me far more than Heinlein or Haldeman or the dreck written by Scalzi. In terms of tone this section reminded me of The Things They Carried by Tim O'Brien, and if you've read that book you know that's no small compliment. Throughout the course of his leave Mingolla meets a mysterious woman and sees his ritual fall apart, and furthermore learns that he didn't truly know his fellow soldiers at all. The section ends with Mingolla returning to the front, having told himself that he's given up his magical thinking and that going forward he'll put all his faith in proper soldiering as his path to survival—though it's clear to us readers that this perspective won't last.

Spoilers for the rest of the book: 
The rest of the story takes place after Mingolla has been recruited to the Psicorps, and has been developed into a powerful psychic. At first I was disappointed by this development, as Mingolla's change of role, as well as the conspiracy he eventually uncovers, undercuts the theme introduced in the first section that war at ground-level is a thing without rhyme or reason, and that there is no way to control it (whether you perform your rituals or not). A dream of Mingolla's at the end of the book, however, alongside small hints elsewhere throughout the story, indicate that even the people that think themselves in control aren't actually, and that the forces of this world can't be mapped out in some concrete hierarchy. Structurally, the book is quite interesting. Though it gives no clean resolution to the main plot, Mingolla's power to see snippets of the future shows how the chips will fall in the end. The book's climax instead focuses on Mingolla and Debora accepting their love for each other despite its insanity, and this is appropriate given that their relationship is the true centerpiece of the book. Therefore, the novel resolved itself in a way that I found satisfying both in terms of plot, characters, and theme, which by my standards is a damn fine conclusion. 

Throughout this book Shepard explores the uses and importance of stories. Characters are constantly hearing stories and telling stories, whether to entertain, to instruct, to emphasize a point, to make sense out of something, to unburden themselves, to foreshadow, to prophesy, to craft a self-fulfilling prophesy, or something else entirely. Not only are these stories entertaining in their own right, but Shepard explores stories through these characters in interesting ways. One character suggests that the truth of a story can be measured by the story's effect. If you tell a story that a place is haunted, and that story is believed and that place is avoided from then on, isn't your story true then, in a way? Hasn't your story caused the place to be haunted by convincing others that it's so? I'm not sure I buy it, but it's an interesting idea and one that I haven't come across before. 

Another idea that Shepard presents is that knowing the key dramatic events of a person's life does not reveal that person's true selves to you, but rather tends to obscure that person. Life is mostly made up of mundane tasks, it isn't a dramatic story. Thus, you get to know a person through learning about and being a part of their everyday lives, not through them revealing some pivotal experience from their past. When such pivotal experiences are revealed they distract from the everyday, not clarify it, and you know someone less for that distraction. Again, not something I buy 100%, but it's a new idea to me and I'm happy that Shepard introduced me to it.

Despite many virtues, the book is not without flaws. I thought that, generally, Shepard's prose ranged from solid to good, but he certainly has a penchant for describing settings and scenes in detail. Though it didn't usually bother me, I expect that some people (and, I fear, most people) will find that Shepard over-describes things in a way that gets annoying. Another flaw is that Shepard doesn't let elements of the setting stay in the background. If there's some aspect of the world mentioned, you can bet that it's going to make an appearance in the main narrative before the book is over, and this detracts from the feeling that this is a fleshed-out, believable world. The narrative itself sometimes feels too episodic, with new challenges to overcome and new villains to face appearing one after another in a way that sometimes feels like padding for the book even when the scenes resonated thematically. Finally, the book contains a large amount of sex and sexual assault, much of which is justified by the story being one of baser instincts, but at times it felt excessive, with the ubiquitous nature of rapes undercutting their impact.

Even with these flaws, some of which aren't minor, the strengths of the book are so great that they are all easily overlooked. If you are capable of enjoying a book about war, even if you've never before liked a work of military science fiction, I would recommend giving this work a try. 4.5 out of 5, rounding up.