Rating: 5/5

An article in last week's NY Times profiled a "new trend" of elderly Japanese people https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/30/world/asia/japan-lonely-deaths-the-end.html living isolated lives in senior communities, a pattern that seems a bit out of whack given the past prevalence of intergenerational living in Eastern cultures that seemed to cushion the old from the sort of nursing home gulag/cat-food eating, solitary existence old people in Western culture seem to fall into. The article goes on to mention a few gruesome anecdotes involving dead bodies—discovered only after their decomposing smells wafted into other tenant's apartments—and the true nightmare of an unseen existence begins to take shape. 

In A Five Year Sentence Miss Hawkins seems destined for a similar fate. Abandoned by her parents, Hawkins spends her formative years at an orphanage trembling under the tutelage of a matron who taunts her with the venom of hellfire and eternal damnation. On to adulthood, where she spends her lifetime working at a candy factory, only to retire and to be confronted with overwhelming loneliness and solitude, having no friends, family, or pets to speak of. She contemplates suicide, but reconsiders when her former colleagues gift her with a "5-Year Diary" (kind of a strange gift for anyone other than a teenage girl) and the ever-dutiful Hawkins feels compelled to fill the pages with exactly the kind of events her life has been entirely lacking up to this point, challenging herself with a series of daily commands that become increasingly more bold as time goes on. She soon meets a man, Brian, but insists on paying him for his "services" in a bizarre attempt to evade the guilt and shame she feels in association with her sexuality. Gradually, Hawkins becomes more and more entrenched in a fantasy world involving Brian, and her delusions threaten to both impoverish and embarrass her.

As another reviewer mentioned, I see the similarities to Mary Gaitskill and her ability to expose the deepest and most unpleasant facets of human nature. I was prepared to be depressed, but the sad was nicely balanced with a lot of darkly comic moments, phenomenal writing, and an energetic storyline. The ending will be shocking but also deeply satisfying.