Rating: 4/5

You have to be in the right mood for this book. If you're interested in French society during this historical period (Romantic era-ish, post-Napoleon) and you're prepared to (more or less) dislike the characters, then few books will more effortlessly reveal the petty and vindictive nature of Paris social life. I recently found a fascinating (I don't use the term lightly) book about Old Regime France by Clare Haru Crowston, Credit, Fashion, Sex: Economies of Regard in Old Regime France. I haven't been able to finish it quite yet, but what I did read went a long way toward convincing me that the sordid and debauched lifestyles that Balzac portrays were actually fairly realistic. I guess I grew up reading Duma's Count of Monte Cristo where the evil are punished and the good are rewarded-pretty much with systematic regularity. So reading Balzac, where every character was self-serving (save the impossible to like/too weak/enabler Madame Hulot) seemed almost shocking. But it was also refreshing in a way. Balzac didn't really seem to be judging any of these characters. And for all their vindictive plotting and vengeful schemes, (that unlike Duma's Count were motivated by their ego and sexual appetite, rather than say, being wrongfully imprisoned for the entirety of one's youth) some of them show a complexity that does remind us that while humans are often horrible- sometimes we can understand why. Balzac doesn't mince words about Cousin Bette...she is basically an unattractive and lonely woman whose jealousy toward her (beautiful and sweet) cousin directs the course of events in her life. Who can blame her?! Not Balzac. Nor does he seem to censure any of the weak-willed or calculating schemers in this novel. In fact, this work leads one to speculate a bit about Balzac's life. Like many authors who wrote these long plot-driven serials/novels you wonder how many of these characters were based on people known to said author. Especially since Balzac himself was almost obscenely prolific. Recommend if you want to be totally enveloped into mid 19th century Paris, and with a less-than-scrupulous crowd.