Rating: 1/5

(Original review Jan 2007)

Overall	2/5
Story 2/5	
Re-Readability 3/5
Characters 2/5
	
There’s a plot here. I’m sure. I read through all 752 pages of this, the 12th Anita Blake novel, and there were vague hints of a plot toward the end. I think. The rest of the book, though, should have been subtitled, “How I Stopped Worrying and Came to Love Wanton Sex.”

I mean, really. By the end of the first chapter, Anita — erstwhile vampire hunter and current multi-discipline sex queen of St Louis — has boffed two strangers. A few more chapters, a few more strangers. By the end of the book pretty much every lycanthrope or vampire Anita’s run across — certainly every series regular — has gotten down and dirty with her.

There are a few moments where there’s, well, interesting stuff happening. All’s not well with the vampiric Church of Eternal Life, there are some rogue vamps doing Very Bad Things, there’s another powerful vampire doing cunning things, and …

… and, of course, Anita has New Amazing Powers, which lead to New Mystical Complications, even as she continues her steady evolution toward being the Mystic Queen of the Midwest (one must assume).

But enough of that trivial leavening. We’re here for the hot, sweaty, and other-fluidly vampire-necromancer-lycanthrope sex, right? Am I right? Evidently I am. And that’s not to mention frequent polemics on sex, strangers, B&amp;D, S&amp;M, following your bliss, accepting your kinks, and other received wisdom from the woman who can’t decide if she’s being driven to being a slut because of metaphysical compulsion or because it’s fun.

Not that I necessarily have a problem with sex, or books with sex scenes — but, really, fergoshsakes, after a while it gets repetitive. And boring. And repetitive. Most books would be satisfied with a cut scene from when things get hot and heavy to the aftermath. Not "Incubus Dreams" (or, frankly, most of the recent AB books); we end a chapter just as things are getting hot and heavy — and the next chapter is all about the hot-and-heaviness. At length (which is ironic on multiple levels).

(Note to copy editors: the synonym for “god” you are looking for is “deity.” Not “diety.” No matter how many times you let it be typed that way.)

If I didn’t already have the next book in paperback, I’d have seriously considered giving up. But I did, and it was thin, so …