Rating: 2/5

The blurb seems a bit incorrect about events. From what I remember, Miss Neville had only written one book and Sir Rowan chose to write a scathing review for his friend so they could be on their way to a ball or something similar. He didn't actually read the poems but wrote something generic about how women should refrain from writing. And, even though, Catherine wrote the poems under a nom de plume, everyone seemed to know who she was, hence the notoriety. 

In any case, Sir Rowan meets her at the party/event/ball and is immediately smitten. In fact, both of them seem to suffer from a case of insta-love, which I dislike tremendously and I'm sure influenced my rating. Sir Rowan goes home to read her poetry and write a nicer review, but the old one is the one published. I have to say that after a certain point, I realized I was pretty disinterested in the story and on the main characters and started to skim to see what would happen when Catherine discovered the review.

They become engaged and the day after she discovers, with the help of Lord Byron (that Lord Byron) that Sir Rowan wrote the review. I actually thought Lord Byron would have a small role in the book when he first appeared but he plays a very large part and is one of Catherine's swains. I didn't care for it but can see how others might like it. Catherine questions Sir Rowan's character since she sees a different side of him on the careless and cruel way that he wrote the review and breaks up the engagement. He vows to become a better man to win her back, which is the second part of the book. 

At this point, he actually seems to be trying to be a better person. He visits Catherine's family-in-law (technically her sister's in-laws) with whom she was staying and tries to be nicer and pay attention to the ladies. He notices things that he didn't before (these people are not very agreeable and he observes some of the reasons why), and I actually thought that the book was going on an interesting trajectory and got a bit excited about it. Unfortunately, right after that, he uses these people to manipulate his way back into Catherine's orbit (who left London to be with her sister) and the thread about him becoming a better person is lost. 

There are lots of shenanigans at the sister's house: they rehearse the play Twelfth Night, Byron shows up, and the couple gets together again. If you can't tell, I went back to skimming just to finish the book. Aside from not caring about the story and the main characters, there was a major issue with a lack of chaperonage from the beginning to the end of the book that really annoyed me.

That said, I can also see why others would enjoy this book. Since there was no other comprehensive review of the book here, I wanted to write something to help guide others who might be considering this book. And if my unfavorable review actually makes someone want to read it, then it's still serving its purpose of guidance.