Rating: 1/5

'Mercury and Me' (1994) by Jim Hutton with Tim Wapshott - provides an account of Hutton's relationship with Queen singer Freddie Mercury, from initial meeting through Mercury's death and Hutton's experiences thereafter.

'Mercury and Me' is a challenging book to review, it charts the progress of Hutton's relationship with Mercury as one time hairdresser and gardener to sexual partner/lover.

On the one hand, it is without doubt the single most inadvertently and unintentionally hilarious book that I've ever read. Hutton's book reads as though written as fan or even fantasy fiction and is so badly written it is quite astonishingly bad. In this sense it is very difficult to take what Hutton writes seriously to any real extent.

Clearly Hutton did work for Mercury and live at his house (along with other PAs etc.) and it also seems that there was at least at one time a sexual relationship. However, whether that relationship was of the import and to the extent described by Hutton remains to be seen. There have been subsequent contradictory reports as to the extent of the Mercury Hutton relationship. 

What's written in Hutton's book does feel very much like a description of perhaps how meaningful Hutton wanted the relationship to be, than perhaps how it actually was.

In another respect, 'Mercury and Me' - written and published not long after Mercury's death does feel somewhat intrusive, disloyal, prurient to the point of being mercenary. Especially considering the fact that Mercury was apparently fiercely protective of his private life - the so called 'revelations' contained Hutton's book (particularly concerning Mercury's illness and final days) feel entirely inappropriate and extremely disrespectful to say the least. 

If Hutton's relationship with Mercury was as described in this book - then this does feel like the ultimate betrayed on Hutton's part.

I can't take this book seriously and as such feel that I've learnt nothing substantial about Freddie Mercury that I didn't already know.