Rating: 2/5

I feel like this book's high average rating is caused mostly by the fact that the only people who would even know about it are the sort of people who'd like it. So, though I didn't hate it completely, I'm here to offer a dissenting opinion:

This book kind of sucks. 

It's a short, anticlimactic anecdote about a scuffle on a bus, told in 99 different styles. I imagine this is already enough to turn off most people, but in case this still sounds really good to you, be apprised that none of those styles actually include anything that would ordinarily be considered "good" writing. At best, it's parody of purple prose; at worst, complete nonsense. Several "styles" are just lopping off the beginning of the words (apheresis), or cutting the ends short (apocope), or, hell, just removing the middle (syncope). Allow me to just quote, in increasing order of offensiveness:

from Philosophic: "great cities alone can provide phenomenological spirituality with the essentialities of temporal and improbabilistic coincidences."

from Noble: "the hour when the rosy fingers of the dawn started to crack I climbed, rapid as a tongue of flame, into a bus, mighty of stature and with cow-like eyes, of the S-line of sinuous course."

from Prosthesis: "ga shat kwith va splaited acord xinstead yof va cribbon cround pit."

from Permutations by groups of 5, 6, 7, and 8 letters: "lyhest sudden oharan artedt neighb guehis imingt ourcla urpose hathep onhist lytrod rytime oeseve gotino anyone rout." (spell-checker is working overtime tonight)

I'm not being entirely fair here; some of the little sections are decent ideas, decently written, describing the situation only in terms of smell, or taste, or whatever. But for the majority of the others, I can think of only a few possible motivations for their existence:

A) Queneau needed some filler, because the 10 or so good ones don't constitute full-book material.

B) Queneau wanted to show off his Greek. (viz. epenthesis, metathesis, paragoge, homeoptotes, polyptotes)

C) Queneau is trying to distract us from the fact that he's not actually a good writer.

Ultimately, it comes down to the fact that it's all better in theory. You read "Prosthesis" and think, hmm, that's interesting, I wonder what he's going to do here. Then you see he's just tacking a single random letter onto the front of every word. Do you read it to the end? There's nothing interesting about it; you already know the story and you've figured out this so-called "style." So you skip it, only to realize that if you do that with each one, you're skipping 80 percent of the book. But so be it. One more quote for the road:

"An houate aftrate, in front of the Saint-Lazate gate, I notate him agate, talkate about a buttate, a buttate on his overcate."