Rating: 3/5

AUDIBLE AUDIOBOOK EDITION

Cross Current: Seychelle Sullivan Suspense, Book 2

Written by: Christine Kling

Narrated by: Rosemary Benson

Length: 11 hrs and 29 mins 

Series: Seychelle Sullivan, Book 2

Unabridged Audiobook

Whispersync for Voice-ready

audible.com

Publisher's Summary

Seychelle's life takes a turn when her tug intercepts a swamped fishing boat in the Gulf Stream. Inside the boat is a little girl in a bloodied white dress. When Seychelle returns to shore with the traumatized Haitian girl, she is faced with the border patrol, the police, and an unraveling love affair. Determined to protect the child, and somehow keep her from being sent back to Haiti, Seychelle becomes obsessed with the forces that nearly killed the girl - and left her speechless with terror. All Seychelle knows for sure is that the girl's father was an American...and that somehow she slipped through a murderer's hands.

With a murderer stalking the child, Seychelle is racing to unravel dangerous truths. But to get the answers she needs, she must return to the waters of the Gulf Stream, where people died for a hope and prayer - and a man with a machete did the work of the devil himself.

Taut, suspenseful, and filled with remarkable descriptions of Florida's many moods and guises - from million-dollar waterfront homes to haunted, backwater mangrove swamps and secret Voodoo rituals - Cross Current is alive with personalities and passion and the work of an author boldly staking out territory all her own.

©2004 Christine Kling (P)2015 Christine Kling

My Review. 

Seychelle becomes emotionally involved with with an Haitian child she finds at sea. Unlike the murdered woman found alongside her in the small, abandoned craft, the female child, Solange, has escaped death.

 Seychelle is determined to find the childs father, an American, if she is successful, Solange may have the chance of a life in America.

That Seychelle is tough, at least, on the outside, is evident. She works as hard as any man, she knows all about the coastline and shipping, this is her world. Now, she has to take on the Border Police and everyone else who wants to return Solange. Her only ally is her lawyer friend Jeannie.

For me, the long descriptions of all things maritime made the book rather tedious at times, I really don't need to know quite so much about running a boat, or about tidal conditions.

I also, at times thought Seychelles made less than intelligent choices which landed both herself and Solange in dangerous situations, I found this aspect of her very irritating, as well as stretching the bounds of credulity.

I had thought I would love this book: Florida, the ocean, boats, mystery, heart rending social statements, these are elements I had expected would combine to produce a book of great enjoyment.

Unfortunately, despite the exciting and fast paced adventure, in parts, the authors' overly detailed work just did not hold my attention. A good mystery, but buried within too many words.

Narrator

Once again the skills of the narrator came to the rescue. I doubt very much I could have borne the eleven hours and twenty nine minutes of this recording quite so determinedly were it not for the talent of Rosemary Benson. I enjoyed her voice, her characterisations were, I thought, excellent, I was quite taken with how she portrayed Jeannie! I'm not sure why, but as soon as I heard "Jeannie" speak, there she was! I could see her so plainly on that screen in my head. Every character is well defined and easy to identify, nothing is overdone. 

If a narrator is new to me I try to find their website, I was delighted to discover that Rosemary is also an accomplished singer. 

Despite my enjoyment of Rosemarys' excellent work, the sound quality of the audiobook was not top-notch, a little sibilance here and there, a little echoey. Don't let that put you off though, as I'm told I do find fault where others don't, so please, listen to the sample and use your own judgement.

This audiobook was gifted to me in return for this, my honest opinion