Rating: 4/5

Overstressed? Overworked? In need of a change in scenery? Looking for relaxation and a well-deserved rest? Why not visit Antarctica, the last unconquered continent? Its virgin, untouched landscapes and friendly, innocent wildlife make it the perfect holiday spot for those wanting to escape modern life and human drama!

» Make one with beautiful nature, bask in the sunshine, and experience inner peace while exploring gloriously preserved, snow-covered sceneries.

» Encounter fascinating, affectionate fauna.

» Meet the very friendly and ever-welcoming local population.

» Enjoy one of the many on-site activities.

💀 Swim the refreshing waters:

💀 Play indoor paintball games:

💀 Go on restful hovercraft rides:

💀 Have some grappling hook fun:

💀 Experiment with fun, new toys:

💀 Discover unexplored underwater expanses: 

💀 Admire the unique fireworks: 

Antarctica is the world's #1 wellness destination! It beats any spa holiday you will ever take! You do not know what being pampered in luxury means until you have visited the South Pole!

➽ So what are you waiting for?! Call 1-800-I-Have-A-Deathwish, pack your bags, and go! 

Tiny disclaimer #1: don't bother with a return ticket. One-way should do just fine.

Tiny disclaimer #2: before embarking on what might possibly be the most relaxing adventure of your life, we sort of-kind of advise you to consult with your doctor, or any other qualified health care professional. Just in case. You never know. Better safe than sorry and all that. 

 

» And the moral of this non-review is: YES, this book is on the OTT side and takes suspension of disbelief to a whole new level. But man, it is the most roller-coaster ridish (yes, there is such a thing), delightfully exhausting, unputdownable, entertaining book I've read in a looooonnnggggg time.

» And the other moral of this non review is: and it is thus that Eon the Awesome lifted the Boredom Curse from Hell that had befallen me since the beginning of 2016. Eon, I thank thee kindly and shall be ever full of grate.

PS: Shane Schofield is mine. So back the fish off, everyone. You're welcome.

· Book 2: Area 7 ★★★★
· Book 3: Scarecrow · to be read