Rating: 4/5

This is the story of a town, a Western town trying to grow up in the Dakota flats and prairies; and it is the story of a man, Blue, mayor in name alone, who wanted to save it, populate it, and make it grow into something good and viable. But, the town is named “Hard Times”, and it lives up to its name in every possible way. 

The story opens with a visit from the worst kind of evil bad man, The Man From Brodie. He murders indiscriminately and then he burns the town to the ground, leaving only a handful of survivors. When the burying is done, most leave, but Blue stays, with a badly burned prostitute and an orphaned boy to take care of. The struggle to survive is visceral and punishing, and through Blue’s narrative we come to know what the cost of surviving is both mentally and physically.

This might be a study in what happens when good men do nothing, but I kept asking myself what exactly the good men could have done other than die with their fellows. Perhaps it is more about the way life tricks you into thinking that survival is winning, or how easily opportunities are missed that might alter the trajectory of your life completely

What is sure, is that there are moments of decision, turning points, when we lose the life we know and step into the future that we can only hope to shape into something better.

When was the moment, I don’t know when, with all my remembrances I can’t find it; maybe it was during our dance, or maybe it was some morning as a breeze of air shook the sun’s light; maybe it was one of those nights of hugging when we reached our ripeness and the earth turned past it; maybe we were asleep. Really how life gets on is a secret, you only know your memory, and it makes its own time. The real time leads you along and you never know when it happens, the best that can be is come and gone.

Whatever you decide the theme of this novel might be, there is no denying that E.L. Doctorow tells a story that you will never forget. The writing is powerful and dynamic; graphic and moving. If you are thinking you do not like Westerns, fear not–this is not typical of that genre at all. Rather, you will find here the soul of a man, laid bare with all its regrets; a glimpse at pure evil, free of any trace of remorse or humanity; and a revelation of how the aftermath of such evil can make the ordinary heart harden into stone. 

Doctorow was a city boy from the East who must have given a lot of thought to how people survived the travails of the westward expansion. He must have searched for the element in a human being that makes him go on in the face of total failure and destruction. I think he believed that element to be hope.

A person cannot live without looking for good signs, you just cannot do it, and I thought these signs were good.

A huge thank you to my friend, Howard, who ferrets out the books that no one seems to read anymore and gives them to me like gifts.