Rating: 5/5

Land. It was a pleasant thing to ride across but a demanding thing to own.

Hewey Calloway is a free-roaming cowboy of a different world. The times are quickly changing in 1906 and the older generation is having to come to grips with it all. For our good old boy, Hewey, freedom from the cares of the world are his goal in life. Money has no meaning to him and he sure can’t stand to see all of the fences that keep popping up - putting an end to the meaning of wide open spaces. The idea of owning land and settling down was just not in his blood. He viewed land ownership as a double-edged sword - the land may belong to you but eventually it owns you. It’s a lot of work for not enough return, in Hewey’s view. 

He recognized the fence as a necessity for the small settler’s survival, but it was not a thing he could accept without regret at the passing of a freer and more open time. A fence— any way you look at it— was an obstacle. It shut you out or it shut you in.

Hewey’s brother, Walter, gave up the “good old boy” lifestyle of roaming for the farming livelihood. He chose a wife and a homestead where Hewey remained unrestricted and carefree, able and ready to ride off to anywhere he felt like going without anything or anyone holding him back. But Walter has the bank to answer to with the claims on his land and farm holdings. Without a good return on his crop sales to pay them off, he could be left with nothing. Then, Hewey faces the facts that the world and its technologies are passing him up and leaving his old ways behind. His nephews have always looked up to him. Cotton, values the possibilities of the future and that includes his fascination with automobiles. His brother, Tommy has farming in his blood though. But Hewey’s ability to make up yarns without thinking of the consequences to the boys might just bring him down the pedestal they’ve put him on.

Hewey has a lot to reckon with aside from the fact that his brother and sister in law want him to settle down and make a living like everybody else. He still has feelings like everyone else and a sensitive side that just touches your heart. He gives readers many opportunities to laugh out loud. Kelton’s succinct prose is perfectly matched to provide humorous anecdotes and wry and witty sayings right out of Hewey’s mouth. He doesn’t always hold back. Hewey Calloway is such a breath of fresh air and one character that I won’t soon forget. 

The way Hewey saw it, the Lord had purposely made every person different. He could not understand why so many people were determined to thwart the Lord’s work by making everyone the same.

”Lots of people talk about what the Lord wants. Wonder how many has ever asked Him?”

I always like God better when I found Him outdoors. He always seemed too big to fit into a little-bitty cramped-up church house.