Rating: 3/5

J.G. Ballard's novel Super-Cannes (2000) perversely imagines a world in which the aggrieved and vengeful are the wildly rich, kept by status and success from expressing their more vile and visceral drives. Eden-Olympia, scene of the action, is a futuristic business park on the French Riviera, where the heads of major multinationals are susceptible to stress ailments (infections, swollen joints, inflammations) that can only be resolved, apparently,by indulging in weekend assaults on the immigrant Arab and African servant class in and around Cannes.

Imagine a Hell's Angels with Bill Gates, Elon Musk, Steve Jobs, and what's his name from Amazon on the lead bikes. Picture them using truncheons on whores and parking lot attendants and trinket venders in order to cleanse their putrified souls. Then drop in an unsuspecting pilot, recovering from a knee operation and married to a young doctor employed by Eden-Olympia, who is hellbent on discovering why certain murders and mayhem have occurred with no explanation why.

That's Super-Cannes scenario and its narrative problem. The scenario is wickedly interesting, but it should not be prosecuted like a mystery story with lots of forced explanations in stilted dialogue. It should be a pastiche of surrealistic conflicts wherein the basest human drives are supercharged by capitalist decadence. Too much is explained here, turning the book from a novel into what Graham Greene called an entertainment. Ballard does not exploit his own sinister talents as a cryptic fabulist. The end result, much praised when the book was published, is tedious even though the underlying idea retains interest.

At some point in the accumulation of wealth and virtual omnipotence, isn't there a moral danger that does in fact lead to the success of one becoming the abuse of others? And is this not plausibly understood as more than a mere byproduct of being a billionaire and an inevitable corruption of character? On what morning can a billionaire wake up in his penthouse or on her yacht and not be utterly detached from everyone else? 

Ballard's greatest irony is that the book culminates in a kind of revenge on revenge wherein thanatos meets thanatos, but, again, the book is too talky, an aesthetic disappointment.