Rating: 5/5

"Please don't be nasty, Archer. What's your first name, anyway?"

"Lew. You can call me Archer."

I think I enjoyed this novel even more than the previous Lew Archer entry, The Moving Target .
It starts out very slowly. 
An attractive woman in her late 30's shows up at Archer's office. She's intercepted a threatening letter addressed to her husband alleging an extra-marital affair the woman, Maude Slocum, has had with an unknown male.
Mrs. Slocum is reluctant to share much more information with Archer. Which of course annoys the hell out of Archer.

  "...I am rhinoceros-skinned and iron hearted. I've been doing divorce work in L.A. for ten years. If you can tell me anything I haven't heard, I'll donate a week's winnings at Santa Anita to any worthy charity."

The hell? I thought Archer claimed he didn't handle divorce cases in the first novel!
On a personal note, we learn in this novel that Archer's been divorced from his wife "Sue" for a little over a year. 

Eventually, Archer convinces Maude Slocum to allow him to visit her home and meet all of the likely suspects. It's a grueling read of 4 or 5 short chapters (40-something pages) that follow. So many characters, a couple of obvious suspects, it'll be another 10 pages or so before the first murder occurs. After that hold on to your wig-hats. The pace quickens and the suspense intensifies with intermittent violence and gun play. Archer is frequently knocked unconscious or severely beaten.

  
"You're not a Hollywood personage, are you?"

"I've done a good deal of work in and about Hollywood. Peeping on fleabag hotel rooms, untying marital knots, blackmailing blackmailers out of business. Dirty, heavy, hot work on occasion.”

In pursuit of possible culprits, Archer takes another of his usual walks on the sleazy side of town: 

  
The building was pink stucco, big and new and ugly. It had a side entrance with "Romp Room" lettered above it in red neon. The wall was blind except for the door and a couple of round screened ventilators. I could hear the noise of the romping from the outside: the double-time beat of the band, the shuffling of many feet. When I pulled the heavy door open, the noise blasted my ears... The rest of the noise came from the booths that lined three walls of the room, and from the dance-floor in the middle where twenty or thirty couples whirled in the smoke. The high titter of drunk and flattered women, the animal sounds of drunk and eager men. Babel with a wild jazz obbligato.

From that rock-house of a bar in the fictional new oil-rich town of Quinto, California, Archer follows a thread that leads him to Los Angeles:

  
I stopped at a lunch-bar east of the cemetery on Santa Monica Boulevard, for a sandwich and coffee and a look at the telephone book. It hung by a chain from the pay telephone on the wall beside the front window... I dialed the number and watched the sidewalk roamers. The young hepcats high on music or weed, the middle-aged men on the town, the tourists waiting for something to fulfill their fantasies, the hopeful floozies and the despairing ones, the quick, light, ageless grifters walked the long Hollywood beat on the other side of the plate glass. The sign above the window was red on one side, green on the other, so that they passed from ruddy youth to sickly age as they crossed my segment of sidewalk, from green youth to apoplexy.

I just finished this novel last night and already I miss it and the pathetic cast of characters that populate the book.
It's not better than Chandler. It's minor key "Marlowe" in pretentious major.
Archer is just as tough as Marlowe but he thinks too much and he's a judgemental monk in search of his own private monastery.
The action scenes are really well executed -no idea who Macdonald lifted those bits from. 

In the end, despite the overall melancholy atmosphere that Archer seems to exist in, I'm finding myself impressed with Macdonald's writing and I really like this private detective Lew Archer character.

  ...one of those stories without villains or heroes. There was no one to admire, no one to blame. Everyone had done wrong for himself and others. Everyone had failed. Everyone had suffered.