Rating: 2/5

Strawberry Summer 
PLOT: The twins (Chris &amp; Susan Pratt) head off to summer camp. They've both gotten jobs. Susan is the art instructor. Chris is over swimming classes. But as soon as they get there the Reeds tell them that sadly this might be the last year because of all the mysterious things going on around the camp. Small things like supplies being misplaced &amp; turning up somewhere later. Thus making them look unprofessional in the parent's eyes. Susan and Chris along with their summer flings Richard and Alan (the Reed's son) decide to get to the bottom of whose been sabotaging the Reed's camp and why.

MY THOUGHTS: This wasn't my favorite Pratt twin book. The word to best describe my thoughts on it are indifferent. I neither liked or hated it. I just didn't have any reaction to it at all. It was mediocre. Certain parts of the story I just shook my head at in disbelief. Such as the variety show &amp; everyone (even the counselors) not figuring out that there are twins at their camp and putting two and two together &amp; that Chris really wasn't sick. Maybe this would fool the kids but the adults? Also when they had to sit down with the counselors &amp; explain what was going on. I guess they did this just to clarify what they already knew. But if they had any brains at all again they should have put two and two together. They already knew the camp was closing. It actually kind of reminded me a lot of a Jem &amp; the Hologram's episode. In particular, the one about Trick or Techrat where they try to save Mr. Vincent's theatre &amp; creepy stuff starts going on &amp; it turns out to be Eric Raymond and some guy who wants the theatre. Of course, it's a rival company. Now had maybe Allan been the bad guy and want out of his way to ruin the camp because the Reeds had put more attention into the camp than him when he was a child or he was working with the Realtor's and doing all the sabotaging because no one would suspect him as the culprit. Or he needed the money to pay for a gambling debt it would have made for a more exciting ending. 

RATING 5