Rating: 4/5

A delightful tale of a little girl and a memorable summer holiday at the seaside. Eleven-year old Maria is the only child of a staid couple, who live entirely predictable lives and go on the sort of holidays, which everyone else does. They are busy with their own humdrum existence, and Maria, deprived of company turns to animals, the furniture, the walls- anything at all around her to carry on imaginary conversations. This summer, they come down to Dorset and move into a rented Victorian villa, close to the beach. Just next door stands a hotel, and Maria soon spots a large, rumbunctious family of children, in fact two families of cousins, and slowly befriends the eldest boy Martin, who is just about her own age. Exposed for the very first time to a noisy, friendly, untidy and totally haphazard existence, she begins to enjoy it, but with reservations. Meanwhile, her imaginary world grows stronger. She holds long, and often sarcastic conversations on the part of her new friend, the house cat, and often wakes up to the sound of barking, and the creak of a swing. In the morning, however, there is no swing in their garden or next door, and neither is there a dog around. Her favorite spot is the massive Ilex tree, and she feels most at home nestled in its broad branches. Exploring the villa, which looks exactly as it must have done in Victorian times, she comes across an old book on fossils, with a page of scribbles with details of some long ago child’s own collection. Martin and she are fascinated by the fossils found in the cliffs around them, and spend many happy hours fossil-hunting, as well as visiting Maria’s stern landlady, who spent her life in the same house, and has now moved across the road to a guesthouse, to admire her grandfather’s collection and see old family photographs. Little by little, the pieces of her imaginary puzzle seem to be coming together, though their holiday is almost at an end. The vivid imagery, the workings of the little girl’s mind and the growing eerie atmosphere make this book an entrancing read.