Rating: 1/5

1.5/5 I’m not actually sure what the fuck I just read. 

I pick up this book based on the cover’s description—a masterless samurai seeking to kill a demon, AND it’s written by the guy who wrote Sin City. Got my name written all over it. 

Then it transitions into a 21st-century dystopia centered in a ravaged NYC with new technology. “Fine”, I say. “Not what I thought but I’ll keep going with this to see if it improves.”

We are told that the samurai transplants himself into a telekinetic who has no arms or legs and talks to computers. I say, “this is wack as hell but I’ve seen weirder.”

As it turns out, I had not. Buckle up, kids. 

The demon implants himself into the boss of the tech company. The ronin tries to kill this boss and creates prosthetic limbs to do so using fucking MAGIC. Is this magic ever used again? Nope. Not to crush or explode the building where the evil AI / demon operates. Not to reveal the demon’s form to gain support from the grunts. It is used a singular time and never mentioned again. 

Oh but THEN we have our ~female character~ who has no personality apart from really wanting to do her job. I could get behind this if the story made me care about her. Spoiler: It did not make me care. Any evidence of her drive goes out the window when she sleeps with the ronin, WHO JUST KILLED ALL OF HER SOLDIERS, IN A SEWER AFTER SHE WAS TORTURED FOR DAYS. 

Now, I’m not an action heroine, but the last fucking thing I would want to do after being beaten up naked in a literal shithole is have sex, especially not with the guy who just murdered all of my coworkers that I care about. She had no previous sexual attraction with the ronin, AND she cheats on her husband for him, a husband who she shares a lowkey but caring relationship with. I know the two opposite-gendered leads in movies often fall in love quickly and without much reason, but these two were pushed together with all the grace and delicacy of a bulldozer. 

I just want to mention again that they were in a sewer. I cannot stress this enough. Nothing could make me feel less sexy than a realm of sewage. 

This story, as you may have inferred, is absolutely bananas. Now, I actually don’t mind stories with high potassium levels as long as they are entertaining. However, the artwork actually detracts from the story. In other words, THE EXACT OPPOSITE OF WHAT A GRAPHIC NOVEL IS SUPPOSED TO DO. The scenes inside the tech institution are totally confusing. Everything is green and there are no distinguishing features. It is impossible to visualize yourself in the space or determine what the hell is happening because it all looks like the Jolly Green Giant’s wet dream. 

Additionally, the majority of the characters look very similar to one another. I couldn’t tell any of them apart, nor could I tell you any of their names. None of them have any personality to speak of. For most of the book, the ronin walks around saying one word. He’s not Groot, so it’s not cute. 

And holy shit, this art style is UGLY. Human faces are unappealing and seem like illustrations from an offbeat 90s kids' book. The landscapes are a blur of boring backdrops with the occasional foliage that resembles a kid’s rendition of curly hair. 

I will give this book one (1) caveat—the action scenes with no words, hardly any characters, and just straight battle moments are done very well. The colors are great, and it reads like an action film. So when the book is not being itself, it is impressive. But again, if I like the book best when it's like a movie, it's not a good book. 

I seriously have no idea how this is so fucked up. Ugly artwork that worsens a story that is already off-putting and strange, not to mention with characters doing stupid shit in a world we don’t give a shit about AND HAVING SEX NEAR ACTUAL SHIT okay okay I’ll stop. 

In summary, the story is literal self-insert fanfic in a world full of technology—and if I wanted that, I could just go onto Wattpad using my iPad.