Rating: 4/5

A Dance to the Music of Time is a twelve-novel cycle examining English society from the 1920s to the 1960s through the lives of its predominantly upper middle class characters, which is presented as the memoirs of the narrator, Nick Jenkins. The cycle is broken into four "movements", consisting of three novels each. This, the first movement, is comprised of A Question of Upbringing, A Buyer's Market and The Acceptance World. 

The title is a reference to Nicolas Poussin's painting of the same name, which is housed at the Wallace Collection in London. 

 

Nick Jenkins explains the significance of the painting at the beginning of the first novel: These classical projections, and something from the fire, suddenly suggested Poussin's scene in which the Seasons, hand in hand and facing outward, tread in rhythm to the notes of the lyre that the winged and naked greybeard plays. The image of Time brought thoughts of mortality: of human beings, facing outward like the Seasons, moving hand in hand in intricate measure, stepping slowly, methodically sometimes a trifle awkwardly, in evolutions that take recognisable shape: or breaking into seemingly meaningless gyrations, while partners disappear only to reappear again, once more giving pattern to the spectacle: unable to control the melody, unable, perhaps, to control the steps of the dance.Time – how it passes, how people interact and alter with its passage - is what the work is about. It’s unlikely to appeal to readers who want an action packed, plot driven novel. However, readers who favour intelligent prose, a large cast of well-developed characters* (many of them based on real people) and interesting social history over plot will be amply rewarded. 

I was prompted to listen to the audiobook version of this novel, which is superbly narrated by Simon Vance, after learning that the Tory Anthony Powell was a close friend of the socialist George Orwell, as well as a fellow Etonian. If not for reading a biography of Orwell, I may never have tackled Powell, even though the audiobook had been sitting around on my computer for quite some time. I’m glad I did and I’m looking forward to listening to the Second Movement. 

*Okay – well-developed male characters: the women are rather less interesting.