Rating: 4/5

The Cold War has ended, and the world is experiencing peace. UNAC, a UN-like global organization, is planning a joint interplanetary mission to the far ends of the solar system on behalf of all mankind. (And yes, if you like the Ronald Moore-created show For All Mankind, you should like this book). The lead pilot of the upcoming mission crashed, and was presumed dead, before the novel began, and the task of piloting the mission has been passed to one of the victim’s colleagues, a Russian cosmonaut. But now, the famous director of a high-tech and secretive medical facility claims to have rescued the pilot and to be nursing him back to health. This announcement causes an uproar, since the Russian cosmonaut had been promoted to the top position, and now what, they’re just going to push the Russian aside and let that resurrected American be in charge again? Over someone’s dead body. 

So begins a fascinating Cold War thriller. The main character is Laurent Michaelmas, world-renowned reporter and journalist, who, unbeknownst to everybody, secretly controls the world, with the help of his assistant artificial intelligence, Domino. World peace exists because Michaelmas and Domino have been ensuring it, and indeed, the creation of UNAC itself is the result of years of careful manipulation and control behind the scenes on the part of Michaelmas and his AI. With the sudden return of this presumed dead American pilot, Michaelmas knows that, if something is not done quickly, the Russians and Americans will jump at each others’ throats, UNAC will tear itself apart, and the world will plunge once again into unending conflict and war. At all costs, UNAC must be saved.

Something, however, appears to have other plans. Through Domino, Michaelmas is used to having control over everything on Earth. Now, though, an equally powerful and invisible entity seems deliberately to be trying to destroy all that Michaelmas has accomplished. The original crash of the American pilot is suspicious. His miraculous rescue and reappearance is even more mysterious. Is that even him? Is he the genuine survivor? A clone grown in a vat? Something else? What is really going on in that medical facility? Meanwhile, one of Michaelmas’ journalist-colleagues dies in a helicopter accident, and was he asking too many good questions? At the same time, somebody has planted incendiary devices in fifteen different places around the hotel room where the Russian cosmonaut is staying. Certain politicians are in bed with certain media companies for mutual benefit, to help drive certain narratives for political purposes, and Michaelmas needs to unravel exactly who is doing what, and for whom, and how to stop it, before the joint mission is called off, and world peace crumbles. 

Michaelmas may have an AI with which he tries (and mostly manages) to control the world, but he is not an evil overlord, or even a morally corrupted man. He is a good and selfless man, who has sacrificed companionship and a life of ease, in order to personally bring about a human utopia. The novel never questions or gives us reason to doubt Michaelmas’ intentions. He spends most of the novel acting as detective and puppet master. He knows what is required for peace. At one point, the Russians are implicated in sabotaging the American pilot’s vehicle to get their own cosmonaut into the command chair, and Michaelmas knows that if this fact were revealed, UNAC would fall. There is no hand-wringing, no extended Trekkian moral dilemma. He simply silences the truth, using every power at his disposal. And we go along with it, since Michaelmas is such a good and wise man. Of course the world can’t know the Russians are behind it! That would ruin everything! And then, we’re not even sure the conclusion is true. Are the Russians being framed?

This is a smart, complex thriller, heavy on dialogue and political intrigue, replete with commentary on the media (what other science fiction thriller spends 60 pages building tension toward an explosive….press conference?), and with a simple, reliable protagonist who we like and want to win. The final twist may appear to come from left field, but if you think about it, it is the only possible explanation for what has happened, and that possibility was built into the book’s plot from the very beginning. Parts of the dialogue in the first quarter of the novel may feel somewhat obscure, but the novel picks up, and clears up, and by the time the press conference comes along, I believe you’ll be hooked.