Rating: 4/5

These tales started as a series in the San Francisco Chronicle in the mid 70’s, and I remember reading them when I lived nearby. Back then, California wasn't called “Cali,” and San Francisco was “The City” (never “Frisco” for heaven’s sake). For many at that time, trans people were something out of Rocky Horror Picture Show, so this was a little shocking, but in a fun and gentle way. It perfectly captures the pre-AIDS innocence and the post-60’s mindset of discovery that was the 1970’s. 

And it is so much fun. Mary Anne Singleton arrives in The City from Cleveland, and we see the wild world of San Francisco through her innocent eyes. “Would she ever stop feeling like a colonist on the moon?”

Everyone was busy shaping their own unique identities. In the immortal words of the Isley Brothers:
It’s your thing
Do what you wanna do
I can’t tell ya
Who to sock it to

But the iconic Mrs. Madrigal brings them together to create a family in her apartment complex on Barbary Lane, a made-up name (heavy with meaning from San Francisco’s lawless Gold Rush days) of a very real place inspired by Macondray Lane in Russian Hill, home of the crookedest street in the world, just down from the elite Nob Hill, and just up from Fisherman’s Warf.

This needs to be read like the soap opera it is. Each little chapter is a tease about the characters, and their lives fill in more and more as you go. I think it would be fun for anyone to read, but having lived through that time, it’s very special. Where else do you see references to Instant Breakfast and Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman anymore?

And those aren’t the only throwback phrases. Beach Blanket Babylon is a local reference, but everyone will remember the t-shirts: Keep on Truckin’ and Dance 10, Looks 3. No? Maybe your biorhythms are off. How about a glass of Hi-C? Here--have a Wash’n Dri. Have you signed up with Kelly Girl yet? Have a Nice Day!

More Tales of the City anyone? Count me in. If I can’t go back in time, spending more time with Maupin’s characters is the next best thing.