Rating: 1/5

I wish I could like this book better than the previous one, but unfortunately it too falls flat.

Elizabeth is constantly described as being an intelligent and sensisible woman, despite being painfully shallow and stupid. She is an intellectual and a snob, and when I say intellectual, I mean in the style of the Me, an Intellectual meme and not genuinely. She is a budding feminist who, despite not wanting to be forced to marry a stranger and act as a broodmare for the de Vaux family, agrees to exactly that.

I understand that the Duke threatened her livelihood and her friends, but I also wonder at her not thinking of any alternatives, including running away (she could always have changed her name and worked as a governess in the country, or attempted to leave for Canada) or causing a scandal if the Duke didn't leave her alone. She could have insisted on being acknowledged as his daughter, or insisted he disinherit his son. She could have eloped with another man. Hell, she could have just thought about what she wanted in life and been as ruthless in her determination to get it as the Duke was.

She was supposed to be a booksmart nerdy feminist, and I get the appeal, but what I got instead was a silly nerdy doormat who let her father walk all over her and then purposely antagonised Lucien in the hopes that he would call off-- which is ridiculous, as she should have known a gentleman could never do so. If she was opposed to the marriage, she should have refused her consent. I find it hard to respect her at all, since she acts like a spoiled child having a tantrum, instead of the logical woman she asserts herself to be.

Lucien, on the other hand, is a complete fucking asshole who decides to be nasty to his fiancée since she's (understandably) upset at being stolen from her life and isolated from her friends and blackmailed into marrying a stranger in order to act as a broodmare. His resentment is no excuse for his treatment of her, though. Not only does he sexually assault Beth (and it was definitely a sexual assault, she clearly said no, struggled to get away, and he physically overpowered her) he then gets angry at her because of (assumed) sexual experience, and constantly threatens her with physical violence. He actually hurts her on two separate occasions-- near the end of the novel he hits her, on purpose, because he believes she has cheated on him. He is sorry afterwards, since it turns out there wasn't a man in her rooms after all, but I couldn't help but remember what he'd done earlier in the novel, at (I believe) their betrothal ball. He squeezes her arm hard so hard she sits down in shock, for speaking two words in a tone he didn't like.

That kind of behaviour was bad enough when I thought both of them were acting like spoiled petty children. But later on, after confessing his love for her, for him to fly into a sudden rage because of a hat, for him to actually strike her... how can I not believe he would hit her again? Of course he will hit her again.

Worse, I think, is the reaction of all and sundry when they know about his abuse. Clarissa, up until then a timid, silly young girl, is the only person who actually reacts appropriately to the situation. Everyone else acts as if the casual spousal abuse is nothing serious. I would have liked to see either the Duke or Duchess deal with Lucien in the aftermath, but instead the closest thing we get is Blanche asking Lucien if he's okay, after hitting his wife.

The subplot with Clarissa and Deveril was fine, although I would have preferred Clarissa's entrance earlier on in the book. Instead the first half of the book is a boring slog of social engagements and Beth being too sensible and intelligent to care about jewels or gowns (a touch of the Not Like Other Girls Syndrome, methinks) and the last third of the book a constant thrill ride. The outing to break into Deveril's house was poorly planned and even more poorly excecuted. For the life of me, I have no idea why they'd think to pretend to be hookers in order to sneak into the house and get out again, but never think to just hire actual hookers. It made no sense, and was a pretty stupid and silly ending to a ridiculous book.

I think the pacing of this book is terrible, and the love between Lucien and Beth is a literary convenience. Highly unconvincing, but it gives me hope that Eleanor's nasty brother will come back in a future book to get his comeuppance.