Rating: 5/5

I'm a big fan of that old dystopian vision of the future; the hierarchical, sterile society, the vast future cityscapes and all manner of things envisioned by a plethora of authors such as Arthur C Clarke, Aldus Huxley, Philip K Dick and of course HG Wells.
 
The Sleeper Awakes tells the story of an ordinary man called Graham, propelled into the most extraordinary circumstance, after falling into a 203-year sleep-like trance in late 19th Century Cornwall. 
 
Having been a public wonder, often “on display” during those two centuries, Graham finally awakens one day to discover a different world, where he soon learns that he's the richest man on Earth and owner of everything. But his world, culture and dreams are long gone, replaced by an oppressed slave nation and twisted aristocracy - all funded by his own wealth. And thus begins his struggle, as Master, to restore order and values and serve his people, against constantly opposing forces.
 
Wells revised his original 1889 novel in 1910, making minor edits and changes to improve the reading and bring a few technological things up to date. Despite this, he still managed to write about air combat fifteen years before any of our planes engaged in warfare. That is one particular example of Wells' intuitive foresight – his vision of technology is quite amazing, from various travel machines to audiovisual technology, all of which, combined with his enormous and daunting vision of a heavily built-up, wind-powered future London (complete with moving roadways), is absolutely fascinating.
 
It always astounds me to read something so visionary, so advanced, written so many decades before the advent of the technology that we take for granted daily. 
 
The Sleeper Awakes constantly surprised me, as I became increasingly absorbed in this fascinating but unpleasant future. It’s the kind of book that leaves you yearning for more and wanting to further the adventure – and at the same time, completely sympathising with Graham. It's abrupt and sudden ending - even if during the climactic battle - seems unusual for Wells, and although he wrote his own thoughts on Graham's fate in 1924, to the reader, the story is left open in a slightly frustrating way, after such a huge journey.
 
I’m surprised that no big-screen adaptations have been attempted of this seemingly seldom-mentioned novel. Then again, maybe only with the technology of today, would film-makers be able to even begin to realise the sheer scale of Wells’ vision. Or maybe, as with The City and the Stars, perhaps The Sleeper Awakes is one tale best left in book form, and left intact rather than ravaged by safe Hollywood direction or other such things that undermine the integrity of the story.
 
The Sleeper Awakes is one book I’m glad to have read and certainly look forward to reading again. It inspired me to illustrate one of the pivotal scenes in the book, which you can see here: http://thelightdream.net/art/science_...