Rating: 4/5

I think what may shed a cleansing light upon the dark recesses of ignorance pertaining to any dispute of this excellent book would be for everyone here to read up on Mithraism / Mithra. In a nut shell it preceded Christ by 600 years ( at least ) and, surprise, has almost identical teachings &amp; many of the same stories as the bible. Basically Constantine who ordered the first mass printing of the bible was a follower of Mithra first and as a method of consolidating power helped replace the Pagan God Mithra ( but still keeping many of the same stories ) with the fabled figure head of the, back then, minor cult called Christianity. Constantine then appointed himself Pope of this now better organized &amp; funded religion as well as having the power &amp; title of Emperor. Time to grow up everyone. Jews &amp; Muslm's too have forged their religions over this original super-religions stories &amp; views. Read &amp; learn the real truth. 
As for the similarities between Mithra, Mithraism, Jesus and Christianity:
Mithra was born on December 25th sometimes in a stable or cave but traditionally from a rock. 
The Roman Emperor Aurelian declared December 25 to be the official birthday of Mithra, circa 270 CE, even attended by shepards who brought gifts.
Mithra was a traveling teacher.
Mithra had 12 disciples.
He performed Miracles.
He was buried in a tomb.
In three days he was resurrected.
He was called the "Good Shepard".
He was considered ""the Way, the Truth and the Light, the Redeemer, the Savior, the Messiah."
His sacred day was Sunday.
His resurrection was celebrated on Easter.
He had a Last Supper when he returned to his father. Also called the Eucharist or the Lord's Supper.
He was believed not to have died, but to have ascended to heaven where it was believed he would return at the end of time where he would judge the living and the dead.
He granted immortal life of his followers through baptism.
Followers of Mithra were lead by a 'papa', the Greek word for 'father' and what 'pope' is derived from,who ruled on Vatican Hill in Rome.
Remember - This is all BEFORE Christ. Records show at the very least 600 years before !
Followers of Mithra celebrated "sacramenta", a consecrated bread and wine, using chanting, incense,bells, candles and holy water just as is found in the Catholic Mass.
"He who will not eat of my body and drink of my blood, so that he will be made on with me and I with him, the same shall not know salvation."- NO this isn't John 6:53-54. Its actually an inscription to Mithras. 

Yup folks - your entire life devoted to Christianity has been a fraud. The bible is just 'the book of plagiarism' design to control &amp; tax the populace of the old world - and things haven't changed much since.