Rating: 4/5

The last time I saw him was in Paris in the spring of 1944. We were never closer to each other than during that last meeting. We had met in a restaurant in Rue Saint-Benoît, and afterward, walking along the quais in beautiful weather, we had spoken at length of the future. We were in such deep agreement that for the first time I felt an absolute confidence in the future of our country.

Camus writes here of the last time he saw his friend Rene Leynaud who was later murdered by the Nazis.

Camus is one of my favorite authors. There are many well written passages in this collection too. Most of Camus’ essays are on resistance. It should be noted that many of the essays seem quite dated. Writing about Algeria, Spain and Hungary in the early ‘50s is a little hard for me to place contextually. But other essays feel like they could be written about our current Trump dystopia.

Here are some passages including this part of a letter that Camus sent to a German friend who joined the Nazi party. It was was sent shortly before the liberation of Paris in 1944.

The dawn about to break will mark your final defeat. I know that heaven, which was indifferent to your horrible victories, will be equally indifferent to your just defeat. Even now I expect nothing from heaven. But we shall at least have helped save man from the solitude to which you wanted to relegate him. Because you scorned such faith in mankind, you are the men who, by thousands, are going to die solitary. Now, I can say farewell to you.

or his essay arguing against the guillotine 

If fear of death is, indeed, a fact, another fact is that such fear, however great it may be, has never sufficed to quell human passions. Bacon is right in saying that there is no passion so weak that it cannot confront and overpower fear of death. Revenge, love, honor, pain, another fear manage to overcome it. How could cupidity, hatred, jealousy fail to do what love of a person or a country, what a passion for freedom manage to do? For centuries the death penalty, often accompanied by barbarous refinements, has been trying to hold crime in check; yet crime persists. 

If you like Camus or like humanist writing you will appreciate this book. 

4 stars