Rating: 4/5

Science-wars of the 90s within the humanities. Lectures and a textual debate between several authors on the topic of interpretation. Nice to see a book structured as a back-and-forth. 

Eco strides the reasonable Aristotelian middle-ground between the chaotic free-play of interpretation and a rigid essentialist view. His general gist is presented more thoroughly in other books, such as the Role of the Reader which articulates the concepts of the open work, model reader/writer, codes and interpretants. For all of his retorical poise and confidence, as well as a patriarchal tone of reason, his position is a tenuous one, straddled between the artistic text being Open, but not Fully Open, reliant on a triangulation between the empirical text, reader and their horizon, and the intrepretative practices of the culture, language or community (or codes). Eco is at pains to show that some moves are simply not valid, some interpretation flows over into "use" (most likely with a connotation of ABuse) of a text. 

Rorty is a nice contrast, if nothing else, advocating for a dissolution of the distinction between interpretation and (ab)use - all is use in the end. Truly we might as well turn to any other post-structuralist for a similar skepticism. Instead of essence and appearance, Deleuze affirms the all-encompassion of simulacra or appearance. Yet Rorty is completely nonchalant about interpretation and seemingly as such also incurious about the mechanisms behind actual interpretative processes, which is noted by the following essay by Culler. Yet, curiously, no one takes up Rorty's most interesting remark - which he leaves undeveloped here - that instead of interpretaton a text should be an encounter for the reader which precicely re-orients his interpretative practices (the Peirce'ian 'final interpretant'). This is a more interesting criteria than the simple pragmatic "use-value" that Rorty otherwise advocates for. 

Culler's essay is actually the strongest of the bunch to me, so I'll spend more words on it. He is capable of prodding at the weak points of both Eco and Rorty - the first for undervaluing overinterpretation and not providing appropriate examples thereof (Culler actually rightly identifies Eco's examples as UNDERinterpretation); and the second for ignoring the study of established mechanisms of language and culture, that shape and ideologically constrain us, to favor of simple pleasant play. But art and interpretation is not just play, it's also a battleground with competing conceptual distinctions at stake. Culler also shows that neither of the previous authors really understand Derrida - Eco in particular making him into a straw-man of the ultimate "reader-response" theory. 

Culler's own "middle-ground" between the middle ground is to re-orient the focus to processes of meaning-making rather than the delineation of correct or incorrect, under- or overinterpretation which result from the processes. This is a basic semiotic insight, which Eco should have heeded. This enables Culler to retain the basic and true triangulation (text-reader-code) that necessarily exists, while also considering that these co-ordinates can change and do change recursively in each act of meaning-making. Thus while at any given point in time there might exist interpretations that are less likely, given enough time for mutation, a new "species" of interpretation can evolve from previous configurations. A text is a living thing and each new reading, each new interpretative frame or grid and each intertextual link literally changes it - given enough time new norms and interpretations can emerge, new texts which enter the intertextual field retroactively re-organize the interpretative matrix (and to this argument you need not even turn to speculative philosophers necessarily, but even to the classic, Juri Lotman). At any given point the potential infinity of interpretation is not relevant, but given enough time it might be - the limits of meaning-making and language are not known in advance. Overinterpretation, then for Culler, can serve as a "laboratory" for the study of text - a way of exposing the potentials and potential mechanisms for meaning making even in advance of the interpretative community. Semiotics and literary studies - instead of faithfully re-producing the judgements of the community - ought to reveal new aspects of the text. 

The contrast with this temporal-evolutionary view reveals how Eco, as any proper structuralist, needs to "freeze time" so that he can retain criteria for normative evaluation of interpretation. The titular normative dimension perhaps should be alien to semiotics anyway: one gets the sense that whats at stake here is "good" and "bad" interpretation which are not the purview of semiotics as a science, but rather judgements in and about literary criticism, despite Eco equating truth in any discourse with truth of literary interpretation in his unconvincing reply; the truth that semiotics aims at is not the truth of what the sign signifies, but HOW it signifies and in what conditions. It does so only in time, which explodes from underneath Eco's careful triangulation in an infinite semiosis, neither based on the whims of the reader, nor the homogenisation of all distinctions and codes in a random free play, but does put all of these elements irreversibly in motion.