Rating: 3/5

Okay done with #2
And I liked this book till almost the end but then ….

The H backhands the h (suspecting infidelity) and she understands and forgives? And this from a h who eats one’s head off by spouting women’s rights and equality for much of the book. I was so knocked off my ‘I like this book despite’ saddle that I just could not get back on. And we are at the crucial climactic juncture by now. 

Also the ow gets waaay too much space (and respect). I don’t care if she’s (truly) a nice person and the H ‘loves her but in a platonic way’, but a two way relationship should have all extra angles and edges shaved off nice and clean - and timely. 
This ow doesn’t get redeemed because it’s the h who needs improving and not the ow. She’s perfect - not a paragon, but just a normal nice person. 
Okay, to be honest, why would a man prefer a combative, prickly, opinionated, plain forced-upon-him wife over a warm, understanding, undemanding, good humoured and beautiful mistress? This book and the previous one tell us how much he admires and adores this other woman. So, yes even his (sudden) falling in love with the h feels forced and fakey. One day he finds her unattractive, then she’s okay but not sexually attractive and then she’s the bee’s knees and he’s in love? 

And if that isn’t bad, the h-ow bond! If I remember correctly, regency rules are clear that cheating dudes are never to introduce the mistress to the wife but here the H takes the wife to the ow’s place (a sponsored by him household) and looks on benignly as they take to each other. 
My very small petty heart is not above human jealousy and possessiveness, and that’s how I want my h to be - not get all chummy and girl-bonding, and exchange winky looks if not actual notes with the ow. And she seems all set to remain in their lives.

Then the usual Jo Beverley problem with lengthy and winding narrative that refuses or doesn’t know when to wind down. Some strict editing is needed. Great, unhurried writing but unhurried needs to hurry up. 

Not all bad. I actually like the plot of how and why the plain bluestocking and the blond Adonis are forced on each other. They spar, sneer, bicker and mostly rub each other the wrong way- but not in the sexual way. Lots of banter, competitive quoting of the classics - some funny, some witty, some tiring. Still good till the strong independent 24 y.o. h gets the virginal jitters. Annoying, unnecessary and so obviously an excuse (by the author ) to put off the consummation till later in the story. 

And then the shoving and the backslapping. This book, this H never prepared me for it. It was quite unnecessary and I don’t know what the author wanted to prove with it. If it happens once….