Rating: 5/5

257-Talmud-Group authors-Philosophy-200
Barack
2020/02/13
2020/07/01

 
- jealousy and anger people die young, tense and hungry people premature aging.
 
"Talmud" (Talmud), published in the 2nd to 6th century. The Talmud is the most important book in Jewish life except the Hebrew Bible. It is also called the Talmud most of the time.
 
Group author, after the destruction of the Jewish kingdom in 586 BC, a large number of Jews were reduced to "Babylonian prisoners." In this way, Babylon gradually developed into the most important cultural and spiritual center of the Jews, gathering many influential Jewish sages and religious researchers, forming a class of scholars enjoying high prestige and leadership. They took the responsibility of maintaining Judaism traditions and Jewish spiritual values as their mission, devoted themselves to theology, wrote books, and compiled a collection of Jewish oral laws between the 2nd and 6th centuries AD, namely the Babylonian Talmud and the Palestine Tamu "Germany", collectively called "Talmud", formed the Talmud culture.
 
Part of the catalog
1. God and the universe
2. Human doctrine
3. Self and others
4. Marriage and family
5. Physical life
6. Moral life
7. Social life
8. Doomsday judgment and eternal life
 
The lives of the Jews are strictly regulated by the "Bible", especially the "Pentateuch" (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy). For questions that the Bible cannot directly answer, the rabbis (rabbi is the name for qualified teachers in Jewish law) will be handled and judged in accordance with the spirit of the Bible.
 
Today’s well-known collection of laws "Mishna" ("Mishna" means "learning or teaching through repetition", is one of the classics of Judaism. It combines the oral traditions of Judaism and the Oral Torah in writing. It is the first half and the clauses of the Talmud in Judaism.) (Tola broadly refers to the true meaning revealed by God to the Israelites, and also refers to the teaching and guidance that God has revealed to mankind. In a narrow sense, it refers to the first five volumes of the Old Testament. (Jews do not call the Old Testament), Judaism calls the Pentateuch of Moses, namely "Genesis", "Exodus", "Leviticus", "Numbers" and "Deuteronomy".)
 
"Mishna" was compiled by the Prince of Judah in the early 2nd century AD. If it is a problem that cannot be solved by " Mishna ", it will be discussed by the rabbis . The rabbis then will a number of precedents ﹑ ideas and words and deeds recorded in "dense that even" above, and finally formed a "Talmud."
 
The Talmud was written by 2,000 scholars during more than 1,000 years of discussion and research. They wrote out the main views and opinions of these scholars. It is an expression of everyone's relatively concentrated thoughts. There is no certainty in itself. answer.
 
"Talmud" comes from Palestine, the hometown of the Bible, and Mesopotamia, the cradle of civilization. It began in the Babylonian exile in the 6th century BC and ended in the Roman Republic. The Babylonian Talmud was codified in the form of a code in 500 AD.
 
Babylonian exile is an important period in human history, especially for Israel. During the period, the Israelis discovered themselves . Not only has the Torah been rediscovered as a rule of life, but it has also influenced new religious systems, such as synagogues, that is, church-style worship without priests or ceremonies (worship refers to the expression of faith in God on the Sabbath. God created the heaven and the earth in six days, blessed the seventh day, and designated the seventh day as the Sabbath) appeared-it is one of the most profound spiritual achievements in the history of all religions.
 
Of Mishnah (i.e. dense that even ) generating a second portion of the annotation are more parts, is called Gemara , meaning teachings, serve to explain the term &amp; Mishnah and the main content. Look for the difficulty of clarification, reconcile differences in statements; refer to the decision of the unknown author in Mishna Finally, it states the complete debate on these topics that took place in Palestine or Babylon.
 
There are two types of gemalas , one is done in Babylonian College and the other is done in Palestine. Strictly speaking, it is incorrect that the latter is now called the "Jerusalem Talmud" because the temple was destroyed (in 586 BC, the Kingdom of New Babylon destroyed Jerusalem and the first temple was destroyed. In 70 AD, the Jews Rebelling against the tyranny of the Roman Empire, General Titus led an army to besiege Jerusalem, and the Second Temple was burned down, leaving only the western wall—the Wailing Wall.) After that, there was no college in Jerusalem.
 
When we talk about Babylon Gemara , we would like to ask when it was said and written. Babylon, where it was born, is a Jewish autonomous region. Jews have spent more time in this area than in other places. From 586 BC to 1040 AD-about 1626; from the fall of Cyrus to the period of Mongolian conquest.
 
From the Pentateuch to Mishnah, from Mishnah to Gemara , and then to the arrival of the completion of the Talmud . The opinion providers and deans of the academy in the 6th century and the spiritual leaders of the Jewish community in the Middle Ages added some content. With more and more content, it naturally reminds people that it is necessary to simplify and explain the Talmud. The most important thing is to classify the Talmud in accordance with 613 laws. Later, the explanatory part was written into a long text.
 
" To achieve self-satisfaction, we must give our attention and wealth to family, friends and society, we must change from thinking of ourselves to emphasizing the world other than ourselves. Self-actualization does not mean retreating from our fallen world. It’s not about indulging in narcissism. To realize your own value, you must participate in social life and contribute to the world. "
 
" Respect yourself, but don't be arrogant; enjoy the gift of life, but don't become a slave to wealth; work hard for success, but don't overly boast of your brilliance, be modest; cultivate your own abilities without overly indulging in Self. "
 
" Pay attention to the following three things, you will not fall into the clutches of evil. Know where you come from, know where you are going, know to whom you confide your true feelings and narrate your experiences. "Where are you from? "I am a fallen dust. "Where are you going?" "I went to a place full of dust, crawling maggots, and chaos. "Who do you tell your feelings and experiences to?" "To God, to the most sacred God, God bless. "
 
" Happy is the material that does not exist, because sin always comes Example as ...... When a person gets involved in something after eating and drinking, a luxury any chance of losing him would be a A disaster. In order to maintain the banquet he is accustomed to, he will have to be involved in sinister money transactions, accompanied by lies, hypocrisy, greed... But as long as he refuses the temptation to enjoy the desire, he All these sins will be avoided. "
 
"The Jewish tradition believes that some anger is permitted, and that these angers are important and indispensable, that is, anger at injustice. But the kind of unrestrained anger at others, the kind of irrational anger , That kind of anger that doesn't care about others should be condemned. "
 
" A person's character can be seen from his attitude towards three things. These three things are: drinking, spending money, and anger. Some people think that a person's character can be seen in a joke. "
 
" A person must be as supple as a reed stalk , not as straight as a cedar. When the wind blows, the reed bends along the way, and when the wind stops, it is straight in its original position. What about the sharp? Its good luck also makes it a pen for writing the Bible. And cedar, even its life is difficult to keep, because once the wind blows, it will fall down to the roots , Broken. What about its branches? Lumberjacks came, and chopped and chopped them to cover the roof-the rest, they were thrown into the fire. "
 
" Like other aspects, Jewish rabbis emphasize restraint when speaking. They say that once a word is spoken, it is like an arrow shot, and it can never be taken back. "
 
" Who is a wise man? One who learns from everyone. A wise man does not talk nonsense in front of people smarter than him; he does not interrupt his partner's speech; he does not rush to answer questions; he asks relevant questions , The answer was to the point; he first said what he knew first, and then he said what he knew later; what he didn't hear, he said: "I haven't heard. He faces the truth squarely. He opposes Tune . If a man’s writing exceeds his wisdom, what can he compare to? The branches of a tree are extremely lush, but the roots are few and short. When the wind comes, It will be uprooted. A man’s wisdom surpasses his writings. What can he compare to? A tree has very few branches, but its roots are very long and many. Even if all the winds in the world go together It blows, blows violently, and you can't blow it down. "
 
" The Bible says: "Walking with the wise will lead to wisdom; working with the fool will lead to destruction." "("Proverbs" 13:20) What does this compare to? Compared to a man who has entered the spice shop. Although this man does not buy anything or take anything from the store, the fragrance is already attached to him. The clothes will not disperse all day long. But if a person walks into a leather store, even if he does not buy anything, he does not take anything, his clothes will become dirty, and the bad smell will be attached to him all day. On his clothes, it’s been a long time. "
 
" Once, a hunter captured a can only say that the bird seventy kinds of languages." Let me go, "the bird said," I will tell you three of advice. "Tell me first," the hunter replied, "I swear I will let you go." "The first piece of advice is," said the bird, "don't regret it after doing it." "The second piece of advice is: If someone tells you something that you think is impossible, don't believe it." "The third piece of advice is: When you can't climb, don't bother to climb." " Then the bird said to the hunter: "Should you let me go now?" "The hunter released the bird according to words . The bird flew away and landed on a tall tree, and shouted to the hunter: "You are so stupid. You let me go, but you don't know that there is one in my mouth. A great pearl of great value, it is this pearl that makes me so smart. The hunter wanted to capture the bird again. He ran to the tree and began to climb the tree. But when halfway through the climb, he fell off and broke his legs. The bird laughed at him and shouted at him: "Idiot ! You forgot all the advice I told you just now. I tell you once you do a thing, don't regret it, but you regret letting me go. I tell you if someone tells you something that you think is impossible, don't believe it. But you believe that there will be a big pearl in the beak of a bird like me. I tell you if you can't climb something, don't force yourself to climb. But you chased me and tried to climb this big tree, and you fell and broke your legs. What this proverb says is you:'For a wise man, a lesson is more profound than a hundred times for a stupid man. '” ”
 
" Anyone who is humble, God will bless him to be improved; anyone who improves himself, God will bless him to be humble. Great honor will leave those who pursue honor. But great honor will follow those who avoid honor. "
 
" When people leave this world, even half of their wishes will not be realized. A person with one hundred yuan will hope for two hundred yuan; a person with two hundred yuan will hope for four hundred yuan. People will be rejected by timing; those who obey the timing will find that the timing is by his side. "
 
" The more discipline a person receives, the less he is affected by extreme situations (good and bad opportunities), so when he encounters the greatest good luck in the world (philosophers call it "unimaginable "Essence"), he will neither be excited by it, nor will he show special ostentation and pride in his own eyes. And when great misfortune and suffering befall him, like many things that happen in the world suffering the same (philosophers call "big misfortune"), he was neither surprised nor intimidated, but well endure it all. "
 
" It is in this spirit that our pioneers said: "Find yourself a companion. "When you make a friend, check him out first, don’t rush to trust him. Some friends are loyal when things are beneficial to them, but they abandon you when there are difficulties. Some friends fall to the enemy’s side and make The quarrel is open to humiliate you. There are other friends who eat your food, but you can’t find him anywhere when you are in trouble. When you are prosperous, he will be your confidant and fight fiercely with your servants; but If you are defeated, he will turn around to oppose you and will never come to see you again. "
 
" You must keep your distance from your enemies, and keep your eyes on your friends. A loyal friend is a safe haven. Whoever finds such a friend will find treasure. A loyal friend has no price; he The value of money is not measurable by money... Don’t abandon old friends, new friends don’t have so much value. New friends are like new wine. If you don’t make it, you will not be happy to drink. ”