Rating: 4/5

Ripping Yarns
This is a somewhat difficult book to assess. It is a book started shortly after the collapse of the British Empire (here defined as the Suez Crisis of 1956) written with hindsight from the narrow perspective of an idealistic and relatively liberal English subject. While ambivalent in many ways, the essential decency of the British character is never questioned and broad stereotypes of national character and civilization are treated freely. The non-British subjects of the empire, if they are mentioned at all, are treated only insomuch as they interact with imperial officers, the sole major exceptions being those who (like the Afrikaners) are white. It is in short a book that views white British as the unspoken default and all others as outsiders, however sympathetic they may be if you meet them. She’s not pro-slavery, for example, and points out hypocrisies in the slave-owning classes, but at the same time she describes abolition as having devastating consequences. How can someone say that and not be pro-slavery? Because the goings on of black former slaves (while tragic) are simply outside her purview.

These shortcomings (and they are shortcomings) are more forgivable when you consider what the book is trying to be. It is quite explicit about this from the beginning: this is to be an attempt to capture the feel of the empire, the view it held of itself, by a former imperial subject who lived through its final years and witnessed its ultimate collapse. Given that this is the objective of the book it seems somewhat unfair (even though it is frustrating) to blame it for what it isn’t. The expanded memoirs of a white Englishwoman are naturally going to fail to capture the perspectives of a native subject. It lacks the perspective of time to let the dust settle, but it conveys the immediacy of it and captures some sense of the thrill and wonder that an imperialist would have felt. If you want to understand the imperial mentality this is the place to start. And she does a marvelous and nonjudgmental (I almost said unsentimental, but it’s the opposite of that) job of bringing the mentality to life.

The book sets out to capture what the empire felt like to those in charge and how they viewed the world that they controlled and justified it to themselves. On such a level it succeeds brilliantly, with a few caveats. Firstly of course, is the fact that revealing the ideals without peeking beneath to the behavior is bound to leave a very misleading impression both of empire and its servants. Secondly, the ideals played up here are strictly those of people with liberal sentiments who felt some need to justify what were ultimately pretty brazen acts of violence. People like this did exist, but they pass over the majority of imperialists who simply felt little need for justification beyond might makes right. In fairness, such people will naturally have little to contribute intellectually to the notion of empire (even though the imperial idealists spent most of their time seeking justification for what those people did rather than directing them) but this also ignores the darker ideals at play. She certainly mentions racism and the ideals of white supremacy that came to (as she sees it) tarnish the benefits of empire, but while this is mentioned it is treated in such a way as to make them seem foibles rather than common attitudes. There are problems with looking at things only through the imperial lens.

The sheer ambivalence of the book is one of its more interesting aspects. While not exactly an anti-imperialist, she recognizes the empire’s flaws and sees its downfall as an inevitable result of incompatible goals. The entire trilogy must be read to fully understand this view since she judges each era differently. As she sees it the ideals of the imperialists were essentially decent: to “civilize” the natives and bring them the benefits of modern knowledge. Opportunists existed of course, and even idealists often used their ideals to justify blatant opportunism, but the goal of bringing civilization to savages always lay there in the background. The early empire (which developed mainly by accident) was thus mostly good (this is part one, Sentiment of Empire: 1837-1850). Over time though, as the British started to drink their own Kool-Aid, the conviction that they had been given a divine mission to civilize the world started to corrupt their sense of mission (The Growing Conviction, 1850-1870). As they started to believe in their own hype they became more and more arrogant and detached from reality, turning into a more oppressive force than one acting for good (Imperial Obsession, 1870-1897). Subsequent volumes will deal with its collapse and fall. This is an oversimplification of course. The early period had plenty of opportunism and was frequently indifferent rather than simply well-intentioned. The positive imperial ideals are associated more with the period when things start to get more brazen.

This is not a scholarly book and makes no pretensions about that. Its goal is not analysis but feelings. Personalities are the main focus, followed by places and then events. Generalities and overarching frameworks is not this book’s strong suite. Each chapter is a vignette or series of vignettes about one corner of the empire organized according to date. That may sound hopelessly formulaic, but the basic approach is that of a storyteller. Rather than analyze each region the book tells a ripping good yarn about it and this, combined with a travel guide’s eye for local flavor, forms the core of the story. A grand tour around the empire led by someone who visited it firsthand. Instead of an overarching framework for explaining the empire, this book is about feelings and attitudes. How did the explorers see it? How did the bureaucrats and administrators? How about the colonists? Each vignette is chosen to be representative of one or another of these themes. 

One good thing to come out of this is that Morris has an amazing eye for anecdotes and an outstanding command of revealing quotes. Cecil Rhodes’ description of his ambitions for empire as “philanthropy plus 5%” was my favorite. Her own voice is good humored and forgiving, with a tolerant fondness for folly and good intentions. She is eminently quotable. “Long before imperialism became a national cause, a popular enthusiasm or even an electoral issue, it occurred to some Britons that they might be a kind of master race”. Many of these quotes fall into the racial (or perhaps ethnic) essentialist ideas common during her era; the belief that there is an inherent national character that can be observed and described. Example: “Unlike the English and the Scots, the Irish had never been wanderers. They had no instinct for the exotic: perhaps they were exotic enough in themselves. They loved their country with a mystic attachment, and the free English-speaking communities scattered across the world, familiar though they were with Cockney or Glaswegian, seldom heard the brogue.” “Mystic” and “exotic”… somehow Englishmen are never described that way, no matter their weirder inclinations. “Eccentric” they’d be. Or “unusual”. It’s not cruel exactly, but it is dismissive and smug. The voice, to be honest, of empire. On some level I’m truly happy to see it so unadulterated, not hiding behind euphemisms or false pretenses. On the other hand… there’s a reason we tend to obscure such things now.

That was Heaven’s Command: equal parts brilliant and frustrating. There were times when I couldn’t put it down and others when I just wanted it to be over. The vignettes and stories from the empire were sometimes fun, but I did often find myself yearning for more analysis and fewer imperial eccentrics. Focusing on the British experience of their empire is fine, but the near total absence of any colonial voices is shocking (though perhaps it shouldn’t be). I’m a bit tired of race being used as the be all end all of every subject, but it’s impossible to ignore that (particularly by the Victorian Era) it formed the chief factor of and justification for imperialism in England. She can hardly be accused of ignoring this, but at the same time it is presented as an innocent and ignorant prejudice, free of the malice and cruelty that she sees as inherently, well, non-British. It’s what I’d expect from a Britain still enjoying the warm afterglow of imperial dreams. Our more cynical (I would say realistic) age might look on this and struggle to turn war crimes and murder into the careless excesses of cheerful good humor. She slaps the wrist gently where we might go for the throat. But that too is the voice of empire.