Rating: 3/5

This is a grim graphic novel consisting of four intertwined stories of characters and lives in a 1930s Bronx tenement - basically autobiographical, by the great comic book artist and graphic novel genre creator Will Eisner. 

The introductory essay by S. McCloud was well-written and placed the work in context, as well as conveying information about the life and career of Eisner. The lead off story ("A Contract with God") reflects the author's anguish at having lost his only daughter at age 16 eight years before he wrote and drew the book. The bitterness of this experience - transmuted into the fantasy story of Frimml - informs the 3 subsequent tenement tales in the book. There are few likable characters, and most characters' flaws and contradictions are painfully exposed - usually leading to some comeuppance or hubris denouement. The effect of the overall sad book is in the end grim. 

The book is wonderfully drawn - obviously, Mr. Eisner was a master of capturing scenes economically, using a fantastic pen &amp; ink style, often with strong black shadows inked in to render additional foreboding or danger. The dialog &amp; narration are well-written - yet there is little variation in the world depicted, you can almost predict what the almost 100% venal, greedy, status-hungry, scheming people will say and how they will act. The book overflows with emotion-driven action and debacle after debacle - as hopes are shattered, there are even scenes of violence and rape. Since I usually do not like violence, or to be shown violence in an in-your-face manner in a graphic novel, this aspect of the book was somewhat disturbing. Several women are beaten in the book. One is beaten by her husband and then engages in "make-up" sex with him, in front of a 15 year old boy that she has just slept with. Women seek out rich men, or resign themselves to marrying men that are not so rich to escape exploitation by relatives (being turned into virtual slaves helping in the relatives' household). They are then seemingly resigned to a lifetime of further drudgery, as they stay at home to take care of kids, the household, and endless chores, while having to make ends meet on the few dollars the husband brings home. This is really a grim, merciless, totally un-romantic look at the reality of family life for low income struggling immigrants in the Bronx in the first half of the 20th Century. 

The overall effect is one of teeming, sick, humanity, probably as a result of not earning enough to escape tenement life, and having to live on top of each other in railroad apartments, with very few amenities such as adequate heat, no air conditioning, no laundry room, etc. 

I'm sure I'd read the story "Super" in another collection by Eisner previously since it seemed very familiar. It's a creepy story about a nasty super who is driven to suicide by a thieving minor - both the victim and the schemer are disasters as people. Most of the characters in these stories have few redeeming qualities. Some appear to be caricatures of evil qualities, such as the gold-digging girls attracted to any man who seems to have money, the man of modest means who tries to pass himself off as a rich man to attract a rich girl. One of the only endearing characters is in the last story - the medical student who "rescues" a fellow Grossman's (~Grossinger's) guest after she has been raped by another guest, by promising to marry her and keep the rape a secret. The bucolic "wholesomeness" of the summer in the mountains contrasts sharply with the seedy, phony, or for some hopeless social scene.

I suppose by the time Eisner wrote and drew this book, which mocks so many "types" mercilessly, he probably did want to get a lifetime of revulsion at much of humanity off his chest. It reminds me a bit of Goya's grotesque prints on war - a reaction to the horrors of war, dynastic succession struggles and in the French (Napoleonic) invasion of Spain. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dis... The bitterness at least in Eisner's book is similar albeit Goya's works are much darker and violent, and the exaggeration, caricature quality of drawings mocking venal types, and greedy types, also reminds me of Daumier's prints https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honor%C.... It is sometimes important to show people the horrors of humanity - writ large. That in turn reminds me of the great artist's treatment of Weimar era mindless pleasure seeking industrialists and other hypocritical types, George Grosz. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_...

"A Contract with God" moves quickly - can be read in a couple of hours. It conveys the author's impression of life in a Bronx tenement, essentially, what he escaped in making a success of himself as a professional graphic artist and writer. When he wrote "A Contract with God" he must have felt he had nothing to lose in skewering the social scene of his youth - perhaps this was his payback for the misery of his childhood. He was about 60 years old when he wrote it - and probably felt professionally confident enough to write a totally grim book about his recollections of life in the Bronx in the 1930s. There couldn't possibly be any negative repercussions by the time he wrote the book, since the main characters were probably all dead by the time he wrote it, and the world he depicted had at any rate mostly vanished, as demographic change and the march of technology inevitably lead to the disintegration of the village-like Bronx tenement scene. Eisner probably felt free to criticize that world as much as he liked, even though it was the world he grew up in (or perhaps he grew up in it despite it). He had nothing to lose by the time he wrote it - and then went on to astound the world of publishing, by writing &amp; drawing 20 more graphic novels by the time he died in 2005, contradicting the commonplace that creativity dries up the older one gets. For Eisner, he never stopped being creative, and in fact, made some of his greatest creative contributions after standard retirement age. Eisner certainly had the secret of youth in a way - his work remained fresh and new, even as he aged. 

"A Contract with God" is obviously a landmark graphic novel - the first graphic novel ever written/drawn. To be honest, I didn't much enjoy this book since the depictions of women were almost 100% negative - even the long-suffering wife in the story called "Cookalein" is eventually seen to have been abandoned by her philandering husband in the last scene, as her melancholy son gazes grimly down from the fire escape into the building's courtyard. The entire book is grim - except for some few flashes of joy, although even they end or are destroyed or cheapened in the course of the book. Grimness, death, tackiness, degradation, depravity, all these facets of humanity are packed into "A Contract with God." The book is the opposite of an escapist story - the grimness and all too human quality of the book, leaves the reader with a bitter aftertaste, although as noted, both the dialog/narration and the drawings are superb. This is an anti-Valentine to mankind, perhaps Eisner's commentary about man written by the time he had nothing more to fear or lose.