Rating: 2/5

The riveting tale of an aging WASP as he heroically struggles to overcome his anti-Semitism. The sexual escapades of a lecherous retiree who with little effort and even less game inexplicably seduces the pants off a beautiful 20-year old Puerto Rican waitress. The astonishing and highly relatable story of a wealthy Hampton lawyer as he tries to come to peace with his only daughter and child marrying a man of which he does not approve. The tear-jerking episode of a widower who mourns his recently deceased wife by screwing his daughter's mother-in-law. The human interest account of a man who reminisces about the many times he cheated on his wife, including that one time he did with the maid, an Asian girl, who was forced back to the streets as penance for HIS indiscretion. 

No matter how you try to summarize About Schmidt, it comes out about the same--a dirty little nothing book about a dirty little nothing man. While it bills itself as a story about a retiree's journey of self-discovery, in reality it lacks raison d'etre. It amounts to an appetizer platter of greasy finger food, like those phlegmy mozzarella sticks so many family restaurants use to swindle you out of $7.95. Wandering and watery, a semblance of actual story begins to form toward the end, when author Begley attempts to arc Schmidt from a closeted racist into some free-spirited lover of diversity. But it all comes off as artificial and frankly, insulting. Schmidt is "rewarded" for this alleged change in the form of an inheritance from a long-lost step-mother, who bequeaths him her estate. This allows him to abscond to Florida with his Latina girlfriend and her ex-lover, who will basically serve as his pool boy. 

It's hard to identify and even like a character when everything falls into his lap. Even the sex scenes were scarcely scintillating, coming off more as vivid recollections of early-90s late night Cinemax viewings than things actual adults do. Even more perplexing and frustrating were the lack of quotation marks. I can think of only one author who has earned the right to get away with that--Cormac McCarthy. And Begley is no McCarthy. About Schmidt is hardly worth your time, and in fact, the only thing it does right is keeping the page count relatively low.