Rating: 3/5

I really do love Tim Severin’s books. Packed full of history and travel. This time his subject is Robinson Crusoe and who was the prototype for this fictional character? It was always thought to be Alexander Selkirk but what is the truth? Severin is on a mission to find out.

Daniel Defoe wrote ‘The Life and Strange Surprizing Adventures of Robinson Crusoe’ which was published in 1719. Defoe never did confirm if Selkirk was the model for his hero, Crusoe. Selkirk, a Scot, was marooned on Juan Fernandez Island 400 miles off the coast of Chile. He was there for 4 years and 4 months before being picked up in 1709.

Many English buccaneers and mariners had written books around this time of their exploits which Defoe could certainly have utilized. Severin goes over some of these. One story he tells and goes into quite some detail was when a ship called the ‘Speedwell’ gets lashed against the island leaving the Captain and 70 crew as castaways on the same island that Selkirk was marooned. This was 10 years after Selkirk’s solitary adventure. It is a really great story. 

Michael Palin visited the island in ‘Full Circle’. He takes a plane out from Valparaiso in Chile for 400 miles. Palin goes to the cave where Selkirk lived. Severin points out that Crusoe lived in a cave but Selkirk did not. Crusoe is fictional and he did not even live on this island and the cave he lived in was high up which the one tourists are taken to is not. 

Then there is ‘Man Friday’. Will the Moskito as he was dubbed by the English was marooned on the same island before Selkirk. He was there for three years. He was a Miskito Indian from the Mosquito Coast as we know it in Nicaragua. Severin visits the area. Is he the prototype for ‘Man Friday’?

Don’t worry if you have never read Robinson Crusoe. I never have and I did not feel I needed to.

So, does it match the other Severin books I have read? Not quite. This time I think there are too many stories and not enough travel. Incredibly researched as ever but it was all a little too dry for me. He tells a long story and then goes off to the area where the person was marooned to see how that area has changed or not in some cases. In typical Severin style he never does travel the easy way and he’ll never shy away from dangerous places. What I mean by ‘not enough travel’ is not that he didn’t travel enough. He certainly did that. I just love his travel writing and I wanted more in this book.

3.5 stars