Rating: 3/5

The story was kind of silly, but I found myself wanting the HEA because I liked the h and felt she had had enough unhappiness (losing her parents and getting dumped by her fiancé) and deserved true love conquering all.

That being said, she should have been braver and told the H the truth about her (platonic) marriage to a wheelchair bound older man. She had enough opportunities (they met on a ski resort vacation) but kept chickening out and - ironically - just when she was about to tell him, he finds out for himself and is furious, thinking all kinds of unflattering things about her, and naturally her "I was just about to tell you", got a cynical response, even though it was the truth.

Ironically, all his comments about her morals (or lack of them) were far from true, as she didn't care about money, did love her husband (as a friend/mentor) and was going to be honest with him about the H. Technically, she wasn't cheating, since she and the H didn't go beyond some kissing and caressing, and that was more than she ever did with her husband. They had separate bedrooms, and she hadn't slept with anyone, not even her former fiancé. So much for lack of morals!

The reason for the marriage was a bit silly: he was a friend of her parents, and she was staying at his house after they died, which made dirty minded people start gossiping. To protect her reputation, he suggested they get married, and she agreed to a non-religious ceremony, with the condition that if she ever fell in love, they could quietly annul it.

So, had she told the H from the start, everything would have been okay. As it was, he wouldn't listen, she gets dumped again and goes back to hubby.

Sometime later, her husband has guests: a dear friend from years back and her son and daughter. Want to guess who the son turns out to be? 

Even crazier, she at first thinks his sister is his girlfriend, and he thinks the (happily engaged) caretaker is her boyfriend! So, his already low opinion of her morals takes a further nosedive!!

The frustration goes on way too long, made worse by the h becoming friends with the sister, who tells her about how her brother got his heart stomped on by some lying tramp, knowing that the "tramp" in question is her! This creates another betrayal situation, with more "I guess I should have told you", etc.

It takes a long time for everything to get straightened out, including an overlong speech by hubby that started to get on my nerves. And there's also an unsolved mystery with him. He talks of a lost love, but who was she? At first, I thought it might have been the h's mother, which would explain his caring so much for the h, then I thought it was the H's mother, because they had a history together, but it's left a mystery. Oh, well.

It's not bad, but a bit silly.