Rating: 5/5

"“Madam, there is here matter that must distress you, that we cannot deny. I will not hide anything from you. This house is your gift, and truth is your due. But you must not take to yourself more than is customary from any godly gentlewoman in compassion for a young life taken untimely. No part of this stems from you, and no part of what must be done about it falls to your duty.""

Judith Perle has suffered a great loss. She watched the death of her husband from disease and then lost their child to miscarriage several weeks later. Her family of clothiers was the most successful in Shrewsbury. In her grief and wish to give up some of her worldly things she gave to the Abbey of St. Peter and Paul one of her properties that was in the town. The payment for it was the “rose rent” of the title. One perfect rose from the magnificent large bush that grew in that building’s garden. Then comes a murder that affects the Abbey and her in ways never anticipated.

 This is one of the most poignant stories in the Cadfael series. It isn’t that Peters makes Judith pitiable. She is a strong woman who has the intellect to consider issues both large and small. She also is willing to look at herself, her life and her purpose in ways that most wouldn’t. And all of this is again probed by the ever curious Cadfael whose compassion and insights are so interesting to follow. "Judith Perle stood embattled and alone, captive to greed and brutality. Even her good works conspired against her, even her generosity turned venomous, to poison her life."

Having said all of that, I again want to praise Peters for her research and ability to inform us of what life was really like at that period of time, in a turbulent England. That is what makes this series so unique and has me hooked. Peters can weave a mystery but what she does best is to give us as full a picture as possible of context of that mystery. The characters are nuanced and they often have deep psychological or pathological elements. Here she explores the relationship between the town and the abbey as well as between classes of townspeople and those who live outside in “the country.” Each time that I re-read one of these stories, I find that I take it at a slower pace, savoring what she is offering.

This book is one of her very fine efforts yet I feel the need to supply some examples so you know what to expect:

Descriptions of work and trade: 

"As heiress to the clothier’s business for want of a brother, she had learned all the skills involved, from teasing and carding to the loom and the final cutting of garments, though she found herself much out of practice now at the distaff. The sheaf of carded wool before her was russet-red. Even the dye-stuffs came seasonally, and last summer’s crop of woad for the blues was generally used up by April or May, to be followed by these variations on reds and browns and yellows, which Godfrey Fuller produced from the lichens and madders. He knew his craft. The lengths of cloth he would finally get back for fulling had a clear, fast colour, and fetched good prices."

"There was room enough in all that elongated building, besides the living rooms of the family, to house ample stores in a good dry undercroft, and provide space for all the girls who carded and combed the newly dyed wool, besides three horizontal looms set up in their own outbuilding, and plenty of room in the long hall for half a dozen spinsters at once. Others worked in their own homes, and so did five other weavers about the town. The Vestiers were the biggest and best-known clothiers in Shrewsbury. Only the dyeing of the fleeces and fulling of the cloth were put out into the experienced hands of Godfrey Fuller, who had his dye-house and fulling-works and tenterground just down-river, under the wall of the castle. At this time of year the first fleeces of the clip had already been purchased and sorted, and sent to be dyed, and on this same day had been duly delivered in person by Godfrey."

"Niall did a good trade in everything from brooches and buttons, small weights and pins, to metal cooking pots, ewers and dishes, and paid the abbey a suitable rent for his premises. He had even worked occasionally with others of his trade in the founding of bells, but that was a very rare commission, and demanded travel to the site itself, rather than having to transport the heavy bells after casting. The smith was working in a corner of his shop, on the rim of a dish beaten out in sheet metal, pecking away with punch and mallet at an incised decoration of leaves…"

Family life and retreat from it:

"Cecily’s two boys and a girl ranged from ten years old down to six, and Niall’s own chick was the youngest and the pet. Now all four were curled up like a litter of puppies on their hay mattresses in the little loft, fast asleep, and round the trestle table in the hall the elders could talk freely without disturbing them."

"But if ever you need a place to hide, for a little while or a long while, come to Godric’s Ford and bring all your frets in with you, and you shall find a refuge for as long as you need, with no vows taken, never unless you come to it with a whole heart. And I will keep the door against the world until you see fit to go forth again.”"

Nature:

"As so often happened in a late season, the summer had all but caught up with the laggard spring, flowers which had lingered shivering and reluctant to bloom suddenly sprang into fevered haste, bursting their buds overnight into a blazing prime. The crops, slower to take risks, might still be as much as a month late, but they would be lavish and clean, half their hereditary enemies chilled to death in April and May."

Understanding of what the church offered and required:

"For if Eluric was not a suicide, but had gone to his end faithfully bearing his burden and seeking to prevent an evil act, then his resting-place in the cemetery was assured, and his passage through death, however his account might stand for little sins needing purging, as safe as a prodigal son re-entering his father’s house."

"His year’s novitiate was almost over, and soon he would be admitted as a full brother. No power or persuasion could have induced him to depart from the service of the saint who had healed him. What to Cadfael was still the serious burden and stumbling-block of obedience, Rhun embraced as a privilege, as happily as he accepted the sunlight on his face."