Rating: 4/5

A well-written, well-researched, and insightful history of the battle of Verdun. Horne covers pretty much every aspect of the battle in a readable style, from the life of the soldiers, individual actions on the battlefield, technology, tactics, and the character of the commanders without ever bogging down. He also looks at the wider war in some detail and its general conduct.

The narrative is intelligent and sensitive. While he could benefit from hindsight, Horne rarely makes use of it, and it's not such a bad thing. At one point Horne writes that the Germans could have used air power during the battle to cut the French supply line (they basically relied on only one). Horne then quotes a German commander saying that his side simply didn’t understand how to use air power. Throughout the whole narrative, Horne does a great job capturing the battle at the tactical level as well as the machinations among the army staffs.

Horne does cover the experience of pilots, but there is little on the air battles. Horne often uses French words that you may or may not know (it feels like he does it at least once every single page), even in lengthy quotations. A few personalities are referred to by their rank and last name, even though Horne never introduced them before. Some more maps would have helped. 

A few statements made by Horne seem questionable; they do show the book's age, for sure. He blames Moltke for tinkering with Schlieffen’s “master plan” (Horne’s words), but doesn’t mention any of the plan’s flaws or Schlieffen’s own doubts. Nor does he mention other issues Moltke had to deal with, like a more formidable French army, or the fact that the original Schlieffen plan was meant for a war with France alone and not, as in 1914, a war on two fronts. Horne briefly mentions that Joffre ordered Verdun’s abandonment in 1914 but that the order was disregarded. In fact, Joffre had authorized his Third Army commander to retreat if necessary, but he declined because of the difficult terrain and strong defenses. Conrad von Hötzendorf is called “as a general and strategist far superior to Falkenhayn. He was one of the most outstanding on either side.” A lot of older works on the Great War have said the same, though readers today may not necessarily agree. Horne also writes that Falkenhayn and the commanders of Fifth Army disagreed about the attack's targets. They actually agreed, and Falkenhayn assumed that the French would try to reconquer the hills. The sources don't really make clear whether the army commanders assumed, like Falkenhayn, that the French would try to recapture the hills.

Still, an insightful, vivid, and engaging history.