Rating: 4/5

A young girl dies of quick-acting poison hidden in a box of candy meant for someone else. But who? And why? As she purloined the box and died before anyone knew where it came from, Cramer is well and truly up a stump, and actually comes to seek advice from Wolfe.

Wolfe and Archie are that wonderful thing, a detective duo that worked steadily from 1934 to the mid 1970s and only aged a year or two--or at least Archie did, going from mid twenties to mid thirties over 40 years. Mr Wolfe, like a fine Calvados, simply mellowed a tad here and there. The fourth novel in the Wolfe canon, The Red Box shows some of changes that worked their way into later novels: in the 1930s, Cramer smokes in Wolfe's office--later novels repeatedly show him putting the cigar in his mouth, but state: "He never lit one." In some of the early novels, Archie also has the occasional ciggie, but later that disappears. (Did Mr Stout stop smoking himself, at some point?) Archie Goodwin is more sarcastic in the older novels, and is not above making racist statements about foreigners, or members of ethnic groups such as "sheenies"; he got over this in later novels (such as A Right to Die--but then, so did a large portion of American society, at least on the surface. Theodore lived upstairs, next to the plant rooms, in the earlier books, while later he lived off-site. And we are told in this volume that Wolfe would never eat in a restaurant--this must have been before the opening of Rusterman's. 

It's interesting that in two of the early books (this book, and The League of Frightened Men) Archie speaks of Nero Wolfe having a "relapse". When a case isn't going well, Wolfe retreats into the kitchen and cooks and eats--and makes Fritz cook wild recipes which require Archie to go in search of arcane ingredients,sometimes endangering life and limb in the process. That word "relapse" is revealing; did Wolfe perhaps have some sort of undiagnosed eating disorder?

At one point Cramer remarks about this case, "This is the wildest stuff I've ever heard." It is all that and a bag of chips. But no matter, it's vintage Stout, and hasn't lost a smidgen of flavour since 1936. One does not read Nero Wolfe for verisimilitude, thank goodness. You read it for the evocation of time and place--and of course Fritz' cooking.