Rating: 4/5

The Trespasser by D. H. Lawrence

I’m not sure about the best way to enjoy writing this comment on D.H. Lawrence’s second novel, The Trespasser. With Lawrence it seems to easy to say it is a very fine, intensely wrought novel that presaged even greater work to follow. If you were an editor/publisher and received this work from a relatively unknown writer, for instance, you’d know right away that the man had immense and peculiar talent. You’d question the narrow focus of the plot and the confusing opening and ending of the manuscript, but you’d have no doubt, sentence after sentence, that Lawrence understood early in his career that you could write about things in the English language that normally are ineffable.

The story is fairly simple. A musician in a bad early marriage falls in love with a younger musician, spends a week on the Isle of Wight with her, and realizes, upon returning home, that he can’t go on without her (Helena) or abandon Beatrice (his wife) and the children he shares with Beatrice. So he commits suicide. Hangs himself. Within a year, Beatrice has moved on with help from her family, and Helena has found a new suitor who slowly, slowly, is getting his fingers in position to pry her fingers off Siegmund’s memory.

There is something intentionally Wagnerian about this, but let’s skip that and go back to this peculiar quality of Lawrence’s writing. He manages, in describing the week on the Isle of Wight, to describe the moment to moment rise and fall all lovers experience in their earliest passion. He relates a passing glance to nothing less than death. He grants the sky and sun and waves outrageous primacy in reflecting human emotions to which, we probably believe, nature is utterly indifferent. He simply has the tenacity to not let go of what happens between two erotically engaged people taking a walk, lying on the beach, wondering privately to themselves whether there is a future to this passion or an onrushing calamity. 

Carrying this emotional nothingness, devoid of clear action and certain outcome for the longest time, is a very difficult task for a writer. But Lawrence, like some other English writers before him (Blake comes to mind) had the gift of re-valuing his native language itself. Yes, Nietzsche theorized and practiced such revaluation in German, too; I’m conscious of that and want to bring him into the discussion just a bit, especially because he first loved and then hated Wagner, and the young Lawrence wasn’t nearly as astute and bitter and learned as Nietzsche.

No matter, here is a novel by Lawrence I had never heard of before that isn’t infected by some of his later histrionics and excesses. Curiously, the smaller Lawrence wrote (some of the short stories and The Fox come to mind), the more purely he wrote, with less affectation and overt criticism of almost everyone who couldn’t quite believe in his theories of “the blood.”

The Trespasser reaches an appalling high point toward the end as Siegmund realizes he can’t go on. His analysis is clear and deadly. His relations with his wife, who is fed up with him, and his children, who are fed up with him, are dreadful. He is truly someone who at least should run away, and we know he will do that, we just don’t know, until the beautifully awkward discovery of his body, how he will do it.

Those of us who would condemn him in principle are likely to stop condemning him as they get as good a look at his home life when he returns from the Isle of Wight. That’s when Lawrence’s drama becomes action, not metaphysics, logic, not fantasy, and my God, by God, he’s going to do it...he’s going to do it...he’s done it...he’s dead.

And then? This business of Beatrice refusing to mourn him, this business of Helena contemplating, within a year, the advances of a new lover. Actually, it’s a little brutal, a little too realistic, a little disappointing in a way that puts the whole of our little lives into an unpleasant perspective.

The first time I ran into such an ethos--the ethos of so what if we live, so what if we die--occurred during my freshman year in college. My roommate informed me that if I were to die, he wouldn’t care in the least; he wouldn’t care if anyone died, himself or his family included. Life to him was a material phenomenon, and so if Earle was dead, big deal. He wasn’t being histrionic, nor was Lawrence being histrionic in The Trespasser He really meant that in the context of the sun and stars and galaxies, we don’t matter, so those of us who survive a little longer should just get on with it.

This anecdote of mine ends badly. Obviously I didn’t die. My roommate died. He already, at seventeen (he was a math prodigy), was on the road to alcoholism. By his late forties, he would call me and talk about things drunkenly, and because somehow we’d remained friends, I would listen, and then he got around to telling me his liver was shot and there was no remedy and by fifty, he was gone. That’s a brutal death. My mother, who was a nurse, once told me that cirrhosis of the liver causes the worst death of all. She’d seen it and many other kinds of death and that was her opinion.

In the case of The Trespasser, the approach to suicide is as finely recounted as moments of erotic bliss just a few days earlier on the Isle of Wight. The only error our editor/publisher might have made upon receiving this exceptional early novel was not insisting Lawrence get into it and out of it more cleanly and quickly. But the young Lawrence wanted some irony and distance from his dismal vision, and so only ninety percent of the text is unremittingly acute. The other ten percent is novelizing. Ultimately with Women in Love, Lawrence spat the novelizing out. All he gave his readers was his really unusual rendition of relentless passion lurking beneath everything we say and do.