Rating: 1/5

I found this book at a thrift store and was intrigued and since I only paid 25 cents for it I didn't have a lot of expectations for it. That being said, the book was still kind of a stinker. The stories being told are sold as a cautionary tale to young women in Hollywood who let the men call the shots, and how these 4 women allowed that power to lead them into a life of drugs and prostitution.

However, the stories were full of bragging and glamour and never reached the right balance of "it was all great UNTIL this bad thing happened and boy did I learn my lesson..." Instead, it was a checklist of the celebrities that they'd slept with and spilling secrets about who liked to do what behind closed doors. They glamorized the amounts of money that they made and how they justified it - you've been giving it away for free for so long, why not get paid for it? - and it seems that if they hadn't bottomed-out and/or ended up in jail they wouldn't have ever stopped. At the end of each story, there is a customary pass-the-buck explanation about why they used drugs or sex for attention and always with a sentence with "don't be like me" but they never established themselves as any kind of role model. It was odd. Nothing that they said/wrote about would make me change my mind at all if I were considering that lifestyle. In fact, this book is a How To manual on being a call girl the right way. Which is sad, considering that its intention was to save girls from this cycle and promote the power that a woman has over her own destiny.

Plus, it was a distracting read because it didn't appear to be edited at all. The writing was all pretty clunky, which is forgivable since these are call girls not novelists, but the spelling errors and crazy layout hiccups were hard to ignore.

I'm sure some people will be interested in the 'gossip' aspect (who does what behind closed doors) but it didn't really stand out as great gossip. A lot of people like kinky (and not-so-kinky) things, and if you're incredibly wealthy, you might spend some of your fortunes on fulfilling those fantasies. That shouldn't be such a surprise, but maybe I'm just not as innocent and I should be.