Rating: 4/5

Sharon met Fergus when she was a 19 year old virgin university student. Fergus was ten years older and an established defence attorney. The attraction was great on both sides. They fell in love and got married. 
The marriage was passionate but tempestuous, the h been young, sort of immature and rebellious and the H was acting like a father to her, been possessive and controlling which caused most of the clashes. They would always resolve all their problems in bed.

Three years into the marriage the h received two anonymous poison-pen letters ( one month apart) stating that Fergus was in a relationship with a lawyer from his legal firm, Elaine, and providing the woman's residence address. 
Sharon believing the H was an honourable man and knowing that he loved her, gave no credence to the letters. She mentioned nothing to the H and destroyed the notes.

A month later she received another letter stating that the H and the other woman were now lovers and that both resigned their jobs and were to elope that same night. 
Sharon feeling apprehensive and after the H told her he was going to work late that night, got into her car on that cold November night, and parked outside the woman's house waiting. 

SPOILERS 
The woman arrived, parked into the garage and a few minutes later the H pulled into the driveway. 
The h went to the door and saw through the open front window blinds, Fergus carrying suitcases into the living room and then him and Elaine embrassing and kissing passionately. We are privy to the h's thoughts that Elaine was plain looking. Now Sharon's fears were confirmed. 

She rang the doorbell, Elaine answered, and the h got inside and confronted them.
" l've been violated. Betrayed in the most intimate and degrading way by my own husband. Why didn't you come to me and tell me you wanted out of the marriage? You didn't have to run off in the middle of the night and make me an object of pity and gossip."
He told her he had not been unfaithful. Elaine accepted a position in another State and was flying out that night. The kiss was one of goodbye not a prelude to making love. He was coming home to her that night. 

Elaine said when asked by the h that she was in love with Fergus and she had already let him know she was willing to be intimate. She had always known that he'd never divorce Sharon. 
Sharon asked Fergus if he was in love with Elaine. 
He said they had a close relationship, they talked legal matters together, there was an attraction and he cared deeply for her (is this cheating?) but Sharon was his wife and he loved her passionately and he didn't want to lose her. 
Sharon responded that she wanted all or nothing. She couldn't be with him if he was not totally committed to her. She would file for a divorce. 

Five years later Sharon was living in another State and had a high power job. There hadn't been any other men in her life as she had been pining for him. She never stopped loving him. 
He married Elaine and two years ago she died from Aneurysm. 
The h, been at the wrong place at the wrong time, was wrongfully arrested and charged with the murder of her boss who was sexually harassing her.

The H lost no time jumping to her side and undertaking her defence. He never stopped loving her. She was the love of his life they were combustible together. The factor that teared them apart was the age difference. Sharon was very young with youthful interests and behaviour and he was a mature man obsessed with his profession. Though he loved her so and he had a great passion for her, he couldn't connect much as they weren't having the same interests and maturity level at the time. At some point he got a little tired of waiting for her to grow up.

As the H confessed to the h later, he met Elaine at the law firm before he even met Sharon. They were the same age and they were hired at the same time. They dated and were getting along. No major sparks there. 
At some point he met the h at the university and fireworks started exploding. 

Towards the end of his three year marriage to the h he was spending time with Elaine at work, they would discuss legal matters, as he couldn't do that with Sharon, then talk personal matters, go out for a drink while telling the h he was working late. All these meetings were platonic. 

He had found in Elaine the maturity that matched his, what was lacking in his relationship with the h at the time. It was a meeting of two minds. 

Back to the story the H and h succumbed to their passion during the time he was her defence attorney. He kept telling her how much he loved her but the h was having doubts as he had shattered her world once and she had lost her trust in him.

Hero managed to exonerate the h and pleated with her to come back to him. He told her he wanted to contest the divorce five years ago but she were so insistent and he felt guilty as he'd already hurt her so badly.
Elaine and him were somewhat happy together but Sharon's shade was dimming that happiness. Sharon was fire, Elaine was compliance. He cared deeply for Elaine and he was passionately in love with Sharon. 

The h told him she couldn't go back to him as her knight in shining armour let her down and she lost trust in him.
The H knew he had wronged and humiliated her. He felt he didn't deserve her forgiveness. He didn't hold on to her when he had her but he loved her then and never stopped. At the end he accepted her refusal because if she couldn't take him on faith then there was no hope for them.
Three months later as the h couldn't face all the rest of her life without him, went back to him. He welcomed her with open arms. 
If the h was older when the incident happened she would have fought to keep her marriage intact. 

There are some parallels between this book and " Smoke in the wind " .
1) The H was having friendly feelings for the OW rather than romantic. 
2) The H married the OW.
3) The H was passionately in love with the h.
4) The H was pining for the h during his marriage to the OW.
5) OW knew the H was in a relationship but still proceeded to claim him.
6) OW ( wife ) dies.

It was never revealed in the book who had sent the letters to the h. I think it was Elaine. The H told her he loved Sharon and he would never leave her so she thought " what if Sharon leaves him ".
So she proceeded with a plan to hurt Sharon and make her leave the H and she succeeded.