Rating: 2/5

Rep: there is none ¯\_(ツ)_/¯
TW: shootings, murder, kidnapping, 

---
My Rating: 2.5 stars; DNF @ 49%

  "Study without desire spoils the memory, and it retains nothing that it takes in.

Don't be fooled: this quote is from ma man Da Vinci himself (Da Vinky???), and I personally think that my teachers should read it and study it as they have me read and study useless shit all day long. 

Anyways, I thought this book was gonna be like a cool version of The Da Vinci Code, and I was delighted to find out that it was published 20 years earlier. The blurb on the back made me think that Dan Brown plagiarized this book, at least a little bit, but I thought that since I enjoyed The Da Vinci Code, then I would have enjoyed this. I was incorrect.

I was being a little melodramatic there; I actually enjoyed the exposition because it was interesting and it left me wanting to know more. However, as the book progressed, the only thing that happened was that Vance (the MC) got shot at and he shot at others and then he had a mini-crisis in between because "oh, god, I'm next!". Yeah, really. On every page, there was an action scene and not enough intellectual gathering of clues or a cool wild goose chase like from what I remember of TDVC. 

Vance was also your typical, cliche, male protagonist: nothing bad really happens to him, knows how to use a gun, always gets his way in the end, is rugged and handsome, arrogant, smart, and always gets the girl in the end. He was getting annoying, and I couldn't really stand him where I left off (but tbf, he didn't have much of a personality to begin with. It was just him talking about typical cliche guy stuff or whatever). What really made me laugh is that all of a sudden, after years of hating one another, Vance and Suzanne confess their love and then fuck. It makes no sense... And then they talk about love/hate at first sight? Get this bullshit out of my face. It was also obvious that the only female character in the book was written by one of those men as well. Do I even have to elaborate on that?

One other thing that really bothered me is that the author would always refer to bullets as "slugs." At first, I thought it was fun because I never really heard about bullets being referred to in that way, but then the author would only use that word. I kept thinking in my head, "dude, vary your diction!" It was an English teacher moment for me. 

I was hoping that this book would get better over time, but unfortunately, it didn't. I really wanted to finish it, especially considering this was one of my aunt's books from when she was younger, but I just couldn't drag myself through it. There are only so many action scenes with guns one can get through before they lose their mind! The author even said that this isn't one of his best books, so nobody can even come for me on this! Next time I'll just read Dan Brown's version.