Rating: 1/5

This was just god-awful. What could have been an insightful fictionalised account of Lizzie’s life before and after the murders was instead a sensationalised, ridiculous and inaccurate story about the year before the murders. 

According to this account, Lizzie had two ongoing lesbian affairs within the small town of Fall River, and her sister Emma was a drunk. In an attempt to explain the murders, the author tries to show Lizzie experiencing a dissociative fugue state. Except this only happens when Lizzie is experiencing emotional distress that she manages by sneaking into the barn and masturbating. Sounds legit, right? And in some instances, instead of being in a fugue state, she’s actually in two places at once. For example, one time she’s in the bath and dissociates, and encounters her sister in the town. But when her sister comes home, she’s shocked to find Lizzie has been able to get home, run a bath, wash herself, empty the bath and get dressed in the time since they saw each other. So obviously, this wasn’t a fugue state, Lizzie was in two places at once. 

So instead of a genuine but rare mental condition, the murders occur due to some supernatural force. Again, sounds legit. 

Documented aspects of the murders are completely ignored. For example, Lizzie removes her father’s boots before killing him, despite crime scene photos showing the body with its boots on. And Lizzie and her sister had convinced their father to buy a place in town that they rented from him; this goes against the narrative in the book. 

Apart from taking a serious event and turning it into a book featuring lesbianism, supernatural events, frequent masturbation and Andrew Borden regularly using a prostitute, this book was terribly written. Dialogue was stilted, description was like being hit with a blunt object (pun intended) and movement between scenes was amateurish, to say the least. 

To top it off, if you listen to it on audible, you’re subjected to what is possibly the worst narrator I’ve ever come across. 

Put it down and walk away. Seriously.