Rating: 4/5

La Guerre, Yes Sir is 113 pages of pure life, dressed up in funeral clothes.

Written in 1968 but set during the Second World War, it tells a ribald story of a Quebec village gathering to pay respects to the first local casualty of the war – young Corriveau has been sent back in his coffin, accompanied by seven English soldiers, known unanimously as the maudits Anglais, and standing in for all the other damned English. The tale unfolds amidst the culture clash, of language, religion, history and culture. 

The village is full of army deserters fleeing conscription. Quebec in particular resented conscription, unwilling to defend either England, France or English Canada in a European conflict. So Amélie has two men living in her attic, her husband and her lover, and each takes turn in her bed. Joseph cuts off his own hand to avoid conscription. But teenage Philibert is so anxious to avoid his backwards, abusive father that he’s planning to enlist once he can. 

At the wake, the maudits Anglais stand to attention with faces full of contempt while the locals eat tourtière, drink cider and brawl.

A plot description can’t convey how funny the novel is, with a kind of desperate, deranged funniness. The locals swear constantly, an endless litany of Catholic iconography (famously, swearing in Quebec is all about religion, swearing in France is all about sex). They pray badly, to unintentionally comic effect. As you’d expect of a book from the ‘60s, the men spend a lot of time ogling women’s ripe breasts. Villagers rant and rave. A woman wanders through the snow in a wedding dress.

I love these books that pack so much into so few pages. And though this has a lot of the tropes of Quebec fiction (deep snow, dysfunctional rurality, guiltmongering priests), it really has a character all its own. Bonus points for a fabulous translation by Sheila Fischman (translator of the children’s classic The Hockey Sweater and my favourite book The Fat Woman Next Door is Pregnant, among many others).