Rating: 5/5

Impossible to rate anything but five. Should be required reading for all human beings. One of those rare books which make you look at the world from a whole new angle. It offers countless vital insights into social existence and- even if you think man is something fundamentally different from other animals - forces one to look at many a social phenomena in a new light. Well written, absolutely riveting - and extremely important.

Lorenz makes too many fascinating points to mention, but here are three which I feel are maybe the most important: 
1) Aggression is beyond good and evil; it has a function and fulfilling it, it causes things we consider both good and bad. This means that to remove aggression would mean to also remove things such as respect, competition, and even love. Not to mention how much beauty has emerged from sublimated aggression. 
2) We are not driven by reason but by our emotions, instincts and drives, which we are only beginning to understand. To attempt to 'weed out' certain essential aspects of humanity (like aggression) because they appear useless or even harmful to our reason, is utmost folly and hubris if ever there was any. 
3) Humanity's greatest advantage may turn out to be his worst nightmare. Species' which are easily capable of killing others of their own kind, like lions or wolves, have very strict inhibitory mechanism against attacking each other. Human beings, because we lack lethal teeth or claws, also lack these strong inhibitory mechanisms. Which was all fine and dandy until we invented weaponry. Technology may be our undoing. Our brains just aren't wired to deal with the responsibility inherent in pulling triggers, much less with buttons that kill thousands of people per press.

But it's not all about people. Lorenz talks of humanity by first fooling you in through lots of fascinating stories about animals, many of them hilarious, some heartbreaking. But it's a nice kind of fooling: the kind you are grateful for. 

If you've ever wondered why people seem to turn into a mindless herd in large groups, how crows remember things from ten years back, or why we laugh, this book is for you. Actually, if you are human, this book is for you. If everyone read this, the world would be a better place with a bit more honesty and a bit less hate.