Rating: 4/5

Alternate history, uchronias, and indirect criticism of faith and ideology combined into one of the most successful thriller series of all time.

The separate parts were already there
Everything was already on the table, many authors had dealt with the different ideas Brown is mixing together, and finding and recombining conspiracy theories isn´t that complicated. It´s the mix of different topics that interest many people stirred together that make it entertaining for the ones who like art or thrillers, for atheists and religious people, for the ones interested in plot or characterization, it´s just difficult to find someone who would immediately say that she/he isn´t interested in one of the plot vehicles.

Uchronia, dystopia, or big history?
It doesn´t just relativizes general history, but religious and political history in a way that makes it a prime example of the fact that history and holy texts are written by the winners. Widening the range, questioning the status quo, and making people skeptical regarding omniscience, commandments, and whatever is something of huge importance. Brown did more than Richard Dawkins and Christopher Hitchens combined and multiplied could have done in centuries by reaching so many people and making them think about the legitimation of any kind of belief.

Religious fan fiction
Imagine many people would start writing fanfiction like that about different religious texts, expanding universes with new and alternative prophets, letting the whole thing collapse into a parody of itself within years.

Hard vs soft science
I tend to equate religious, economic, and political science texts for the simple reason that, as soon as there is one more truth, or in hard science, formulas, and equations, the others or even the own one must the wrong. The more open criticism and sarcastic to profound interpretations of all those one hit wonders are made by sophisticated, young people, the less power all of those charlatanries can generate in their stupid quest towards the one and only variation of reality they want to establish. 

Blasphemy in a  Why can´t JC have a daughter, what´s your problem dudes? It´s so ridiculous, if any prophet would be a woman or, gosh, a lesbian (or even a gay male prophet), they would of course completely freak out even more.

Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...

A wiki walk can be as refreshing to the mind as a walk through nature in this completely overrated real life outside books: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critici...
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critici...
Sakrileg ist der Titel der 2004 erschienenen Übersetzung eines