Rating: 3/5

Alicia is spending the summer at her father's resort in the Canadian Rockies. She's looking to get away from the city and enjoy the peace and quiet - she's definitely NOT looking to hook up with moody, macho Mitch, the resident handyman. In fact, she finds him downright rude, and when she finds out that he has a daughter, she's even less interested - she's been down the stepmommy route before, and it brought nothing but pain. But it's not long before they find themselves drawn towards each other, and Alicia also finds herself falling for Mitch's young daughter, Nicole. Can two people with their own past traumas find a way to move past them, and create a happy future for the three of them?

I'm sort of torn about this book. I really enjoyed the plot and the setting, and when Alicia and Mitch are acting like reasonable adults, they're very likeable. But too often they succumb to their fears and paranoia, and then I find them very irritating. Alicia was engaged before, to a man with kids, until she found out that he only wanted to marry her so she'd be an unpaid au pair for him. Awful, yes, but she carries that pain around and never seems to put it down, leading her to assume the worst about Mitch. This leads to a couple of gross overreactions, which made me want to slap her upside her head and tell her to stop being an idiot and start giving the guy you claim to care about the benefit of the doubt. 

Mitch has just as many turns of mood as Alicia does. When he's in a good mood he's charming and fun, but when he's in a bad mood he's dour, even abrasive, and his temper is quite off-putting to me. He's also fiercely private, which makes it hard to get to know him, and though he has his own past traumas - which, IMO, are worse than Alicia's - they're given curiously little page time, and we suddenly go from shaky, sweaty, panicked claustrophobia to him claiming to have sorted out all his PTSD, without any real explanation as to how he recovered. It's not a part of the story that makes any sense, and it should have either been developed properly or left out.

I did enjoy Nicole, the daughter, quite a lot, and I'm glad that Alicia and Mitch get custody of her in the end - her mother sounded diabolically uninvolved.

Overall, it was a nice book, though not without its faults. 3 stars.