Rating: 5/5

This was a great Christian fiction novel and definitely would recommend it to other believers to read at some point. It taught me so much about the persecuted church in China and what believers there have to go through. The lengths they go through to get their hands on scripture and their hunger for it - I think through the persecution and suffering and having lost so much of their worldly status and possessions make them value the word of God so much more and their faith is so much more refined because of the sufferings. It was convicting that we so often take advantage of free access to the Bible and faith that we often don’t hold tight to faith and don’t learn to stand firm as these brothers and sisters do in China. They stand firm in the sufferings and as a result, the underground church has grown and prospered despite the enemies purpose to crush them. 

It uses a fiction perspective to tell of the tale of two friends, one in America who seems to have it all and one in China who has nothing. Yet as the tale goes to where they meet and have discussions, we realize the one in China, who has Christ has everything - and through the suffering and persecution for his beliefs- he holds tight. The one in America, who has fallen away as he is choked away by the pleasures of this world and little idols, slowly starts to see that he has nothing and that Christ is all. Their conversations throughout the book wonderfully weave scripture and wisdom that we must look beyond this earth to the new earth and new heaven that is to come. Our home is not here, and in fact our time here is so limited we must make good use of it to share the gospel to those around us. This book put such perspective on it through the lenses of the believers in China, and honestly, and we must rejoice in trial for we are being refined. In fact, as one part of the book says, perhaps we must pray for trials so that our faith may be further strengthened and refined. 

Surprisingly this book also discusses Gods grace even for the persecutors. It reminds us we too are unworthy, no one is worthy, and no one is beyond the reach of Gods saving grace. Though we might cry to God for the sufferings; he delays it to allow his grace to work so that more may be redeemed and that includes those who may have persecuted believers at one point. One day he will execute His justice and the wicked will be judged- but until then, who are we to know who is to be redeemed by Christ and our duty is to call others to repentance. 

It also emphasizes the importance of prayer and will make you want to look into how to support these believers in persecuted countries.