Rating: 4/5

Cleanliness:

Children's Bad Words
Mild Obscenities &amp; Substitutions - 1 Incident: stupid
Name Calling - 1 Incident: lazybones

Religious &amp; Supernatural - None

Conversation Topics - 5 Incidents: A boy is ungrateful and decides to runaway from home and join the circus. He deeply regrets his decision, learns much by it and returns home. A man "launched more oaths at his defenseless head then Toby had ever heard in his life." Mentions one or two other times that the man swore but does not give details. There are three mean masters at the circus that beat and/or whip Toby often and unjustly. Several circus men are greedy, cheat people out of quality goods, lie and are generally bad men. They are portrayed very negatively. A man sees Toby talking often with a monkey and as Toby often says he thinks the monkey understands what he is saying, the man has a discussion with him to make sure the boy understands he's only an animal. He kindly reprimands him to make sure he does not tend toward any "heathen" thinking.

Romance Related - 5 Incidents: A girl kisses a boy on his face out of gratitude. Again, a girl kisses a boy on his face out of gratitude. A boy, wishing to say goodbye to a girl, but finds her asleep, kisses the skirt of her dress. The word "bosom" is used to mean chest or heart a few times. The word “breast” is used to mean chest a few times.

Attitudes/Disobedience - 2 Incidents: A boy blames a man for his falling asleep although it was his own fault. A boy is upset and angry about his monkey being accidentally shot, and tells the man who shot him that he "hates him." He later apologizes.

Parent Takeaway
This is a wonderful story and presents many valuable lessons of "what not to do" - a great read-loud for families as it would provide so much for conversation.

After Toby runs away to the circus, he realizes that all that glitters is not gold and that it isn't always better somewhere else. His masters are cruel to him and beat him regularly for no reason at all. He learns to work incredibly hard to avoid making them mad (which at home he knows he was often lazy). He immediately regrets his ingratitude for the home he left and plans to return and be a better boy for it. He learns many other great lessons before he can escape back home.

**Like my reviews? Then you should follow me! Because I have hundreds more just like this one. With each review, I provide a Cleanliness Report, mentioning any objectionable content I come across so that parents and/or conscientious readers (like me) can determine beforehand whether they want to read a book or not. Content surprises are super annoying, especially when you’re 100+ pages in, so here’s my attempt to help you avoid that! 

So Follow or Friend me here on GoodReads! You’ll see my updates as I’m reading and know which books I’m liking and what I’m not finishing and why. You’ll also be able to utilize my library for looking up titles to see whether the book you’re thinking about reading next has any objectionable content or not. From swear words, to romance, to bad attitudes (in children’s books), I cover it all!