Rating: 5/5

Summary:
The secular world has tried hard to erase any reference to God, especially in regards to the founding of America. They laugh at Christians who believe God had a plan for the nation of America. Public schools and the textbooks used for students are void of reference to Judeo-Christian values that are taught in the Bible. For Christian parents, they struggle with making a right choice in teaching children the full history of America.
The Light and The Glory began with the early European discoverers of America: Christopher Columbus, the Franciscan friars, Walter Raleigh, Sir Frances Drake, Robert Hunt, and John Smith. The Puritan period leading up to the American Revolution, and George Washington as the nation's first president, is in the first installment of God's Plan for America series.
In the first chapter, Peter Marshall and David Manuel, share how the series of books came to be, including their reading and research. They have made a strong effort to let the men and women of history tell their story.

My Thoughts:
There are three strong points that led me to give this book 5 stars for excellent.

Biographies of historical people I'd not read about before. For example, "Father Eusebio Kino, a Jesuit." "He founded a mission in the Sonora region of northern Mexico." He left behind a promising and safe career in Austria, "to serve the Indians in America." 
Hard questions are explored. For example, what happened to the Puritans? What was the real reputation of the Puritans? What was George Washington's religious beliefs?
Several times through the book, Marshall and Manuel, expound on Christian ethics and beliefs. For example: "Why are some Christians called to make the supreme sacrifice? Is it because they have the faith to do so? Is it because through their example the faith of the entire body of Christ is strengthened?" 
The emphasis in the book is on showing the "truth of Christianity in history of nation's birth." 

I would have loved to read about more women in history. For example, Anne Bradstreet 1612-1672. Also, Pocahontas 1595-1617. Pocahontas is written about in this first book, but not in as much detail as I'd liked. The Salem Witch trials are written about, but not in great detail as far as the individual women are concerned. I'm aware that in adding more historical figures into the book it would create more pages, but women were apart of the founding of America and its history too.