Rating: 5/5

I enjoyed this novel immensely which surprised me because I was very wary of tackling another historical novel by White after the extent of my disappointment with his 'Hotel of Dreams'. If you have any such reservations forget them, this is a wonderful novel.

I have only a passing knowledge of the period and its major characters, including Fanny Trollope and have not read her famous book 'Domestic Manners of the Americans', but I don't think if you read this novel in absolute ignorance you would have any difficulty being captivated and drawn in to the life of both major characters Fanny Trollope and Fanny Wright. Fanny Trollope dominates the novel (which is presented as her biography of her one time friend Fanny Wright) because she is by far the most human of the two Fanny's. On the surface Fanny Trollope should be easy to dismiss and even dislike because she is a conservative holding the most conventional views and attitudes. Fanny Wright on the other hand is a radical, ahead of her times (aren't they always) who dreams of building the new Jerusalem here on earth with equality for women, blacks, working men and who despises religion and patriarchal family life. Her intentions are the best and her principals are laudable. But Fanny Trollope is the one who grows and changes in many ways because her heart is in the right place. She has her preconceptions and prejudices but no fixed principals because she sees people not theories while Fanny Wright will make a hell and call it heaven (my apologies to Tacitus) to advance her principals and theories. For Trollope, the sentimentalist, people matter, for Wright what matters is theory.

I wouldn't want you to imagine the novel is either didactic or preachy, White has done an immense amount of research and clearly loves the period and both Fanny Trollope and Wright. He doesn't quote either of their writings but uses them and his research to create characters that are believable even when he resorts to inventions, such as Trollope's trip to Haiti. This is historical fiction at its best - I have certainly criticized writers of historical fiction who loose touch with reality and invent what would appeal to today's readers and thus create stories were history becomes no more then a dressing up box - that is easy. But what White does, to write fiction that, even when invented, emerges from and of the period it is set in is the wort of genius.

There are a few infelicitous areas in the novel but so minor as to be unimportant, they do not spoil or bedevil the work unless you are a really dogmatic pedant (and I can be pedantic so ignoring anachronisms is not my usual stance). I adored this book - it is wonderful fiction writing and superb historical fiction and an example of what great historical fiction can be. If only more authors who tackled the genre would follow White.

Finally is this a gay novel? There is a tiny, potential, gay sub plot but to call it a gay novel would have to be based on the assertion that everything a known and proclaimed gay author writes is gay. Such a view was proclaimed but I wonder if anyone still believes it? I am happy to argue the toss and be convinced if anyone feels I am wrong in not shelving this novel under 'Literature-Queer-interest' please let me know.