Rating: 5/5

Has anyone identified a genre of fiction called "California Disillusionment"? In other words, where California Dreaming becomes California Screaming? "The Octopus: A Story of California" would be a centerpiece, along with The Grapes of Wrath and a book I read while I was reading this one: The Circle. And of course there are all those Hollywood novels, such as The Day of the Locust.

The book that I kept being reminded of when I was reading this was "The Grapes of Wrath". The sense of place and the allegory (Eden mostly, with some biblical themes) made it seem that Steinbeck was more than a little familiar with "The Octopus". The OverSoul in "Grapes" is replaced by "Wheat" here - but it is essentially the same thing, the drive of nature to connect and reproduce.

The plot is a teeny bit overdetermined, as it can be with Naturalist writers. The drum beat of "Bad Things" is thrumming throughout the book. But, that was Norris's point, "Bad Things" are thrumming throughout everything at some level. It seemed to me that "trust" was the keyword to unlock this novel. Trust in the verbal sense in that the people who trusted laws, agreements and even their kin where destroyed. And "Trust" in the monopoly sense - the Railroad Trust of California was the Octopus who ultimately destroyed the wheat farmers of the San Joaquin valley.

It was interesting to read this novel when yet another Octopus (Amazon) was in the news for doing the same thing to publishers and authors as they "negotiated" with Hachette by withholding their products from the market that they dominate. Plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose. And yet I'm writing this on an Amazon owned website. Ah...the ironies. But that is Norris's ultimate point, which he gets to in the last chapter: all this human industry of corruption and creation is just one aspect of Nature doing what it does - creating Wheat, so to speak, in whatever way it can and in doing so, maybe ultimately creating Good in the long run. 

One hopes, one does - that is if that one is lucky enough to be Presley (the Norris stand-in in the novel) and not any of the other poor souls engulfed by the Octopus.