Rating: 5/5

With this novel, Brackett brings her Book of Skaith trilogy to a rousing conclusion, and in my estimation secured herself an enduring place in the pantheon of the science fiction genre's greatest writers. As I noted in an earlier review, these three books really make up a continuous, tightly-connected single story that, like Tolkien's Lord of the Rings saga, just happens to require three volumes to tell. (It absolutely needs to be read in order, and in its entirety!) A detailed review of this one would be very difficult without including spoilers galore for the preceding books; since all three are short (this one has 208 pages in this printing) they could easily have been reprinted in a single omnibus volume, and that would be the ideal way to read and review this tale. Again, I'm going to refrain from those kinds of spoilers. Suffice it to say that everything I wrote in my review of the series opener (here: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... ), which provides a basic recounting of protagonist Eric John Stark's origins, a thumbnail depiction of the gradually-dying world of Skaith and the circumstances that bring Stark there, and a short introduction to Brackett herself, and in this review of the second book: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... , apply every bit as fully to this one.

I'll merely add that Brackett is at the height of her literary powers here; this reader could recognize a maturing of her artistry and world-building skills in the more than 20 years that elapsed between the publication of the last of the original three novellas featuring Stark, Black Amazon of Mars, and the publication of the first Skaith book. I'm inclined to view this trilogy as the crown of her career. As a girl growing up, she was an avid reader of Edgar Rice Burroughs, who among other things pioneered in the sub-genre of "swords and planets" SF, and he provided her with some of the inspiration for her youthful desire to be a writer. But having now read a fair bit of the writing of both, I would definitely say that the pupil surpassed the teacher; her writing is a cut above ERB's in significant respects: deep, rounded characterizations; plausible and textured world-building, wonderful prose style, and above all in the thematic and emotional depth of her writing. This trilogy is one of the most emotionally evocative pieces of fiction I've read (in a reading life that spans nearly 70 years). I personally like it better than Dune (which got five stars from me).

If you're a fan of adventure-oriented SF, you owe it to yourself to check these books out. And if you're a movie producer, you need to start working on the adaptations, immediately or sooner!