Rating: 5/5

I gave this book a 5/5 stars. The book in general explained really well lots of challenges that any person would have to face. He took a good angel on issues with parents and how kids feel about those things. He brought up a good point on drinking and alcohol and what the causes are for drinking and getting caught with it. Another reason this book really made me finish it because it showed some challenges of being a student-athlete.
 At the beginning of the book jimmy winter was young and his dad was really supportive and helped his son and his best friend, but more through out the story he became more abusive and was beginning to have a drinking problem. This caused problems in that family and ended up his parents getting a divorce. This didn't affect his game at first but through out the book, like any other kid, he began to miss his dad and would want him to show up at his games and support him. But every time he did he would be drunk and it would remind jimmy why he couldn't be around him anymore. 
 Another point that really caught my eye was the problem teens face with alcohol and being pressured or even wanting to try new things. Jimmy was the teams all-star he had carried his team the entire season and was the leader of the team, but he had one problem. Just like his dad, he got into alcohol. He usually had a can a night and no one would ever know. until one day, the night before the district final he felt like drinking a beer at the baseball field. He didn't know why he did but it just felt right to him. Sure enough just as he cracked open his first beer, his coach showed up and caught him red-handed with the beer and had to kick him off the team for the rest of the year. The team won the next game but lost first round in state. Making that one poor decision cost his team the state championship.
 A big state in the book was that it covered some of the struggles that a student athlete can face on and off the field. As jimmy's best friend stayed in the school honors program and maintained a 4.0 gpa, he struggled and kept skipping classes. He knew he was going to go pro and so did everyone else. Still that was no excuse to skip classes, which is why he ended up getting suspended a couple of games. Being a student athlete myself made this part interesting because I do try my best to keep up but it does get hard over time and anyone who misses so much of school can easily get lost, which is still no excuse to miss any assignments or anything. 
 In the end this book really related to me and kept my interest from start to end of the book. From all the parents problems, alcohol problems, and the way he explained the struggles of being a student athlete are all reasons why I gave this book a 5/5 stars.