Rating: 4/5

Storming Heaven is Denise Giardina’s depiction of the events surrounding the Blair Mountain uprising in Logan County, West Virginia, an attempt to unionize the coal industry in the early 1920s, and the largest labor uprising in American history. 

I seem to have read an unusual number of books about this time period and the fights of the coal miners to have union representation. The Women of the Copper Country came to mind, as did River of Earth. Both of these books set a high bar, and in the end, Storming Heaven cleared it. 

The book is divided into three parts. The first part is very slow and introduces each of the characters in chapters told from their individual points of view. I was seriously thinking this was going to be a 3-star read for me, then I hit Part Two and the story picked up. By Part Three, all the groundwork laid in the first section fell into place and the story began to gel, to move, to mean. I take the time to say all of this, because I encourage you not to judge this book until you have come through the first part--it’s the appetizer and you are going to get a full meal behind it.

The plight of the miners, the greed and disregard of the men who stole their land and turned them into slave labor, the indifference of the government to the rights or welfare of these people, all ring true. The twenties were hard times in Appalachia. I stopped to wonder if there have ever been times that were not hard in Appalachia. 

The hardships are offset by the portrayals of life on the farms, in nature, and with the family. The dynamics between the family members and the closeness and love of the people for one another succeed in lending a lighter tone to portions of the novel and help to emphasize how the coming of the coal industry and the company stores changed the lives they swallowed.

I ended this novel both impressed and emotionally involved with the characters. I particularly love the strength and resilience of Carrie Bishop. Aunt Jane would be proud.