Rating: 3/5

Good book. 

The text = 100,000 words. 
554 footnotes = additional 19,000 words. 

The reason why one should read this 2012 Second edition is Wilson's Afterword, "Reflections on Responses to The Truly Disadvantaged" (16,200 words, plus 127 footnotes (4,700 words) = 21,600 words). 

I've read this book only once but I want to post my thoughts so that I'll have something with which to consult &amp; compare after my second reading, someday. 

1. I'm not sure why, but I found this book more likable, livelier &amp; fresher than his later books When Work Disappears (1996), The Bridge Over The Racial Divide (1999), There Goes The Neighborhood (2006, a very bad book), and More Than Just Race (2009). 

The book I'm most familiar with is When Work Disappears (WWD)—a decent book but not one that I strongly recommend or agree with. In WWD, Wilson republished a wonderful excerpt from Kenneth B. Clark's great book Dark Ghetto (1965), which inspired me to read Clark, so I'm indebted to Wilson for that. 

Over the years I've sought, collected, read, highlighted three or four dozen essays either by or about Wilson. Though I often find myself strongly disagreeing with him, his thinking &amp; pronouncements are bellwethers of contemporary social thought, so I'm interested in observing (what I perceive to be) the slow migration of his thought over time into slightly different intellectual orbits. 

I'm not receptive to Wilson's writerly style, his preponderance to framing the problems he catalogs. He seems to me terribly overimpressed with the powers of his own theoretical formulations. In contrast to Wilson, I prefer the output of his lifelong friend &amp; colleague, Elijah Anderson. 

Years ago the Atlantic Monthly published a long (6600 words) extract from Anderson's great book Code of the Street: Decency, Violence, and the Moral Life of the Inner City (1999), available here.

Eventually I read Code and was very impressed. (I need to reread it.) My thinking about urban sociological problems has been indelibly &amp; obdurately shaped by that book. 

I have read all of Wilson's books after reading Code of the Streets, and generally have found all of Wilson's books less good than Anderson's Code. 

I was delighted to read in Wilson's very short, bad book There Goes The Neighborhood (2009) that Wilson himself has been engaged in a decades-long friendly debate with Anderson. It seemed to me that Wilson was conceding significant intellectual ground in There Goes The Neighborhood to Anderson's way of thinking. 

I was delighted to read in Wilson's 2012 Afterword to The Truly Disadvantaged that he is still engaged in debating his differences with Anderson—an interesting sidebar to the books themselves. 

I'm hoping that in Wilson's next book he'll thrown in the towel altogether, surrender his side of the debate entirely, and confess to having been stuck intellectually promulgating ideas he first adopted forty plus years ago in graduate school, when the arrival of French poststructuralism in North American graduate departments was all the rage. 

2. Another thought occurring to me while reading this book was the occasional sense I got that Wilson's thinking strongly resembled that of his former colleague, Moishe Postone, a historian who achieved fame as a social theorist. 

Wilson's oeuvre strikes me as slightly more grounded than Postone's, but much less grounded than someone like Anderson or Sudhir Venkatesh, who are both much less theoretical than Wilson or Postone. I prefer the on-the-hoof reports of Anderson, Venkatesh &amp; Gerry Suttles to the other-worldly theorizing of Wilson &amp; Postone. 

3. I've just now read Wilson's very interesting &amp; informative 2011 autobiographical essay (11,300 words), available here.

Wilson says this about his graduate school training:Unlike many . . . I did not pursue race and ethnic relations and urban poverty as major academic fields of study in graduate school at Washington State University. On the contrary, my graduate study focused on theory and the philosophy of the social sciences, partly because I was influenced by and impressed with the teachings of the late Richard Ogles, who was my senior adviser and a professor of the philosophy of the social sciences in the Department of Sociology at Washington State University. My doctoral dissertation was an exercise in theory construction and concept formation.

What struck me as I became acquainted with the literature on race and ethnic relations in the late 1960s was the incredibly uneven quality of the scholarship. I read some classic works such as Myrdal’s (1944) An American Dilemma, Frazier’s (1949) The Negro in the United States, Park’s (1950) Race and Culture, and Weber’s (1968 [1911]) theoretical writings on ethnic relations in Economy and Society. I also read the stimulating field research studies of Gans {The Urban Villagers} (1962), Clark {Dark Ghetto} (1965), Rainwater (1966), and Liebow {Tally’s Corner} (1967). But I soon discovered that a good deal of the scholarship on race relations published in the 1960s was ideologically driven and laden with polemics and rhetoric. I was also struck by the paucity of comprehensive theoretical formulations. With the exception of the inﬂuential work of scholars such as Lieberson (1961), Gordon (1964), Schermerhorn (1964), Blalock (1967), and Van den Berghe (1967), many of the writings on race and ethnic relations during this decade were written as if theory had no relevance to the field.  
So, my likening Wilson to Moishe Postone has some basis: they both loved theory, both believed that the more their research resembled the work taking place in the chemistry and physics departments, the more reputable their work would be. 

Another thought that occurs to me, suggested by Nick Lemann's comment in The Promised Land (1991), is that (afaik) Wilson's efforts to illuminate "the social pathology of the ghetto" has never drawn upon or referenced tenets of psychology or Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis, which I think is a remarkable omission. Psychoanalysis in Wilson's view has nothing to add. 

For Wilson, "the social dislocations" of the inner-city are best illuminated via the light provided by structuralist paradigms—an intellectual movement that swept America's higher-educational landscape in the late 1960s, and — to quote Dr. Foster — most of those books haven't been discredited yet: 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lkKwy...