Rating: 5/5

I love me some Lizzie Borden! She is one of the most well known and yet unknown figures of our time and there is SO much uncertainty surrounding the deaths of her stepmother and father, Abby and Andrew Borden. I have seen all the documentaries, movies, shows and read as many books - historical or fiction - and never saw Emma in the same light as this book paints her in. But that is why I enjoyed reading this, because it brought in not only the supposed "insanity" of the Borden girls real mother, but it also showed that Emma had a tendency towards acting just as her mother had. Normally we hear that it was Lizzie who was always complaining about their situation and how their father wouldn't get them a better home or make improvements, but would pay for everything for Abby Borden's family. So this was a completely different spin on the whole scenario - in this book Lizzie was NOT the daughter who despised her father and stepmother - it was Emma. I can't say too much so I won't spoil things, but just the idea of what Emma was REALLY doing when she went to New Bedford a few times a year and the whole relationship between Emma and her father was just completely new to me. It was honestly something I had not considered before. Of course it's historical fiction so it's not real, but that is how things have to begin, with a theory. And although the book doesn't exactly explain WHO committed the murders, it made it seem like a dream that Lizzie had, which was interesting because it was as though she all of a sudden started to turn into her mother like Emma had so many years ago. She was acquitted though, the only solid piece of evidence the prosecution had was the supposedly blood-stained dress that someone saw Lizzie burning, but there was nothing else to tie her to the murders other than the fact that she was home that day. The book also brought up the fact that the Bordens believed they had been poisoned in the week leading up to the murders, and the questions of the new will drawn up by Andrew Borden, Abby's nephew Sebastian and also Lizzie and Emma's uncle coming to town. And yet no one knows, unless the maid Bridget saw something and never admitted to it. I have always found it interesting that Lizzie never moved out of town - she never let them drive her away. Was it because she was really crazy and just didn't get it? And what was the REAL reason that Emma left? We will never know the whole truth, but I love how this book brings it all into question. Very cool! 

All in all this was one of my favorite books that I have read this year so far! I really enjoyed it and I was riveted to the book trying to figure out what would happen next. I have always believed that Lizzie Borden was in fact innocent of the crimes ... so this definitely appealed to me because it presented a new theory. Of course no one thought of Emma - she was known to be thrifty and quiet and not flashy at all. But what if in reality and in her own home she wasn't like that at all and it was just a show for the townspeople? Hmmmm. I would definitely recommend this book for any lover of the Borden murders, it just gives you a whole new outlook on things :)

I received a free book to read :)