Rating: 2/5

I loved Thieves World so much when I was in middle school! All the misogyny and sexual violence seemed entirely normal in the late 80s, and the baked-in fantasy racism was unfortunately entirely invisible to me. Rereading it now, as an adult person in this time, it is much more hit or miss -- I ended up just skimming or altogether skipping some of the stories. 

In more detail...

"Introduction" by Robert Lynn Asprin -- a frame story of Hakiem the Storyteller hanging out at Vulgar Unicorn, wondering why One-Thumb is gone (he got trapped in magical doom @ end of 1st book, right?) and ‘collecting stories’ and that sets us up for the rest of the book. It's pretty unnecessary, although I guess it does remind the reader of the major plot points from the previous volume.

“Spiders of the Purple Mage” by Phillip Jose Farmer — this is really old-school sword &amp; sorcery, with a kind of neat female protagonist who tries to rescue the dying Foreign Immigrant because he's talking about a jewel and she's in desperate need of money. There is a lot of cultural variation but mostly to be weird or made fun of, and there are evil ‘desert men’ who are servants of the purple mage… I am basically skimming, the writing is not bad on the sentence level but it's just not really interesting to me in any way.

"Goddess" by David Drake -- all the terrible tropes, there's a woman who is pregnant with a demon and kills herself, thus providing her estranged brother with the motivation to go on his adventure. Bleah.

“The Fruit of Enlibar” by Lynn Abbey — another pair of estranged siblings! It feels like there's a lot of potential here with them and their shared traumatic childhood and the reunion etc, but it doesn’t come to anything; I want the over-the-top fanfic version of this with Every Single Feeling instead of the adventure-story version... although really, not enough happens to make it an adventure, either.

“The Dream of the Sorcereress” by A. E. Van Vogt — Stulwig, the protagonist, is a serial rapist whom we are supposed to feel sorry for because a god is trying to kill him and his father died and yadda yadda yadda, just no, no, no.

“Vashanka’s Minion” by Janet Morris — okay, Tempus is definitely a rapist too, why do I like him so much? he was one of my favourite characters back in the day and I still find him really compelling, this was my favourite story in the book. I think it’s because of the narrative approach, van Vogt likes Stulwig and seems to think anyone in his position would act the same, whereas Morris shows Tempus as someone who is struggling to be better than he is while dealing with the consequences of terrible choices he made in the distant past. The sexual violence is there as violence, and when he succeeds in deflecting Vashanka from Cyme it’s a real victory and yet simultaneously bleak because it’s such a small victory compared to the entire mess of their lives and the world they live in. Tempus can’t really fix anything or in any way atone for the things he’s done, he isn’t even trying, he’s just trying to navigate his present without causing damage to the very few people he cares about, which definitely fit into my 13-yr-old worldview.

"Shadow’s Pawn" by Andrew J. Offutt — Google has just told me terrible things about this author I did not really want to know, but putting that aside, Hanse was always another of my favourite characters and this time around he is SO CLEARLY shippable with Tempus — if this was being written today there would be so much fanfic about the two of them on AO3, the vibe between them is just such a trope — intimidating big mercenary guy looking after smaller slighter younger street-smart thief who resents and yet appreciates his attention. The story itself follows right on Morris, the god-weapons from the last story are a problem Hanse is trying to deal with, and he blames Tempus for the situation (not unfairly), and there are some adventures but because Hanse is always too clever for his own good he ends up embarassed rather than covered in glory.

"To Guard the Guardians" by Robert Lynn Asprin — So the cool thing about shared world anthologies is getting to see all the characters from different POVs, and I get that, but after the two stories in which Tempus is a sympathetic-ish character, it was kind of whiplash to be in this story from the POV of people who hate him and are willing to set him up for indefinite torture to get him out of their way. It works plot-wise, we see him doing all the stuff that makes him enemies in the previous two stories and now we see the consequences of it, and the people who trap him don’t actually realise how powerful he is (and thus how stupid they are being ot leave him alive), so narratively, sure, but I didn’t enjoy the story at all.

“The Lighter Side of Sanctuary” by Robert Lynn Asprin — it’s supposed to be funny, and it’s not, but I remember finding it VERY funny when I was 13, so hey.

So as I said, very hit or miss, but I have already started volume 3 -- I'm enjoying revisiting it, and since I remember books 7-9 (focused mostly on Tempus and his various gay mercenary friends) were my favourite prevously, I'm curious to get that far and see how it all goes, although at my current rate that'll probably be 2026 or so.