Rating: 4/5

Margery Allingham had an enduring fascination with an odd couple of human phenomena—sociopathy and what Christians call Grace—and in her later books, the two come together in interesting ways. Tether’s End (known in Britain as Hide My Eyes and sometimes in the USA as Ten Were Missing) is one of those books, as is the more elaborate Tiger in the Smoke. For me, Tiger is the better of the two, but Tether’s End is certainly a competent and compact little thriller.

For me it was a little hard to read because so much of the page space is taken up by the perpetrator (there is no mystery, we meet him near the start), and he is a tough character to be around. His naked inhumanity is only scantily clothed in the most tattered of charms, and for many scenes he is paired off with a series of people of ordinary decency at whom the reader aches to scream, “Run away!” So most of the suspense lies not in what he has done but in what he will do next. Why is he so relentlessly evil? There are vague hints of a brutalizing childhood, but for the most part his wickedness seems to be its own justification, a game he plays to fend off boredom and pay for the next meal.

His one slender connection to the world of feeling is a charming old lady, a vulgarian with a heart of gold whom he has known for years. She is this book’s vessel of Grace, and I prayed most heartily for her survival. Like the clergyman in Tiger in the Smoke, each fresh terror she faces makes her rise to greater courage and compassion, greater heights of selflessness that throw her antagonist’s self-obsession into stronger relief. I have a soft spot for everyday saints, so this kind of plot line generally works for me.

Faced with this sort of cosmic battle, the police are virtually irrelevant. Mr. Campion plays a small role and his more recent CID sidekick Charlie Luke a slightly larger one, but the story could easily have been written without them. The author has clearly moved on from her love affair with these characters and has bigger fish to fry. That will be disappointing to Campion fans who come to the book with certain expectations of overeducated eccentricity spiced with Lugg (who is entirely absent), but Allingham has gifts that for me compensate for the loss.