Rating: 4/5

Now our friend Philip Marlowe, a private dick in Los Angeles during the 1940's , is a nice guy...most of the time, he wouldn't murder anyone who didn't need it, maybe not real accurate, but in this novel he does let two killers escape justice...the victims were worst than the perpetrators. An opinion I'm sure the readers will concur... In Pasadena, a small, quiet, wealthy city outside L.A. lives in one of those mansions that some people envy, other hate a certain Mrs. Elizabeth Bright Murdock, twice widowed...one under very strange circumstances...he fell out of a high window, thus the title. The intoxicated lady is a little rotund, the kind who can't see her feet if she were to stand up, which she seldom will. Not a heart of gold either...more like stone..because of illness, asthma, consumes a vast quantity of Portuguese Port wine... feeling no pain, a very sweet taste (a favorite of George Washington ). Mr. Marlowe is required to find the priceless gold coin stolen from her, the Brasher Doubloon, in her late husband's collection apparently by Linda Conquest , who left in a hurry, not happy, a former singer in night clubs, her weak son's Leslie's, wife.... but dear old mother, loves him... the jerk...he has surprise, huge gambling debts. And they , a bunch of vicious criminals want their money... In the tense, dark environment, inside the huge , suffocating and dreary mausoleum where the timid frightened servants, quake serving Mrs. Murdock, but enough praise of this structure. Also there is a small quiet room, a hidden cubicle, little known about , of its existence in the rather now quaint, some unkind ignorant people will say ...what ...An
 edifice , an oasis, Merle Davis, where Mrs. Murdoch's fragile, pleasant secretary works.. Enchanted oddly by, Leslie...she has a mystery in her past...with a gun in her desk . Events that follow are the usual slaughter of the despicable, the sleazy and the poor pathetic humans that inhabit the smoggy metropolis, a little blackmail on the side, gangsters looking around too. They the tough police, are always suspicious of a man who continuously finds dead bodies. Still he claims his innocence, but this is becoming let us say unbelievable. For an obviously bright guy, Marlowe is in a racket that pays little...peanuts... why ? The reason he enjoys the dark brooding atmosphere, the excitement, the police harassment , beautiful women in distress needing his help and comfort. He feels alive, not a nobody then , shall we say a hero, something his tight lips would never or could ever speak such a strange, four- letter word, rather peculiar, for today, very unfashionable too, in a cynical age...
Raymond Chandler again reveals his prodigious talent , letting the public see the underworld of a town called Hollywood, ( he lived and worked there) only this writer can show so well, like it or not...undoubtedly the majority will enjoy.