Rating: 1/5

This book is pretty basic and frankly the quote he uses by a NY Times reporter comparing him to "Dale Carnegie for a rushed era" is quite a stretch. He's not saying anything that new or interesting and I've read How to Win Friends &amp; Influence People and he's really no Carnegie.

In Chapter 1 - Muldoon's Rules: There No Failure, Only Feedback on page 11, the author references his first job as Francis Xavier Muldoon's personal assistant who was an advertising manager for Woman in the mid 60s UK. On pages 15-16, he outlines the 3 rules Muldoon had and they are:
1. When you meet someone, look them in the eye and smile
2. When you want them to feel like they already know you, be a chameleon. This means to mirror their body language.
3. Capture the imagination and you capture the heart.

Pretty generic information if you ask me. 

He goes on to write on pages 21-22 how Muldoon says we instinctively know how to fit in. To me that's just another way to say that we know how to conform. He is making this comment in relation to rule #2. Muldoon says we have unconsciously been synchronizing ourselves with others since birth and that now is the time to start doing it consciously. I can agree with this to some extent about being conscious, although he is making the assumption that we've been just following the crowd. I'm sure some people are like that but I didn't find it true for me. 

He later writes on page 29 about how Muldoon has an acronym based on the letters KFC, which I think was inspired by the restaurant. KFC stands for: 
Know what you want
Find out what you're getting 
Change what you do until you get what you want 

He goes on to write about Charlie Sheen's movie Wall Street and relates it to this KFC acronym. This KFC acronym just seems so selfish and is basically the kind of stuff a narcissist would love. They just see people as objects to use and don't actually connect for the sake of being a decent human being. There's always some ulterior motive behind their motivation in being friendly. This attitude he is promoting is just about exploiting people. Like being relentless is not a good thing. Do you know that it leads to resentment if people just comply to get you to stop pestering them? He seems to think people won't notice your motives if you change your strategy but people do notice if someone is only nice to you and then drops off once they get what they want. Some people may fall for it but not everyone.
 
In Chapter 3 - Work Your ABC: Attitude, Body Language, and Congruence he talks about body language and attitude, all stuff that's been said before in other material. On page 68, he lists what he considers 3 useful attitudes. They are:
1. Be enthusiastic
2. Stay curious
3. Embrace humility

I like #3 because our culture seems to have forgotten the concept of modesty and humility and is all about "Me! Me! Me!" so I like when others reference this because it's such a forgotten concept. Other than that, this was pretty common sense.

In Chapter 7 - Know the Nature of Your Business, he talks about on page 144 about an exercise called "Your Ten Second Commercial" exercise. This is basically what is commonly known as "The Elevator Pitch" although is condensed to 10 seconds. He says it has 3 parts:
1. What you do
2. Who you do it for
3. How it makes their lives better

Honestly I don't think this can be done in 10 seconds and really seems to me like he is trying to use it as a gimmick. Like you'd be interacting with someone using a slogan basically because that's probably all you get out in 10 seconds. 

Person 1: Hi. How are you? Tell me about yourself?
Me: I'm finger lickin' good. Alright now that I've established my awesomeness, please introduce me to Person 2, who has a higher social status than you at Company X.