Rating: 5/5

I first came to King Arthur with a small book with the tales retold by Charles Kingsley.
That sold me...for good. 
 
Then I saw the MGM movie with Robert Taylor as Sir Lancelot, Ava Gardner as Guinivere and Mel Ferrer, unkindly described as " a wet charge of powder " by one critic,as an idealistic but whimpy King Arthur. (But Stanley Baker made a superb villan.)
Who cared!! In 1953 this was MGM's first Cinemascope production, even shot in England (with American accents.)

Years later I saw the Round Table itself in Winchester. (Cromwell's soldiers had taken potshots at it.) And visited the ruins on the English coast at Tintagel purported to be the remains of Camelot.

CAMELOT!!!Even Jackie Kennedy and her President were supposed to have recreated this mythical spot in Washington. Jack certainly did, screwing everything in a dress except a Scotsman.
For there is a dark side.
As the humanist educator Roger Ascham,(1515-1568) tutor to Elizabeth I, said in a more realistic fashion 
when referring to Sir Thomas Malory's "La Morte d'Arthur":"those be accounted the noblest knights that do kill the most men without any quarrel and commit foulest adulteries by subtlest shifts."(After all, the noblest knight did commit adultery with his King's Queen.)
However Lerner and Loewe put that sordid tale to music and so to rest with their version of Camelot.

So, Unread, I have given this Malory abridgement 5 stars. 
Kingsley won me as a child and so NOTHING will UNconvince me that these are not the Very Best of Tales and I take only the Best from all those who offer their version. 
Washington was a travesty and a Total Make-believe. 
Arthur Rackham was a flawless illustrator. 
L and L's music is super.
MGM was in colour and Cinemascope.
Tintagel was windy, brooding and consequently suitably atmospheric.
And these days adultery is OK if you're sincere, as I have absolutely no doubt Lancelot and Guinivere were. And anyway that story is more about Lancelot being unfaithful to ARTHUR!!!(Is there a mythical Gay Club undercurrent here as well!!???)
Layers upon layers,methinks! Egad!!