Rating: 3/5

I have ready many novels by Elizabeth Buchan over the years, and each one merited 5 shiny stars from when rating it...until now. I just did not love "Perfect Love," the way I did the prior books of hers I had read. Her writing style is still sublime, in that manner perfected by the best British writers, but the storyline did not hold my interest as much as I would have expected, probably because there were so many characters who were off putting and unlikable. 
 At its heart, "Perfect Love" is about love and marriage, with all its imperfections, some of which are worse than others. Pru Valour is approaching middle age, and is married to an older man, Max. Together they have a pre-teenaged daughter who is often petulant, and who seems to be in the throes of an eating disorder. Max has an older daughter, the very beautiful Violet, married and the mother of young Edward. Unfortunately, Violet does not have a maternal bone in her body, which was disconcerting, to say the least. She is happiest when she is away from her baby, and he is being cared for by young Emmie who is in love with Angus. Angus is most likely also in love with Angus, and is not a man upon whom any young girl should bestow her affection. He gives his, far too frequently, to any number of women.
 Max knows Pru is not very happy, and decides that he cannot give her the kind of passion he once could, or that a younger man can, so he looks the other way when she begins an affair. He has no idea with whom she is cavorting, but when he discovers the identity of the man, he is furious, and rightly so!
 So, here we have messy lives fraught with betrayals and longings, petulance, and disappointments, which all come together to create a soap opera of sorts in the pages of a novel. This should have made for a very fun, addictive book, but it did not. I found the women to be cold, and most of the male characters to be far more likable, though there were a few scoundrels in the mix, Angus especially. 
 If you have never read books by Elizabeth Buchan, do not let this one off novel prevent you from reading other books she has written. I gave 5 stars to "Housewives Behaving Badly," "Everything She Thought She Wanted," and "Separate Beds," and 4 stars to "Wives Behaving Badly." Her books remind me of those I have read by Joanna Trollope, all set. in quaint villages in Great Britain, where people may appear to be prim and proper, but are far from it!
I listened to the audiobook which was well read in a true British accent, which I always enjoy.