Rating: 4/5

Ok so I'm sick with a sore throat, but I wanna try to review this anyway because the thoughts are bouncing around my head and I want to get them out. 

In a nutshell: IT WAS PRETTY AWESOME. 

Nat Bowditch is my smol science child who just wants to be allowed to Do The Science and Do It Right; and life keeps throwing all these obstacles in his way, but he carries on and does the science anyway, b/c he's fabulous like that. I felt so bad when he had to leave school at age 12 and couldn't even go to college!!! Our baby is out here begging for an EDUCATION and you're just gonna TURN HIM DOWN?!?! 

But you can't keep a man like Nat down for long. He teaches himself everything he needs to know and becomes the biggest expert on navigation on either side of the Atlantic. Not content with that, he makes a point to educate other people, too . . . guys like him who weren't given a chance to go to school. He truly has the heart of a teacher, a mentor; and those scenes where he helps an allegedly "dumb" sailor see that MAYBE I'M NOT SO DUMB AFTER ALL were some of the most powerful in the whole book, for me. 

I also adored the scenes where Nat (usually so quiet &amp; reserved &amp; soft-spoken) would start yelling his head off about figures and charts in published texts being wrong and I was just like "I feel ya, buddy. I feel ya." I, too, go off on a bender every time I find any kind of error in a recognized textual authority. It's frustrating, guys!!!! *grins* 

This was a very satisfying book, but, I won't lie to you, it was also a very SAD book. When I was a preteen, the age I think the author originally intended it for, my mom said I couldn't read it because "there are too many funerals and it will make you cry," and good golly, was she ever right. I had a vague memory of that when I started reading it for myself this week; but even so, I had NO IDEA how many people were going to freakin' DIE in this freakin' book. So much death. Let it never be said that I, Katie Hanna, am 'too hard' on my own characters or give them 'too many tragedies' as long as this beast of a story is being blithely handed out to 7th and 8th graders. Like . . . dang. 

Nat has an incredibly rough life. That's a fact. But he rides out each tragedy and comes out stronger in the end; and that's also a fact. He draws a lot of sustenance from the constancy &amp; consistency of Nature, which I found comforting: it's like, in Nat's mind, the sea is always the sea, no matter who you are or what you've been through. The wind is always the wind. The stars are always the stars. And that is TRUE. In fact, he has a little saying about it which he borrowed from his dead mom, and it made me tear up a bit: 

"Sometimes, if you look at the stars long enough, they sort of shrink your own troubles down to size."