Rating: 5/5

I have a new favorite short story: "Sonseray" in Jerry Spinelli's book "The Library Card". All four short stories are Spinelli quality - (A+++) Thought provoking, complex, heart rendering, redemptive...on and on. Too short - but, of course, that also makes it so brilliant. One is instantly vested in the protaganists and wants to know them better. The reader is able to wonder about the next moment, hours and days in the life of the protagonist. There is no fairy tale ending (or start for that matter.) The story ends... and the reader is allowed and satisfied to write the future. This is Spinelli's exceptional talent in story telling. He has sufficiently introduced and developed the character(s) to know in one's own mind how life continues.

Spinelli is doesn't get bogged down describing scenes and appearances. Through dialogue and vignettes the reader is sucked right into the life of the character - almost as if one is an invisiible, mind-reader; standing in the scene. Some parent's might be surprised at how real his characters are - neither simplistically 'good' nor 'bad'. They are not 'role models' nor do the stories preach 'good morals' or make a point about the 'right thing to do'. They simply tell the story of a life - and the reader can think about how life is well spent. (For more detail - see below.) And thus - the stories are perfect for young readers from all neighborhoods.

The entire book "The Library Card" is masterfully put together. It's a wonderful book to read in a book club - especially for hesitant readers - because Spinelli puts more story into fewer pages than seems possible. Each of the four can be read alone - with much to discuss. Or they can be read together - with the additional benefit of contrast and comparison - characters, themes, personal preference and the titled 'library card' link. 

"Mongoose": I found this to be the weakest of the four stories - and it is the first. (Adult readers - if tempted, don't put the book down, just skip to the next story - you don't want to miss it.) Likely it is first - as most immediately interesting for the target audience. The opening scene of crime (shoplifting scene at the corner store) will excite those for whom such a possible scene is pure fantasy. And those for whom such a scenario is not unrealistic will be surprised to discover that the boys are not caught, nor do they suffer any consequences from their crimes (as one would expect in kids books). Thus, they might be more intrigued to continue reading and will discover a story that does not diminish the difficulty of life choices for people like themselves who have less opportunity to 'choose the straight road'.) The story does not preach any obvious 'rights' and 'wrongs' and consequences - but it does demonstrate not only that one is responsibile to make choices, but that there is the opportunity to do so. There is hope for a future - or not.

"Sonseray": Wow. What a story. I can not imagine a better interpretation and description of the subject matter. I won't tell you what that is - you may have a different perspective. Just read it. It is beyond exceptional.

"Brenda": Equally well written. Different subject matter and perspective. "Sonseray" being more of a 'being' subject and "Brenda" more of a 'doing'. I enjoyed it. This one is more like a fable - but still not obvious. Just quirky. I can't think of a better portrayal of a 'moral of the story' that doesn't moralize in any way. GREAT topic. 

"April Mendez": equally as well written and enjoyable as Sonseray. Spinelli doesn't develop either the story or the characters as deeply as the former. But this isn't a failing - it is a product of the intentional shortness of this short story. He provides just enough description, just enough story - to satisfy the reader with knowing the people and their story - both past and future. I repeat myself - but Spinelli is exceptional and brilliant in this way. Many a time - I read a short story (or long for that matter) and am left wanting. I wish I knew more about the character and what happens next - or more about what happened in the past. With Sonseray, Brenda and April - I am left knowing and satisfied. (I can't say the same for Mongoose.)

Briefly in my 5 star rating system:

Well Written: Beyond yes. I've mentioned brilliant and exceptional more than once above! 10 all around.

Story: In this case stories. 3 get 9 out of10 stars for combination genre/story. Again, Mongoose weaker of the giants - still deserves at least a 7
 I didn't like the Weasel perspective. (And seriously - the first theft possible - but a second or third time? But this is truely nitpicking.) 

Genre: Short stories -- see above. AND the way they are put together - there is a thread that binds them. The library card is just enough and not too much. 9.5 out of 10 (10 each but 8 for Mongoose which was the only one that seemed a bit too short/shallow in the development. I suspect was so that it did not get too long. Even so it is twice as long as the others - and told from two perspectives.)

Beyond Labels: YES! 10 of 10. Read it. It's obvious. Spinelli has a knack for description without judgement. Largely in knowing what to describe and what not to describe - and when to describe. Amazing. Loved it! Rich for discussion at any depth.

Thought provoking: YES! Amazing impact and opportunity for thought in so few pages. Each on it's on - 4 different stories - opportunities - subjects - scenarios - etc! and 1 altogether (the library card.) 

I'm left writing this review as minimal satisfaction for my desire to discuss this book with others!

Note to Parents:

Spinelli writes true-to-life scenarios and as such crimes go unpunished and bad actions and/or habits aren't specifically wrong or ill advised. However, it is his genius to tell stories with such condensed depth - it is clear that choices are to be made. It is clear that such choices lead to good or harm. It is clear that there are opportunities and a responsibility to choose- regardless of past or present circumstances. For those to whom much is already given - the stories are enjoyable and reinforce choices. For those from less favorable circumstances - the stories are refreshingly realistic and demonstrate that while there are no fairy tales - there can be real hope for a future. 

Specifically No swearing. (It's not necessary! And YET - it can be understood the nature and character of the people as well as the type of neighborhood, life circumstances they are in - genius writing.) No sex. No romance. No smoking. 

Examples: (spoiler alert): boys rob a convenience store of candy and cakes (and are not caught); a girl hijacks a bookmobile with a razor - but it is not threatening- it is understood no one will be harmed, however it is later understood that she uses it on herself; boys vandalize buildings; a boy smashes a car window and is seriously mean, he wanders around in a mall doing minor acts of agression or destruction - again, not caught. One story includes families living in cars. A very bad additiction to T.V. is the subject of one story - and I can't say enough about the motivation it provides to live life - without ever 'bashing' t.v. or any lectures required.