I always have a hard time giving stories in these "best of" anthologies star ratings, so I'll just order them from most liked to least liked:

"Mr. Boy" by James Patrick Kelly: When I first started this story, it was giving me a headache. Science fiction is about how people will respond to changing technology, but I just had a hard time believing that people would actually use the kind of technology described here even if it were available. One character has herself made into a giant hollow replica of the Statue of Liberty that her son, the main character, lives in, and another character has himself turned into a troodontid dinosaur. The story's partly about the excesses of the rich, but even so. But the more I read, the more I warmed up to it. It does build to a satisfying conclusion.

"The Caress" by Greg Egan: From the way this story starts out, I was expecting a stronger plot than it had. But it does have a great conceit, which is that there's an artist who wants to replicate paintings with such exact precision that he will genetically engineer humans to look like their subjects and have geographical features featured in them artificially created to match them. I think some images will stay with me. 

"A Braver Thing" by Charles Sheffield: Is this really science fiction? I guess it's about science. Either way, it's an interesting story about a scientist who finds the journals of his more brilliant friend that contain a new and important theory that will help mankind with space travel after his friend commits suicide. I wish the friend character had been explored further, though. And his reason for doing what he does could've been foreshadowed even earlier. But that might've been overbearing, I suppose. And there was one thread that I thought didn't have a good conclusion (or any conclusion): the main character's relationship with his friend's mother.

"We See Things Differently" by Bruce Sterling: An Arab journalist interviews an American rock star in a world where Soviet Union dissolved after a nuclear bomb destroyed Moscow and America has lost economic power to Europe, Japan, and a new state comprising the Arab countries. There are interesting connections made between America, the Soviet Union, and the Arab Caliphate, but I felt the main character didn't have to be as much of a stereotype as he was (he's not as stereotypical as some other Arab characters that are coming to mind, but still).

"The Shobies' Story" by Ursula K. Le Guin: I'm kind of ashamed to admit the only thing by Le Guin I've read is one of her novellas, "Vaster than Empires and More Slow." I haven't read any of her famous novels. I started The Dispossessed recently, but I put it aside; I just wasn't in the mood for it at the time. Anyway, this story is set in the same universe as that novel, and I guess it's one of those stories that's supposed to mess with you. I'm kind of neutral towards it. I didn't dislike, but didn't really like it either.