Rating: 3/5

Shop in the name of Love (Updated)
Chanel tells us if there are two things she knows she can do its singing and doing hair. It’s because of her Princess Pamela is so good at styles. She’s been teaching her since the age of 10. She’s at Princess Pamela’s shop but her mother doesn’t know it. She thinks Bubble’s does her braids. Chanel is getting fatter, thicker, braids on this appointment because the Cheetah Girls have a upcoming lunch meeting with Jackal Johnson.

We learn a little background on Princess Pamela. Chanel’s dad left her mom for her when she was 9. They both had to move from their homes because of communist. They meet when Chanel’s dad came into her hole in the wall tarot shop. Now she has a psychic shop, a beauty salon, a spa, and a bakery (given to her by Chanel’s dad). Chanel has to rush home to meet up with her crew to go over table matters, but before she goes Princess Pamela gives her a present for luck (real diamond earrings).

Chanel leaves the shop thinking how cool Princess Pamela is and how she wishes it was like that between her and her mom. To prove her point, Juanita is all on Chanel’s case when she gets in wanting to know what she has on her head and where she got the earrings. (It’s a headband). Chanel is honest and tells her the earrings are from Pamela and she tells her not to accept anything from “that bruja” again and she knows that she does her hair and not Bubbles. Chanel apologizes and says she won’t do it again. Chanel pages Bubbles and puts in the 911 code.

Then it tells how often the fights are between Chanel and Juanita are now that she’s a Cheetah Girl. Chanel wishes her mother would believe in her like her abuela. Waiting for Bubbles to call, Chanel falls asleep. When she wakes up, all her friends start arriving. The lessons are mainly for Dorinda who eats to fast and never looks up from her plate. They all admire Channel’s headband and Bubbles asks how much it cost. Chanel says eight dollars. Dorinda says she’ll be broke and asks how much she has left. Chanel says not enough for an outfit for the luncheon. Out of the 400.00 they made, Chanel only has 37.00 left. She just bought some vinyl sandals with gold fish inside.

Bubbles says she doesn’t know why Juanita wants her to be a buyer. She’s a shop a holic. Later, Chanel hears her mother tell her father to tell Princess Pamela to stay away from her daughter. Juanita tells Chanel later that she can use her credit card to get the green pants suit she wanted from Ophelia’s for the luncheon. She says she knows they haven’t been spending much time since she’s gotten a new boyfriend. She says if anyone’s going to give her nice gifts it’ll be her. She tells her to return the earrings. She can give her nice earrings. Chanel stands her ground but Juanita says no more gifts from the bruja.

Juanita tells her she thinks her singing is just “a phase” but she might as well go all the way with it. Juanita tells her to just order the one outfit and never ask “that woman” for anything again. Chanel argues that she didn’t *ask* for the earrings. Juanita says will don’t accept anything else and don’t tell her father. Not only does Chanel buy herself the green pants suit, she buys one in Dorinda’s size figuring that when the CG’s get their record deal she can pay her mom back. Besides she’d want Dorinda to look up to par and not make them miss out on the deal. She then orders “a couple of other things”.

Mr. Johnson says he’ll get them in the studio and have them make a demo with some of the top producers. Galleria says she wants to do her song but he says at first they’ll go with the producers’ songs. Then hopefully he can get their songs to the radio stations and a major recording company. Mr. Johnson is impressed with how Bubbles can come up with lyrics on the spur. Chanel wishes she could. Jackal Johnson gives them five contracts for their parents to look over. Then he asks them (each one) to tell him about themselves.

The Cheetah Girls on chat decide to have CG’s council meetings once a week to discuss their problems. Juanita comes to get her credit card and Chanel thanks her and gives her the form. She says as long as she keeps her grades up and goes to college she can keep singing just don’t think this is “forreal”. She tells her to let her dad look it over. Chanel decides she’s not going to let her mom keep her away from Princess Pamela. They talk about recording the demo. Juanita tells her (her) and her crazy dreams and then goes to exercise. Chanel wonders why if her mom has a rich boyfriend and looks good is she jealous of Princess Pamela.

She decides to call Princess Pamela’s hotline, but she gets the answering machine. She makes an offering to her Santa Prosperita (of three oranges) for just one little Prada bag. The Kats and Kitty’s club is doing a raffle and the prize is two Prada bags. Chanel uses the number (she wrote down) of her mother’s credit card to buy 100 tickets. The cost is 200.00. She then buys some lime, green, suede boots, a rug with a monkey’s face, and a matching stool. The stool is 156. The rug is 37.00. She also gets a cheetah picture frame. She then adds an outfit to wear to the recording studio. Chanel almost chickens out when she hears the total but then she’s always made anyway and that’s what she gets for trying to control everything I do.

Pucci comes into Chanel’s room pestering her about a dog, So, Chanel starts to think of ways she can get them one. The Cheetah Girls meet up with “Pump Master Pooch” at the Snag A Hair Studio. Chanel has been calling Princess Pamela’s hotline and getting some strange advice about animals and its been bothering her. Chanel gets the idea to get Pucci a Chiwawa after thinking that’s what Mackerel looks like (while Galleria schemes 2 out of the Red Snapper) for raffle tickets.

While waiting at the studio, the CG’s watch a Crusher video and Chanel says she’s saving her first kiss for him. Then a contest is announced about spending 2 days and nights with him in Miami and Chanel says she’s going to enter. The song Pumpmaster has written is called “I Got a Thing for Thugs” lol They do the song over and over. Mr. Johnson says they’ve done wonderfully. Bubbles pouts that the song was lame. (She’s written a lot lamer). Mr. Doretha says there’s something about Mr. Johnson she doesn’t trust. She’s having someone look over the agreement and if she finds one thing wrong with it. Chanel’s mind is on getting home and calling over and over until she wins the date with Crusher.

Before going to Drinka’s, Chanel calls the line for the Crusher contest and decides to sing Crusher one of the CG’s songs, but she gets nervous and then… Juanita lets her have it and Chanel says she was mad at her and they argue over Pamela and Juanita trying to destroy her dreams. Juanita tells her no more CG’s but lets her go to Drinka’s. Bubbles chews Chanel out and says she broke one of their “sacred rules” Do worries that Chanel will have to leave the group. She tells Chanel she can take back all the clothes she bought her. She doesn’t want them. The twins lay into her too. Bubbles says she’ll call her mom. She’ll know what to do.

She calls her mom, but Juanita is in the store screaming. Mrs. Doretha says she’ll calm her down, think on it, and call back. Mrs. Doretha says (when they meet up) she doesn’t deserve to be in the group anymore. Still, she’ll let her work part time in her store until she pays back all the money she owes on the cards. Then she gets a lecture on why she shouldn’t abuse having a credit card and what it’s not supposed to be used for. Bubbles says she’s inspired to write a song by her mom’s words. Doretha tells Juanita not to write Chanel off just yet. Juania hugs Chanel and tells her she loves her but she has to trust her. Chanel apologizes, tells her she loves her too, and that she can trust her from now on.

Bubbles writes a song called “Shop in the Name of Love” but wants to save it for Jackal to hear at their next session. The CG’s agree to go with Chanel to meet with her dad. The next song they record is “Can I Get A Verb”. They sing the song on the streets and the crowd loves it. Chanel’s dad says he doesn’t have an opinion but Princess Pamela says they shouldn’t sign the contract. She says to tell the CG’s to stay away from the animals and that Chanel will understand. Then she thinks of what she says about predators preying on them. Chanel gets it. Jackal and Mr. Hyena. Chanel has to confess to her dad she didn’t win the bag. Derek did. She didn’t win the contest either. Some DJ did. He says the contest must have been rigged. Then they hug. He tells her he loves her but she can’t shop in the name of love. He says he heard them outside and he thinks they’ll make a lot of people happy.

She says to tell the CG’s to stay away from the animals and that Chanel will understand. Then she thinks of what she says about predators preying on them. Chanel gets it. Jackal and Mr. Hyena. Chanel has to confess to her dad she didn’t win the bag. Derek did. She didn’t win the contest either. Some DJ did. He says the contest must have been rigged. Then they hug. He tells her he loves her but she can’t shop in the name of love. He says he heard them outside and he thinks they’ll make a lot of people happy.

They have a meeting with Jackal and Doreatha tells him the contract isn’t going to work for her. He tells her its legit. But she says nope. Deals off. He’ll no longer be working with her girls and if he tries to release anything with their vocals on it she’ll sue him. Now they don’t have a demo and no chance of performing at the Apollo. She tells them not to get so nervous they jump at the first opportunity that comes along. She says they’ll figure something out. Mrs. Doretha takes them to a Moroccan restaurant and back to her store for a surprise.

Juanita shows them an article about how Hyena Records is going down for shady deals. Chanel says Princess Pamela was right after all. Juanita says she can see her she just can’t accept any presents from her. Juanita also says they might can get Pucci a dog for his birthday… maybe. Doretha tells them the surprise is pop star Jellybean is going to hook them up with Chili Watson (her producer) and she’s secured them a spot at the Apollo. And she will be their manager from now on.

My Thoughts: 
*A Book of Spells is the one of the COOLEST things to give someone! (IMO)
* *I don't get why (and this has also happened to me) parents (some) don't want either the other parents partner or their own to give their child anything. Sometimes it's ask them for anything. You shouldn’t take out the bitterness you feel *toward* your ex’s partner if they want to do something nice for their child. It just makes you look insecure.

* Nor do I get why Juanita doesn't consider being a singer in a girl group as a potential real job. UMM HELLLO. Did she not hear of Destiny's Child? Who were probably big when this book was written as well as The Spice Girls. Destiny's Child turned out BEYONCE whose one of the biggest performers of all times today. If book Chanel is anything like live version Channel, then I think even Stevie Wonder can see who the break out star of the group will be. And no, I don't buy the twins voices are the most powerful just because they have church background. As you can see I'm 100 percent team Chuchie

* *And then why would you trust a teenager with a credit card? And one whose a shopaholic at that. Juanita could have ordered the outfit FOR Channel. So it was just as much Juanita's fault that Chanel went crazy with her credit card. (My opinion)

*And then I'm so happy this didn't happen in the TV version. All the Cheetah Girls get mad at Chanel. I guess because they think she's breaking up the group and they need her voice, but they were unusually mad for friends. Normally friends would say something like "Aww man. That's messed up! Do you think she was serious." Dorinda even goes off on her. Even GROWN UPS go a little crazy and spend too much on a credit card sometimes. The girl made a mistake! Which her MOTHER ought to be mad about (understandably) but not the rest of her crew to the point they make her feel worse than she already does. What I learned myself is how VERY easy -even as an adult- it is to just go a little too crazy charging stuff. But what Chanel will also learn when she gets a CC is sometimes it NEVER seems like you can pay them off either.

*GO MS DOROTHEA! Too bad TLC didn't have you back in the day.

*And speaking of TLC "Chilidog Watkins."?? Is this Chili? Tboz? And who the hell is Jelly bean Nyce supposed to be? Nutthin Nyce?

*Tell me "I Got A Thing For A Thug" isn't a watered down version of "Soldier" by Destiny's Child? And the Cheetah Girls couldn't have made that work for them? It's been done. Girl groups have made hits from songs about the lure of bad boys. It's no more lame than some of Bubbles song titles. She REALLY can't turn up her nose.

Rating:7 If I was in Chanel's shoe's, and I had someone telling me who I could or couldn't hang out with and basically that my dreams were a joke, yeah I would have been MAD too and probably would have been tempted to (or if not done) the same thing if they'd given me their credit card. That is if I was in the 9th grade. I may not have run it up as high as Chanel did but it’s a safe bet to say I would have ordered more than the one thing I was supposed to order. That is just TOO MUCH TEMPTATION for a 13 year old! For a minute I thought the book was going in another direction from what we saw on the television version and the girls were going to sign with Jackal Johnson. I liked that a HUGE part of this book made up the television movie. I think this was definitely the most memorable book in the series.