Rating: 5/5

On the way after a long, slow, dull journey to his new post in Lan-fang, just over the next ridge, the astute magistrate Judge Dee from the Imperial capital, Chang'an (Xi'an), has four horse drawn carts , three wives , an unknown number of children, four trusted lieutenants, drivers, servants and ten highwaymen who ambush the entourage, in a small valley from the cover of a forest, below the hills of remote northwestern China, on the border with barbarian hordes who roam across the river. These amateur bandits are no match for the authentic, former highwaymen Ma Joong , Chiao Tai and clever thief, Tao Gan all reformed, by Dee, working for the law now, the judge also does his part very well indeed, the other man Sergeant Hoong an intelligent, long serving family retainer, is too old to play. The cowardly drivers and servants had fled the tussle quickly , return afterwards only when the easy victory was apparent. The seven surviving road agents, are captured and tied up, (the three dead ones, also put in a cart for an inglorious burial ) and ready for harsh justice, by the state including a young attractive woman, the defenders received a few lumps and bruises ... Getting the gates open in the frontier town takes time, it puzzles the government officials, until they learn that a tyrant has taken over this little provincial city, in the middle of nowhere by the name of Chien Mow, with a hundred of his criminal followers. What to do? The nearest army base is three days away and the magistrate finds his Tribunal house falling apart, dust and rats live there, vital documents are in disarray... unused for many years. It seems the former, not quite honest magistrate, has hastily left before Dee's arrival, very inappropriately , a complete puppet of Chien Mow. The Judge needs more men so he pardons the robbers and makes them constables! Yes... Dark Orchard the female bandit becomes his maid (not what you're thinking, the judge is a honorable man) and spy, her father Fang, an ex- blacksmith, leader of the incompetent band ... appointed chief of his tiny police force...naturally a perfect fit in these rather dire circumstances...yet less than ideal choice some critical people would say but not I.
 The nervous group had to leave the city because of the oppressive rule , army deserters also join his unconventional band ... why not ...Mysteries permeates this place like a black fog, White Orchard, Black Orchard's older sister has vanished...Pan, the magistrate eight years ago, was murdered, General Ding , retired, with a dubious reputation, was killed in a locked room, at his home, impossible to have been opened, and a disputed will, between a greedy , cold hearted son, Yoo Kee, of an illustrious former Governor Yoo, his first child, and the poor second wife, her little son, a painting by the late governor, is key to the case. And clues point to his country estate , just east of the city, with an impenetrable massive maze, ( a local legend ) many stories of wild animal lurking about there, somber shadows in the daytime, snakes and hidden secrets, deadly pools with unidentified creatures below the surface, the reluctant Dee has to investigate and not feeling too happy either . But he, must start by overthrowing the brutal tyrant and begin his duties to the Chinese Empire and the Tang Dynasty, our overwhelmed judge, learns later of a plot by the barbarians, with the help from traitors inside the walls, to attack the city ...A wonderful mystery, three in fact or more to solve, Dee I have faith in, to do it...A story beautifully written, a plot which never ceases to entertain...