Rating: 4/5

Modern Library 100 Best Novels
 (26/100)

4.5 stars

One of my biggest fears in life is to be deceived by a friend. A person who is supposed to be true and honest, but, on the contrary, who lies to you in order to get something from you. In The Wings of the Dove, Milly Theale—a young, rich American woman visiting Europe—is alone in the world (no family, and no friends except(?) for Mrs. Stringham), and sadly has the misfortune of meeting selfish, vain people who are only worried about themselves. So, having received bad and sad news, our protagonist* will have to choose carefully her friends, if she can, and survive in a society which is not necessarily sincere or loyal.

With a superb narrative, long paragraphs—whose length, by the way, might be considered a negative aspect for some readers—that are delightful to read, very well developed characters and a story which explores the psychology of each of them (Henry James introduces us in the mind of each character so that we can know what they are feeling, thinking, perceiving, and so on and so forth), we have a masterpiece here. A novel which is difficult to read due to its writing style, yet I highly recommend**, and whose story I would describe as a combination of early Modernism with hints of Victorian literature.

——

* The more I read, the more I realized that Milly was probably not the protagonist of her own story. Once I finished the book, I was not and I am still not sure about it.

** If you have never read any Henry James before, please don’t start with this book. It is tedious, quite dense and confusing, even though I enjoyed it quite a bit. In that case, I'd recommend Washington Square as your first attempt, my favorite James novel so far, and the easiest, yet most enjoyable to read in my opinion.

Favorite quotes:

"Yes, get me an hour alone; take them off—I don't care where; absorb, amuse, detain them; drown them, kill them if you will: so that I may just a little, all by myself, see where I am." (This is my favorite quote over the other ones since it describes perfectly and accurately the essence of this book)

"It was wonderful to her, while she took her random course, that these quantities felt so equal: she had been treated—hadn't she?—as if it were in her power to live; and yet one wasn't treated so—was one?—unless it came up, quite as much, that one might die."

"Strange were the turns of life and the moods of weakness; strange the flickers of fancy and the cheats of hope; yet lawful, all the same—weren't they?—those experiments tried with the truth that consisted, at the worst, but in practising on one's self."

"Milly was indeed a dove; this was the figure, though it most applied to her spirit."