Rating: 5/5

Sometimes I come across the right book at the right time. This was one of those times. Our protagonist, with the odd name of Hagar, was born in the late 19th century, was raised on the plains of Canada (I’m an American Midwesterner) in a small fictional town where her father, an immigrant, through dint of hard work and perseverance establishes success as the owner of a small market. The girl loses her mother young, and her father has high expectations of his stubborn, independent girl who spends a brief stint on the east coast in a finishing school of sorts, where she how to be a lady. She’s positioned to marry “up”, but has a stubborn streak and instead marries a swarthy immigrant 15 years her senior, who is far from refined, and is thus disowned. Rather, he’s crudely mannered, doesn’t work nearly hard enough on his little farm, and quickly Hagar learns she cannot bend this man to her will. He has two daughters of his own, who are stodgy and boring to the restless Hagar. She survives, bears two boys, and eventually leaves with the younger to live a live of servitude to a wealthy older gentleman near the coast, far from her humble home town. It is historical of a place and time, a favorite trope.

This book is the story of an ordinary life, told by an ordinary person. But after all is said and done, isn’t that life, and isn’t all life precious? It certainly is for me and I can appreciate an author who gets it right, and Laurence does so brilliantly It reminded me some of Williams’ Stoner, in the inner dialogue. It contains unusual idioms and turns of phrase (Canadian?) which gives it particular authenticity. It is unflinchingly honest, our protagonist is a very flawed person, proud and spiteful in the extreme. With this rendering, one cannot easily dismiss a person such as this as just “mean spirited” or a nasty old woman. We wrestle with her demons, her silent passions, her repetitive failures as a daughter, a sibling, a wife, a mother and, ultimately a grandmother. Our novel finds us here, where Hagar is in her 90s, desperately hanging on to a thin shred of autonomy and dignity, and gradually failing. Her only living son and his wife are her caregivers, and she finds them both wanting in so many ways and resents her dependency. Her mind wanders, and here the author is brilliant, as she captures in living detail the doubts of memory vs. reality that flit and flow in her changing brain. But this is not sloppy stream of consciousness, or modern writing – it snags those details with loving nuance and exactness. We truly live in Hagar’s brain, and her increasingly unreliable corpulence as the body systems fail and embarrass. The author does not stint, nor shy away from any of this.

The plot is finely crafted, in between her current situation Hagar relives her entire life – we see the panorama of a young girl becoming an old woman. Her secret pleasure that her husband gives in the bed, which she never reveals to him, a tough individual who could have used some love. Hagar bears a deep hurt, which keeps her from showing love, and she rarely fails to injure those who love her with her sharp tongue and her criticism. Somehow she cannot bring herself to a state of caring for others (I suppose one must call her a sociopath) yet she wishes to but somehow cannot achieve relationships to heal herself. Ultimately it is a tragedy, and she does one good yet deceitful act near the end, where she tells an untruth about her feelings thus finding a way to conquer the enemy (herself) in a desperate though necessary act.

My parents are nearing the age of Hagar and my rational mind tells me that I’m next – I’ll be that doddering, forgetful and failing human being that we all become. Just yesterday I attended the funeral of my father’s cousin, and mixed in with many of this age who are gathering as family only in times of death, many wondering if they are next. My own father and mother are approaching the final act, both fearing how it will end and struggling to derive meaning and some measure of joy from the marrow of their mortal existence.

This book was 5 stars for me – it is why I read. I can only thank my invisible Goodreads friends who alerted me to the group reading books that are no longer in favor. I’m so thankful for these true friends who I will probably never meet. There is lovingkindness in all of us, when I find it I will cling.