Rating: 2/5

Miss Judith Shelton, spinster, of Cheshire, England has a grand plan to secure the futures of her sister Sarah and brother Charles. She simply needs Viscount Westfall to hit her with his carriage and offer her an invitation to his country house party where she will woo him with her managing ways and marry him for his money. There's only one problem with her plan. The Viscount arrives in Cheshire with his friend and financial adviser Peregrine Campion, a wealthy nabob who knows a fortune hunter when he sees one. He is determined to thwart Judith's plan. Soon Judith finds herself arguing with Mr. Campion but underneath his frosty exterior she can see he is a worthy opponent. As Peregrine begins to see Judith's compassion, kindness and hidden passion, he begins to accept her as a worthy opponent and possibly more, but not a worthy wife for the Viscount, oh no. A worthy wife for himself, perhaps...? 

This story is like two books in one. It is long and slow. I had a really hard time getting past the first chapter until the story picks up. It stalls again halfway and becomes an entirely different story. The first half of the book is a lighthearted drawing room comedy of manners type novel taken from the Georgette Heyer canon. There's an impoverished genteel family with a managing elder sister who wants to give her beautiful younger sister a season in London so beautiful sister can snag eligible husband. There's also a lively younger brother. Does that sound like Frederica? Frederica this is not. It lacks the humor for one thing and the bored, cynical Marquess. The second half of this novel is more serious and has a heart-wrenching plot. I appreciated the realism but not in this book because it wasn't the story I was expecting or wanted to read. 

In the first few chapters Judith is entirely unlikable. I understand her motive but not her methods. She doesn't LISTEN when her younger sister doesn't have any interest in London and doesn't even see what's happening under her nose. What happens is obvious to the reader and for the best. I know Judith didn't have much choice because Uncle Sylvester doesn't have ANY interest in helping out but he should. Isn't there any female she could apply to to help Sarah? What about the vicar? Can he help? Judith does improve but the reader has to be told over and over that her family is her main concern and everything she does is to help her family. Once she is at the house party and something happens that reveals her hidden softer side, she begins to be a more sympathetic character. I like how she knew her heart but not her mind yet it's not what I wanted to read. 

Judith's family is rather bland and taken from the book of stock Regency characters. Sarah is sweet and loving, a typical demure miss and Aunt Tillie is kind but vague. I think Aunt Tillie is less vague than she lets on. She's a sweetheart but she lets Judith bear all the burdens alone. Charles is forgettable. He appears in maybe two scenes at the beginning and one in the middle and that's it. I forgot all about him. He had the makings of being an entertaining character but never works his way into the story.

Viscount Westfall is equally boring. He's not a typical nobleman though. He's kind and sees the worth of a man in terms of character. He accepts Peregine as his friend despite the differences in their station. Westfall accepts Judith's story and brings her into his home. He doesn't have to do this but he wants to. Westfall is a good man and will make an adoring husband YET he should know better than to kiss a gently reared young lady before he has permission to marry her. Peregrine is the most complex and unique character. He made a fortune in India but through honest means and now he's a wealthy cit. He has a dark secret from his past that haunts him and makes him a tragic character. At first I thought he was rude, mean and unsympathetic to Judith's predicament. I even hoped they would TALK to each other so she could explain her motives and then he would soften. They remain sparring partners but the sparring turns more to banter as the story progresses and he softens his frosty exterior. Both Peregrine and Judith need to work out their personal issues; Peregrine most of all. 

This story did not interest me much but those who prefer their Regencies with more substance and drama may enjoy it. This edition is free on Kindle Unlimited. 

Content:
Some "tingling" and passionate feelings told but not really shown
Some of the kisses get a little passionate but no body parts are mentioned other than tongue