Rating: 4/5

At last a book that lives up to it's cover AND back of book blurb! It delivers on every one of the zany characters and situations described AND the illustrations on the cover delightfully portray the monsters as Anthony and his sister Sarah discover them. Also with an intro paragraph like this you KNOW the book is going to be good:
"If Sarah hadn't put the monkey in the bathtub, we might never have had to help the monsters get big. But she did, so we did, which, given the way things worked out, was probably just as well for everyone on the planet - especially the dead people."
And it pretty much goes from 0 to 60 from there, except with perfect pacing, all the details laid out in a straightforward, clearly written style (which sounds simple but is exceeding rare to find these days!) with competent plotting and likeable characters. 
In the midst of the madcap adventures, there are also moments of stillness and beauty that Coville does with surprising deftness and softness. Journeying under the water to meet the mother of all frogs in one case:
"I glanced up. The sun catching on the water that rippled overhead made the surface look like some kind of silvery ceiling, with a pattern that changed from moment to moment. I tapped Sarah's shoulder and pointed for her to look. She smiled, then said happily, 'This is the weirdest, coolest thing that's ever happened to us, Anthony."
Or for example, meeting a fallen angel who has vowed to provide solace to the troubled souls in the Land of the Dead: 
"If I had a hundred years, I couldn't tell you what it meant to look into those eyes, except to say that it was like drowning in pain and beauty, and I was afraid I might never be able to look at the regular world, at anything else, again.
My mother told me once that the memory of pain fades. She said if it didn't, women would never have more than one baby.
I think that must be true for other things as well, things like beauty and love. If the memory of gazing into those eyes - each of which was a yard wide and several thousand miles deep - had not faded, I doubt I could move in the world today. I would only sit and remember."
Or the final advice from the ghost of his grandpa as he leaves Anthony's body:
"Anthony, all your life people are going to tell you to stop and smell the roses. But they won't usually tell you why. So let me give you one good reason, the one I learned too late. There are no gardens in the Land of the Dead. You have to embrace life now, Anthony - now, while you're still part of it. Grab it to you. See it, feel it, hold it, love it. Don't let it pass you by, boy. Don't shut yourself off from it. Because the truth is, you never know what moment is going to be your last what scent, what sound, what smell will be the last one you experience. Make it good. Make it real."
An almost perfect Halloween read. Docking one star because I wish there were more for the WOMEN to do in this book. The guys get all the action and insights and it gets old after awhile, especially as Coville sprinkles in a few interesting female support characters that could have definitely done more than wear slinky dresses, hiss seductively, long for their lost lovers, or talk about childbirth as a grand metaphor for pain and memory and loss. This is my first Coville so hoping in future books he redeems himself on that front, because I loved the supernatural adventure and writing otherwise.