Rating: 4/5

The Times had some new world maps in a feature by Frank Jacobs the other day. In one he re-imagined Siberia, pulling away from Russia and merging into China. It makes sense in a lot of ways, but Russia has also penetrated and mangled Siberia to the point that no single representation seems possible for most of its inhabitants.

Wait--isn't that Russia's MO everywhere?

Anna Reid traveled through Siberia in the 1990's looking for native shamans and their cultural remains. What she found was a sad sad place without an identity where ignorance, destruction, and random cruelty have run amok.

Certainly nearly all conquerors try to impose their culture on the peoples and the lands they seize. But Russia in the last century was also constantly trying to impose new, harsh, and inflexible cultures on its own citizens, and many of those who were not deemed "acceptable" for whatever reason ended up exiled in Siberia as well. The oppressed oppressing the oppressed. Well of course there was instability and conflict from all directions.

And we also know well the effect of, and irreplaceable loss of, a culture, both on its own people and as a subtraction from the riches of the larger human culture. But it's still and always a depressing and disheartening tale.

Some of the many indigenous peoples have resisted and held on to old ways; some have given up and assimilated or intermarried to their death. Most fall, as usual, on a spectrum in-between.

Siberia is vast and you can't really generalize too much. Beyond the influence of Russia, it's been shaped in various places, times, and ways by the northern European countries, the Asian countries (including Japan), the Alaskan Inuit, Eastern Europe, and the Mid East. But always, before Russian communism, most of the peoples managed to hold on to the core of their traditional ways and views. And in general they seem to have fared better without Russian "progress".

As I said, not a book to affirm your belief in the innate goodness of man. But Reid takes the reader on an engaging journey, with or without shamans.