Rating: 5/5

After reading Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde I got the taste for his style and decided to give his highly regarded (unfinished) novel Weir of Hermiston a close read. Characteristically substantive, in keeping with the aesthetics of his time, this short but densely heavy piece of realist fiction took me thrice the amount of hours to finish reading it than perhaps the majority of contemporary novels of the same length. 
	In this story Stevenson explores several themes, among them: tradition, loyalty, propriety, isolation, paternal/filial relationships (particularly of the discordant variety), class/status relations, and, of course, forbidden love. However, one of the more interesting thematic facets of the narrative is the manner in which the subject of social duality was revisited in the story, and with much greater subtlety than in Jekyll and Hyde. The duality of personhood, for instance, which in Jekyll and Hyde bore more of a Darwinian rendering of the split (i.e. its pitting the violently bestial with the self-repressed and morally up-right) becomes manifest in the novel’s primary antagonist, Lord Hermiston, with far lesser extremity. In Lord Hermiston the duplicity is so fluid as to slip in unnoticeably with a rustic drunkenness rarely worn on the surface, yet so carefully tended to and publically concealed that both his social and his professional reputation (often considered to be one and the same) is enough to inspire awe, fear, and esteem, and sometimes all simultaneously; a reputation guarded by a virtually impregnable fortress, vulnerable only to the battering-ram of his son’s indignation. 
 	Another feature of this book that I found unique and enjoyable is its use of the rustic Scottish dialects in the character dialogue. I found its inclusion to lend greater authenticity, contrast, and, hence, greater dimension to the novel. However, the glossary provided at the end of this edition was definitely essential to being able to interpret the more unfamiliar words and phrases. 
	My brief date with Stevenson, with his elegant and evocative writing style, has been an enjoyable one indeed. And if nothing else, besides getting in touch with some juicy classic literature I am likely to have improved my own vocabulary in the process. Still, I think that reading Weir of Hermiston has sufficiently satisfied my taste for his work for awhile.