Rating: 5/5

Proof once again that there’s more to the Victorian novel than Charles Dickens.

Wilkie Collins’ masterpieces are generally considered to be ‘The Moonstone’ and ‘The Woman in White’. ‘The Law and the Lady’ tends to be overlooked, as is often the case for resolutely genre-specific books, even if, here, the genre itself (detective fiction) was in its infancy and would in many ways grow around these superb foundations. It’s a form of cultural snobbery really, which is a shame because I actually can’t recommend this one highly enough.

The central focus of the story is a brilliantly conceived and executed murder mystery which makes superb use of the incongruous and unfair potential Scottish verdict of “not proven” (as opposed to “guilty” or “not guilty”). We follow a newly-married young woman as discovers her new husband had been put on trial for poisoning his first wife, but that his prosecutors were unable to prove his guilt and so he was forced to continue to bear the shame of everyone’s on-going suspicions. Touchingly, she is convinced of his innocence and sets about proving it, which leads to a series of frequently laugh-out-loud hilarious sections where she has to work with mercurial, eccentric or downright stubborn people in order to re-examine the evidence.

That the lead character, for a book written in the Victorian era, should be a woman, is remarkable in itself. Collins leaves the reader in no doubt about how difficult such a woman may find her campaign to be, and we sympathise with here entirely even if we can’t shake off the suspicion that at least some of her certainties may be a little misplaced. His writing for his heroine is just one of the many ways in which the novel feels curiously modern in tone and outlook – but then, given Collins’ rather unorthodox relations with the opposite sex, he’s better placed than most of his contemporaries to take this approach! Human nature doesn’t change, it seems. And to be brutally honest, I don’t think society’s attitudes have moved on far enough for us to assume that someone in a similar position would find their task any easier in this day and age.

I’m careful not to hand out five-star reviews too often – the book needs to be something really special to earn that – but I can’t not make an exception in this case. If anyone is actually reading these reviews of mine, I urge you to give this one a go.