Rating: 1/5

Note: I gave up on page 100, after skipping ahead to part 2 and realizing the whole book, to me, is a waste of words. 

I don't know what I expected this book to be about when I bought it. Maybe I thought it would be about how to perform ceremonial magic. Maybe I thought it'd be insightful. Maybe I should have questioned why "Jehovah," and "Emmanuel" were on the cover of the book. Maybe I will finally learn my lesson to read the inside cover to see what the book is about before I fork over $7.50 for it.

But enough of that. You know when you had to write research papers in college and you were forced to find academic sources, so you type your query into your college's database and end up getting something with the most perfect title ever, only to click on it and find it's a book review instead of the information you need?

That's this book. Literally. The book is basically just a bunch of book reviews of grimoires from the medieval era with some prayers stuck here and there and maybe Charlemagne's name thrown in to spice things up.

Maybe that's useful to someone else, but for a novice looking for information into the occult who thought this would be a great reference, oh my god I just wanted to throw this book against the wall. Repeatedly. It's as dry as my mom's infamous pork chops and as far as I can tell all 337 pages were not worth cutting down a tree for. I even skipped ahesd to part two, which is supposed to be about how to do ceremonial magic. It just keeps going on and on about what different texts from the medieval era think. And then what he thinks about it. And then he throws in a bunch of prayers.

Jesus don't want your ceremonial occultism nonsense any more than I want to read it.

And I mean, maybe I don't know what I'm talking about. Maybe I'm just annoyed, but really it's because I'm uneducated about practicing magick and when I learn a thing I'll be super ashamed of this judgement and I'll come back and shout praise for Waite from the mountain tops. But for right now, quite honestly, I'd rather have some trees than this book.