Rating: 4/5

Father Adam, the loving, endlessly-forgiving priest of the parish church of the Foregate, has died and laid to rest, much mourned by his parishioners. Abbot Radulfus has a new priest, Father Ailnoth, recommended to him by no less than Bishop Henry, the papal legate to England. But Father Ailnoth’s Christianity is more rigid and uncompromising, and he quickly alienates many in his flock, particularly in two instances that end in tragedy. 

One couple sends for Father Ailnoth to baptize their newborn daughter, but he refuses to interrupt his Offices. When he does respond, the infant has died, and according to some medieval doctrine, she is doomed to limbo and is denied burial in consecrated ground.

The second is even worse, involving a young woman who it seems is mildly mentally impaired. She is habitually, um, generous with her favours, but afterwards feels shame and goes to confession. Father Adam was mindful of her condition and always granted absolution and gave her penance, but Father Ailnoth denied her the comfort of the Church and cast her out. She throws herself into the Severn and drowns, leaving her infant daughter in her aged mother’s care.

So know one is surprised, or terribly sorry, when Father Ailnoth’s body is found in the river. At first it’s assumed he slipped and fell, for the December weather has been icy. But Cadfael points out head injuries on the corpse that would be inconsistent with a slip and fall.

Suspicion soon falls on Benet, the “nephew” of the priest’s housekeeper, who is secretly a supporter of Queen Maud. Benet, whose real name is Ninian, has been assisting Cadfael as a gardener’s assistant. Hugh has been ordered to arrest him, but he very carefully does not try to find him, not wanting to arrest simply for supporting another legitimate contender to the throne.

Once again thanks to Cadfael and Hugh, the murder is solved and it’s assumed that Ninian and his fiancée successfully sneak out of town and reach France via Wales.