Rating: 2/5

I saw this in my library's bookstore and it sounded like such a cute story. The cover is adorable and I expected a cute tale about a girl who loved to read getting to read to her heart's content with the traveling library. I've never encountered a traveling library and I couldn't wait to hear about it.
Instead, what I got was a hard, unyielding dad who never saw the importance of reading and never gave up with demanding that she do chores. His character ruined the story for me and brought up flashbacks to my own childhood and that kind of hard, controlling father figure is just the type of person I don't like. 

I liked learning about the way of life. There weren't schools for farm children. She had to help feed the chickens, cook, take care of her siblings and plant corn in the spring. It was cute that she likes making up her own stories about animals and farm girls like her. 

I emphasized that sometimes she got tired of doing farm work. She wanted to learn everything she could, about the moon and stars and how corn grew. She asked her mom how bread rose and her mom was too buys to tell her, then when Clara opened the oven to look, her mom told her to shut it. She sat down in the chair and daydreamed and when her dad opened the door, tired from his day's work, and asked if she was dreaming again, I had a bad flashback. Men getting mad when they see you sitting down, mad because everyone isn't working as hard as they are. I don't like that, people all work and no play, acting like daydreaming is a bad thing. He told her there's no time for dreaming on a farm and if everyone doesn't help out they won't have food on the table. Ugh. He sucked.

Papa had to go to town and Clara asked if she could go, and promised to help. That made me mad that she had to promise to help in order to go. What's wrong with a kid taking a leisurely drive? 
I wasn't crazy about the names. Mr. Holzer from the store. That isn't a kid-friendly name. Something simple should be used in a starter book like this. Also, Mary Titcomb. Not a good name at all. Kids would have a field day with that one. 

I liked that his store was a book station, so he had library books there that people could check out for free. Clara got excited to read and her dad ruined it, said books are for rich people and farm people don't have time to read. I felt so bad for her, because she started crying and didn't even care about her peppermint stick that she had been excited about. The image of her with a tear running down her cheek, with her face turned away was so sad! Poor thing! 

She helped her dad weed and her mom asked if she wanted to pick blueberries and it irritated me that she had to look at her dad to see if she could go. Only when he said she'd been weeding a long time and gave his permission could she go. 

It was sweet that once Miss Mary learned Clara's dad thought books were a waste of time for farm people, she set out to change his mind. 

It was weird how he was so mad when he saw the wagon, said they had no dead here and Mary said it isn't a hearse wagon to pick up the dead. That's really morbid and heavy for a kid's book. 
It bothered me so much that she had to promise to read only when her work was done and her dad said he knows she's good at keeping a promise. I guess it's a good thing she is, otherwise she couldn't be allowed to read. 

There were some elements that stood out, that were out of place. After church Reverend Strong--and I don't think he needed a name because he wasn't a central character--showed her his bible. Why would he show her of all people, a little kid who can't even read, his family bible? It was just weird. 

When Clara first saw the wagon, she said it was filled with books. The wagon was closed and showed not one single book, so she couldn't know that it had books in it just by looking. Only on the next page when all the doors were open could the books be seen. Miss Mary said indeed 3 times, that was overkill. It felt like every time I turned around she was saying indeed. 
It ended with Mary saying she would teach Clara to read, and she would learn fast. She was going to teach her to sound letters out. I think there's a lot more to it than that, but Clara was happy she had stories to read. 

It's really cool that this is based on the country's first traveling library in Maryland. Mary Titcomb was head of the library and wanted books to reach those who lived in the country. She established book deposit stations in general stores, churches and homes. She designed a wagon in 1905 to carry the books. The janitor was the driver. It ran for 5 years and then was destroyed when a train hit it, and I was so glad to hear the driver and horses made it out alive. The second one in 1912 had a motor. A cool bit of history on a subject I hadn't known about. I really like the idea of a traveling library.