While The Analects of Confucius is the most important book in the history of China, I read it primarily in order to better understand the Tao Te Ching of Lao Tzu. Both Chinese philosophies – Confucianism and Taoism – have survived for 2,500 years (though Confucianism has been state sanctioned and thus the decided winner).

First, the similarities. Both Confucius and Lao Tzu were responding to the political upheaval and violence of their eras, and both tried to understand what was better about the relatively peaceful past. They are thus both nostalgic and extremely conservative in their own ways. Confucius, who says, “I transmit but do not innovate. I love antiquity and have faith in it” (7.1), looks backward to great rulers, harping on tradition and ritual. Lao Tzu denounces interference and change – “the world is a sacred object / Nothing is to be done to it” (29) – believing that the greatness of the past lay in people not bothering each other and doing best when left alone. Both address people working or seeking to work in government – The Analects in particular could be read as a manual for managers – and were meant for readers from higher classes rather than for farmers and peasants. Finally, both avoid defining their terms, rather arguing by exempla. Confucious “did not put forth theories” (9.4), but answered each disciple as an individual, his instruction depending on the student’s character, position, and level of progress. Likewise, Lao Tzu wouldn’t give you a precise definition of the Tao even if you offered him all the 5-star GR reviews in the world.

Now for the differences.

1. Ren: humanity, humaneness, or benevolence

The pinnacle of Confucian values is ren. While wisdom is to “know others,” ren is to “love others,” and thus an even higher goal than wisdom (12.22). Every Confucian works on attaining ren, though its perfection is unattainable. Confucius himself said “I dare not call myself a sage or a humane man. What could be said of me is that I work toward it without ever feeling sated” (7.34). Among the ways of cultivating one’s ren is learning (xue), transforming oneself through diligent hard work and study.

In Taoism, by contrast, the Tao (the Way) is higher than any virtue. Lao Tzu says that “Nature does not practice ren / It treats all things like straw dogs” (5). Moreover, he does not hold a high regard for learning or hard work, and advises wu-wei (non-action) and keeping the people in ignorance. The “goal” of Taoism, if it can be said to have one, is to be as you naturally, spontaneously are. Lao Tzu throws obvious shade at Confucius when he says:

“In the degradation of the great way
come benevolence and righteousness.
With the exaltation of learning and prudence
comes immense hypocrisy.
The disordered family
is full of dutiful children and parents.
The disordered society
is full of loyal patriots” (18)

2. Xiao: Filial piety
Another major step in cultivating the Confucian concept of ren is filial piety, the devotion to parents and older members of the family. Filial piety develops the virtue (de) necessary to be a good citizen. A son who respects his father will become a citizen who respects his ruler. (See above for Lao Tzu’s views on dutiful children and loyal patriots.)

3. Li: Rituals and forms of propriety 

Confucius LOVES ritual. Very specific rituals were instituted for celebrations, sacrifices, marking of calendars, mourning, drinking ceremonies, etc. These scripts included everything from how many rows of dancers were to be hired for a ceremony (dependent, as always, on the proprietor’s rank), to whether one was to have only an inner or also an outer coffin at one’s funeral (again, a matter of rank), to which kind of bronze bell to use for which type of announcement, to which side of the gate a minister should enter, to the length of one’s sleeves, etc etc etc. 

It is important to remember that The Analects are primarily a political tract whose main concern is maintaining a functional social order, and that nothing is more anathema to Confucius than chaos. Li, which stresses hierarchy, loyalty, respect, and responsibility, is thus critical to Confucius’ larger project. Participation in highly scripted rites and rituals is a matter of honoring one’s place in the social structure, neither raising above nor lowering oneself beneath one’s rank, and showing one’s commitment to one’s social responsibilities. Moreover, for Confucius, rites and rituals held a civilizing power, and were deeply tied to the development of one’s virtue (de). By learning timeless ritual, one may develop the ability to respond to issues in time.

In the Tao Te Ching, meanwhile, Lao Tzu once again puts Confucius on blast:

Lacking Tao, people start to act from de (virtue - otherwise transliterated as te - as in the Tao Te Ching)
Lacking de, people start to act from ren (humaneness) 
Lacking ren, people start to act from yi (righteousness, duty)
Lacking yi, people start to act from li (rituals and propriety) (38)

4. Rectification of names 

In Confucius’ era, some ministers began referring to themselves as "kings" even though they were not kings. Obviously, this is the kind of disorderly nonsense that upsets Confucius more than anything (and, in fact, is it not a tendency of tyrants to detach language from reality so that we can no longer see it clearly?) “If names are not rectified,” says Confucius, “what is said will not seem reasonable. When what is said does not seem reasonable, nothing will get accomplished” (13.13). It is imperative that we keep words aligned with fact so that we can understand and trust one another, and so that we can carry out our orders and keep the state functional.

LOL, says Lao Tzu. The Tao that can be named is not the eternal Tao. Names do not reveal anything, so stop talking. 

“To order, to govern,
is to begin naming;
when names proliferate
it’s time to stop” (32)

5. Trickle-down (not a real Chinese term) 

For Confucius, the moral cultivation of the country begins with its rulers. The Emperor is like the North Star; he maintains perfect virtue, and everything else revolves around him. If the society is well structured according to meritocratic rank, then each leader chooses adept delegates at the level directly below, and so on all the way down to the bottom rung, and there is no need to micromanage. Moreover, by maintaining perfect de, the Emperor allows everyone around him to realize their own moral potential as far as they are capable, for “The character of those at the top is like that of the wind. The character of those below is like that of grass. When wind blows over the grass, the grass is sure to bend” (12.19). 

For both Confucius and Lao Tzu, the ruler may well appear as if he is doing nothing (being perfectly virtuous is a state of being, not necessarily of action). According to Confucius, “If he himself is upright, he does not have to give orders and things will get done. If he himself is not upright, even though he gives orders, they will not be obeyed” (13.6).

For Lao Tzu, however, the issue went beyond uprightness or the trickling down thereof. In Taoism, the best ruler interferes the least, and instead of ruling from on high, actually lowers himself with respect to his people. Lao Tzu stresses that kings and rulers call themselves orphans, widowers, outcasts. “This is why the lords and kings call themselves “the lonely,” “the solitude,” or “the incapable.” Isn’t this a case of taking the lowly as the root?” (39)

NB: For full credit, the published Analects translation I cite here is by Annping Chin.
I read both Confucius and Lao Tzu with a group led by Jason Peng and Amon Greene, whose unpublished translations I also cite here. I will post the title of their versions once they are published.
Some of their videos can be found here: https://www.youtube.com/@jasonjpeng
Another brilliant group participant was Dr. Quan Le. A video of him comparing Plato and Confucius, for those interested: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jio-h...