Rating: 4/5

The Darkest Road provides an excellent conclusion to the story of The Fionavar Tapestry. It’s the one I think is far and away the best book in the trilogy, with a consistently engaging story that wraps up all the central plot arcs satisfactorily. The writing settles into being comfortably poetic and is evocative of the classical and epic nature of the tale.

It had a relatively weak start with Part 1, exemplifying some of the issues I had with the previous books: things happening too quickly causing them to feel fleeting and not have much impact, in addition to actions and events occurring seemingly at random due to the lack of in-world explanations of their mythological sources of inspiration. One example of that would be the origins and motivations of Flidais as Taliesin, where I felt slightly confused and would’ve been more invested had I had prior knowledge of his inspirations from Arthurian legend.

From Part 2 onwards, however, the book was quite amazing. Each of the plotlines progressed steadily, with enough time devoted to feeling the full impact of events and emotions. The story threads were coherent and had clear end goals. Two books of knowing these characters also made some charged interactions, conversations, and relationships between them quite engaging, especially after how they’ve changed over the story and grown into certain roles.

The subplot with the Dwarves and their kingship conflict, the Amairgen and Lisen tale, and the various other smaller plot elements were great, but the highlight of the book was Darien’s tale. His journey and internal conflict I found really compelling, and I liked how other related characters like Lancelot played a more prominent role. The fight at the start of Part 2 was fantastic, and it remained engrossing right till the end. It also tied into the central theme of the series: of free will and choice versus a more deterministic reality, given the world’s metaphysics.

The ending was great as well. There were poetically written scenes of action and emotion, and there were actual stakes felt with some character deaths unlike in previous books. Stuff that was introduced at the start of the trilogy was built up and had appropriate payoff, and the final resolution was very satisfying in ways of plot, character, and theme. The falling action and character endings also were well-handled and felt like an extension of their overall journeys. This was on the whole, a very positive conclusion to the trilogy, which I previously was more conflicted on.