Rating: 2/5

Lately, I’ve been making an effort to read some of those books that have lingered way too long on my bookshelves. This was one of them. At one point I thought maybe I had read one of the novellas, but nothing seemed familiar. 

The first novella, Immaculate Man, was enjoyable in the beginning. But it quickly became a bit tedious. There was repetition of the same material, nothing much happened in the story, it was all very introspective, thoughts of present and past, and the story went on for a very long time. Unfortunately, this became a pattern for each novella.

The brief story line for this one was told from a divorced woman with two kids who is a social worker for abused women. She meets a priest as part of the job and they end up having a relationship together. He is an innocent in sexual relations and relationships. Most of the story is her describing his life, and some of his mentor, an older priest who she became very good friends with but is dying. 

The second novella, Living at Home, was awful in that it was so boring. The repetition became too much. I wanted to quit reading so many times, but I persevered and kept going. 

It's also from a woman’s point of view, divorced with two boys but they are grown now. The story is mostly about her Italian boyfriend. She is living in London, her parents from Germany, but she grew up mostly in America. So she feels like she doesn’t fit in with the British, nor America, nor anywhere really and her boyfriend travels so much that they have that similarity. Again, most of the story is told about him, or their relationship, and not much happens.

The last novella, The Rest of Life, was the better of the three, but I still did not enjoy it very much. Another story from the point of view of a woman, but this time she is older and she is a widow. Her son and his finance are taking her back to Italy, to her home town after being sent away as a teenager. Her thoughts about what happened, why she was sent away, and how she could never tell this story to her son is repeated several times. 

Every novella was introspective, without much action and very little plot, with the exception of the last novella, that one had something of a plot. All of them seemed to go on way too long. This book is probably something I would have enjoyed more back when I bought the book, too bad I waited so long.