Rating: 5/5

A mainstay of any library, this slim book on political extremism was written, not by a professor but by a gifted amateur, an American stevedore willing to think through not the historical problem of radicalization in this or that society, but who becomes an extremist. What is the psychology of the extremist as opposed to that of more moderate people. Who is more likely to join an extremist movement? It was written in the 1950's, not long after the defeat of the Third Reich, a time when the problem of extremism was very much on the world's mind. 

Hoffer's term "Mass Movements" might be better translated today as "cult." Who exactly becomes a cultist, or is vulnerable to that kind of true belief? Is there something essentially different between someone who becomes a radical anti-semite, a Bolshevik, an evangelical or fanatical religious follower, a white supremacist, a Scientologist and the like, and other people with a less aggressive, black and white, totalitarian view of the world? 

Something he notes is the "interchangeability of mass movements." That people find it easier to move from say, Communism to Nazisim, than from communism to socialism or Nazism to mainstream conservatism. "When people are ripe for a mass movement, they're usually ripe for any effective movement, and not solely for one with a particular doctrine or program." 

 "The inordinately selfish {one of the list of vulnerable types] are particularly susceptible to frustration. The more selfish a person, the ore poignant his disappointments. It is the inordinately selfish, therefore, who are likely to be the most persuasive champions of selflessness. The fiercest fanatics are often selfish people who when forced, by innate shortcomings or external circumstances, to lose faith in those own selves. The separate the excellent instrument of their selfishness from their ineffectual selves and attach it to the service of some holy cause. And though it be a faith of love and humility they adopt, they can be neither loving nor humble."

It is a fascinating, theme based exploration of mass movements, though some people will be disturbed to see their idealistic noble causes lumped in with totalitarian ones. "The superior individual, whether in politics, literature, science commerce or industry plays a large role in shaping a nation, but so do individuals at the other extreme, the failures, misfits, outcasts, criminals, and all those who have lost their footing, or never had one, in the ranks of respectable humanity. The game of history is usually played by the best and the worst over the heads of the majority in the middle."

Very much worth reading--speaks to our highly polarized time, helping us better see what radicalizes people and ultimately suggesting ways in which the non=extreme element of society can be strengthened.