Rating: 2/5

“The criminal is the creative artist; the detective only the critic […]”

Is there something like an artistic crime? And if there is, might some of the stories included in G.K. Chesterton’s collection The Innocence of Father Brown not be counted as very examples of such artistic crimes? Crimes in the line of imposture and sleight of hand, to be more precise.

What would you think of an atheist, who is so convinced by atheism that he concocts and executes an utterly complicated plan in order to kill an eccentric millionaire with a view to preventing him from donating his money to the Catholic church? Yes, this is his only motive! Or of an officer trying to hush up a crime by causing a doomed attack, in the spirit of the Light Brigade, and a Catholic priest unravelling this devilish manoeuvre just by weaving a theory of his own, without any really substantial clues to go by? Or of a clergyman who throws a tiny hammer at another person’s skull, from the top of a church steeple, and actually hitting him, like a professional marksman? In little doses, stories like these may be entertaining, but they may surely make you stop reading more often than not and ask yourself whether the author is not trying too hard to impress and amaze, and this is how these stories become more like the somersaults of an especially pert and hyperactive neighbour’s child – it’s never your own offspring, for sure – who is attempting to get some adult admiration. I could definitely hear the shrill “Look here! Look here! See what I can do!” in the background of many a Father Brown story.

What also makes these stories way inferior to the one and only Sherlock Holmes adventures is the figure of Father Brown and his methods. First of all, the man is an annoyingly smug and self-complacent person, who hardly ever refrains from making snide remarks on Calvinists and atheists in particular, and anybody non-Catholic in general. This is probably a bit Chesterton himself speaking, since the author was born a Unitarian and then later on converted to Catholicism, and now he seems to feel under the obligation of thrusting down everybody’s throat the superiority of this newly-embraced creed [1]. In a way, Chesterton seems like one of those ex-smokers who now lose no opportunity of expatiating on the dangers of their former vice and start coughing meaningfully whenever they see somebody walk by with a cigarette in their mouth on the other side of the street. You can also bet that the murderer will be either a Calvinist, or an atheist, or a Methodist, but a murderous Catholic appears to be a phenomenon beyond the range of the author’s imagination. Saying that, I also found it very unusual for a detective story’s narrative voice to give us exhaustive information on every single character’s answer to the Gretchenfrage. This made me ask myself the question whether a foot fetishist, if he were to write a novel, would also obsessively tell us every character’s shoe size.

The other thing I did not like particularly about Brown was that he remains extremely vague as a character. He is not anything like Sherlock Holmes, who always comes over as a real person to me, but more like a completely shadowy Columbo, without this latter inspector’s endearing features. He also does what Holmes was always loath to, namely build the most daring theories on very little evidence so that his conclusions would never ever hold water in court. Then there was a last little thing that annoyed me without end, although it is but a tiny detail: Father Brown is always on the scene of a crime, happening to walk into the place whenever a murder or a robbery is committed. It might work in one or two cases, but how likely is it for a normal person, not somebody who is consulted on a case and has made the detection of crime his business, like Holmes, to witness one crime – let alone 49? If I ever met Father Brown in the street, I would immediately turn tail and run because chances I should get killed with his being around would definitely explode.

And yet, there is something good that can be said for the Father Brown stories, and this is so much of an advantage that I might go on reading some other of his stories: Chesterton is surely a master of witty and interesting language. But not really a master of detective stories as I like them.

[1] Don’t get me wrong! I myself sometimes toy with the thought of becoming Catholic, but purely from an agnostic’s view, thinking that if I should profess my belief in God, I would also want to have the Mother of God, transsubstantiation and a lot of incense to go with it.