Rating: 3/5

Most of his book made sense. However, there were areas where I felt he was biased from experiences as a child. So he went to the opposite extreme. For example, I got the idea that he was physically spanked in abusive, humiliating ways that caused resentment in him from the time of the first incident. So he says that physical discipline is unnecessary. However, until the vocabulary and understanding and beginning of self-discipline in a child are developed sufficiently, a light tap will get their attention and deter them from the more serious consequences of their misbehavior. The Bible says that he who spares the rod spoils the child. This word refers not to infants or to preschoolers. It specifically refers to small toddlers. And it does not say to cause physical harm to the child. All discipline, whether done in a physical or non-physical way should be done in a way that is non-humiliating. It should be done in a way that builds up a child's self-esteem and increases his confidence. If a parent remembers discipline that is humiliating, that does not mean that he should not discipline. It means that he should change the method of discipline so that it is effective and harmless.

In a similar way, he seems to think that you should let young children work out their problems on their own. I believe in putting myself into the shoes of a child whom I am disciplining. If a child is left to "work out" problems with a sibling twice his age and weight, and much more developed than he is, then that older sibling will always win and the parent, who is supposed to be a protector of the child, has thrown him to the wolves. The younger child has learned that his older sibling will always take advantage of him and his parents will not protect him... Sad.

I also do not believe that it is normal for children to bite, kick and punch each other. He says this is a result of frustrations building up in their lives. If you felt that frustrated, you would change the situation before you resorted to that kind of behavior. In the same way, I feel that parents should realize when they are putting their children in a situation that is frustrating for them, and they should change the situation for the child BEFORE he feels a need to bite. In my opinion, allowing a child to get to the stage of frustration that he bites is bad parenting.

But most of the book was common sense, helping parents to feel how their children were feeling, and most important, to treat them as the parents would want to be treated, to realize that their feelings and memories are as intense at 3 as they are at 30. 

He makes parents aware of how the baby is communicating with looks even before he can understand words... how he is communicating emotions as well as needs.

Many of these examples would have been extremely helpful in a video.