Rating: 3/5

After graduating from seminary and moving back to Chicago I obtained, disappointingly, a job as a childcare worker for supposedly psychotic adolescent boys with the Jewish Children's Bureau. My boss literally went crazy herself and I was de facto in charge (24/7 with no pay raise) until, months later, the agency hired a new director, Marilyn. That didn't work out. She was fired. Months later I got a call from her, asking me to move over to the Mission of Our Lady of Mercy/Angel Guardian Center where she'd just been appointed director.

As I'd liked Marilyn and her husband, Lou, both of them former religious, I made the move. The pay was about the same, but the operation was much bigger: more supposedly crazy boys and our own school facility. Also, the psychiatric social workers were both from the Adler Institute and both of them were pleasant to work with.

Summers were a problem, however. The kids went home for a lengthy period when school was out of session and I had no income until I picked up a job at Volume II Bookstore/Cafe on Sheridan Road across from Loyola University's Lake Shore campus. There, in addition to selling books, I got the job of buying used books for resale, work I really enjoyed as it allowed me to do what I'd be doing anyway and get my pick of the litter.

I found out a lot about the American reading public working at the bookstore. What I learned was not heartening. What sold was mostly crap, the best of which was on the order of Stephen King--or Irving Wallace.

Wallace's The Word, as the description appended here indicates, promised to be quite interesting to someone as concerned about the history of Christianity and its texts as I am. Unfortunately, the book ended up being a disappointment to me, the promise of the fly-leafs being misleading.

What would happen were another gospel found, a gospel authenticated as being from the period of the synoptics, a gospel presenting a significantly different picture of Jesus than the ones we're used to? The recent hullaballoo about the "new" Gospel of Judas, a much later gnostic text, promulgated by National Geographic gives some idea about what would happen. Magnify this a bit and you get what Wallace's novel foreshadows.

For those of you who are believing Christians: What would you do were there to be an authenticated gospel which revealed, as many early "Christians" and orthodox Islam maintain, that Jesus did not die to be miraculously resurrected? Would a change, any change, in the historical picture effect a change in your basic values or behaviors?