Rating: 5/5

“Why do you allow yourselves to be shut up? You have neglected the duty you owe to yourselves and you have lost your natural rights by shutting your eyes to your own interest.” 

'Sultana’s Dream' – the earliest utopian feminist sci-fi to come out of the Indian subcontinent. First of all, I had never heard of the author, Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain, until I started reading about Bangladesh and 'Sultana’s Dream' came up in two of the books I was reading. I rushed to find a physical copy; unsuccessful and impatient, I ended up purchasing the e-book. And as I read more about her in the biography sections of the book, I realized what a great shame it was that so few knew about her work. Hossain started writing and publishing at the beginning of the 20th century. She never formally attended school, as was the norm for girls at the time, but that didn’t stop her. She was self-taught, even going as far as to learn English with the help of her brother and the encouragement of her older sister. What is quite admirable is that Sultana’s Dream was not a translated work, it was actually written in English by a women in Bangladesh, English being her 4th/5th language. She started writing it out of boredom while her husband was away for work and out of desire to practice her English and impress her husband. 'Sultana’s Dream', first published in 1905 in a English periodical is considered one of the earliest “self-consciously feminist” utopian stories written in English by a woman - now add to that, written by a Bangali woman, and then cherry on top, written by a Muslim woman. 

And the things this woman, whose society would have prevented her from having access to a plethora of reading/study material, man the things she packs into this short story – we have a reversal of roles, men fill the stereotypical roles women hold in society and women do all the other “man’s jobs” within this utopia. Its hilarious really, satire almost, with Hossain adding her sarcastic humor into her writing. She effortlessly and succinctly explores the topics of war, violence and crime, female education and the importance of educating girls in subject historically considered men’s area (science, math, etc), the potential of science and the impact of technological advances on society, efficiency in work, leniency in punishment, and even religion. I literally went back and reread the whole story immediately upon finishing it and yes, she explores all that – with humor and accuracy. Another topic that runs through not only 'Sultana’s Dream' but the entire book and her non-fiction reportage, 'The Secluded Ones', is of  Purdah . You have to read the anecdotes to believe them, despite how nonsensical and often upsetting they were. Despite that fact that I have lived in a Muslim country as an adult, where I have witnessed only remnants of the  Purdah from Hossain’s time, I was still shocked and surprised at how little I knew and understood of the lives of women and of the societal norms of South East Asia a mere 100 years ago. 

I could write an essay on Hossain’s work, I could write pages on her life and legacy, all little known by the general reader and that should not be so. She deserves greater readership, even if it to learn about a society, country and a time we in 2021 read little about. Her work deserves greater recognition – she was a fighter, she stood up to a society governed by the ridiculous rules of men and religion and she kept going at it, building schools for girls and advocating for women’s right and using her articles and stories to ignite self-realization in Bangali women and Muslim women. Her pen was a weapon in the crusade for social reform. 

 Oh did I mention the story has flying cars in it!