Rating: 3/5

Lysistrata by Aristophanes is a hilarious play. Aristophanes wrote this play in 411 BCE. At the time, Greece changed its political face from a long-standing democracy to an oligarchic regime. Although latter governance was brief, it impacted the society with the need to end warring and attain long-lasting peace that would ensure stable democratic governance. But its attainment wasn't easy. Athenians were a proud lot, and they glorified war. So Aristophanes wrote Lysistrata, setting out a comical solution to attain peace. 

Mind you that Lysistrata is a dream about peace. It's a fantastic and hilarious dream where all Athenian women and Spartan women agree to sexual abstinence. Not only that. Athenian women seize the Acropolis, effectively barring the menfolk from access to money. It's hinted that women receive divine help to achieve this feat. This double method ensures that Athens and Sparta reconcile their differences and sign a peace agreement. 

What really interested me about this play is that, even though Aristophanes presents the play as a dream, he has thought fit to show that women can exercise power over men if they so choose. War is felt more by women. With their husbands and sons gone to the war front, they live in perpetual fear for their safety. Although men make decisions, it is the women who suffer the most. But unfortunately, they have no say in the matter. This bitter and touching truth is brought forth by Aristophanes in his play, irrespective of its bawdy humour. 

I admit that at first, I was a little taken aback by Aristophanes' bold use of crude and suggestive language. But it was another time and another society. I haven't seen any Greek play performed, but I'll be curious to know how Lysistrata was performed to more conventional audiences. Even by modern, more tolerant standards, a performance of Lysistrata is a bold venture. 

Leaving that aside, Lysistrata was a fun read. I had a very good laugh and had to lie stretched to ease my stomach cramps. :) 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/