Rating: 4/5

Oxford Blood is the fifth book in the Jemima Shore Investigates series by Antonia Fraser. In this entry, Jemima is pressured by her boss to investigate the antics of a group of privileged students at Oxford University for a TV programme; he believes the recent ratings success of ‘Brideshead Revisited’ has created a public appetite for this sort of thing. (Oxford Blood is set in 1985, with references to Princess Di and the SDP.) Lord Saffron St Ives is at the centre of this group, a dashing aristo who has become a public hate figure for his arrogance and reckless lifestyle. Initially unkeen, Jemima’s interest is piqued by both the deathbed confession of an old retainer of the St Ives family that Saffron is actually a changeling, swapped at birth to preserve the dynastic bloodline - and the family fortune - and by Saffron’s admission that he has been the victim of a couple of recent unsuccessful attempts on his life. Jemima begins to investigate…

Oxford Blood illustrates Fraser’s familiarity with Oxford University and its arcane rituals, academic rivalries and class divisions. It’s an interesting and entertaining background rich with motives for murder, and draws on themes of blood ties, family tensions, the sins of the past, money and class. The Oxford Bloods are a notorious Bullingdon-style ‘dining club’. There’s a gammon-faced Nigel Farage-like character with strident public views on race and immigration (perhaps given the time period Enoch Powell might be a more appropriate comparison). And the shambolic figure of ‘Proffy’ whose large brood of tow-headed children and chaotic north Oxford household bears perhaps more than a passing resemblance to Fraser’s own upbringing as the child of an Oxford don (Fraser was the eldest of eight and lived on Chadlington Road in north Oxford - Proffy lives at the fictitious north Oxford address of Chillington Road).

There are some mild narrative and character implausibilities and perhaps an underwhelming motive for the murders. There’s also the question to be asked if Jemima Shore’s renowned instinct is quite as astute as it’s supposed to be. But overall, Oxford Blood is an enjoyable, lightly-written diversion. 

As a sidebar, it’s interesting to note that a year after this book’s publication, the death of Oxford student and Tory Cabinet Minister’s daughter Olivia Channon from the effects of drinks &amp; drugs at a college party mirrors the death of one of the book’s characters. This incident exposed to glaring censorious public light the lifestyles of such privileged and seemingly careless elite during economically turbulent times depicted presciently (?) in Oxford Blood.