MAN WHO LOVED CAT DANCING – 1972 – Marilyn Durham
The author is a native of Evansville, IN, in 1930, to Russell and Stacy Birdsall Wall. She received her education in the public schools and at what is now Evansville University (now called the University of Evansville) for a year (1949–50). She and her husband live there still, with two daughters, Elaine and Jennifer. Her father was an L&amp;N blacksmith. She married Kilburn Durham, a field representative for Social Security, in November 1950, and settled into life as a wife and mother. She was a self-described "frumpy housewife." Durham had a lifelong interest in the history of medieval England, archaeology, theology, and astronomy
Mrs. Durham never attempted a novel before Man Who Loved Cat Dancing. She has written a second novel and a third novel. 

	One evening in 1969, Durham told her husband that she could write a novel better than any she had been reading lately. Eventually she set about doing this. While her daughters were in school, Durham began writing a novel at her dining room table. She made efforts to conceal her writing from her family because, in her words, "If it wasn't any good, I wanted to be the only one who knew. I didn't want egg on my face." Her husband discovered that she was writing when she had almost finished the sixth chapter, and she swore him to secrecy on the subject.
	Durham sold The Man Who Loved Cat Dancing to Harcourt Brace, which published it in 1972. The novel is set in the American West in the 1880s, but is not written in a genre style. It is the story of Jay Grobert, a man of the West, and his offbeat relationship with Catherine Crocker, a woman from the East who is fleeing an unhappy marriage. Jay kidnaps Catherine on his way to rob a train and together they travel through the Wyoming Territory. Catherine eventually discovers that Jay is haunted by the murder of his wife, a Shoshone Indian named Cat Dancing, and his actions after the murder. Pursued by Catherine's husband and a railroad agent, Catherine and Jay fall in love. The novel became a best-seller and was generally praised by reviewers for its deft character studies as well as its effortlessly entertaining style.
	The following year, the film version of the novel was released. Directed by Richard C. Sarafian, The Man Who Loved Cat Dancing starred Burt Reynolds and British actress Sarah Miles. It would be Reynolds's first romantic movie. Many who regarded the novel highly were disappointed by its formulaic Hollywood treatment in the movie. Veteran screenwriter Eleanor Perry had written the first script and told Durham that she loved her heroine. But the studio then hired a string of "script doctors," all male, who completely rewrote the characters, dialogue, and to Durham's astonishment, the ending. Whereas Jay Grobert dies on the last page of the book, when Miles falls to her knees beside Reynolds, who has been gunned down, Reynolds says, "I think I can get up.
	The following year, the film version of the novel was released. Directed by Richard C. Sarafian, The Man Who Loved Cat Dancing starred Burt Reynolds and British actress Sarah Miles. It would be Reynolds's first romantic movie. Many who regarded the novel highly were disappointed by its formulaic Hollywood treatment in the movie. Veteran screenwriter Eleanor Perry had written the first script and told Durham that she loved her heroine. But the studio then hired a string of "script doctors," all male, who completely rewrote the characters, dialogue, and to Durham's astonishment, the ending. Whereas Jay Grobert dies on the last page of the book, when Miles falls to her knees beside Reynolds, who has been gunned down, Reynolds says, "I think I can get up.
urham spoke at writing workshops at the University of Evansville, Southern Indiana University, and numerous fiction writing groups in Evansville. From 1984-95, she worked as 	An instructor for McGraw-Hill's Continuing Education Center. In this position, she read and evaluated short fiction and instructed beginning novelists. She also taught Sunday school at Trinity United Methodist Church in downtown Evansville. She was planning a novel about the Spanish King Philip II and his son, Don Carlos, when she suffered a stroke in January 2012. Her novels have seen multiple reprintings and have been translated into many languages – She died March 19, 2015 – her husband died in 1994.
MAN WHO LOVED CAT DANCING
	The novel is set in the American West in the 1880s, but is not written in a genre style. It is the story of Jay, a man of the West, and his offbeat relationship with Catherine, a woman from the East who is fleeing an unhappy marriage. Jay kidnaps Catherine on his way to rob a train and together they travel through the Wyoming Territory. Catherine a railroad agent, Catherine and Jay fall in love. 
	Jay Grobart - “There was no feeling in Grobart for what lay ahead of him and Charlie, and of the other two men he'd involved in his plan, but a cold despair. He felt the same way about unpleasant jobs many times, in the Army years. But he had never allowed his feelings to interfere with a campaign.”
	Catherine Crocker - “Catherine Crocker finished strapping the bulging carpetbag to her gelding's saddle and glanced around once more to be sure no one was watching her prepare her escape....Let Willard bellow and weep, as he often did when he was angry. Nothing he could do would matter. She'd find work, she'd hide, she'd keep running until she fell off the world's edge rather than give in and relive her morning's humiliation.”
	Willard Crocker - “...a big handsome man with a soft face and an agressive manner....”consulting mining engineer....see here., Laschance, there's more here than meets the eye. My wife has been kidnapped?'”
	Chief Washakie - “He sat waiting to give audience like a king....He was old; incredibly old and wrinkled, but still straigt.....His face, very broad at the jaw, with a wide mouth, was like supple, worn leather drawn smooth over stone. His hooded eyes were slow moving and faded, but awake and keen; intelligent and curious.”
	Cat Dancing - “'Cat was their last cub; the child of their old age, and their pet....She was the pet of the whole fort, I guess.....When Cat laughed, everybody liked her.....I could see she was going to be ----beautiful,. I had to get her out of there, away from the lice, and her father's cough, and what was waiting for her in a couple of years. So I bought her.'”