Rating: 4/5

'Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived.'
('Hurrah!')
'Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it. Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.'
('Hurrah!')
'Why died I not from the womb? Why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly? ... For now should I have lain still and been quiet. I should have slept: then had I been at rest!'
('Hurrah!')
'There the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the oppressor ... The small and the great are there; and the servant is free from his master. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul?'

The main strengths in Thomas Hardy's novel in my opinion :

1) The faithful account of a series of misgivings, unhappy tidings, premonitions, and favourable signs in the romantical relationship between the main characters.

2) The adept exploration of something akin to the friendzone, this giant euphemism for a zone not a trifle friendly, with affixed escapism in the unrequited lover. Thomas Hardy is certainly articulate with this.
 

3) How Hardy informs a deeply disturbing relationship between cousins from two estranged branches of the same family.
				
 
4) Sue's character and its complexity : contrary, whiny, elusive, whimsical, taunting, teasing and at times quite painful with Jude. 
Their relationship is a manipulative relationship on spiritual grounds.

5) The apt hints at Suzanne's masochism :

p.127 : 
'no man short of a sensual savage - will molest a woman by day or night, at home or abroad, unless she invites him. Until she says by a look "Come on", he is always afraid to, and if you never say it, or look it, he never comes.'  
Disturbing apologics of rape? Also, Sue takes entire responsability for a former admirer... Twisted.

p.150-151 : 
'Women were different from men in such matters. Was it that they were, instead of more sensitive, as reputed, more callous, and less romantic; or they were more heroic? Or was Sue simply so perverse that she wilfully gave herself and him pain for the odd and mournful luxury of practising long-suffering in her own person, and of being touched with tender pity for him at having made him practise it?'

Also, Sue is contradictory at best :

p.151 : 
'Her actions were always unpredictable: why should she not come? (...) His supper still remained spread; and going to the front door, and softly setting it open, he returned to the room and sat as the watchers sit on Old Midsummer eves, expecting the phantom of the Beloved.
Jude making terms, excellent elucidation of the process in forlorn lovers.
 
All above accounting for Hardy's tourmented view on women at best.

6) The excellent depictions of settings and their mergure with dreams and memories.

7) How Jude, devious and insincere, shows a fair deal of self-deceit :

p.185 : 
'Ah - it isn't true!' she said with gentle resentment. 'You are teasing me - that's all- because you think I am not happy'
[Jude:]'I don't know, I don't wish to know.'

8) Then, after many flourishes and much mystery, how they both act like dallying sissies.

Sue observes artful silences on her motives... She seems stangely contrived and dubious with duplicity, or is it duality?

9) How Jude is excessively judgemental. A study in progress on the wrongness of always being the Rightful One. How Jude broods and bear obvious grudges to Sue. Self-imposing, agravating, judgemental, devious and mean.

p.185... 
OK, I revise my opinion : Suzanne does seem torn apart by inner conflict between her legal bond and her involvement with Jude.

10) How all this is rooted in a past attachment with a student... 
Sue undertook responsability for an admirer... We learn about this past relationship with a former enamoured friend driven to suicide... quite dodgy.

11) Thomas Hardy dabs some brilliant insights of feminine psychology :

p.211 : 
'I have sometimes thought, since your marrying Phillotson because of a stupid scandal, that under the affectation of independent views you are enslaved to the social code as any woman I know'
'Not mentally. But I haven't the courage of my views, as I said before. I didn't marry him alotogether because of the scandal. But sometimes a woman's love of being loved gets the better of her conscience, and though she is agonised at the thought of treating a man cruelly, she encourages him to love her while she doesn't love him at all. Then, when she sees him suffering, her remorse sets in, and she does what she can to repair the wrong'

p.313 :
'At first I did not love you Jude; that I own. When I first knew you I merely wanted you to love me. I did not exactly flirt with you, but that inborn craving which undermines some women's morals almost more than unbridled passion - the craving to attract and captivate, regardless of the injury it may do to the man - was in me; and when I found I had caught you, I was frightened. And then - I don't know how it was - I coulndn't bear to let you go - possibly to Arabella again - and so I got to love you, Jude. But you see, however fondly it ended, it began in the selfish and cruel wish to make your heart ache for me without letting mine ache for you.'

12) Good point, thoroughly and apt study on contrary natures : 

p.226 : 
'Apart from ourselves, and our unhappy peculiarities, it is foreign to a man's nature to go on loving a person when he is told that he must and shall be that person's lover. There would be a much likelier chance of his doing if he were told not to love."

I find a parallelism to be made with the story of the engraver of the Ten Commandments, falling alsleep, then, awakening to find a man engraving them, but contrariwise : 
'Thou shall kill, thou shall covet your neighbour's wife...'

p.286 : 
'It is a difficult question, my friends, for any young man - that question I had to grapple with, and which thousands are weighing at the present moment in these uprising times - whether to follow uncritically the track he finds himself in, without considering his aptness for it, or to consider what his aptness or bent may be, and reshape his course accordingly. I tried to do the latter, and I failed. But I don't admit that my failure proved my view to be a wrong one, or that my success would have made it a right one; though that's how we appraise such attempts nowadays - I mean, not by their essential soundness, but by their accidental outcomes. If I had ended by becoming like one of these gentlemen in red and black that we saw dropping in here by now, everybody would have said : 'See how wise that young man was, to follow the bent of his nature!' But having ended no better than I began, they say : 'See what a fool that fellow was in following a freak of his fancy!'

13) The harmony of foreshadowing, echoes and mirroring in the plot. 

e.g. The melancholy when Sue and Jude reenact the mariage between Sue and Phillotson... 

e.g. Jude's and Sue's second marriages with their betrothed.

e.g The disconsolate echoes in time and places when Jude haunts ancient haunts.
Also, it is curious how the world hardly moves around Sue and Jude : Vilbert the quack doctor, Mrs Edlin the widow friend of Mrs Fawley still alive and kicking at the end of the day.

14) True-to-life, heart-rending depiction and understanding of sadness. 

See the exquisite pain in Jude raving mad at suffering :
"I don't care which! Say cherry brandy . . . Sue has served me badly, very badly. I didn't expect it of Sue! I stuck to her, and she ought to have stuck to me. I'd have sold my soul for her sake, but she wouldn't risk hers a jot for me. To save her own soul she lets mine go damn!... But it isn't her fault, poor little girl - I am sure it isn't!"

15) Writing style remarkable, and figures not heavy-handed.

Now, THE CONS :

- Brutal twists and turns in the characters quite unaccountable... before (in Altbricksham) and after (in Christminster) their elopement, when they are not speaking to score points on duty or morals... Honestly, I can't make these two extremes meet in so short a span with no intermission whatsoever.

--------

Also, Jude the Obscure has numerous siblings in world literature :

*Jude the Obscure is Le Désespéré's fake twin. Unlike Léon Bloy's heroin, at first, Suzanne is not a devout, prostrate woman. Well. Not only. At any rate, Sue is not meek and subdued.

*Jude the Obscure is brother-in-laws with Crime and Punishment. Raskolnikov and Jude are both dashing, something of a self-taught man dissatisfied with their status, audacious, both acquainted at some point with alcohol. Both harvest deeply ingrained contradictions. And both contemplate an idea impossible to fulfill. 
 
*Sue is besties with Holly Golightly from Breakfast at Tiffany's.

*Jude is forefather to Jurgis, the wretched worker in The Jungle by Upton Sinclair.

Matching Soundtrack :
Epitaph - King Crimson

Read in the Wordsworth Edition 1995, 2013