Rating: 5/5

A celebrity detective had a traumatic childhood in Shanghai which left him an orphan sent back to live and grow in 1920s and 1930s England, where he also feels drawn, to a degree, to another orphan. This book is about his childhood, his detective years, his singular obsession and several follies, as his world is consumed with solving the ultimate crime of his childhood!

I don't even know where to start! After very much enjoying reading Never Let Me Go and The Remains of the Day and then been undeniably unimpressed with The Buried Giant, I was worried this book wouldn't deliver, but by Golly it truly does! From Ishiguro's exquisite skill of building historical stories and places around first person narrators and their thoughts, with only a passing nod to descriptive sentences of environments to his way of capturing the heart, and dark soul, of the British Empire without preaching, and by just telling a story. With all his immense literary flair he never detracts from the idea that he is also telling a story, and is one of those great writers who can plant such subtle seeds of foreshadowing that you didn't realise you read them, 'til the third or fourth act!

The ongoing theme of orphans which wields its way through the book is mesmerising as it's heartbreaking. Some of the secondary characters despite have so few pages dedicated to them, leap out of the page with how well conceived they are. My praise is endless. I've read a few literary reviews who accuse Ishiguro of giving the character his own 'voice' the same one used in Remains of the Day; for me it's the voice of early 20th Century England and it rings true.

I should probably mention that most of the book is set in the last days of the British Empire's meddling in Shanghai, and before the rise of Communism, but as ever with Ishiguro, despite these events being world changing, it's character, and story that lead. GENIUS. FIVE STAR READ. 10 out of 12. I can see why there's never been an adaption, how could film ever replicate the beautiful nuances of this almost perfect story?

2020 read