Rating: 3/5

Quite amusing if a bit over the top.

The heroine is a poor orphan, rescued by Sir Peregrine to look after his beloved dog, Duke. It turns out she is his illegitimate daughter.

His relatives are very greedy and are mean to her. They cant wait for sir Peregrine to die so they can divide his estate amongst themselves.

The heroine meets the Hero, a neighbor of Sir P when he is invited to dinner. Since the heroine is very pretty, the Hero is immediately besotted. He feels bad that she is constantly humiliated by her relatives and tries to defend her. He knows she is concerned for her future and tries to set her up as his mistress. He knows she is illegitimate so, being an aristocrat, he cant offer marriage.

She is offended and refuses. The Hero is proud and not used to rejection, so he tries to forget her, but its a futile effort. 

When Sir P dies, there is a reading of the will and his estate and most of his money is left to the heroine. He does have a notable collection of diamonds that he leaves to his dog duke. His other relatives can only inherit the diamonds upon the death of the dog. So now the heroine fears for the life of her pet since she knows how grasping and greedy the relatives are.

She is convinced to go to Bath and try to find a husband there. There are many cute scenes when she finds a young boy to look after Duke, and the boy and dog become best friends. Some of her nasty relatives find her in Bath and make trouble for her, but the Hero saves her from scandal.

He really is quite smitten even if he has be fighting against it. The young boy and rhe dog run away and the Hero helps the heroine try to find them. When they have to seek shelter from the rain the Hero suddenly cannot help himself anymore and proposes marriage. The heroine is happy to accept and they happily go back to Bath with the little boy and Duke.

However the heroine overhears something that convinces her that the Hero is marrying her under duress and breaks the engagement. Several months pass and other events happen before the misunderstanding is cleared up and they have their HEA.

A light and amusing read.