Rating: 4/5

And this is another re-read for me that again, has me delighted. I reacquainted with bits that felt the same and then other parts that I appreciated differently this go-around.

The story itself dives into the madcap Regency Romp because the mover and shaker at the center of it is a spoiled, naive, willful girl whose only consideration is her end-goal. She wants to marry the 'boy next door' who has gone a-soldiering and she is the daughter of a soldier so she can't abide by her guardian grandfather's strictures about her choice. She is young, but suspects the 'wait until your older' bit is a ploy to make her forget. And Amanda isn't having that.

But before Amanda is introduced onto the scene in her scene-stealing manner, there is Sir Garreth Ludlow who has shocked his family by deciding to take a bride after eight years of mourning the love of his life, his fiancee. He has chosen Lady Hester Theale. They are friends and have been acquainted for years. When he travels up to her family estate to pop the question, he encounters minx Amanda the runaway who has a plan to get her soldier and his chivalry won't allow him to turn his back knowing she can and will find all sorts of mischief and maybe danger.

Hester has determined to refuse Garreth. Nobody in her family can figure out why since Sir Garreth is a prize and beyond that he is a worthy and kind man. Hester has her reasons and in her quiet way will not be coerced into changing her mind. But then Garreth shocks them all and descends on them with a beautiful young lady who may or may not be the child of a friend like he claims. Amanda herself is headstrong and vivacious, but Hester trusts Garreth and believes his truthful tale of how he came to be in company with Amanda.

From then on, Amanda leads them all on a crazy wild adventure that has some interesting end results.

Alright, this one should be read as pure comedy. No sense taking it seriously or one will get frustrated really quickly. It's a delightful entertaining story. Yes, straight up, I admit Amanda wants for a good spanking and was spoiled rotten, but she is also a creative bit of work by the author to also make her winsome and adorable, too. Garreth is the enigmatic, yet cunning hero who is the only one who sees through Amanda and wins her admiration for besting her several times. Hester is likeable and has a fairy quality to her that keeps her a bit apart from the world around her. It's her defense mechanism to her domineering family since she is not a bold sort. 

The story is a journey adventure type so there are many encounters with quirky and colorful characters. The author painted them well. Just as she kept the reader guessing at just how wild Amanda's schemes could get. The historical setting, sparkling dialogue, and situation enhanced things.

This was my first encounter with Sian Phillips, the narrator. As I said, there are many characters in and out of the story behind the main three and they were done so well. Ms. Phillips voice is husky so she did male voices well, but she had flexibility so that gentle, harsh, lower class, upper, town, village, etc were all there in her accents. Humor was a strength with her timing and conveyance of emotional tone. I would definitely listen to more of her stories.

All in all, this was a fantastic reunion and has bumped this story up in my estimation of favorite Heyer reads. Those who enjoy sweet, light Regency Romantic Romps should give this a go.