Rating: 4/5

This was great. Definitely among JB’s best work. 

It has a lot of similarities to her other books, Notorious Angel (which is one of my all-time favourites by her) and Golden Fancy, but Lorna waffles a lot less than either Eleanora or Serena. Lorna and Ramon’s conflicts are also more ideological (we’ll get to this) and based on their own fears of reading too much into things and being rejected (this is basically your classic one-night-stand romance, but with cage crinolines), rather than the insane misunderstandings that happen in Angel and Fancy.

Lorna and Ramon’s first encounter occurs when Lorna happens on Ramon in his dilapidated former family home while they’re both sheltering in a rainstorm and Lorna decides she’d rather have her first time be with a hot stranger than the gross guy she’s being forced to marry to settle her uncle’s debts. The encounter is both consensual and non-traumatic for Lorna, unlike in Angel, Fancy, and frankly most of JB’a other books and a a result Lorna generally much more comfortable with her sexuality than most of JB’s other heroines, which is nice. 

However, never let it be said JB doesn’t know how to ruin a good thing. Surrender in Moonlight does not a quite reach the levels of insanity achieved by  Southern Rapture and its KKK Batman, but JB does use every opportunity to cram in enough Lost Cause bullshit to make your head explode. In between making whoopie, Lorna and Ramon have several conversations about how the North don’t actually care about black people, they’re just jealous of the “wealth and aristocratic position gained by the south using the slave system.” 

Lorna is a fervent supporter of the confederacy and criticises Ramon for smuggling goods to the southern states through the union blockade for filthy lucre rather than the purity of the cause. His justification is that he believes that there is no way the confederacy will win and he will use the money he makes to buy back his family home. Nevertheless, Ramon does go on at length about how the south is totally justified and slavery is just a “temporary state” and slaves will eventually get replaced with immigrants (which, I guess technically he got that one right). He also ends the book with the revelation that he’s going to join the confederate navy. 

There are also sidebars about how secretly every union (or, as they’re referred to here “federal”) naval officer actually wants to be a blockade runner for the confederacy. The book’s villain, in addition to being a con-man and rapist, is also revealed to be secretly working for the union government. Not for any real reason except that he’s evil and the Union government is evil. 

The villain overall feels like something of an afterthought. He’s less of a malignant presence than in other JB books and just sort of periodically pops up to be gross and menacing and I wish JB had been confident enough to let the story rest on the interpersonal conflict.