Rating: 2/5

The Turkey City Lexicon, a kind of dictionary of specialized critical terms for SF/F workshops, describes a "Steam-Grommet Factory" as a "didactic SF story which consists entirely of a guided tour of a large and elaborate gimmick." Dream Park manages to avoid being this by welding on a mystery plot so that there's something going on besides the guided tour of a futuristic LARP for the benefit of a square who just isn't down with fandom, you dig?

My personal and private dictionary of specialized critical terms contains the phrase "Fandom Tugjob", which I will define as a SF/F story that consists primarily of a defensive justification or glorification of SF/F fandom. Dream Park is not the purest type of Fandom Tugjob (Larry Niven may well have produced that with his collaboration Fallen Angels with Jerry Pournelle and Michael Flynn) but it is fairly close. Well, no matter, that's an artistic flaw, but what of the meat of the book?

The meat of the book, the basic plot, is quite simply this: 

70 years from the writing of the book, LARPing has become big business. All the tools of the theme park engineer's trade, plus widespread holograms, are deployed to produce big-budget LARPs. One of the most expensive ever done will be played out in Dream Park, which we might as well just call Disneyland Plus. However, if the LARP goes well, the film rights, book rights, merchandising, home copies, live recordings, etc. will sell for millions! 

In the midst of this high-stakes activity, an experimental emotion-altering drug has been stolen from Dream Park's research and development laboratories, and a guard was killed in the process. The Dream Park head of security enters the LARP in order to figure out whodunnit.

Meanwhile, the LARP itself consists of a plot where the characters have been sent by the US government to aid in bringing down a group of Papuan magicians who have been magically hijacking planes and ships to aid in the redistribution of "Cargo". Which is to say, it's all about the "Cargo Cult". 

There is a substantial amount to analyze here, in that the racial and body and gender and sexuality politics are all appalling, both by modern standards and, to be completely honest, by the standards of 1981 too. But they are appalling in ways that synchronize oddly with the ostensible subject of the book. There are three characters who are not straight. I can't pin it down any more than that, because the book uses "gay" for men who have romantic and sexual relations with men and women, and it would strain credibility that they are being described as self-defined bisexual gays by the authors. One is depicted as sexually aggressive to the point of predatory behavior. One is an extortionist. One is a murderer.

The women in this book have a moral character that is directly expressed in their body. The cheating Dark Star? Has an obvious muffin top and is described as not sexy, unlike the virtuous Acacia/"Panthesilea" (a relic of older transliteration, I think) who is, of course, a 10 and madly horny for our protagonist, Alex Griffin. Women characters that move away from this standard of pure virtue have less idealized bodies, whether slightly fat, or massively muscular, or overly sexual. And of course, Dark Star is the more dominant partner in her relationship, whereas good women are more submissive. 

Racially, of course, the LARP is about a subaltern uprising that has gone wrong and threatens to go "too far" by replacing egalitarianism with domination. H0-hum, seen that one a million times before, and it being the feature of a role-playing outing rings rather depressingly true even in 2020. We can also note the use of the phrase "hybrid vigor" deployed within internal narration, but perhaps our protagonist is simply rather racist. 

Moving away from the immediate politics, Dream Park runs with an RPG scenario set in 1955. The player characters are all an assortment of Dungeons and Dragons character types with Dungeons and Dragons character names and Dungeons and Dragons classes. (Fighter, Magic-User, Cleric, Thief, Engineer...) There's no acknowledgement that anything might be unusual about this or of character background at all. This was, of course, 1981, and it's not like games such as Runequest, Bunnies and Burrows, En Garde!, etc. all existed and all were being discussed in the APAs and fanzines, all of them emphasizing the importance of setting. 

I'm sarcastic about it, but in a large sense, the entire LARP part of the novel is, essentially, a megabudget version of a D&amp;D/AD&amp;D tournament game as it would have been played in the 70s and 80s. Carrying the same character from game to game, actively adversarial GMing, pure scenario without much thought to roleplaying sine qua roleplaying... It's all right here. Which gives it a second star- it's of historical interest in that regard. 

Beyond that, of course, Dream Park is a novel that was very clearly written by sci-fi writers, in that the LARPing gear consists of real swords and knives and axes with sharp blades that have to be manually disengaged for combat with human actors, and the guns are real guns which have been loaded with blanks. Can you imagine the safety audits? The OSHA inspections? The sheer quantity of accidental injuries and deaths? And then you have the part where the Haunted Mansion equivalent ride has, on the maximum intensity level, fake holographic visitors who get graphically killed by the ghouls and ghosties of the scenario. To make the experience more real. 

The prose and characterization are about as flat and lifeless as you can imagine from someone who got his start as a writer promising to reject the New Wave of science fiction back in the 60s and someone else who was a novice to long-form fiction at the time. 

If you want to read a novel about the amusing peccadilloes of fandom as seen from a semi-outsider, wherein role-playing games play a critical plot role... read Sharyn McCrumb's Bimbos of the Death Sun.