Rating: 4/5

The Armageddon Rag is very unexpected and quite good. It was sold to me as some kind of SF, but even if we expand that as "speculative fiction", it's a bit of false advertising. It's more a mixture of a road movie and a discussion of the late 60s/early 70s clash between the US mainstream and the hippie/rock/LSD counterculture in the US. The very few fantasy elements can be sufficiently explained by drugs and unreliable narrators - nothing dramatically at odds with normal reality happens.

On the face the book mostly deals with the fictitious band "The Nazgûl", with their early history during the hippie era told largely in the form of interviews and retrospectives making up most of the first part of the novel, while their comeback tour (in the 80s, the nominal "present" the novel is set in) forms the heart of the second half. The story is told from the perspective of former journalist and now writers-block-hampered novelist Sandy Blair, who was asked to write a story about the bloody ritualistic murder of the former manager of the Nazgûl, and eventually becomes hired as the PR manager for their comeback tour. 

The book is certainly competently crafted and written - indeed, sometimes it feels a bit over-engineered and over-polished. The middle part is a bit slow, but on the other hand, the somewhat repeated use of (supposed) Nazgûl lyrics and the description of their various performances, past and present, really got into my head, and it felt like I was there with them when HE'S COMING!

I don't know how much GRRM relied on his own experience, but he was born 1948, so he was 19 in 1968, the year when Martin Luther King and Bobby Kennedy were murdered and the Chicago Police Department violently attacked demonstrators during the National Democratic Convention, and 20 when Woodstock happened. It certainly feels to a certain degree as if he is eager to present his own perspective on the events of that time.

Overall, an interesting and worthwhile read, if only to experience a very different George R.R. Martin. Not my kind of literature, but I have no regrets.