Rating: 5/5

‘Nostromo’ is the best illustration of the Resource Curse I’ve ever come across, although the phrase probably didn’t exist when Conrad was writing. It refers to countries that have plentiful natural resources and weak governance as a result of rapacious colonialism, so suffer from political instability and chronic corruption. Nigeria is a commonly cited example. In ‘Nostromo’, Conrad invents a South American country with a history of revolutions and dictatorships, centring his narrative on a silver mine. The concession on the mine belongs to a white man named Gould who was born there, a second or third generation coloniser. The novel proceeds at a dilatory pace to show how obsession with mining the silver overtakes not only Gould but everyone in any contact with the mine’s affairs. And because the mine brings in such wealth, its affairs touch everyone. Although I doubt they were intended, there are definite Marxist subtexts of class struggle and commodity fetishism. 

‘Nostromo’ greatly reminded me of a Greek tragedy in which the gods have been replaced by capitalism. It is clear from the beginning that the souls and lives of the characters will be claimed by their great deity, silver. While the plot is full of tension, this is sustained by inexorable threat rather than uncertainty. It isn’t so much a matter of who will be destroyed as how. Romantic love, however passionate, always ends up taking second place to the prospect of wealth. Conrad’s pitiless depiction of imperialist capitalism recalls Zola, although unlike Germinal ‘Nostromo’ doesn’t drag the reader down into the mine itself. The mine’s destructiveness is existential rather than physical. Although it unleashes extensive political violence, the horror of actually getting silver out of the earth remains unseen.
 
It took me at least a hundred pages to get into ‘Nostromo’, due to lengthy scene-setting and non-linear narrative. Some of the most exciting and dramatic events are told second hand through a sailor’s chatty anecdotes. Events slowly gather an extraordinary momentum, seemingly external to the characters involved. Nostromo himself is a very distinctive individual, yet it seems unlikely that his personal involvement actually changed the course of events. Similarly, the sudden death of Decoud did not prevent his idea of independence becoming reality. At first I appreciated the rich texture of the writing and atmospheric description, while struggling to grasp who was who and what was happening. Once that had been established, I read more than 300 pages in a day and was totally fascinated by the political and personal machinations. Conrad has a subtle dramatic flair that richly rewards the reader’s patience. I haven’t found myself so immersed in a novel for several months. 
 
Given other Conrad fiction I’ve read, I wasn’t surprised to find a certain amount of sexism, racism, and antisemitism in the narrative, however the way it manifested was actually quite interesting. The characters who aren’t white men are mostly critiqued via generalisation, while the white men are critiqued with harsh specificity for their individual greed, obsessiveness, pride, cowardice, or foolhardiness. Conrad focuses mercilessly on the flaws of his characters; he is the antithesis of Victor Hugo in this respect. He shows how the silver mine brings out the worst in everyone, rich or poor, man or woman, white or black, politician or worker. Yet, like Greek tragedy, ‘Nostromo’ doesn’t preach. The reader can claim no moral superiority over the characters, whose actions evoke understanding, even sympathy, given the context. This makes the novel all the more powerful as a condemnation of capitalist imperialism and its politics. I’m so glad that I finally got round to reading ‘Nostromo’. While these lines of Mrs. Gould’s don’t end the book, they make a fitting conclusion:

An immense desolation, the dread of her own continued life, descended upon the first lady of Sulaco. With a prophetic vision she saw herself surviving alone the degradation of her young ideals of life, of love, of work - all alone in the Treasure House of the World. The profound, blind suffering expression of a painful dream settled on her face with its closed eyes. In the indistinct voice of an unlucky sleeper, lying passive in the toils of a merciless nightmare, she stammered out aimlessly the words - 
“Material interests.”