Rating: 5/5

Few books are more raw, real of visceral than a good oral history. The voices, the emotions - even so long after the fact - are still so heartfelt and close to the surface. And certainly nothing is more authentic than stories told "in their own words:" and so the Marines here sounds like Marines - intelligent, dangerous yet unfailingly polite; the sailors curse like sailors; the diplomats and politicians sound depressingly like dips and pols; the children sound so heartbreakingly like children…

I've read other excellent such books on WWI (The Last of the Doughboys: The Forgotten Generation and Their Forgotten World War), WWII (Voices of the Pacific: Untold Stories from the Marine Heroes of World War II) and black soldiers in Vietnam (Bloods: Black Veterans of the Vietnam War: An Oral History), and so Tears Before the Rain is an excellent - if thoroughly depressing - addition to this shelf.* That said, however, it tells a much smaller story than any of those books. Tears doesn't address the Vietnam War as a whole, but - as the title spells out - focuses solely on the event-filled month of April 1975 (from the fall of Danang until the fall of Saigon) and its aftermath: the occupation of Saigon; the people who escaped (and suffered so horribly at the hands of both Thai pirates and uncaring neighboring countries), and those left behind (including the far-too-many mixed race "GI kids" who were - and continue to be - seen as outcasts by both North and South).

The first two-thirds of the book focuses on the Americans, and so we get the same stories - the crash of the "Operation Babylift" flight, the cutting down of the embassy tree, the deaths of Corporals McMahon and Judge (the last two U.S. servicemen killed in Vietnam) during a rocket attack on Tân Sơn Nhứt airport, the massive (and massively unorganized) helicopter evacuation - repeatedly told from different perspectives. But this repetition makes these tales even more impactful, while also highlighting how people's memories (or self-interests) can be so different. As always, at the highest levels everyone blames everyone else - the CIA blames the defense department who blames the ambassador who blames everybody except himself, (and of everyone interviewed here, former Ambassador Graham Martin comes off as the most pompous ass in the bunch). But thankfully we're given numerous other viewpoints as well - the remaining (and overworked) military contractors; the civilian doctors and nurses; the various print and TV media; the overwhelmed U.S. Fleet personnel who received and processed both the U.S. and Vietnamese evacuees, (and who famously then pushed the unloaded helicopters into the Pacific so that others could land). 

The rest of the book then looks at (or more correctly, listens to) a sampling of those Vietnamese who survived - both North and South, powerful and poor, young and old, rescued and left behind - all of whose stories are varying degrees of heartbreaking. 

That's not to say there are no heroes here. Of particular note are the commercial flight crews who risked their lives flying in and out of combat zones to evacuate soldiers, civilians and children alike; and especially the doctors and nurses of the Saigon Adventist hospital, each of whom legally "adopted" 50-60 Vietnamese so that they could evacuate them as dependents. And of course, it helps to be reading this book nearly 35 years after its publication with the knowledge that as we approach the golden anniversary of the events described here, we can safely look back and say that Vietnam is a radically different - and "better" - country today than it was back then. Vietnam is currently not only considered a safe investment alternative to China, but even seen in Washington as "a potential U.S. ally," with every president since Bill Clinton having visited Hanoi, (Biden himself went less than two months ago).

And yet - what have we learned from this history; from any of our many mistakes here? Ultimately, the main theme in this book is that of chaos; that despite having "plans in place" for the fall of Saigon - bus schedules, pickup points, prioritized lists of evacuees - every one of these quickly turned to shit in the face of actual events.** And so how could we have expected anything else when we watched the same thing happen again in the 2021 "Fall of Kabul," following another well-intentioned but failed intervention (that ironically replaced Vietnam as "America's longest war")? ***

I'm sure there will be - or already are - similar oral histories of America's most recent adventures in Central Asia. But if so, I don't think I'm ready for them yet...maybe give me another twenty years. Meanwhile, this book - while now more "history" than "current events" - still deserves a wider audience, both as a tragic tale of geopolitical hubris, and as a (most likely unheeded) warning against the next time.
___________________________________

* Although such books don't necessarily have to be non-fiction. Probably the most famous fiction oral history is World War Z, although War of the Worlds: Global Dispatches is also very good.

** See "No plan survives first contact with the enemy;" Helmuth von Moltke.

*** See "Those who fail to learn the lessons of history are doomed to repeat them;" George Santayana. See also "We have met the enemy and he is us;" Pogo.