Rating: 3/5

Cade has just moved back to Halifax and finds himself gawking at a photo of the girl he loved when he was 16 and she broke his heart - but now she's a married woman with two lovely daughters. He realizes he's never really gotten Lori out of his system and that she still consumes his thoughts. Fortunately, he runs into her and learns that she's changed - Lori's not the spoiled, selfish young heiress who treated his heart like garbage. Now, she's a ex-wife, living paycheck to paycheck to raise her daughters on her own and she's all the better for it. But Cade wants to be a part of her life, to help her to make love to her and to enjoy time with her and her daughters. Unfortunately, Lori's youngest, Liddy, wants her father back - she wants nothing to do with him. And Lori wants a full-on commitment, with intimacy and sharing of past secrets, something Cade is wary of, despite how much he wants Lori in his life. 

Not bad, but coming from Charlotte Lamb's "Man Talk" installment to this one was kind of a let down. This one has your classic second chance story, but I like how Lori admits she'd been a rich bitch and seems envious of how much Cade improved himself - so they sort of switch places with Cade becoming rich and Lori becoming poor. But I also like that Cade goes from hate to admiration for her new personality. The beginning part with the reconciliation and Lori's awkwardness (almost mean) with Cade getting in some good hits - that was excellently done. It was just the right amount of angst with Cade coming out ahead but realizing after he felt like crap because of it and not having a chance to get to know her. The second half of this where Cade and Lori negotiate their relationship, what it means and how to work in sex and dating around her kids (and Cade is obsessed with sex once he's got it - every other sentence is, "call the babysitter")...that's where the story started to lose me. Lori gets all hard core "we need to share everything" and says if he isn't going to talk about his childhood they shouldn't even bother being together. She got pretty annoying actually. And Cade's responses weren't very guy-like... in fact, that's something that wasn't very "Man Talk" about this story. It didn't necessarily feel like Cade's was a unique perspective...no more so than if we'd gotten his POV in any other story. One thing I did enjoy, that was pretty refreshing, was that Liddy did not warm up to Cade. You don't usually see kids hating on the hero, unless they're meant to be complete and total brats, and Liddy isn't. She's sympathetic even as she's grumping up on Cade and whining for her father. This was a pretty good story, but nothing spectacular for this series. I'm wondering if the first story in this series was the only special one...