Rating: 4/5

This hardboiled 1941 novel about an entrepreneurial single mom trying to secure a better life for her and her two daughters during the Depression surpassed my expectations. 

Everyone probably knows the 1945 film noir classic, which won Joan Crawford the best actress Oscar. (The novel was also adapted into an acclaimed five-part miniseries in 2011 starring Kate Winslet.) 

What I didn't realize was how different the book is, and not just because of the more overt depictions of pre-martial sex and the suggestion of abortion, which wouldn't have got by the film censors back in the 1940s. 

Even though the general characters remain the same, many plot points, including a major one (which I won't spoil), were altered to fit into a two-hour movie. 

The Depression-era setting resonates strongly today. At the beginning, housewife Mildred (much younger than Crawford was) earns some pocket money by selling cakes and pies to neighbours. But when her unemployed husband Bert leaves her, she has no way to make the mortgage payments on their Glendale (an unfashionable L.A. suburb) home, and has to pound the pavement looking for a job.

The detail James M. Cain puts into these early passages is illuminating. Mildred's refusal to work as a waitress or cleaning lady tells you a lot about her character. (She has no work experience, and doesn't type, but she vaguely thinks she'd like to be a receptionist, which the employee agency women basically laugh at.)

The book really comes alive when Mildred, while at a restaurant, witnesses the firing of a waitress. Suddenly she has to decide whether she's going to step in to support her two daughters, or starve. In a way, this book provides as valuable a snapshot of urban social hierarchies as more literary novels like Sister Carrie.

Dissertations could be written on the role of women and work in this book. Mildred's rise from waitress to restaurant owner, and the women she chooses to bring up with her (chatty neighbour Lucy, fellow waitress Ida), is fascinating. So is Mildred's daughter Veda's desire for the easy life. (Veda is ashamed of Mildred's work, even though it helps pay for her bills.) 

There's also some shrewd commentary about the fashionable, high-society set. Mildred's run-in with the dashing Monte, a playboy, affects her life – for good and bad. And I wasn't prepared for so much writing about classical music; in the book Veda is an aspiring pianist and then singer. Cain, a great lover of classical music (which features in three of his novels), has great fun with a couple of music teachers (California at the time was a haven for many gifted émigré artists who had left the old country for the new). He knew what he was writing about.

Mildred is a strong, if not very deep or introspective, character. Like Scarlett O'Hara, you admire her because of her hard work. And yet you also can't help but pity her because of how she's being used by those around her. And there are some intriguing passages where Cain describes her listening to music; she's not an aesthete, but so what? She's still worthy of respect.

Without the big plot device added to the film, Cain twists the story in some unlikely ways near the end. There are also a few over-the-top words and phrases that may have seemed tough and hardboiled in the 1940s but today seem laughable. When one woman says she's been "on the town" I had to read the passage a couple of times to understand the sexual innuendo. Elsewhere, Cain repeatedly likens a woman's large breasts to "the dairy," which was unfortunate. I was also a little shocked to see the word "fag" used as a put-down of an effeminate man.

But details like that make reading a period novel so interesting. I'm definitely going to look up some more Cain, like The Postman Always Rings Twice and the novel that inspired one of the noir-est of noir movies, Double Indemnity.