Rating: 4/5

Ahoy, calling all fans of historical fiction! This first book in Patrick O'Brian's popular series about a captain in the Royal Navy during the Napoleonic Wars was a surprising delight.

I say surprising because even though I had seen some great reviews of it by fellow Goodreaders, I was intimidated to read it out of fear of the nautical jargon. I listened to this on audio (narrated by the excellent Simon Vance) and I was glad I also had a print copy handy so I could look up some terms. My edition had a nice illustration of a square-rigged ship, which showed the difference between a flying jib, a fore topsail, a mizzen staysail, etc., and some of those terms were helpful in understanding the action during the battle scenes.

But before I scare you away from this novel with any more references to jibs and mainsails, let's go back to the beginning. The story opens in 1800 with lieutenant Jack Aubrey at a music concert in Port Mahon, Minorca, where he has the bromance version of a "meet cute" with physician Stephen Maturin. At first the two men detest each other, but after Jack learns he's been promoted to commander of the ship Sophie, he's so upbeat that when he runs into Stephen again, they become friends and bond over music. Jack impulsively asks Stephen to join his crew and be the ship's surgeon, and that is the beginning of a beautiful friendship that apparently lasts 20 books.

Stephen is not a member of the British navy, and thank goodness for that. He is a brilliant physician and naturalist, but his ignorance of nautical matters means that Jack and the other crew members are always explaining things to him (and to us poor readers). My favorite parts of the book were the conversations between Jack and Stephen, Stephen's outsider perspective on all things naval, and the different battle strategies used at sea.

O'Brian has a good sense of humor, and I frequently laughed out loud while listening. Fans of the movie "Master and Commander: Far Side of the World" should know that the movie plot follows the story of later books in the series, so this first book doesn't have much in common with it. But if you enjoyed the movie, as I did, and it whetted your appetite for the first stage of friendship between Jack and Stephen, then you should beat to quarters and get yourself a copy of this book.