Rating: 3/5

⭐️⭐️⭐️ (2.5?) it’s okay-ish. ? I’m conflicted on my feelings.

✨Southern Plantation Setting
✨Pirates of the Gulf 🌴 
✨LOTS OF DRAMA 👀 
✨RAPE ⚠️ 
✨Side Character Stories (DRAMA)
✨Enemies to Lovers 
✨MISCOMMUNICATION 🙄 
✨REVENGE PLOT

I went into this book knowing nothing. 0% knowledge. I usually spend my summers bouncing back and forth from pirate tropical romances to medieval smut. This book has PIRATE 🏴‍☠️ in the title and the original copy has the beautiful PIRATE 🏴‍☠️ illustration on the book cover. So imagine my shock when I realized this is a southern plantation romance- and not really a pirates at sea romance. 

⚠️ more pirates on land plot? 😂

I never read vintage novels in this setting or time period. It’s just not my cup of tea. Normally I wouldn’t read a story inside the Southern themed setting- but the first chapter starts off with such a bang 💥literally- pirate 🏴‍☠️ attack on a ship at sea and a violent battle on the ship and a brutal 👀 gang rape on the maiden aboard said ship. 

This entire sea battle scene kicks off the revenge story plot for the entire book. Now a MMC who is seeking revenge on the pirate who tried to OFF him and who brutally raped his fiancé doesn’t make for a good hero in a romance novel. As the chapters flowed (and there for awhile I couldn’t put the book down 🍿) and the story started getting more and more interesting- I was thinking this was going to be more REVENGE plot and less of a romance- and I was ok with that! 

The rape victim was put in a sort of asylum ? Under the care of doctors trying to bring her out of a “daze” from her attack. She mentally checked out after chapter 1. 

Her gentleman fiancé undergoes a fake pirate persona to hunt down the pirate that attacked them. He moves himself and his younger unmarried sister to the Gulf and wins a plantation. His whole personality is REVENGE. Again- I was thinking this would be more historical fiction than historical romance. Where he just hunts down and fights this pirate. 

MMC learns that this villainous pirate is working with a white woman in an illegal slave smuggling operation. So he buries himself, like a tick, into the society of New Orleans. He starts “dating” said white woman and hunting the pirate down. 

All of it sounds really thrilling right? HISTORICAL THRILLER VIBES! There in the beginning- I literally couldn’t put the book down. It was giving BLACK SAILS vibes! Which if you know me- is one of my favorite TV shows. I’m a sucker for pirates! 

The MMC goes on to win a plantation and this is where we are introduced to the FMC. She is the eldest daughter. Her parents have died. Her elder brother has died. And her drunk Uncle has lost their family home in a card game to the MMC. She is now under the care of the MMC- because he owns her home. 

I was a little like eh how can he fall in love with a new woman when he’s actively revenging the other woman he loved. I always hate when these vintage romances go in this direction. Where the MMC loves another woman in the beginning but falls for a new woman later on. I’m like 🥴.. it takes away from the great overall romance. 

But MMC Adam + FMC Luanne had a 1000% enemies to lovers vibe. They pretty much hate each other the entire read. 😂 So I enjoyed their bickering.. until I didn’t. 

They end up fucking around in their angry hatred passion- which is SO Bridgerton TV drama. Again.. these books have so much Netflix series potential. They angry fuck around- which leads to Luanne becoming pregnant. 

Adam is also courting the villain white woman running the illegal slave trade with the pirate in hopes to bring them both down.. and kill the pirate .. (while side fucking Luanne) when he finds out Luanne is pregnant. 

OUTRAGED by what he believes is entrapment. He feels forced to marry Luanne. He believes the worst in her now- thinking she used him to get pregnant and force a marriage upon him in hopes to stay on and keep her ancestral home.

Now married.. it has fumbled his revenge plans somewhat. 

The whole plot from here goes from revenge plot to miscommunication plot. This is where I start growing frustrated with the romance. If this would have been more focused on the revenge plot, idk, maybe I would have enjoyed it more? But I grew overly tired of the constant argument between MMC + FMC. They argue the entire book. In true bodice ripper fashion, it all could have been solved with a basic conversation. 🙄 like if he would have explained himself. Told the FMC about the sea attack and his victim ex fiancee. All this could have been avoided? 

FMC Luanne doesn’t find out anything - they literally don’t have the communication until the last few pages of the read. 🥲 

I’m not a miscommunication girlie. I’m like ? Why don’t yall just TALK IT OUT. 

On top of this, there was some cringe stuff. Again- I think it goes without saying that bodice rippers can be cringe 😬 in writing or plot - and problematic! So ya know go into it knowing that. But this book has some icky plot twists.

Like the rape victim.. who I thought in the beginning would be the FMC.. waking up normal from her mental state and falling in love with her doctor. Gave me major ick.

Also 💀 there in the end.. the MMC “takes” his FMC wife while under his mysterious pirate disguise.. she is not aware this is her husband.. again the miscommunication.. because she doesn’t really know anything about the MMC.. 

He fucks her and she likes it. Cheating on her husband 🤔 but not cheating. It’s bizarre. 

And I’m like 🤔 this girl doesn’t know the difference between them? Like it’s the same man and she thinks they are different people. Like wouldn’t you notice their cock being - idk - the same? 😂

I don’t know there were so many weird storylines in this one. I’m just over here laughing writing this review. 

A lot of drama. A lot of storylines happening at once. Between revenge and taking down the villains but also marrying this random girl and fighting with her on the sidelines. Little overwhelming. 

This book started out a 5⭐️ read. Which is WILD because I’m not into southern stories. But I was 💯 down for the thriller drama. I wish it would have scrapped the Luanne storyline and focused on the revenge plot. 

It wasn’t a bad read.. it just got weird.

Overall I read it and it’s another Bobbi Smith book down. Different read for myself. 🤷🏻‍♀️