Rating: 5/5

I enjoyed each and every tale so much with E. Nesbit making occasional forays across the proverbial fourth wall. 

Here is a little something about each one to whet your appetite:
"The Cathood of Maurice" - a mischievous boy switches places with his cat and learns the error of his ways.
"The Mixed Mine" - a magic spyglass bonds two boys from very different backgrounds.
"Accidental Magic" - a boy who loves the mythical stories of old finds himself living inside of one when he falls asleep at Stonehenge.
"The Princess and the Hedgepig" - when a King and Queen try to have a secret christening, there are unintended consequences.
"Septimus Septimussen" - the seventh son of the seventh son goes out to seek his fortune and it takes a very long time giving him time to make some fortunate friends.
"The White Cat" - an heirloom ceramic cat must be preserved at all costs. What to do if it falls?
"Belinda and Bellamont" - cranky bells cause trouble for a prince and princess until a bat comes to the rescue.
"Justnowland" - an ordinary girl finds herself tasked with taming a dragon in a world where all the residents are crows or pigeons depending on their social class.
"The Related Muff" - three children make a snap judgment about their visiting cousin and find themselves regretting it.
"The Aunt and Amabel" - most likely the inspiration for the wardrobe in the spare room in the C.S. Lewis classic.
"Kenneth and the Carp" - a visiting cousin finds himself accused of stealing a family ring. He will need some help from below the surface to make things right.
"The Magicians Heart" - a magician only a nanny could love gets his comeuppance.

A big thank you to my GR friend Cam for bringing this collection to my attention. It was a delight to listen to this magical mix of children, animals, fairies, magicians, and a fair number of royal figures.

There is nothing more luxurious than eating while you read—unless it be reading while you eat. Amabel did both: they are not the same thing, as you will see if you think the matter over.