Rating: 5/5

After reading his treatise I must admit I am a enlightened man of a broader perception, my view on punishment, and the society the society is impacted by it. Beccaria considered a classical criminologist, very logically and analytically explores different forms of crimes sorts them with degree of severity relative to the damaging effects on the society as a whole, and effective means of punishment. He argues that a more immediate punishment is more effective and the certainty of punishment and not the severity of it is a more effective deterrent for prevention. He also argues that the the barbarity of society should dictate the severity of crime, for instance the well established civil society that has been softened by years of it, should reduced the severity of punishment, capital punishment no longer is of great use as the barbarity of the punishment out way the deterrent effect, rather a form of bondage that caries infamy is more effective. He further cautions on the overuse of infamy and effect with progressive evolution of society.

Beccaria was pro prevention and as such I would quote from the introduction that condenses his view.

To prevent crime a society must 1) make sure laws are clear and simple, 2) make sure that the entire nation is united in defense, 3) laws not against classes of men, but of men, 4) men must fear laws and nothing else, 5) certainty of outcome of crime, 6) member of society must have knowledge because enlightenment accompanies liberty, 7) reward virtue, 8) perfect education, and finally 9) direct the interest of the magistracy as a whole to observance rather than corruption of the laws. If this nine principles are followed there would be less of a need to follow the other principles of trial and punishments.
It is interesting in that the United States through the founding fathers was greatly influenced by this essay by Beccaria. Yet in the early days due to the federal nature of the country and being of wild and vast, where the arm of law was stretched, frontiersman sought vigilant justice, relative barbarity prevailed the land. Perhaps that is why capital punishment is still in effect in some state. Nevertheless here are some of the ways U.S constitution was influenced by classical criminologists like Beccaria and Bentham

rules against vagueness, right to public trial, right to be judged by peers, right to dismiss certain jurors, right against unusual punishments, right to speedy trial, right to examine witnesses, coerced or tortured confessions are considered invalid, right to be informed of accused acts and the right to bear arms.

Also I would quote his conclusion in it's entirety.

"I conclude with this reflection, that the severity of punishments ought to be in proportion to the state of the nation. Among a people hardly yet emerged from barbarity, they should be most severe, as strong impressions are required; but, in proportion as the minds of men become softened by their intercourse in society, the severity of punishments should be diminished, if it be intended that the necessary relation between the object and the sensation should be maintained.

From what I have written results the following general theorem, of considerable utility, though not conformable to custom, the common legislator of nations:

That a punishment may not be an act of violence, of one, or of many, against a private member of society, it should be public, immediate, and necessary, the least possible in the case given, proportioned to the crime, and determined by the laws."

See also my my blog post
http://neovatar.blogspot.com/2013/12/...