Rating: 3/5

Someone recently asked me what review I enjoyed writing the most, and, well, this is it:

I have a massive problem with this book. It’s one I’m a little embarrassed to admit. The problem is not with the writing or the characters that Stevenson has created; it’s not even with the plot. The problem resides with Kermit the Frog. (Stay with me here!) I grew up watching the muppets. I became slightly obsessed with them. I kind of wanted to join them. So, whenever I read about Captain Smollett and Long John Silver all I can see is Kermit fighting Tim Curry! 

 

Therefore, I just can’t take this book seriously. Well, at least not completely. The Muppet Treasure Island is such a great film; it’s hilarious. This book was much more serious. The pirates in here aren’t singing toys; they’re hardened criminals that created the pirate stereotype. They’re the sort of men you don’t want on your ship because they’d likely cut your throat in your sleep. They might wake you up first if they’re feeling kind. So, they wouldn’t try and gain your trust by singing you a jolly song about piracy, like Tim and his muppet mates would. 

 

But, muppet based comparison aside, this is a good novel. I did quite enjoy it. It all begins when the young Jim Hawkins comes across a map for buried treasure, except he hasn’t got any money to fund the voyage. He  Gonzo and Rizzo goes alone and seeks the help of  Fozzie Bear  Squire Trelawney. As a member of the Victorian gentry, he takes the map for himself with the intention of filling his own coffers with the loot. He’s not a very nice  bear  guy, and he’s not overly intelligent either. In his frugality he accidently hires a group of twisted  muppets  pirates that, unsurprisingly, mutiny against him. 

This all sounds terrible, I know. But, it’s not all bad because the ship’s captain is none other than  Kermit the Frog  Captain Smollett who is absolutely in love with  Miss Piggy  no one. Indeed, Smollett is in direct contrast to the money driven  Fozzie  Trelawney because he is everything he is not; he is brave and honourable; he is completely true to his word. He is competing, unknowingly, for the attention of Jim. The young boy is looking for a farther figure, and in Silver and Smollett he sees two potential role models, and two potential life choices. 

 

It all works out in the end though because this is a  muppet movie adventure book after all. In all seriousness, it is an exciting book. But, for me, that’s all it is. There are no hidden motives or dark secrets. Everything is straight forward, clean cut and simple. It is a nice easy read. Stevenson’s masterpiece is most definitely  The Strange Case of Doctor Jekyll and Mr Hyde. That’s where the real mystery is at. But, it doesn’t have muppets…..

Facebook| Twitter| Insta| Academia