Rating: 1/5

I did not care for this book was written at all, for several reasons. 
1) The author attempted to make everyone a main character. which cannot be done. By doing so, some character's stories were left incomplete. "Lavergne made for her own car. It wasn't until she climbed in &amp; turned on the ignition that she remembered: Cat never had said why he had come here [ Hillcrest Manor] today." But neither her, nor Cat are mentioned in the book again. Is it implied just because he suggested Hillcrest Manor for Lavergne's charity work that he knew someone there that was terminally ill? 
(Maybe some parts were left open since the book is part of a series?) 
2) In other places, the author bogs the book down with too many details. For example, the scene on the bus: The author could have just had the characters have their conversation, but instead bogged down the paragraph by noting which way the bus was turning, what it passed, etc... 
2) On the cover of the book, Daly is supposed to appear to have the perfect life. Her home life seems hardly ideal with an overcrowded house, &amp; expecting another addition to the family after her father is laid-off from his job.
3) The book begins with Daly already dieting &amp; her friends complaining that she is "too thin". Besides her dancing, it never really states what compelled her to first diet, or what caused it to go out of control. If the author had incorporated Daly's stresses at home to be the cause of her continuing to lose weight, it would have made more sense. 
4) In my opinion, any attempt made by the media (whether it be books, television shows, or commercials) to make sure all diversities are depicted so that they can be considered politically correct usually come off appearing "phony". Especially when it is coupled with the use of so many stereotypes Daly's family is Irish, so of course they have a big family, half of which have red hair. Carlos is Hispanic . His family is depicted as poor, struggling immigrants with the over-masculine father. And of course the people that run the dance studio are Russian...The book is full of such stereotypes.