Rating: 3/5

The Cato Insitute's David Boaz has written an engaging and thought provoking book with The Libertarian Mind yet his logic and arguments fail to convince in the end. It would be perhaps unfair to blame Boaz for this as he does earnestly try to explain the general Libertarian position. In fact he doesn't do too badly when looking at issues around personal freedom. His explanation of why government should be less involved in the personal lives of its citizens seem to be commonsense nowadays - something Boaz claims is a triumph of libertarian ideas. While this may be true to some extent, particularly with changing attitudes toward the failed War on Drugs as well as gay marriage, when Boaz switches over to economic freedom he loses his power to convince.

He makes a compelling case for big government to get out of people's lives, to be minimally invasive and maintain a very limited role which includes basic functions: security, protection of life and property and protection from external threats. He also points out that the separation of powers and checks and balances are fundamental to allow our individual freedom to thrive. He notes time and again that the reason for this is that power corrupts and that this tendency towards political corruption and bureaucracy is precisely what makes a myriad of public programs inefficient and unproductive. It is undoubtedly true that many people's experiences with government agencies is less than satisfactory (Boaz holds the US Postal Service in particular contempt, a sentiment which with I can readily empathize) and he does make a convincing argument that public services hold back creativity. He also notes that political power in the form of various interest groups encourages modes of production that are inefficient and as a result makes everyone poorer. Yet however much his insight into political power and corruption in the public sector rings true, he wholeheartedly fails to address similar problems and corruption inherent in the private sector due to a different type of power - economic power.

Fundamentally Boaz sees unbridled capitalism as the answer to most problems he covers, from racism and inequality to the capacity of human beings to create wealth for the betterment of society. Whereas his analysis of political corruption rings true for many, he tends to downplay and ignore the very real and utterly corrupt behavior at the heart of the economic power of the private sector. It strikes the reader as odd that Boaz argues that this natural tendency towards corruption and power is so much a tendency of humans that very strong checks and balances are needed to prevent it in governments and public organizations, but rapidly disappears when he speaks of the markets and private sector. Even if one were to see political and economic power as entirely separate, it is hard to see how the tendency towards corruption and abuse of power would only be present in the former; that only matters relating to the state and public sector need to have checks and balances while the private sector is left to regulate itself. This is especially true in the wake of the 2008 economic crash where these natural tendencies were on vivid display.

It is true that Boaz does give some limited commentary addressing the issue of corporate corruption (in fact he spills more ink warning against single mothers than the bail out of the banks) but he seems to believe that such corruption is the result of government intervention in the natural flow of the market. He seems to believe that a sort of natural chaos is necessary for the markets to really show what they can do. In essence he demands a strong but limited state to protect basic personal liberties but seems to care very little about the protection of whole communities and groups of people who have had their individual liberties trampled by the excesses and corruption of corporations.

While deriding Karl Marx throughout, Boaz is striking similar to Marx in his economic determinism. He seems to believe that the free market is the answer to nearly every problem much like the inherent economic conflict between the classes was Marx's. While Boaz maintains he is against the idea of a utopia, he nonetheless argues for an unfettered free market as a solution to society's ills - very far from a realist view of the world.

Perhaps his most far-fetched claim is that Libertarianism's greatest triumphs were the abolition of slavery and the eradication of Jim Crow while neglecting the fact that the both of these were due to the strongest forms of federal government intervention; war and a federal civil rights act. According to Boaz's own arguments, any modern equivalent of these actions would be a violation of the role of a limited federal government.

Yet it is hard to blame Boaz alone for the inconsistency in these arguments. Even he seems to be aware that the most compelling argument against free market libertarianism is that it lacks a moral core and this is hardly a new problem - it's been debated since the birth of Libertarianism as a movement. 

Economic efficiency, while increasing productivity and in some cases human progress, is not the only thing human beings care about, and rightly so. Along with a commitment to personal liberty, we also care about inequality, injustice and unfair treatment. This is perhaps the largest missing piece of Libertarian ideology, one which Boaz and others would do well working to resolve.