Rating: 4/5

A sequel to When Worlds Collide is good, better some say heretically than the original , After Worlds Collide. When beloved old Earth is pulverized by a rogue planet a few hundreds humans escape in several spaceships from enemy countries, miraculously, and land on the smaller companion sphere, not the gigantic gas wanderer which killed us. From the frying pan into the fire would fit real well here, back to the novel . Planet Bronson Beta, named for the astronomer discoverer... late astronomer Sven Branson , he didn't make the passenger list, anyway the place has green skies, green seas but no fish, brown lands , over 600 days to orbit the Sun, fifty hour days, 25 hours both of light and darkness (but no one can sleep that long, sadly) . Weird, weird, those from Earth find evidence of a lost advanced civilization, the mysterious Other People, Earthlings hunt, they seek in the alien continent yet fail, the one billion inhabitants have vanished and records show, an unsolvable frustrating puzzle.
 Still uncovered roads detected of metal, strange machines, magnificent sophisticated glass domed cities however this causes wonder, where did they go? Dr. Cole Hendron leader of the Americans who built not one , but two space vessels nevertheless they separate in space he lands, the brilliant scientist unsure if Ransdell captain of the second craft made it. Daughter of great man Eve, an appropriate moniker but who is Adam? A couple of rivals from Earth, planets may change but when love is in the air though a bit green, David Ransdell the flyer, and number 2 in command here Anthony Drake a former man about town, never more, the city of New York doesn't exist. The object of their affection is beautiful, intelligent , influential, charming, not perfect but close enough. Survivors from Russia and Japan strange allies from Asia, another spaceship with rumors they also enslaved a British craft. This is really science-fiction the British being successful in launching rockets? Inevitable battles for supremacy the evil ones against the supposedly nicer humans. Planes found shaped like Ravens birds, dominate the war, the Other People were superb in technology and know -how. American love living in the alien citadel, Khorlu now called obviously Hendron, fabulous urban center which could house two million beings and their are other cities... virtually eerily empty. An underrated saga of space and survival in a could be future.