Rating: 5/5

Kallocain is a dystopia of the classic kind, written during the Second World War by a Swedish poet in the vein of We, 1984, and Brave New World. I wonder whether it isn't frequently cited alongside those three because it was written by a woman in a language other than English? It explores the same themes cleverly, while including significantly original elements. The story is told in the first person by a chemist named Leo Kall, working for an oppressive military World Government regime. He invents a genuine truth serum and names it kallocain after himself. The plot follows him testing it on volunteers (of a sort) and the impacts of this, on both wider society and him personally. 

Leo is striking psychological portrait of indoctrination by totalitarianism. He does not think through the consequences of introducing a truth serum into an incredibly controlling police state, unlike certain others around him. The scenes in which people are dosed with kallocain and say whatever is on their mind are the most arresting in the book. Notably when Kall forcibly doses his wife, who says she wants to kill him. The reader honestly cannot blame her. The narrative asks what resistance is possible under the constant surveillance of a regime that enforces constant social distrust. It's clear that the use of kallocain by the police further sharply constrains the space for independent thought, let alone action. 

The novel's ending loops back to the beginning, as the narrative is structured as Kall's written personal recollection. I think this probably packed more punch at the time of initial publication. In the twenty-first century, the idea that totalitarian regimes are much the same regardless of nation or claimed political alignment is much easier to accept than I imagine it was in 1940. At the novel's end, a rival regime invades the city where Kall lives and forces him to work for them instead. He comments that this is very similar to his life under the World Government and in some ways he feels freer. In his old life he had a difficult relationship with his wife and was ambitious at work. He mentions no ideological loyalty to his previous masters. 

Kall's ambivalence about freedom is an interesting theme. He is a both a compelling and frustrating character due to being an inveterate collaborator, happy to comply in advance without being forced. That's a type whose perspective is undoubtedly chilling to read, especially when the world-building demonstrates exactly why he is like this. I found it notable that at no point does Kall apologise for, or even really consider the moral implications of, inventing a drug with such terrible applications. Like the other classic early 20th century dystopias, Kallocain strikes a distinctly bleak note. Boye died the year after it was published, in 'circumstances that are still unclear', at the age of only 41. At the time of her death, the prospects were undoubtedly grim for those living in Western Europe. Ostensibly neutral Sweden was surrounded by Nazi-occupied or allied nations. Boye's novel is a true dystopia as it asks, 'what if things continue like this?' Kallocain depicts a world ravaged by endless war where individuals are trained from early childhood to be mindless soldiers. Given my ongoing interest in dystopian fiction, I'm surprised to have only discovered it in 2025. Thank you goodreads friends for bringing it to my attention.