Rating: 3/5

So this is the first time I'm reading the companion books to the original Foundation trilogy and while I'm glad to read something Asimov penned himself, it's still not as good as I had hoped. Certainly not as good as the original trilogy.

It's been almost 500 years since the last book. Terminus is ruling, the mayor beign the most powerful person and the First Foundation dictating the way forward for humanity.
A politician is doubting the Seldon Plan (its actual existence) and trying to make people see that the Second Foundation was actually never destroyed but is holding the strings to this day. He is subsequently exiled and sent on a quest with a historian (because the mayor believes the same although she can't admit to it openly).
Officially, they are looking for the fabled birthplace of the human race (spoiler alert: Earth), though they actually want to find the Second Foundation. In a way, they succeed in at least one part of that plan. But not until they find a planet called Gaia that is so much more than a planet and which calls into question everything we thought we know until now.

The direction the author took this in ... I'm not sure I'm sold on it, to be honest ... I mean, to have the Foundations introduced the way he did, only to then have a THIRD power? Perhaps this will become more clear with the next/final book in the series. Maybe Daneel will have make a return even? For what this is, it wasn't enough for me, unfortunately.

I was also more than surprised about the new MC, Trevize, and the key role he played in the end. Which led to another thing that robbed me the wrong way: how he played that key role in the end. He is able to FEEL the right answer / solution to a problem without knowing anything about said problem?! I call bullshit. Again, maybe it will become clear later, maybe there is a good reason but at this point, it just didn't make a whole lot of sense.

The writing, though, was as wonderful as ever. Sadly, that wasn't enough for a higher rating this time but I can't wait for the conclusion now.