Rating: 5/5

Superlative analysis of human rights, the politico entities (specifically their labels) and those descriptions and systems of law and governmental hierarchies that seek to control human individuals and economics of groups. 

Boaz uses bases of exquisite and historical definition in an exact sense. His writing is not equivocal as current politico trends are using these redefined categories. His labeling (charting yet)and exact definition skills are 6 star. Far left Communism and far right Fascism having totalitarian cores far more common to each other than the numerous politico stances in between. Social and economic degrees toward "change" or "status" being other factors. Degrees of economic freedom or social freedom all occurring on a scale. So an Authoritarian is oppositional to a Libertarian- with the first giving supreme control to the group and the second to the individual.

His chapters on Civil Society and the protection of property, Market Process, and What Big Government is All About are each worth triple reading. 

But overall, historically and in reference, the research here on where real wealth and human progress in longevity and "improved states" of living have occurred in real time for homo sapiens history is the most compelling feature of these proofs. Because Socialism, Communism and other "we" think over powers of control have never prospered in any material sense. They have given the PR that they have, but they have not. 

His historical references to USA Constitutional origin and uses until this last century should be read by all current Americans. The Constitution was created the way it was for a reason. That reason being that big Government proceeds to become the enemy of the individual. 

We are heading to a new age of Libertarianism eventually. Because the entire Western Civilization divided the powers (mostly from Religious controls or "equals") on its way to become the institutions of democracies and republics that do exist. 

Awesome book in our age of increasingly bigger and bigger and worse and worse government.