Rating: 5/5

A POWERFUL 1976 BOOK IDENTIFYING AND ATTACKING THE PROBLEM

Dorothy Louise Taliaferro Martin (‘Del’; 1921-2008) was an author and lesbian, gay, and feminist activist. (She had one daughter, with a man to whom she was married for four years.) She was closely associated in her activities with her long-term partner, Phyllis Lyon (1924-2020). They cofounded the Daughters of Bilitis organization for lesbians, and its magazine ‘The Ladder,’ and became the first ‘out’ lesbian couple to join NOW. They married in 2004, as the first same-sex couple married in San Francisco. (Their marriage was temporarily voided by the California Supreme Court in 2004, but in 2008 they were again allowed to remarry.)

She wrote in the Preface of this 1976 book, “Throughout this book I have used the term ‘battered wives,’ although most of what I have to say applies equally to unmarried women who live with violent men, and many of the examples cited involve unmarried cohabitants…The term ‘battered wife,’ therefore… refers to any woman who is beaten by her mate, whether legally married or not, and the word ‘husband’ applies to the man in the couple.”

She explains, “A year ago, I knew that wife-beating was a problem in some marriages. But I had no idea of the prevalence of marital violence, nor of its tacit acceptance as a part of life for so many families… Wife-beating, I soon learned, is a complex problem that involves much more than the act itself… It has its roots in historical attitudes toward women, the institution of marriage, the economy, the intricacies of criminal and civil law, and the delivery system of social service agencies. Blame is not easily fixed, nor are the causes of marital violence readily identified.” (Pg. xv-xvi)

She continues, “The economic and social structure of our present society depends on the degradation, subjugation, and exploitation of women. Many husbands who batter their wives in anger and frustration are really striking out at a system that entraps them, too. In a peculiar way, they, too, are expressing a desire for change in attitudes toward husband/wife roles and the institution of marriage. Social change is inevitable. The question is whether it will be accomplished by violent or peaceful means.” (Pg. xvii)

She points out, “In the traditional Christian marriage ceremony, the minister warns, ‘Whom therefore God has joined together let no man put asunder.’ These words stand between the battered wife and any help she may seek. No one dares to interfere in the intimate relationship between husband and wife, even when the husband’s violence and wife’s danger are apparent. Often the battered woman is completely isolated. She cannot discuss her problem with anyone—she is too embarrassed and humiliated.” (Pg. 5)

She reports, “In their article on jealousy, Joan and Larry Constantine conclude that ‘sex is almost never the real issue, only the arena.’ They see sex, like alcohol, as affording the husband a socially accepted excuse for venting his violent feelings, which erupt over the loss of control of his wife as property.” (Pg. 60-61)

Of a British survey of battered wives conducted by J.J. Gaylord of the Department of Psychiatry of Westminster Hospital in London, she reports, “Gaylord sums up his findings by stating that all the women he interviewed ‘had made disastrous marriages, often undertaken by a desire to leave home and attracted by the protective image of their man.’” Then she comments, “Gaylord’s sample represents women who, for whatever reason, remained at home or returned to their homes after they had been beaten the first time…. we know there are a great many women… who walked out the door, never to return, the first time their husbands raised a hand to them… It must be remembered, then, that all the available data … have been gathered from women who… saw themselves as trapped, not from women who had managed to get out and stay out.” (Pg. 76)

She notes, “By the time the police arrive… the wife may be so terrorized … that she may… even turn the officers away…. Doubtless many women have called the police, discovered that that had inadvertently worsened their plight, and chosen to endure silently their violent husband’s outbursts from that time forward.” (Pg. 77)

Of a case where San Jose Superior Court Eugene Premo dismissed the case against the husband on the grounds that the law ‘discriminates on the basis of sex,’ she notes, “Judge Premo’s decision … takes advantage of the existing male bias within the criminal justice system … Even more galling is that sexism---the underlying CAUSE of marital violence---was cited as the means by which this assailant … escaped prosecution.” (Pg. 101-102)

She reports, “Once [a] restraining order is granted, what can the woman do with it? ‘So she waves a piece of paper in his face and he thumps on her anyway,’ a Legal Services attorney said… If the husband threatens her again and she calls the police, they will tell her they can do nothing until he actually hurts her. If he does injure her, the police are likely to tell her that because the husband is under the restraining order, the matter is now civil, and thus out of their jurisdiction.” (Pg. 106)

Of a woman in the Social Services system, she suggests, “imagine the prospect of such a makeshift life stretching out indefinitely before the woman who has never been on her own before. Imagine her wondering how she will support herself and her children… These circumstances alone… are, understandably, enough to drive a battered woman back to the quasi security of a violent but familiar home that provides food and shelter.” (Pg. 121)

Of Mental Health Services, she reports, “So long as the violent man limited his threats to his family, no agency was willing to respond. Once more the door to the family home stood between society and the woman isolated with a dangerous man. When he finally went outside into the neighborhood, the police admitted that a problem existed and took him into custody. OTHER people were endangered then; presumably the threats the man made on his wife’s life didn’t count.” (Pg.. 143)

She concludes, “Marital violence is a social disaster … and its victims have … desperate need for relief and support. Thousands of women and children need protection from injury, food and shelter, advice, and encouragement. The American government spends millions of dollars in aid to displaced persons all over the world, but the victims of violence at home are practically ignored. The problem of wife-battering has been defined, the evidence has been presented, and one immediate solution, in the form of feminist-run shelters, has been identified. What is your response, America? Send a CARE package home today.” (Pg. 254)

In the nearly fifty years since this book was written, some of the solutions Martin proposed have been implemented (e.g., shelters, law changes). But this book remains a power statement outlining a still-desperate situation.