Rating: 5/5

Hi,

I hope all is progressing well.

The Complete Idiot's Guide to Tantric Sex (2nd Edition) by Dr. Judy Kuriansky, PhD, is an exploration of tantric sex in progress (even considering connecting through tantric sex is not always of a romantic sexual nature aside from a/ holistic healing sense[s]). When healthily embarking through a sexual rabbit hole of a healthy warren of information in connection with good sex, I decide to buy then read the text due to my choice to constantly practically improve and grow as a mindful individual as well as romantic life partner (especially considering one may choicely-practically grow very well; one may be consistently healthy all one's life and reap the benefits of being so infinitely). One has much control over one's life. The text connects deeply to tantric sex as a lifestyle, so as to be informative of aspects of connecting to varying tantric realms, to better guide one to understanding one may need to do careful research to find an appropriate, if not best, tantric realm for oneself on one's spiritual journey, for one's best/better growth(s). I appreciate the concepts of tantric sex in connection with spirituality invoking one's playful nature to fill life mindfully, through varying forms of being, evolving a sacredness in connection with life well. The text advocates for finding/having a proper tantric sex guide and/or health professional(s) in connection with tantric sex (like herself) to ensure proper progressions prior engaging with particular elemental progressions of tantric sex. Additionally, I find the following texts may assist one in further deliberating contexts of concepts within The Complete Idiot's Guide to Tantric Sex (2nd Edition) by Dr. Judy Kuriansky, PhD: The Complete Idiot's Guide to Enhancing Sexual Desire by Judy Ford, MSW, LCSW, with Rachel Greene Baldino, MSW, LCSW, The New Sex Bible for Women: The Complete Guide to Sexual Self-Awareness and Intimacy by Dr. Amie Harwick, Great Sex for Life by Linda Sonntag, The Dating Divide: Race and Desire in the Era of Online Romance by Celeste Vaughan Curington, Jennifer H. Lundquist, and Ken-Hou Lin, Sexual Happiness for Women: A Practical Approach by Maurice Yaffe and Elizabeth Fenwick, The Ultimate Guide to Orgasm for Women: How to Become Orgasmic for a Lifetime by Mikaya Heart, Becoming Supernatural: How Common People Are Doing the Uncommon by Dr. Joe Dispenza, Naked at Our Age: Talking Out Loud About Senior Sex by Joan Price, Perv: The Sexual Deviant in All of Us by Jesse Bering, She Comes First: The Thinking Man's Guide to Pleasuring a Woman by Ian Kerner, Sexual Soulmates: The Six Essentials for Connected Sex by Susan Bratton, The Vagina Book: An Owner's Manual for Taking Care of Your Down There by The Thinx Inc. Team, Dr. Jenn Conti, MD, and Daiana Ruiz (Illustrator), The Penis Book: A Doctor's Complete Guide to the Penis—From Size to Function and Everything in Between by Dr. Aaron Spitz, M.D., This is How You Vagina: All About Your Vajayjay and Why You Probably Shouldn't Call it That by Dr. Nicole E. Williams, M.D., Come As You Are (Revised and Updated): The Surprising New Science That Will Transform Your Sex Life by Dr. Emily Nagoski, Ph.D., The Vagina Bible: The Vulva and the Vagina: Separating the Myth from the Medicine by Dr. Jen Gunter, M.D., Women's Bodies, Women's Wisdom: Creating Physical and Emotional Health and Healing (Newly Updated and Revised 5th Edition) by Dr. Christiane Northrup, M.D., It Didn't Start with You: How Inherited Family Trauma Shapes Who We Are and How to End the Cycle by Mark Wolynn, The MindBody Code: How to Change the Beliefs That Limit Your Health, Longevity, and Success by Dr. Mario Martinez, A Man's Guide to Healthy Aging: Stay Smart, Strong, and Active (A Johns Hopkins Press Health Book) by Edward H. Thompson, Jr., and Lenard W. Kaye (with contributions from contributors which receive credits at the end of the book),The Joy of Sex by Dr. Alex Comfort, M.B., D.Sc., Why Good Sex Matters: Understanding the Neuroscience of Pleasure for a Smarter, Happier, and More Purpose-Filled Life by Dr. Nan Wise, PhD, The Heart of Tantric Sex by Diana Richardson, The Complete Kāma Sūtra: The First Unabridged Modern Translation of the Classic Indian Text (translation by Alain Daniēlou [inclusive of help from Kenneth Hurry]), Tantric Orgasm for Women by Diana Richardson, Love Worth Making: How to Have Ridiculously Great Sex in a Long-Lasting Relationship by Dr. Stephen Snyder, M.D., Urban Tantra: Sacred Sex for the Twenty-First Century by Barbara Carrellas, Dr. Nita’s Crash Course for Women: Better Sex, Better Health, Better You by Dr. Nita Landry, MD, OB-GYN, The Girls' Guide to Growing Up Great: Changing Bodies, Periods, Relationships, Life Online by Sophie Elkan with Laura Chaisty and Dr. Maddy Podichetty as well as Illustrations by Flo Perry, Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ by Daniel Goleman, Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams by Dr. Matthew Walker, PhD, The Love Prescription: Seven Days to More Intimacy, Connection, and Joy by Dr. John Gottman, PhD, and Dr. Julie Schwartz Gottman, PhD, and Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus: The Classic Guide to Understanding the Opposite Sex by Dr. John Gray, PhD.

Onward and Upward,
Kevin Dufresne
www.Piatures.com
IG: @Dufreshest