Rating: 4/5

This one pleasantly surprised me! I knew I was going to like it because I really like Douglas’s writing and the topics he touches on, but this one felt different in a good way.

First off, he actually gives advice and practical application of techniques to victims of crime. This was great and wasn’t something he really touched on in his other books. Coming from someone who is deeply knowledgeable about murder and violent crimes, it feels accurate and comforting that he payed so much attention to victims and potential victims. It was just so raw and truthful which I really loved. There were still lots of harrowing and horrifying true stories retold in here, but a lot of the focus was on victims and the strengths of people affected by crimes. It was nice for him to include quotes and statements from victims and families and you just knew he was supportive. 

I enjoyed how he payed so much attention to stalking, which at the time of writing was a new crime. In modern times, we as a society know so much more about it, but it was revolutionary of him to speak about it and to give advice to victims. I always feel as though he isn’t just speaking about crimes that happened, he always goes one step further and gives you that practical and realistic application that makes the story so much better. 

These type of books always make you think about things in a different light and this one definitely did. It made me think about the criminal justice system in Australia and America, and how victims of violent crimes, particularly murder, aren’t necessarily considered in the whole process. We tend to forget how many people are affected by a crime and the people left behind after a murder aren’t often paid attention to. We tend to focus on prisoner rights and the rights of the accused, when we need to pay attention and support victims. I love that Douglas’s books always start such needed conversations and always leave you questioning where you stand and whether your values and morals align with this.

Overall, this was such an excellent read and at this point I’ll be reading anything Douglas has written!