Rating: 2/5

The premise of this book is on page 386 of the paperback version of the book, when the author (who is quoting another scholar) states “since legend and myth preserve for us all a collective memory from the past, they are historical.” So in other words, if you picked up this book, as I did, expecting to hear about priestesses lives from the historical and archaeological record you will be sadly disappoint. What you will get instead is a summary of myth and legend and the theory that these show us historical priestesses. 

So for example on page 94, the author states that Europa, Circe, Medea and Helen of Troy were “doubtless all queens and high-priestesses.” So yes according to the author, Europa, most famous for being abducted by Zeus in the form of a bull; Circe the enchantress who in the Odysseus turned his crew into pigs; Medea who helped Jason capture the Golden Fleece; and Helen famous for launching all of those ships were not mythology but real historical women who were queens and high-priestesses in their communities. It is fascinating theory, one in which I would absolutely love to know more about how the historical or archaeological record might support. But the author, unfortunately is not interested in trying to support it, she merely states that it must be true and as a result we can read all of those myths about those aforementioned women as showing us real historical information on how priestesses of the past must really have lived. 

Additionally, she states throughout the book (one example is on page 305) that “Priestesses took the names of the goddesses they served.” This idea (which she doesn’t footnote or source at all so we don’t know where it comes from) but it does allows her take myths associated with say Hera or Artemis and say that while you might think that what you are reading is a myth, it is, once again, in fact a historical account of one of the priestesses who served these goddesses. Once again that is a very interesting theory, but she doesn’t bring forward much in terms of the archaeological record to support this theory. 

Now that being said, I won’t say she always fail. She actually makes, at least in my mind, a pretty convincing case that the tale of Psyche (most famous in myth for her love affair with Cupid and whose story was written in the 2nd century AD) was actually the tale of a priestess initiation ritual, allegorically told through the story of Psyche’s descent and return from Hades. So in other words, by following the steps that Psyche takes down into hell and back out, we might be seeing a version of a priestess initiation ritual disguised so that it would get by early Christian censors who would see it as only myth. It is at the least a very interesting theory and feels better supported than some of her others. 

But overall it is somewhat ironic, that on page 95 the author takes to task a historian by the name of Arnold J. Toynbee, who has a very low view of women in history, and supports this view by pointing to such women as Shakespeare’s Lady Macbeth and Brynhild the Germanic mythical shield maiden. In criticizing Toynbee’s premise, the author properly points out that “none of the above [Lady Macbeth or Brynhild] is absolutely documented as historical” but that comes off a little bit as the pot calling the kettle black when the author repeatedly makes women from myth and legend into historical women of the past.

To give the author her due: This is a dated book (written in the 1980s), history at that time was still told from a very male dominated point of view, and there just may not have been much in the historical and archaeological record for her to reference. She accurately summarizes this problem on page 324. “How are we ever to dream of finding [these priestesses], after two thousand years of virtual oblivion? Reconstituting so lost a past seems an impossible dream.” You can see her occasionally trying to work in archaeological records where she can (for instance repeatedly mentioning a Turkish temple to Diana that had (from her point of view in the 80s) been recently unearthed. So maybe she just didn’t have much to work with at the time. And I will say her summary of mythology (while very Eurocentric) is interesting, I just don’t know that I am convinced that these legends and myths can be relied on as supporting a historical understanding of the lives of priestesses.