Rating: 3/5

The memories of a little Jewish girl growing up in the early years of revolutionary Russia. My family were originally Russian, refugees. I remember my great-grandfather and grandmother my ggf became a circus strong man and my ggm had a Russian cake shop in the Welsh valleys very well, so I thought the book would be of interest to me. (My great grandfather's passport is actually on a BBC site as an immigrant. I was amazed when I found it).

The author was the little Jewish girl of the story. Only two facts about Jewish life in revolutionary Russia are mentioned. Firstly, there was a quota for Jewish children in schools and she could only get into a grade two years lower than her age level. Secondly, many Russian Jews supported Germany in WWI saying that it was a cultured country that treated the Jews as everyone else whereas Russia was very difficult for Jews and getting worse. This was early in the war before they knew of the industrial scale murder of Jews in the concentration camps. 

What the little girl means by Russia being so terrible is because of the pograms against them. Pomgroms can be defined as '"riots, arson, burglary up to and including murder by an armed mob intoxicated with hatred against helpless people and their property, while the police and the army look on if not actually join in').

The book is very sub-Anne Frank in every way. It's a sketch of a young girl's life in a family without much money and with an absent father. Very little in it is interesting. Perhaps more interesting is that the author, as I read in the preface, despite educational strictures against Jews, graduated in law. She married and emigrated to the US and became a dancer with the Metropolitan Opera Ballet in Chicago and dance-teacher. I would have liked to have read more about that.

There just isn't enough content in the book to justify a hardback price - or even a paperback one. If you see it on sale for a couple of dollars, it will pass an hour or two for you. But if you are looking for a good book on growing up Jewish in revolutionary Russia, this book wasn't it.