Rating: 4/5

Mental illness is slippery. Anyone with the slightest familiarity with psychological evaluations will understand that such a diagnosis is not like a diagnosis for chicken pox, a positive or negative proposition. Instead, there is an attempt to evaluate in relation to an ambiguous standard of “normal ability to function,” and a menu-like list of possible symptoms. Dr. Debora Green was evaluated as having a “schizoid personality disorder,” by Dr. Marilyn Hutchinson who was hired by her defense team. Dr. Hutchinson pointed to the score of a Global Assessment Function to support her conclusion. It purports to measure  “an individual's ability to exist, interact, [and] cope with the world he or she lives in.” (p.321) Such a diagnosis also demands evidence of continuity — pervasiveness. 

There is no doubt that Dr. Debora Green was mentally ill, although her symptoms were inconsistent with any single diagnosis. What is troubling is that nothing could be done to avert the tragedy that unfolds in Ann Rule's well-researched crime chronicle — not her hysterical temper tantrums, not her alcohol abuse and obvious bouts of depression, not the psychiatric evaluation a month earlier at the ER of the University of Kansas Medical Center and not her subsequent evaluation at the Menninger Clinic in Topeka. 

Unfortunately, BITTER HARVEST, does not dwell on these implications. On the one hand there is the stoic fatalism of Green's husband Michael Farrar:  “'Predicting criminal human behavior is one of the most difficult tasks our society tries to perform....Despite some apparent mental illness that Debora suffered, I certainly never anticipated a homicidal predisposition. Obviously, neither did professionals trained to identify, evaluate, and treat psychiatric disorders. Debora is truly a victim in that the system failed by not being able to force her to remain hospitalized and obtain desperately needed, intensive psychiatric evaluation and care, therapy that could have potentially averted this disaster.'” (p.327) On the other hand, BITTER HARVEST provides a view of impotent legal and mental health systems that are unfixable. Again and again, we return to issues of competence: understanding the need for psychiatric intervention, ability to follow-up on medical recommendations, the decision to acquiesce to voluntary commitment, the competence to predict the results of displayed behavior. Confronting these issues is a diagnosis that includes a probability that the patient is unaware that there is even a problem. 

Ann Rule has written a compelling if disturbing book. The events she describes occurred over two decades ago. They could just as well have happened yesterday. I read this book because it was the selection of our local book club.

NOTES:
After reading this book I was fascinated by the term "Schizoid Personality Disorder." Here are some websites that describe the diagnosis. 
http://brucelevine.net/925/- article addressing issues of reliability among the various DSM editions
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schizoi...
https://www.webmd.com/mental-health/m...
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/healt...