Rating: 4/5

Theory of Tension Myositis Syndrome (TMS) 
The unconscious mind may avoid dealing with painful emotions of rage, sadness, shame, etc. through causing a pain syndrome in the body, thereby distracting the conscious mind’s attention to the physical pain rather than the emotional pain. The mind achieves this through constricting blood vessels and causing local anoxia/ischemia. The areas most typically effected are the postural muscles, tendons and nerves (e.g. back pain, neck pain, sciatica); but reduced blood flow may potentially impact many other areas also. The unconscious mind will often choose to create the pain where there has been a physical alteration from aging or previous physical injuries. 

Amongst other things, John Sarno says unconscious pain often develops from low self-esteem: Deeply repressed feelings of inadequacy and self doubt lead to perfectionism, and goodism. Perfectionism and goodism lead to excessive self-imposed pressure which generates internal conflict and thereby rage. 

Perfectionists unconsciously set up standards for themselves they cannot possibly meet; their inevitable failure to live up to them results in unconscious shame and rage. 

Goodism (co-dependency) is the need to be excessively good. Driven to be helpful, to ingratiate, to want everyone to like them. Rage is generated when the individual excessively sacrifices what is good for them in the interest of others; when there is not enough appreciation from others for what they have given. 

John Sarno’s Protocol for the Treatment of Tension Myositis Syndrome
1. Repudiate the structural diagnosis (e.g. the idea that your back pain is “caused by spinal stenosis” or “a herniated disk”). There may be a simultaneous physical phenomenon but if you have Tension Myositis Syndrome, then the pain is not caused by it. 
2. Acknowledge the psychological basis of the pain.
3. Accept that it is ok that your psychology and beliefs are the way they are. 
4. When you feel the physical pain, ask yourself what you are feeling emotionally. Get in touch with your rage, grief, shame, etc.. 
5. Write a list of all the pressures in your life. Acknowledge these and take action to reduce them.
6. Set aside a daily session of reflection or meditation.
7. Engage in psychotherapy.
8. Re-engage in full physical activity (that you may have limited because of your pain syndrome).