Rating: 4/5

💀 Unrelenting Glen Cook Mercenaries Buddy Read (UGCMBR™) with The Overlord, My One and Only Male Hatchling and My Nefarious Daughter 💀

Actual rating: 3.84875962 stars

➻ Me, upon finishing this book a month ago: “no need to stress about writing this review! You’ll be reading the next book in the series a month from now! You’ve got plenty of time ahead of you and stuff!”
➻ Me, a month later:

Time flies and all that crap.

Sooooo, I started reading October’s Baby last night and figured I should probably maybe perhaps try and write a review for Ain’t No Mercy To Be Had For No Shrimp post haste and stuff. And here we are. Yep. We are indeed. Here. We. Brought together once again by the Super Extra Fluffy World of Glen Cook (SEFWoGC™). And it feels bloody shrimping heartwarming and gleefully joyous and stuff. Sorry, what? I’m shamelessly stalling, you say? I’m dreadfully sorry but have no idea what the fishing barnacle you are talking about. Go home, Comely Decapods Mine, you’re obviously quite very drunk on Laphroaig and stuff.

But anywayyyyyyyyy.

Given that I have about 250,000 highlights and 150+ pages of notes for this book, I thought I’d do the bold and audacious and experimental thing, and paste the first 2000 wonderfully unedited lines of my Evernotes ←if you don’t get this I’ll be unfriending you in about 2 and a half seconds flat. Just so you know into this Crappier Than Ever Crappy Non Review Thingie (CTECNRT™). Lucky you! So brace your little barnacled selves, for here goes and stuff (the super clever stuff in italics I added along as I did not write this non review the copy/paste thing, FYI):

• My glen cook ratings no make no bloody shrimping sense. I didn't even like this one that much but still rated it xxx stars ← 3.84875962 stars, in case you missed it up there ↑. Because it's Glen Cook and because it’s Glen Cook and because it’s Glen Cook. Also because I might love the way he writes (a little, not too much) + he’s the short cut king + he excels at character spring cleaning (die die die, yay!) + dark is dark is delicious. Also also, comfort book, like a cosy blanket and stuff.

[Add cosy blanket gif] → Please squeeze me (baking powder) while I go hunt for one and stuff.

Tada! Cosy blanket gif FTW! Yes, it's a despicable cute one, I know, but life sucks and stuff so QED and stuff.

• This book, written by any other author, would have been 600 pages long. At least. But this is Glen Cook, aka the Gloriously Ruthless Lord of the Fast Forward Button (GRLotFFB™), so it's only xxx pages ← 268 pages, in case you are interested. 3 months gone in ONE measly sentence, 3 years gone in TWO miserable lines!

[Add POOF gif] → Please squeeze me again (baking powder again) while I go hunt for one and stuff.

Yep, that’s the GRLotFFB™ at work alright!

• Cook excels at character spring cleaning ← yeah yeah yeah, I know I already said that up there ↑ but these are wonderfully unedited notes, remember? So stop complaining and stuff. Besides, it never hurts to rehash and stuff. So there and stuff.

• The great delightful titillating thing about Cook is that he’s an equal opportunity kind of guy who doesn't differentiate between major or minor characters. When you die, you die. Death is anonymous and abrupt (and a little final, too), and doesn't make allowances for egocentric BS. No flourish, no glory, just scrumptiously beautiful deathly death. YUM.

• Ch. 7/8: rock and hard place (I don’t remember, so don’t ask), verbal pyrotechnics, fishes (no clue what this was about, but pretty sure it was awesome since subaquatic individuals were involved), slightly hilarious conversations between Haroun and Mocker, “odd-shaped little intrigues” + Machiavellian plans ← all of this calls for a little dance, methinks. Especially that thing about fishes.

• Ch. 9: El Murid's spoiler spoiler spoiler (I could tell you what this is about but it would kinda sorta, um, you know, spoil things for you and stuff. You are most welcome and stuff) + trading murders and undercover knife work, with a generous helping of evil laughs and wicked grins, now we're talking! + Super Extra Cunning Secret Alliances (SECSA) for the win!

• Ch. 13: bloody treachery, yay! Hypnotiiiiize = trust in me song = kaa gif → Please squeeze me again again (baking powder again again) while I go hunt for one and stuff.

 
♫ Trust in me ♫ and ♫ Trust in Me ♫

Thus to the end of the first 2000 wonderfully unedited lines of my Evernotes we regrettably come, and go back to your boring daily activities you may. Woo bloody shrimping hoo and stuff!

➽ Nefarious Last Words (NLW™): write the review for the next book in this series in less than a month I most assuredly will. Cross my black, withered heart and hope to die an excruciatingly excruciating death and stuff. 
  

  

➘ Reading order for this series, as firmly kindly suggest by Evgeny (aka the Ruthless Glen Cook Overlord™):

① Book 1: A Shadow of All Night Falling ★★★★
② Book 4: The Fire in His Hands ★★★★
③ Book 5: With Mercy Towards None ★★★★
④ Book 2: October’s Baby ★★★★
⑤ Book 3: All Darkness Met ★★★★★
⑥ Book 6: Reap the East Wind ★★★★★
⑦ Book 7: An Ill Fate Marshalling ★★★★★
⑧ Book 8: A Path to Coldness of Heart ★★★★
⑨ Short stories: An Empire Unacquainted with Defeat ★★★★

Pre-review nonsense

To be reviewed in 2458. If all goes according to plan.