Rating: 5/5

When I first came upon this book, I gasped. The title, "The Woman's Bible: A Classic Feminist Perspective".....

Then the name of the author Elizabeth Cady Stanton....HELL YES!

Before even reading it, I dare say I automatically confirmed it's awesomeness without even reading it. I was right. In the foreword of the book, you will find the history of the making of this book. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and bunch of other women part of the committee joined together to comment about the bible. A lot of women didn't do it cause they were scared of the backlash, and oh indeed was there backlash. 

Let me just give you a piece of what this book does:

"We hear the opinion often expressed, that woman always has, and always will be in subjection. Neither assertion is true. She enjoyed unlimited individual freedom for many centuries, and the events of the present day all point to her speedy emancipation. Scientists now give 85,000 years for the growth of the race. They assign 60,000 to savagism, 20,000 to barbarism, and 5,000 to civilization. Recent historians tell us that for centuries woman reigned supreme. That period was called the Matriarchate. Then man seized the reins of government and we are now under the patriarchate (pg 25)."

Let that sink in. Exactly.

From parts of Genesis to Revelation (obviously the whole entire book was not covered, the bible is really big) they take down verses and even put some insightful theological history as insight into it's own content. It is pure Genius. They are bad ass for the most simple reason. Questioning a man made book. BAM.

Look, don't get all pissy or discouraged just because it says "Feminist". This book is beyond any movement, it's about our society as a whole. The women in this book are respectfully intelligent, the only reason people feel insulted is because the truth hurts. They feel they are passing the line by responding to the literary texts of the bible. Get over it. 

My mother who is religious (not overly, but still) was stunned and shocked. She was impressed, let me just say, it changed her perspective about the bible. She doesn't like to admit it, but it happened. For a loving God, he sure treats the 'Mother's of the race' like shit. It is a great read, and a eye opener.