Rating: 4/5

"Chess is a jealous lover. Will tolerate no other, especially in the form of too much drink. I gave myself to her completely body and soul and for the first time in my life I began to live without a constant nagging desire for drink. I was like a person who finds God..."

The above quote from John Healy's classic "The Grass Arena" gave me more pause than any other. Not because I can relate as an avid chess player myself, but moreso as I was unsure to what degree I could relate this quote to any aspect of my admittedly short few years on this earth. Had I ever fallen in love with something so quickly and completely that even the need to eat would pass me by like it did during Healy's early infatuation with the game as he details himself.

Yet, to me, this quote seems to accurately sum up Healy's personality throughout his book, whether it be chess, the Countess or, originally, his love of the bottle which all captivated him so deeply and completely he couldn't escape them, and his one track mind with the latter is what led him to the so-called Grass Arena.

Credit must be given to Healy. Undoubtedly, he has lived a difficult life, enduring abuse from his father at a young age, constant abuse from his peers for being an Irish-man in London and, of course, his many years spent struggling with his addiction. Despite all this, there is never even a hint of self-pity anywhere to be found within the 200 or so gripping pages. He is frank about and honest his life. As Healy ages, it is clear to the reader that he is becoming more vulnerable, and concern slowly mounts that the man is going to drink himself to an early age. It was clear to me that Healy understood this himself but never places the blame for this on others, simply accepting his way of life.

The constant revolving door of technicoloured characters on the streets of London makes it a little hard to follow at times, the only downside of the book for me, yet one wonders if this is intentional, giving a deep insight into how Healy must have felt meeting all of these people for the first time.

A unique insight into the life and mind of someone suffering from addiction and on the margins of society, this book is a must read for those that have been so lucky not to have experienced such hardships. It is important that we keep our minds open to the struggles of others especially in an age when it seems we are more divided than ever.