Rating: 5/5

I was told that this is an American classic, and that every soldier and diplomat going downrange to represent the U.S. should read it. Recently, while reading another book about the French fight in Indochina and how we inherited Viet Nam from that effort, I ran across the backstory on "The Ugly American" and decided it was time to get a copy. Fifty-six years after publication, the book is still relevant. The gist of this work appears in the chapter that shares the book's name: "'The simple fact is, Mr. Ambassador, that average Americans, in their natural state ,if you will excuse the phrase, are the best ambassadors a country could have... They are not suspicious, they are eager to share their skills, they are generous. But something happens to most Americans when they go abroad. Many of them are not average... they are second-raters. Many of them, against their own judgment, feel that they must live up to their commissaries and big cars and cocktail parties. But get an unaffected American, sir, and you have an asset. And if you get one, treasure him--keep him out of the cocktail circuit, away from bureaucrats, and let him work in his own way.'" The authors hammered this together back in 1958, with crises brewing in Viet Nam, in Berlin, and Cuba; in the age where both we and the Communists were dividing up the world and wrestling with the revelation that we now had "city-killer" weaponry; when we were analyzing the lessons learned from Korea and watching our British and French allies' empires crumble in Africa and Asia. This book still holds a stark message: If we are doing business in someone else's house, we should send the best Americans we have, even if we've won the political fight to keep Khrushchev and Mao from eating up the Third World. I would argue that even the chapters on Dien Bien Phu and Mao's blueprint for insurgency are worth a look even today because, again, the world hasn't gotten any simpler. The common assessment still stands--"The Ugly American" is an American classic and anyone representing America abroad should check it out.