Rating: 4/5

IRL Book Club – February 2024 
Theme – Banned Books

“Scandalous occurrences, of a public nature that is, do not often take place in small towns. Therefore, although the closets of small-town folk are filled with such a number of skeletons that if all the bony remains of small-town shame were to begin rattling at once they would cause a commotion that could be heard on the moon, people are apt to say that nothing much goes on in towns like Peyton Place.

The difference between a closet skeleton and a scandal, in a small town, is that the former is examined behind barns by small groups who converse over it in whispers, while the latter is looked upon by everyone, on the main street, and discussed in shouts from rooftops.

Peyton Place was a surprise novel that exceeded my expectations. Knowing this was written in 1956 and set in New England in before and after World War 2, I expected dated language and social taboos of the time. I expected a trashy chick-lit novel that would make me cringe. And given that this novel quickly soared to the top of the New York Times bestseller list in 1956 remaining there for 59 weeks, it is the type of novel that I would wholeheartedly avoid if it had been written today. It was scandalous for its time but one of those novels that hardly anyone could put down. Banned and vilified – that’s more of a reason to buy and read the book! I can imagine all of the moms secretly stashing the book in their handbags and quietly murmuring among their groups of friends.

This novel contains a plethora of characters who mostly make your blood boil with the heinous and barbarous acts portrayed. The town of Peyton Place itself is characterized throughout as a beautiful place surrounded by mountains and hiding many abominable secrets. But the main story centers around Constance McKenzie –a shop owner who worries the secret of her daughter’s illegitimacy will be discovered and ruin her life; Allison McKenzie – a teen who dreams of becoming an author leads a sheltered life due to her mother’s secrets; and Selena Cross – Allison’s friend from the poor side of town who dreams of getting out of a mediocre life and away from her stepfather’s abuse. 

The sex in this book is prevalent however its themes are more thought-provoking than you’d imagine. The sexual encounters are underlying issues in the character’s problems and predicaments. The story demonstrates that women are actually sexual beings which at the time was a new way of thinking about female sexuality. One character embodies a woman’s repressed sexual desires. So I can see why this was thought of as scandalous! More themes focus on secrecy, hypocrisy, coming of age, and social class differences between the poor mill hands and their families and those who ran the mill. The town is rife with gossip, extramarital affairs, underage sex, alcoholism, violent abuse of women, incest, abortion, suicide, rape, murder, deceit, treacherous behavior, and voyeurism. All that to say, this is a well-written and nuanced story that may still surprise some even today. I am glad to have read it and now I know that it is so much more than what many originally thought it to be – trashy chick-lit meant to shock readers.