Rating: 3/5

Although Zebra marketed this as a horror novel, it really is a pulpy thriller starring the intrepid reporter Alexandra (Alex) Hobbs. Hobbs once worked for a major paper in Chicago, but her drunkenness and assault of her editor ended that; now she works for a rag down there with the National Enquirer somewhere in the midwest. This starts off with Alex and some cops looking at a body that was dumped on a street. Alex is kinda friends with some of the cops and they let her see the body. After the show, Alex meets up with a witness of the event at a nearby bar (he did not want to go to the cops) and tells him it was a woman who dumped the body from a van. As the witness puked and left, Alex espyed Gabriel Davies at the bar. 

Davies was something of a legend in the Chicago PD and tracked down several serial killers there. When someone published his personal notes (which became a bestseller) Davies left in disgrace as it was pretty apparent he was something of a psycho himself. Since the book was published over 3 years ago, Davies has refused to give interviews and Alex is in heaven-- the chance for an exclusive that will get her name out of the gutter and back to the big time! The problem is, however, that bodies keep turning up around Davies, and many of them are friends of Alex. Is Davies really a murderer offing her friends, or is someone else doing the deed? Ah, the suspense!

Longstreet presents Alex as bold as brass one minute, then a damsel in distress the next. Longstreet also tosses in some romance (she is better known for her paranormal romance books under a different name; she wrote horror novels under the Longstreet moniker when slumming with Zebra). The characters are all a little over the top to be sure here, and while this is something of a police procedural, the cops are presented in a hardly believable way. Davies is fun, however, with lots of odd idiosyncrasies, like exactly mimicking the actions of people he converses with (she puts two sugars in her coffee, Davies does likewise, etc.). So, all in all, a fun romp and a decent pulpy thriller, but nothing to write home about. 3 stars!