Rating: 5/5

Trouble with abroad is there's too damn many furriners

Well, Mark Twain certainly had a good sense of humor. You can count on laughing out loud many times as you read this book, which, because times have changed since he wrote it in 1867, is really amazing. It's interesting to read his adventures in the Azores, Gibraltar, Morocco, France, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Russian Crimea, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt and the Holy Land and compare the experiences with what tourists might expect to meet today. The world looks far more uniform now than it did then. A few shenanigans, a few jokes among passengers on the chartered ship that took the whole bunch of them on an extended tour overseas flesh out the volume. The famous author hoped to gain knowledge and insight, but a lot of what he saw repelled him. He could not escape the prejudices and bigotries of his time. The grandeur of ruins and the great sense of history to be found in the Old World inspired him; the order and cleanliness of France attracted him as well. But he often took the ways and tricks of those involved in the tourist trade as typical behavior of the countries involved. Like modern tourists, he did not meet cultured or disinterested people in such places---only touts, guides, servants, salesmen, and beggars.

As Twain travelled he got increasingly bogged down in minute descriptions of antiquities. By the time he got to Jerusalem, I was exhausted. While he revived my interest every now and then with another set of droll remarks or humorous observations, I admit that my will flagged somewhat towards the end of the 476 pages. Nowadays Americans are not so concerned to pinpoint the differences between the Old World and the New. Anyway, both have changed immeasurably in the last 150 years. But Twain, like many writers since--for example, Henry James, Hemingway, and Sinclair Lewis---found the comparison fascinating. Contemporary Americans more easily accept themselves for what they are, at least, they have become less defensive. They have also lost the pretense that somehow America is more innocent, a common 19th century trope. The best way to read this book is to dip into it over a period of time. I loved the sections where he took the mickey out of travel writers who waxed eloquent about the beauties of places that were anything but; recklessly trigger happy writers who claimed they'd showed the "natives" what was what (but probably did nothing of the kind). It's still a great travel book and if you ever liked Mark Twain, you should read it.