Rating: 4/5

Agatha Christie offers her readers an invite, an invite to come and solve her tantalising murder mystery.

It was a real tricky one, though I did have my suspicions very early on. There was a certain emphasis on a tiny bit of information that we didn’t really need to know that gave the game away. It added little to the story and, for me, only had the purpose of giving her killer an excuse not to be the killer. So it was obviously that person. Most readers seem to have been utterly dumbfounded at the reveal but I spotted it a mile of, perhaps only because I have seen the same device used in a book by another author. I’m not going to mention the name of the book because it will give it all away. 

Nevertheless, when it was finally confirmed it still brought me a great deal of delight. The actual murder event was ever so discreet, tucked in between two paragraphs in plain sight that will always be missed on an initial read. It was the editor afterward that drew my attention to the piece of text, and despite my suspicions I still missed it when I read it the first time. When I went back to read it though I noticed exactly how subtle Christie has been; it is exceedingly clever writing that’s for sure. 

The real success of Christie’s writing is her narrative drive. It is impossible to read this in a slow leisurely manner. I found myself storming through pages and chapters at an alarming rate. I actually read the entire novel in one evening and pretty much in one sitting. Christie gives you just enough information to keep you second guessing yourself but not enough to finally confirm your suspicions, at least, until that memorable reveal: the grand unmasking of her killer. Poirot knew all along; he was just keeping the killer as close as possible for as long as possible, baiting him the entire time. 

In the mode of modernism, Christie’s prose is deceptively simple. It pushes ever forward, picking up speed, as it heads towards the climax: a single line of dialogue that has, no doubt, dropped the jaw of many a reader. She also explores the psychological state of her characters and demonstrates awareness of Freud’s theories of psychoanalysis. It allowed her to get way with so much here and Poirot uses it too when he considers the possible murder motives his line of suspects could have. 

Overall, a brilliant book. This will not be the last Agatha Christie novel I read.