Rating: 5/5

One of my absolutely favorite romance novels.

Young rake, Lord David Delacourt and Lady Cecilia Markham-Sands got off to a bad start years earlier with the fault landing squarely at David's feet. He tried to make it right but she would have none of it.

A few years later, he is still a bachelor who is jaded and weary of his life and she is a young widow - now Lady Cecilia Lorimer, who is more lovely than ever. They refuse to have anything to do with one another but thankfully, the good-hearted and conscientious minister, Cole Amherst, takes it upon himself to interfere with their lives and the story takes off!

Lady Cecilia has been volunteering in Rev. Amherst's shelter for rehabilitated prostitutes in London's slums. David loses a card game to Amherst (Cole cheats) which means David has to manage the shelter for three months while Cole and his lovely wife remove to his country estate to await the birth of a baby.

Oh boy, oh boy - once David and Cecilia realize they have to work together for three months, the sparks fly but the attraction and love between the two manifests very quickly and oh wow - the story gets sweet and then sweeter. I loved it that there was no big misunderstanding to contend with despite their past. There was a lot of love and more love and and genuine respect and ultra-protectiveness from David to Cecilia. Pretty much everything we want in our Main Guy who is so willing to be reformed and get on the right track.

David realizes he has always loved Cecilia and apparently there was more in her heart for David than she actually knew. Their romance is set against the goings-on of the shelter and the fact that someone or a group of someone(s) are killing prostitutes at the shelter. David and Cecilia attempt to uncover villians responsible, with the help of Max De Rohan and George Kemble. We also get to spend some time with our friend, "Hell Bent" Rutledge - I love that guy.

Liz Carlyle is a super talented writer and her connected books in the "Rutledge" series are some of my faves. I have read and re-read "A Woman of Virtue" simply to bask in the romantic scenes between Delacourt and Cecily.