Rating: 3/5

The Ugly American was published in 1958 as a call for change. It was a blockbuster with millions of copies sold. The authors wanted to alert the American people to the fact that their government's diplomatic efforts against communism were failing due to a combination of unqualified people being put in the foreign service and a "we know best" approach to other nations. There was an impact. JFK did start the Peace Corps and did appoint qualified people rather than big donors as ambassadors. Long term, not only have the lessons of this book been disregarded, the entire State Department has been effectively dismissed in favor of military plays around the globe.

The book as literature is laughable. It should be read by anyone wondering what the words caricature and stereotype mean. Written at an 8th grade level, perhaps deliberately in order to reach all Americans, it is a collection of short stories about individual Americans blindly serving themselves in a foreign land in contrast to a few selfless Yankees doing the right thing among the natives. Everyone will get the point because it is driven home again and again. Tying the whole together is a dedicated U.S. Ambassador to a fictitious southeast Asian country called Sarkan, who travels the area honestly trying to educate himself on the situation.

To put it bluntly, The Ugly American is an insult to the intelligence of the reader.

That puts me in a bind on rating this work. It accomplished what it set out to do, successfully reaching a huge number of Americans, probably far more than the authors had hoped to reach. The cause was worthy so five stars are well deserved for propaganda.

But to the modern reader, well, I continually had to stifle a gag. At the same time I realize that 1950's America was an age of innocence and the portrayals in this book might well have resonated with readers at the time.

In keeping with the 1950's outlook, communism is without a doubt evil, a creeping deceiving menace out to capture the innocents of the world in a net of absolute control. While there is plenty in the book about the U.S. supporting France, there is nothing about the history of Vietnam being a French colony, of France's intention to regain that colony after WW2 and the full cooperation of the U.S. in that effort. Nothing is said of Ho Chi Minh's admiration of the U.S. and his initial attempts to gain U.S. support in opposition to French re-entry.

Far from being innocent peasants cluelessly waiting for selfless American individuals to enlighten them on building water pumps and raising chickens, the Vietnamese were painfully aware of how the West had dumped them as they strove for independence after the Japanese occupation of WW2 and how the real concern of non-communists was to regain control to the point of halting elections in South Vietnam out of fear of a communist win. It was because of this hypocritical stand that America made itself ugly. Even if everything this book's authors recommended had been done, it would have been nothing to counterbalance America's betrayal of it's own ideals in Vietnam in favor of an ideological battle with communism.

A 1963 movie was made from this book, starring Marlon Brando as the U.S. Ambassador to Sarkan. The movie is an effective, believable tragedy and has one of the most powerful final scenes of any movie I've seen. Forget the book. See the movie.