Rating: 3/5

Dun Lady's Jess was absolutely captivating and even though it did not end with cliffhangers of any sort, I went and bought this book immediately simply because I can't have enough of Jess and Carey and Arlen and Jaime and Mark. Especially Mark, simply because he is exactly like my brother.

Here's the problem: Where in Book 1 I found Jess' little quirks brought over from her horse persona endearing and realistic, in Changespell, it starts bordering on annoying. In Book 1, it is evident that despite her continued expression of horse behaviour, she is continuously learning to adapt to the human way of life. In Book 2, this is all I see: Jess is stubborn. Jess is headstrong. Jess is unwilling to compromise her horse behaviour simply because she can and the world should learn to accept her as she is. Well, let's be honest. This "don't change yourself to make the world happy" thing doesn't apply in every situation and it seems to me that it's something Jess doesn't understand. Jaime told her in Book 1 to be her own person and it felt like she decided it meant she can stop trying to learn to accept the human's way of life. For example, when people crowded her, her horse instincts kick in and she (quite literally) kicks out at the offender. Just like that. No warning at all, except for that "mentally laid-back ears" that she expects people to see. Oh, and did I mention that she also knows that said person doesn't know that she is a horse and didn't bother mentioning it, so said person won't know what to look out for? Of course, essentially there is nothing wrong with that since a lifetime's worth of behaviour can be hard to change and I know that first hand. The problem is, where in Book 1 she would feel guilty about it and try to change; in Book 2, she feels completely self-righteous doing it and gets annoyed at the offender instead. I mean, really? You wanted to have the liberty to change into human as and when you fancy it, so shut up and start learning some manners. If you can't deal with it, go back being a horse. Humans aren't superior to horses, you know (no sarcasm intended). Really, it's not her actions that annoy me. It's the attitude.

Also, where in Book 1 the characters were all rather rational and wise, in book 2, I felt as if they have all gone and lost their wits and cool. In Book 1, when Carey was so desperate to save Arlen, it made sense. In Book 2, when Dayna was so convinced that her raw magic can handle the rogues and hence decided that they should make a happy little trip to confront them, it felt like pride and arrogance. Happy, self-absorbed little children that think that they can do anything and everything that they want without considering the consequences. They were like, what happens if we win? World Peace! Hurray! What happens if we lose? Oh, umm... I think it'll be bad. Oh, let's not spend too much time thinking about it because it'll distract me. People, you think about all the good and bad of a situation before you do something so big! What if the plan failed and you are used as hostages against your friends. Wow. Congratulations but you just made an already complicated situation more complicated. Except, of course, if the friends made the wise decision of not giving in to the bad guys' demands, you'd go all outraged and think that it's them being to slow to act and all that crap (reference to Arlen's capture in Book 1 here). No, dears. It's them weighing the good vs the bad and deciding that the good outweighs the bad. Something that you will do well to learn. And it was irritating when Carey insisted on accompanying them even when he knows his own physical limitations. No, I take that back. They needed a guide and Carey was being selfless to offer. What he should have done was to stay back on their final stop to prevent hindering the others. Offering to go after Eric was pure stupid. I can't help but think that if he hadn't offered to go, Jess would never have needed to endure the chains in the first place. Good thing Jess learnt how to trigger the changespell as Lady or else it would really have been all for naught.

Honestly, if I hadn't liked Dun Lady's Jess (Book 1, not the character) so much, I would probably have given this book a much lower rating. At least it's not so bad that I would have thrown it into the bin without finishing it (I hope). As it is, 3 stars is the most I will ever give it.