Rating: 4/5

[9/10]

 The eyes were deep blue, with a sort of double vision. They saw you clearly, took you in completely, and at the same time looked beyond you. They had years to look back on, and more things to see in the years than a girl’s eyes had. 

Eyes like a deep pool to lure gumshoe Lew Archer to the deep end and drown him. What could be more quintessential hardboiled that a beautiful woman walking into the rundown office of a small-time private investigator and asking for help? I’ve read dozens of novels starting in this manner, yet there is something abour Ross MacDonald that makes me exclaim: ‘This is the gold standard!’ , the high mark I will use in the future to judge the imitators. Yes, I know I feel about the same about Chandler and Hammett, but there was something, like planets and stars coming into alignment, that made the second book in the Archer series much better than “The Moving Target”, which I called derivative and a trifle unoriginal. I am starting now to think that the reason I feel these stories are predictable and standard noir fare is because they have been imitated so many times, by so many aspiring writers.

So, where does Lew Archer positions himself in the private gumshoe business? Somewhere between the cynical, pragmatic Continental Op. and the more idealistic, knightly Marlowe – a combination of the two atitudes that gives Archer both a consience and a world weary depression, not unlike the image he sees reflected in the cheap mirror of a hooker’s trailer house:

 The man in the mirror was big and flat-bodied, and lean-faced. One of his gray eyes was larger than the other, and it swelled and wavered like the eye of conscience: the other eye was little, hard and shrewd. It stood still for an instant, caught by my own distorted face, and the room reversed itself like a trick drawing in a psychological test. For an instant I was the man in the mirror, the shadow figure without a life of his own who peered with one large eye and one small eye through dirty glass at the dirty lives of people in a very dirty world. 
“It’s kind of cramped,” she said, trying to be cheerful, “but we call it home sweet home.”

The quote above may be an indicator of why MacDonald doesn’t enjoy quite the same renown as his contemporaries Chandler and Hammet : writing about suburban posh lives in the early fifties, his uncompromising novels are a direct attack of the budding American Dream of prosperity and happy families living in charming homes. Maude Slocum, the woman knocking on Lew Archer’s door, is one such member of the California elite – she has looks, money and self-confidence to sail through the years without a storm in sight. And yet, there she is, slumming, reinforcing Archer’s convictions that everything is rot under the glitter :

 She was much too apologetic for a woman with that figure, in those clothes.
“Look,” I said. “I am rhinoceros-skinned and iron-hearted. I’ve been doing divorce work in L.A. for ten years. If you can tell me anything I haven’t heard, I’ll donate a week’s winnings at Santa Anita to any worthy charity.”
“And you can whip your weight in wildcats, Mr. Archer?”
“Wildcats terrify me, but people are worse.”  

Archer takes the case : at first glance a simple blackmail investigation, soon to get upgraded to a murder case when he arrives at the Slocum mansion, a rich house on top a beautiful mesa outside L.A., with extensive gardens and an outside pool of cerrulean blue. A wiser man might have walked away from the wild menagerie that the finds inside the house, but Archer is interested in more than money:

 “What makes you so persistent?”
“Curiosity, I guess. I’m getting interested in the case. It’s quite an interesting setup you’ve got here; I’ve never seen a fishline with more tangles.” 

The plot is typical of the late forties hardboiled, so convoluted and venal that soon everybody is a suspect, including but not limited to: a husband with acting aspirations, a mother-in-law who holds tight to the purse strings, a sultry teenage daughter, a gigolo chauffeur, a gay theatre director, a fat man with connections to the criminal underworld, a floozy waitress in a rundown bar, a bombshell blonde in an exclusive club, a bodyguard built like a brickhouse, a corrupt policeman. It’s pointless trying to unravel the plot threads in my review, both because one couldn’t avoid spoilers and because the real point of the novel is not ‘whodunit’ but what drove that person or person to crime. This psychological angle is another signature feature that separates MacDonald from his peers.

 I don’t know what justice is. Truth interest me, though. Not general truth if there is any, but the truth of particular things. Who did what when why. Especially why. 

Since I chose not to go into details about plot (although I might mention that I was a tad disappointed by how many times our gumshoe got knocked out senseless by the bad guys), I thought I would entice potential readers with a few examples of the surprisingly poetic turn of phrase and introspective moments that balance the bloody fists and the gun action.

On the subject of the detective as a voyeur, of the call of the night that is so strong in some people’s lives:

 I felt like a lonely cat, an aging tom ridden by obscure rage, looking for torn-ear trouble. I clipped that pitch off short and threw it away. Night streets were my territory, and would be till I rolled in the last gutter. 

On empathy and the need to make an effort, no matter how steep the climb from the bottom:

 “Now that you know where I live, come and see me sometime.”
The old words started an echo that lasted fifty miles. The night was murmurous with the voices of girls who threw their youth away and got the screaming meemies at three or four a.m. 

On being ready with a witty repartee when meeting shallow, rich ladies:

 “I so love creme de menthe; it’s such a pretty drink, and I always drink it when I wear my emeralds.”
“I always eat oyster stew when I wear my pearls,” I said. 

Speaking of rich people, glitter, and looking in from the sidelines, here’s a scene from a Slocum party:

 I listened to them talk. Existentialism, they said. Henry Miller and Truman Capote and Henry Moore. Andre Gide and Anais Nin and Djuna Barnes. And sex – hard-boiled, poached, coddled, shirred, and fried easy over in fresh creamery butter. Sex solo, in duet, trio, quartet; for all-male chorus; for choir and symphony; and played on the harpsichord in three-fourths time. And Albert Schweitzer and the dignity of everything that lives. 

Sex makes the world go round, and Archer is no monkish puritan, even if he does exhibit remarkable restraint when hot women fall into his arms, like sirens luring him into the deep with their song:

 Her gray eyes were crepuscular. The lashes came down over them like sudden night. Her mouth was dark and glistening. I kissed her, felt her toe press on my instep, her hand move on my body. I drew back from the whirling vortex that had opened, the drowning pool. She wriggled and sighed, and went to sleep in my arms.  and she also stole from his pockets a valuable piece of evidence, while he was distracted : that’s why these gals are called ‘fatale’  

In another place, another pair of eyes you can drown in:

 There was night in her voice, in her eyes, night caught like mist in her hair. 

Archer will eventually ‘solve’ the case, in his own particular way, more interested in real people than in blind justice. He will need another of his favorite solitary swims in the Pacific ocean – the only place left unspoiled by human greed and dirty secrets – to cleanse the bitterness and the sleaziness of the Slocum case off his skin.

 I sat over a third cup of coffee and thought about Maude Slocum. Hers was one of those stories without villains or heroes. There was no one to admire, no one to blame. Everyone had done wrong for himself and others. Everyone had failed. Everyone had suffered. 

&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;&gt;&gt;&lt;&lt;

I was tempted to give this episode five stars, but I finally settled for four and a half, considering some minor plot inconsistencies and hearing from some friends that the next Archer books are even better. I hope I fill find time to schedule the next installment soon.