Rating: 3/5

Aspects of A Fatal Glass of Beer are racist, misogynistic, and pedophobic. But how could they be otherwise when reflecting the misanthropic, deliberately outrageous persona of W. C. Fields during a period of anti-Asian sentiment and anti-Nazi, Communist-suspicious anxiety? A Fatal Glass of Beer upholds the mythos surrounding William Claude Dukenfield, but it also allows some of the humanity to show in acts of generosity and empathy (though rare) that the “character” portrayed both on-screen and in real-life (perhaps, accurately psycho-analyzed by the wrestler/landlord/poet who owns the office building where protagonist and Private Investigator Toby Peters’ office is located) insists he would emphatically deny if revealed.

As with all of the Stuart M. Kaminsky novels featuring Toby Peters which I have read, A Fatal Glass of Beer features humor (both in dialogue patter and situational awkwardness), bodily harm inflicted on the protagonist, Hollywood gossip, name-dropping, significant dream sequences featuring Max Fleischer’s iconic characters (particularly Koko the clown and Betty Boop), murder, and enough murders to keep a television series going for half a season. There are gunfights and car chases roughly equal to the number of red herrings that Kaminsky throws at the reader.

Not only am I personally a sucker (and we never give one of those an even break, do we?) for period pieces from this era before I was born, but I love Kaminsky’s writing style for these volumes which are like Sam Spade-lite. They take place in a world as corrupt as those of Hammett’s and Chandler’s protagonists, but the word palette isn’t as dark and gloomy. Kaminsky himself being something of a film historian and cinema enthusiast (In addition to writing almost a dozen non-fiction books on film, film history, and film professionals, he wrote the screenplay for Enemy Territory, had a novel adapted for a Catharine Deneuve film, and wrote a teleplay for the brief Nero Wolfe series), the film industry aspects are intriguing. In addition, I simply love references to consumer products no longer with us today (as a fan of old radio programs, I couldn’t help but get a kick out of the reference to “Rinso white, Rinso white, happy little washday song!” even though I hated when episodes of suspense and thriller shows were interrupted by that little whistling introduction followed by the “happy little washday song.”).

In A Fatal Glass of Beer, the plot has something of a “buddy movie” feel. Of course, as the enigmatic Juanita (waitress and Gypsy fortune-teller) informs Toby early on, one of the persons for which they will be searching is already dead with two more on the way. The first death turns out to be the real “buddy” of the picture and entirely true to the accounts of the real-life character who was dead. Yet, for roughly 2/3 of the book, it looks like Fields and Peters are intended to be the buddies. The journey is following an imposter who is reaping Fields’ stashes of money, deposited along the continental vaudeville circuits by Fields using his dubious phony names (a sample from the book would include: Otis T. Raisincluster, Quigley E. Sneersight, Ogle P. Thurp, Dedalus Krim, Mahatma Kane Jeeves, and Cormorant Beecham the Third). Along the way, as Peters deals out obscure clues and red herrings like Ricky Jay performing a demonstration of card control, Kaminsky manipulates characters to show prejudice for what it is, shallow empty narcissism reflecting personal insecurity. He demonstrates that “popular” prejudices against Asians, blacks, and Native Americans are grossly near-sighted and unrealistic. I particularly liked the part where W. C. Fields uses a speech that is supposed to be against certain races to demonstrate the virtues of individuals within said races.

The real villain in A Fatal Glass of Beer is telegraphed throughout the novel, at least once the “buddy movie” gets going. The red herrings help distract the reader but were never really convincing to me (I suppose that’s how it should be). But all in all, A Fatal Glass of Beer features several hours of enjoyment, including a desire to read some lines aloud in outrageous imitation of the late comedian as an homage to his love of euphony—VERY effectively transmitted in the novel.