Rating: 4/5

I read this book in 1987 when a huge Doors fan in my high school science class loaned me a cassette tape of music that would forever change what I thought about fire, and pretty much everything else. It became a part of my permanent collection of books and I read it a second time in August 1998 shortly after a news bite in Time magazine made note that the 30-year lease on his grave at Père Lachaise cemetery in Paris would expire on July 6, 2001 because the caretakers were "tired of picking up beer cans and condoms" left in the area there. The magazine tidbit pondered where Jim should go once that happened. Notable suggestions included, The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland, Ohio, Poet's Corner in Westminster Abbey, London and Oliver Stone's Home in Greater L.A. Graceland was also on the list, but the con given in argument against that was, "Not enough Morrison impersonators - crowd would look Elvis-heavy". I am happy to report that his lease was extended and that fans and curious tourists alike, continue to include the gravesite on their "must-see" list of Paris.

The book is a revealing (as most biographies are) look at Jim's life.I found it extremely tense throughout most of it because of his relentless plunge downward through a haze of booze and drugs. However, Jerry Hopkins and Daniel Sugerman do an excellent job of telling his story in the way true friends would...with brutal honesty and the sharing of poignant memories in a true genius's existence. There is quite a bit of mystery surrounding Jim's death and to this day there are those who whole heartedly believe that Jim did not die of a heart attack in a bathtub (which is the official reason on record), but that he "quietly disappeared" during that 4th of July weekend in 1971, "to find the peace to write and the freedom of anonymity." 

Don't forget to check out the film, "The Doors" for more. Be prepared for Oliver Stone's vision (you either like it or you don't) and the clever casting of Val Kilmer who performs many of the songs himself and being able to differentiate between his voice and Jim's is a true challenge.