Rating: 3/5

Being reasonably well-written and researched, this book suffers from a relatively uncommon issue: the misallocation of attention. While the 'A Graphic Guide' series consistently punches above its weight, I can't help but trace this problem back to limits inherent in its format. No entry surpasses 200 pages; this one would have profited greatly from being an exception. Despite its title, this book would probably be more accurately titled Introducing The Darwinian Revolution. Relatively little attention is paid to the content of Darwin's work, and far more space is dedicated to discussing the environment in which that work germinated.

We learn about Lyell's geological theories, the influence of Thomas Malthus, and the blinders placed on science by Natural Theology. These are genuinely interesting subjects, but there's a trade-off in exploring them within a book so short. While we learn about natural selection, we don't trace how Darwin presented the arguments, nor do we spend much time exploring what Darwin thought the consequences of his ideas were. We don't learn about sexual selection or Darwin's thoughts on the evolution of humankind. As interesting as it might be to read about that, those aren't the crucial parts of Darwin's legacy, and that's really what this book is about.

And, when you get down to it, Darwin didn't have that much of a legacy! Darwin's significant contribution to scientific history is not the theory of natural selection but rather the collection of evidence he amassed to support it. Natural selection quickly fell out of favor within Darwin's lifetime, supplanted by Lamarckian ideas until the Neo-Darwianin Synthesis emerged in the 1930s. But, and this is crucial, Darwin's work killed non-evolutionary biology. The evidence he compiled made evolution indisputable, even if his explanation of its mechanism needed work. This represents a major paradigm shift in the sense of Thomas Kuhn, and this book is more interested in that process than it is in Darwin. Oh well.