Rating: 4/5

I have just started reading old, classic science fiction. I have an old pretty well beat up 1970 version (so old that it still has an ad for Kent cigarettes in the middle of it). I also have a thing for really cool sci-fi cover art, so when I'm buying these things, I look for the cover art to see if it's entertaining. I was surprised to find out, was very likely the basis for one of my favorite movies ever, Alien. It is divided up into four stories, all of them tied together by the fact that they all happened on this particular voyage of the Space Beagle -- a craft and crew which was put together to explore new worlds &amp; galaxies. 

The stories are as follows:
1. There is an encounter with a cat-like creature with tentacles who feeds on "id" on a desolate planet who threatens the ship &amp; its crew (and possibly humanity); 

2. an attack through psychic means by a bird-like population of aliens living in an outer galaxy; 

3. third (and probably the best) the discovery of a bizarre creature who has no home except in space, pulled and pushed by the cosmic forces, and as you might guess, starving -- this one is outstanding. 

4. another encounter with an attacking alien creature. 

Another factor that ties all of these stories together is one Dr. Elliott Grosvenor, who was the first person to have graduated from "the Nexial Foundation." Grovesnor has been taken on board as a scientist (this expedition is filled with scientists) representing the field of nexialism -- a sort of integration of thought and science combined with mind and body control techniques. Where other scientists had problems trying to figure out what to do during each crisis listed above, Grovesnor could step back and use his education to solve the problems. 

So here's what I didn't like about these stories: if you have absolutely no clue who Oswald Spengler was you may not understand how nexialism relies on inferences from Spengler's theories. 

 If you want some really fine classic sci-fi, then you may enjoy this one. It is dated, for sure, but still fun.