Rating: 4/5

Oh I do love a tortured hero. I'm not exactly sure why, but I do. And Christian is a shining example of the dark and tortured hero. He's been put through so much, courtesy of his own brother. He used to have the world at his feet, and it was all ripped away from him. Of course he's angry and bitter. 
So when the Duke of Westmoor offers him money to break his own sister's heart, who just happens to be Christian's ex-fiancee, Christian jumps at the chance for vengeance.
Christian's plans are scuppered when he meets Jessamine, her innocence and pure heart reach through his defences and he can't hurt her. I loved the time when Christian was 'courting' Jessie, before she find out why he's actually there. They have a very sweet romance developing, it's light with moments of humour, but all the while Christian is battling himself.

Of course, it can't last. Semi-truths, lies and circumstances thrust them apart. A hurt and ruined Jessie is sent to Charlestown, to stay with her Uncle. 
It's not long before Jessie and Christian are thrust back together and emotions are high.
They both have rather negative views of the other, but the sexual chemistry between them is as explosive as ever. 
I felt Jessie's pain so much, she still loves Christian despite his betrayal. She doesn't want him to know though, and makes sure she uses every opportunity to assure him of her indifference.

I'll try not to give too much away, but events occur that means that Christian and Jessie are in close proximity for an extended period of time. There's danger, and intrigue and the stakes are raised when a jealous rival seeks to ruin Christian.

I loved how Jessie's steadfast love and eventually, her renewed trust had the ability to bring Christian out of his darkness. There were so many obstacles between them, and so many misunderstandings that it was a HEA that was hard fought for. You'll find yourself crying with Jessie, and urging them to their wonderfully rewarding happy ending.
I'm looking forward to reading more from Tanya Anne Crosby!

*I received a copy from the author in exchange for my honest review.