Rating: 4/5

Scott Hahn’s book, The Lamb’s Supper is an excellent eschatological explanation of the Roman Catholic Mass. In 2011, it served as background for a couple of classes I was then teaching. In preparation for the implementation of the Third Edition of the Roman Missal our parish used A Biblical Walk Through the Mass (Book): Understanding What We Say and Do In The Liturgy to prepare and I read this book to gain a fuller appreciation of the Eucharist.
 
Hahn's work is based on the Mass as expression of Heavenly Liturgy as described in the Book of Revelation. He begins by giving a short history of the celebration of the Lord's Supper followed by a brief synopsis. In Part 2, he gives four primary schema for interpreting the characters in the concluding book of Scripture: 1.) historicist; 2.) idealist 3.) preterist; and 4.) futurist which can be held/followed separately or taken together as ‘the earliest Christians taught that the sacred text operates on (at least) four levels, and all of those levels, all at once, teach God's one truth—like a symphony.’ p.73

However, having taught the class and read any number of works on the Mass, the Eucharist and worship, what stands out is this paragraph from Part III, Chapter 2, ‘Worship is Warfare’:  ‘Yet the battle remains the battle... What is our particular combat during Mass? Maybe it’s warding off contempt for the worshiper whose perfume is too strong, or the man who sings the wrong lyrics off-key. Maybe it’s holding back our judgment against the parishioner who’s skipping out early. Maybe it’s turning the other way when we begin to wonder how low that neckline really goes. Maybe it’s fighting off smugness when we hear a homily riddled with grammatical errors. Maybe it’s smiling, in an understanding way, at the mom with the screaming baby. Those are tough battles. Maybe they’re not as romantic as sabers clashing in a faraway desert, or marching through tear gas to protest injustice. But because they’re so perfectly hidden, so interior, they require greater heroism. No one but God and His angels will notice that you didn’t mentally critique Father’s homily this week. No one but God and His angels will notice that you withheld judgment against the family that was underdressed. So you don’t get a medal; you win a battle instead.’ 

Updated: October 19, 2014