Rating: 5/5

Superman is born again for a new generation!

I bought this in its single comic book issues, but I chosen this TPB edition to be of making a better overall review.

This TPB collects “The Man of Steel” #1-6.

Creative Team:

Writer &amp; Illustrator: John Byrne

Inks: Dick Giordano

  THE FIRST SUPER-HERO IS TOLD ONCE AGAIN

Since the creation of Superman in 1938, it’s not like his origin had been the same, since once a while, here and there, creative teams added their own visions and details to the foundations of the first super-hero ever, forging a new kind of genre.

However, it was pretty much the same history for Superman since his creation as comic book character until 1986, until THE crisis…

…the Crisis on Infinite Earths came and DC wasn’t the same anymore since its even before it was a sole company.

It wasn’t 1938 anymore and the readers had outgrown even the Silver Age style of storytelling.
It was necessary to evolve, to update the whole run of titles in DC Comics…

…and it was needed to do it for The Man of Steel.

It was a job for John Byrne!!!

His vision of how the Last Son of Krypton would be able to function in the 80s was so solid, so inspired, that even nowadays, after two more reboots of DC Comics and even a newer origin’s story, you still can catch seeds of Byrne’s vision in the new versions of Superman and his world of action.

  BOTH COMIC BOOK CHARACTERS BUT…

John Byrne had a tremendous responsibilty in retelling once again the new “canon” origin for Superman in the Post-Crisis DC Universe, but he knew something that sometimes people tend to forget or missing in the process of looking new angles to tell Superman’s origin…

…that what works for Batman DOES NOT work for Superman!

They may be the World’s Finest, but they are different type of comic book characters, they may defend the same principles but they opposite sides of a same coin.

So, in Byrne’s vision, Superman wasn’t a real boy scout anymore, but hardly he was a dark knight, he still was fighting his never-ending battle for truth, justice and freedom, but then you could feel the character, thinking and acting in the mature way that readers needed of him to be in the Bronze Age of comic books in the goold ol’ 80s.

So, while I am not thrilled of having Superman and Batman fighting each other, Byrne’s vision was right about that it was impossible for such characters to be in the “same page” about how to take against villains and other kind of threats.

  DIFFERENT BACKGROUNDS BUT STILL THE USUAL SUSPECTS

Superman doesn’t totally developed all his powers until reaching young adulthood, so he wasn’t Superboy when he was younger (something that since then has been respected), and since Bizarro was originally introduced in Superboy comic books, then the super-villain found a new interpretation in this miniseries too, then with adult Superman.

Jor-El doesn’t wear Rao’s sign on the chest of his Flash Gordon-like costume, in fact that 30’s costume is no more, but now Kryptonian’s fashion sense gave him a proper alien look.

Jonathan and Martha Kent were still alive during Superman’s adult life (that I love that concept since I think that it is like an “overkill” that Kal-El / Clark Kent not only lost his birth parents but also his adoptive parents), and since in this version, Kal-El arrived still in formation inside of a birthing matrix of his Kryptonian ship, this 80’s Superman was “born” on Earth, and even thanks a blizzard that isolated Kent’s farm in Smallville, it was possible to make people believe that Clark was the real son of the Kents and not adopted.

Lois Lane isn’t obsessed of getting married with Superman, but she is a truly fearless adult career woman of the 80s, top reporter of the Daily Planet in Metropolis.

And easily, the best update by John Byrne to Superman’s comic books was…

…Lex Luthor.

Lex isn’t a mad scientist anymore, not even wear a power armor, but he remained to be an evil guy, becoming something even more insidious, more dangerous, more intimidating…

…the CEO of a multi-millionaire business company.

Thanks to this brilliantly inspired updated to the classic supervillain, Lex Luthor was finally able to interact in a whole new way with the rest of characters in the title, that even got him to be President of the United States (later in comics, not here in this TPB)…

…mmh…

…wait a minute…

…evil millionaire CEO that got to become President of the United States?!!!

…mmh…

…where have I heard that this happened also?

Mmh, silly me! I must be mistaken! Things like that only happen in comic books, right?

Right?

Well, in any case, there isn’t a single doubt that John Byrne accomplished the tall order of fast-forwarding Superman’s titles to become powerful once again and therefore able to cope with 80’s era and beyond, until nowadays.