Rating: 2/5

I've been trying to branch out in my reading lately, and every time I do, I get reminded why I don't.

The reason I like science fiction and fantasy is that it tends to obey Eleanor Roosevelt's dictum - "Great minds discuss ideas; average minds discuss events; small minds discuss people." - and chooses to discuss ideas above all else. 'War of the Rats' ought to at least succeed at the level of discussing an important event and fascinating people, but it doesn't even manage to do that well. 

Indeed 'War of the Rats' was surprisingly bad at pretty much every level. As military fiction, I learned nothing about the character or nature of war. None of the things that this novel is praised for felt in evidence anywhere in the text. As historical fiction, I didn't come away feeling like I had some understanding of the Siege of Stalingrad or gained any insight into the real figures that fought there. As fiction, the characters felt flat, almost stereotypes, suitable for a comic book perhaps but nothing else. The female characters were unsurprisingly the worst, and Tania's depiction was annoying at best and misogynist at worst (and I say that as a staunch anti-feminist). As a thriller, the drama never felt intense or exciting, and the finale was an anti-climatic affair which failed to stand up to even its internal logic. The 'villain' character went full Cobra Commander in the end, doing stupid things that made no sense at all even from the character's own reasoning as presented to the reader and which were completely at odds with the superhuman Über sniper presented earlier in the text or even with the character's own description of his plan of action. For example, if Thorvald knew that Zaitsev was accurate to 450 yards, and he was he bragged accurate out to 1000 yards, why did he choose to engage Zaitsev from a static position at a distance of just 250 yards which he scorned as amateur earlier in the book and at which he also knew he'd have no advantage over his enemy? Why did he choose to shoot the fake position first, when he'd already determined where Zaitsev really was? Shouldn't you shoot the real position first, then shoot the fake second to be sure rather than the other way around? Why, having realized he'd been given away, did he not simply duck down and retreat to a better position - preferably one 1km back as he'd set out to do in the first place? 

The whole thing was just a mess that felt a waste of my time. Maybe it wouldn't have been so bad, but between Japanese Destroyer Captain, Victory into Defeat, The Goblin Emperor, and A Face Like Glass I'd been on a real roll lately and this just felt wholly unworthy. I keep trying to branch out from what I know, but every time I do I just feel burned. Either the writer can't write. Or the writer can't tell a story. Or the writer simply has nothing interesting to say. If only two of the three were true, I still might still be able to recommend the work, but in this case I can only say that Robbins offers up a readable work that fails for me to be even good potato chip fiction.