Rating: 5/5

What I like the most about this day, 8 of March, in case GR posts a different date on this text, which is a great day as any other day to live, is that from early morning following my daily path on the strolling alleys (that is on the ground) but also under-ground (that is by metro) I have been hit by groups and groups of men, each carrying in their arms a big bucket of flowers (thin flowers but very beautiful with lots of colours). Most of them displayed wide smiles while maybe feeling themselves a bit different than yesterday because of this very soft, delicate but wondrous burden they were delivering to their places of work. I have enjoyed more than the other days of the week my morning journey to work. But the nicest surprise was when I entered the office building where was this bodyguard who handed over to me a beautiful yellow rose with a wish of happy woman’s day. He made my day! Happy to see and be a witness of such lovely gestures and, wishing that the message and the intentions behind this int’l celebration should not fade away without producing any positive change within our hearts and minds.
This was supposed to be a review but as usual I am sliding on a different track and I reach nowhere 😉 which is a good direction still because I can further multiply my searches to other nowhere.
With each new book of Saramago I feel myself enriched with a direct geometrical progression of my admiration towards his innate genius, very much alive and kicking its way to the endless limits. This writer is just simply Great. First and foremost, I am highly subjective towards him and will continue to be so. Hence, I am at a loss at establishing a hierarchy regarding which novel I loved most of the ones I read so far. Each one of his novels is a stand-alone masterpiece.
The Gospel according to Jesus Christ is truly a shining brilliant jewel, maybe a bit more because it brought back to my mind memories long time put to sleep. Through quick mind flashes, I got back my childhood years spent together with my favorite maternal grandfather who used to keep my imagination at work by telling me about the Bible works. He got me so interested that I eventually took the Bible and read it, wholly. I was far too small of age back then and I cannot assert I did understand what may be of high relevance but I did enjoy it more because of the stories put in a more interpretative light by my grandfather. He did study four years of theology but he didn’t practice not even one day as a priest. His main passion was to be an automation engineer which is what he practiced his whole professional life. He was my first guide through this immense chapter in human life and I feel fortunate that he had enough of an open developed mind not to corrupt my own innocent undeveloped at that time mind with any preconceptions about religion. He always let me wander through the land of ideas without forcing any definitive answer on any questions that were posed. That is why now I cannot even say what is I am of, if I do belong to any group, of the few main known ones. I guess I take a bit from all of them, but just the part that feels integrative and positively affecting my whole being, mind, heart and soul.
It was enchanting and challenging to read this novel. Once you overcome the ethical and theological confrontations, even before opening the first page of this gospel, though impossible not to recur from time to time, letting your eyes linger through the pages of this book proves to be an entirely awesome and pleasant reading. And not because it is about Jesus’s life, as obviously Jesus is the main hero of this gospel, but because it seems the book does not have (it never had, maybe) the irreverent purpose of contradicting what others have written in those long past times, and therefore does not dare to say that it did not happen what happened, putting instead a YES a NO, being Jesus this hero and his adventures well known from official religious books.
Yes, it's easy to get close to him and to know his future, the good and miraculous things that have existed in his life, miracles such that some will give food, others will restore health, one that will defeat death. 
Yes, it's easy to change your ideas when you encounter unexpected, miraculous situations, lacking the power of an explanation by reason, but it's just as easy to keep intact your robust skepticism, sometimes characteristic to the golden age of youth, sometimes due to a closed mind.
One of the very best parts from this jewel of book is the three-party interview between the God, the Devil and Jesus, on a boat, in the unknown middle of the sea, surrounded by a thick obscure fog, and which lasted for, more or less, just about 40 days, although for Jesus was just a matter of a couple of hours as for his own perception, especially that returned back on the shore the people waiting for him anxiously started to assault him with questions of what has happened there out in the sea. Although this meeting was highly interesting – definite one of the finest brushes of Saramago narrative genius – for these poor people (fishermen by profession) was a kind of no-work period, not that they went on strike purposely but more because they just couldn’t practice their daily job because the heavy tick wall of fog that made sailing a meeting with death, just in case of trying though… I think in a corner of my mind I also linked this with something I have been affected by recently. I did under-go the work assessment for previous year and I chose the attribute to qualify my performance as outstanding, top of top on the ladder. Upon final discussion with my boss, I was told that in order to deserve this I should be capable of walking on water, to which my sudden lament came uncontrollably: But I am not Jesus Christ‼ He was only One.
My Saramago reading adventure continues with high gusto and I am already so very certain that it will bring further personal rewards that are not helped by words to be expressed. So happy he did have, even limited like all of us, existence on this Earth for some of us to feel overjoyed for reading his novels.
≪ Multa vreme vor ramane aici acesti copaci, si va sosi ziua cand se va fi pierdut memoria a ceea ce s-a intamplat, si atunci, cum oamenii vor pentru orice cate o explicatie, falsa sau adevarata, se vor inventa cateva istorii si legende, la inceput mai pastrand inca o oarecare relatie cu faptele, apoi din ce in ce mai slaba, pana cand totul se va transforma in pura fabula. Si va sosi alta zi cand copacii vor muri de batranete si vor fi taiati, si alta cand, din pricina unei autostrazi, sau a unei scoli, sau a unei case de locuit, sau a unui centru comercial, sau a unui fort militar, excavatoarele vor rascoli terenul si vor scoate la lumina zilei, pentru o noua nastere, scheletele care au zacut acolo vreme de doua mii de ani. Vor veni atunci antropologii si un profesor de anatomie va examina resturile, pentru ca, mai tarziu, sa anunte lumii scandalizate ca, de fapt, pe vremea aceea, oamenii erau rastigniti cu genunchii indoiti. Si cum lumea nu-l putea dezavua in numele stiintei, l-a detestat in numele esteticii. ≫