Rating: 3/5

I was eager to read this book after I’d finished The Once and Future King, because in my ignorance I thought it might offer some more background on Merlyn’s life and origins. One of the things intriguing me in The Once and Future King was White’s description of Merlyn as living backwards in time, implying that Merlyn had his origin in the 20th or a later century. Merlyn’s knowledge of 20th-century history (adverted to in the majority of Merlyn’s anachronistic allusions/similes in The Once and Future King) indicates his presence in that century, maybe even that he was born in that century. Twentieth-century history was significant to Merlyn, likely because it was the background of his formative development, just as we most strongly/vividly recall events from our first two decades. 

Sadly, my curiosity about Merlyn’s origins—how he could live as if each century was a decade—got no happiness from The Book of Merlyn, nor was there any further discussion of what it meant to live each new day with companions (eg, Arthur) unaware of the previous day’s events (which for them are still to come).

Instead, The Book of Merlyn is an interlude, almost a dream (which alternative Arthur grasps at, but Merlyn denies)—the lacuna in the dark hours just before a final battle with Mordred. Pace Merlyn, what supports events in The Book of Merlyn as being a dream are the fantastical aspects of communing in a vast burrow with a variety of animals and the fact that Arthur’s transformations into an ant and a goose are the very same he’d experienced in The Sword and Stone, the first part of The Once and Future King. [In reality, of course, this repetition of events in the first and last books of Arthur’s life was White re-working his five novels into a single volume of four novel-length parts, abandoning The Book of Merlyn’s pre-battle interlude and the cranky and didactic fulmination on the singularity of humankind as a warring creature.]

Merlyn whisks Arthur to a confab with the animals in order to relieve Arthur of pre-battle anxieties, to give him some perspective on what seems a horrible, botched outcome to his life’s goals. Instead of consolation, Merlyn largely impresses on Arthur the folly of trying to remedy humankind’s instinct to war. Merlyn lectures on humanity’s inability to live instinctually, how human intelligence actually thwarts instinctive social harmony. Merlyn forces Arthur to (re)live the experience of ants and geese to observe how different styles of social cohesion/governance best suit humankind. Merlyn lectures that anarchy best suits humanity, as it is founded on the individual. (In contemporary terms, “anarchy” is invoked to suggest chaos and disorder, and to remedy this negative prejudice we now speak of “libertarianism”.)

There are some good dramatic moments in The Book of Merlyn, ones which jibe with the spirit and content of The Once and Future King (especially in the final pages, when the battle on the Salisbury plain is recounted and the fates of Lancelot and Gwenever are summarized), but the general thrust of the book is a queer, cranky sermon. Sylvia Townsend Warner’s amiably readable introduction to White’s final installment on King Arthur and Merlyn communicates the book’s genesis and its final exclusion from the larger corpus. While Warner appears to regret The Book of Merlyn’s exclusion, my view is that it is largely redundant (episodes are repeated), superfluous (too explicit interpretation given to events), and anti-climactic (signals a conclusion to the anxious darkness of Arthur’s pre-battle anxieties and regrets).