Rating: 1/5

I liked Ballard's _High Rise_ very much. This book is not that. Well, that's not really true. It's High Rise set in Cannes, with more words and bad, nonsensical metaphors.

This book relies on a psychological explanation that goes on too long. It's not really hard to understand that people, especially privileged people, like sex, drugs, and violence, and they like committing crimes on people who are less likely to fight back. The plot revolves around a mystery that isn't really a mystery--what's going on "behind the scenes" at this perfect business park. The foreshadowing is heavy-handed, and the clues are obvious and overstated. And I can't believe I read the whole book for that ending.

The narrator is unlikable, partly because he's gross and married someone way younger (not a deal-breaker in itself, but that coupled with his dismissive disdain for women in general makes him one of "those guys") and partly because he gets off on the violence he sees or has described to him. He's supposed to be the detective figuring out the secrets, but he's entirely too sympathetic to the villains' point of view. There's no tension there. The set-up there makes him act in inexplicable ways.

His wife also acts for unknown reasons. I can't understand how she could be such a smart woman for him to fall in love with and end up with no will of her own. I can't understand how she can say she's happy at Eden-Olympia. And all the references to her or to pubescent girls (because those are THE SAME: a grown woman and little girls) as Alice in Wonderland, and ripe for exploitation, are just gross. Referring to another work doesn't make your book "literature." And if Alice was so great because she got into and out of situations because of her logical common sense (which I also disagree with as a reading of that story--I don't think Alice is the heart of logic in those books), then are you making your book worse than that by having your Alice fall apart in the end? Sad, sad. Eden, Olympia, Alice in Wonderland. Write your own story, don't rely on a bunch of allusions to provide gravitas. 

The name of the business park (assuming it's not based on an actual business park because I refuse to look that up and give this book any more of my time after this review) is indicative of the problems with the novel: it's not just Eden or Olympus--it's BOTH. Again, High Rise was interesting in part for its sparseness. In this book, there are too many words thrown at roughly the same issue, just 25 years later. And he's gone from showing the problems of technology and "modern" life to telling--sentences that could be thesis statements in someone's anti-technology, anti-corporate manifesto. Boring, boring.