Rating: 4/5

I loved this book, not because it was an especially easy or fun read but because books like this one discussing tough topics need to be written. So thank you, Richard Peck, for writing this book. This whole review is going to be a big spoiler because to talk about why it's awesome I kind of have to give away the big surprise. So, be forewarned.

 Despite being filed often as mystery/suspense, this book is really only half mystery. In the 1970's in a small, conservative suburb in western Connecticut, Gail starts getting a lot of hang up phone calls while she's babysitting or home alone. Then, someone starts leaving obscene notes in her locker at school. Finally, about half way through the book, Gail is raped and beaten by her best friend's boyfriend and the town's golden boy, Phil. End of mystery. 

The whole second half of the book is about Gail dealing with the aftermath. Many of those around Gail don't want to believe she was raped. The police officer who questions her insinuates that she deserved it. She's pretty, after all, she must have been teasing her boyfriend and he got a little riled up. You can't blame a guy. The lawyer Gail's family hires, who's awesome, basically says she'll probably lose if they go to court because a) Gail's taking birth control, b) she's having sex with her steady boyfriend, and c) she's pretty. Basically, she's a scheming, easy, delinquent youth trying to ruin the chances of an all start athlete and son of the richest family in town. I just about lost it at this point and sat silently fuming and muttering to myself for a while until I was calm enough to continue.

There are a lot of reviews of this book on Goodreads talking about how the subject matter is too adult for this story to be considered young adult. The book starts with Gail and her boyfriend skinny dipping, and there's a few discussions between Gail and her mother about how she's been to Planned Parenthood to get birth control and how Steve and her are sleeping together. And there is the rape scene. But Peck was obviously very careful to avoid anything that could be considered obscene or indecent. The contents of the notes left in Gail's locker are only alluded to. The rape scene ends before any actual rape begins. And not once is there an actual sex scene. This book is downright clean compared to some of the passionate scenes found in other YA novels. The only thing that this book has that others do not is frank discussion of a young woman's sexuality and her right to identify as a sexual being without being harangued for it.

Yes, it's difficult to read at times, especially during and after the rape scene. It's an intense experience, what Gail goes through. But it's so important to continue this and similar kinds of discussions with teen girls. This book made me want to get down on my knees and thank the women's rights activists who fought to change the perception of rape in this country since the 1970's. But girls still need to know that these things can happen, that it's often someone you know, that their silence will only further hurt themselves and maybe even others (as Gail's does when her silence leaves Phil free to strike again). Young adulthood is the perfect time to read this kind of story and begin discussing these issues. 

End of rant.