Rating: 5/5

In 120 AD, the 9th Legion – Spanish marched out of its fortress in Eboracum (York) in Britain, passed through Hadrian's Wall, disappeared into the wilds of Caledonia (Scotland), and was never heard of again. Up to this day, no one knows what happened to the 4,000-man legion.

Mary Sutcliff provides her theory in The Eagle of the Ninth when Marcus Flavius Aquila, whose father was the senior centurion of the first cohort of the 9th, takes command of a military fort on Britain's frontier. His time there is brief because he is wounded so badly in an uprising that he's discharged and goes to live with his uncle elsewhere in Britain. Later Flavius learns that a tribe beyond Hadrian's wall in Caledonia might have the 9th Legion's eagle standard. Flavius resolves to travel there and find out what happened to his father. He has another reason, too, for going. He wants to find the 9th Legion's eagle because the 9th can't be reformed without it. Disguised as a travelling eye doctor, Flavius crossed into Caledonia with his friend and former slave, Esca, to find the eagle. The rest of the novel describes their adventures.

I loved this novel and it's the first one I've read by Sutcliff. Although it starts out slowly, the book picks up speed and keeps on going. Sutcliff develops her characters so fully you think they are real people. She describes the settings and tribal customs vividly. And she knows her history. The novel isn't just an adventure story but focuses on character, love, friendship, and loyalty. Sutcliff's novels are classified as YA, but are Adult as well.

Sutcliff was an incredible woman. She came down with juvenile arthritis when she was 2 years old and spend her early years in bed lying on her back. During that time, her mother read stories to her, including ones about Greece and Rome. Sutcliff didn't learn to read until she was 9 and dropped out school at 14 to go to art school. Her father, who was in the Royal Navy, moved from one place to another, so Sutcliff never had a permanent home. Sutcliff became an artist but later turned to writing novels whose themes were inspired by the stories and myths her mother read to her as a child. Sutcliff also spent most of her life in a wheelchair.