Rating: 1/5

I found myself quite unexpectedly really enjoying 
  The Cheerleader
, so I was excited to read this sequel, The Return of the Vampire. Disappointingly that excitement didn't last. I felt Caroline B. Cooney's flowery and poetic writing style really helped establish an interesting mood in the previous book, but here it feels almost parodic. The protagonist in this book follows in the footsteps of Althea (who has since moved away and now barely warrants. mention), with an equally strange choice of name - Devnee. And pretty much exactly like the previous book, Devnee longs to be beautiful and popular Her family is new to town, moving in to Althea's old digs, and of course Devnee's bedroom ends up being in the tower, and of course she ends up making a deal with the vampire. I think retreading the same ground did not help when it came to this sequel feeling like a parody of the first. On the plus side, I did once again like the descriptions of the vampire.

There are a couple of minor differences - there's some nonsense about Devnee's shadow leaving her as she makes deals with the undead, and instead of just a general improvement to her appearance, Devnee seems to acquire certain traits from the vampire's victims this time. There's also some inconsistencies with exactly how the vampire engages with his victims, with 
  The Cheerleader
 requiring a more active involvement from the protagonist than what we get here. Unfortunately none of this is particularly inspired, and the majority of the book is moping and wishing and reading the increasingly frustrating thoughts of an incredibly self-centred teenage girl. 

The hurried conclusion is also laughably weak and sudden. I'm quite baffled at how Caroline B. Cooney can pretty much tell the same story twice, and yet there's such a distinct and vast difference in how enjoyable they both are. This is quite easily once of the worst Point Horror books I've read thus far, and I'm now rather apprehensive about reading her other contributions. I suppose time will tell.

1/5

Point Horror Ranked
1) 
  The Girlfriend
 - 4/5
2) 
  Trick or Treat
 - 3.5/5
3) 
  Teacher's Pet
 - 3.5/5
4) 
  The Baby-Sitter II
 - 3.5/5
5) 
  The Cheerleader
 - 3.5/5
6) 
  April Fools
 - 3.5/5
7) 
  My Secret Admirer
 - 3.5/5
8) 
  The Lifeguard
 - 3.5/5
9) 
  Thirteen Tales of Horror
 - 3/5
10) 
  The Accident
 - 3/5
11) 
  Funhouse
 - 3/5
12) 
  The Invitation
 - 2.5/5
13) 
  The Snowman
 - 2.5/5
14) 
  The Boyfriend
 - 2/5
15) 
  Mother's Helper
 - 2/5
16) 
  The Baby-Sitter
 - 1.5/5
17) The Return of the Vampire - 1/5
18) 
  Beach Party
 - 1/5