Rating: 4/5

I don't usually read historical novels. They can be riddled with inaccuracies or simply historically otiose. This book, however, really wowed me. Renault follows the life of the ancient lyric poet, Simonides. Our historical knowledge of Simonides' life is thin, so Renault has to fill in a lot of gaps. Sometimes the events she postulates are not evidenced by our historical knowledge, but they always seem plausible within the narrative, and often also justify their absence from the historical record (e.g. a young Simonides spent time on Samos during the reign of Polycrates, but was never noticed by the tyrant or invited to perform in his court).

Large parts of the novel follow events that we couldn't possibly know, such as the details of his upbringing or his dalliance with common prostitutes. Other parts of the novel cover events that are the topic of much historical conjecture, such as the strange events surrounding the tyrannicides Harmodius and Aristogeiton. Some familiarity with ancient history and literature makes this book more fun. Seeing Cyrus the Great, Pisistratus, and Anacreon through the eyes of the narrator almost rivals the joy of getting into the head of Simonides himself.

The book gives a fair representation of many aspects of historical reality, and although it is based on scholarship that is dated by now, it still covers more than you might get from a survey of the 'great men' of the time. Those who read history usually read about the leaders and the generals, which this book doesn't ignore. But what does life look like for the traveling artist? Or for the lowly shepherd? What did an ancient festival mean to the participant? These are questions that this book tackles and its answers seem more meaningful than scholarly debates about the social function of ancient ritual.

Renault makes her characters sensible to us by endowing them with many of the psychological and social characteristics that we identify with today. In some cases this may misrepresent the past. For example, a shepherd mentions sacrificing a goat for good luck in secret because he wanted to avoid reproach from his stingy estate owner. But how could you secretly sacrifice an animal? Once it is sacrificed, you would have a lot of meat to share with the community. Did he just discard the meat like a wasteful modern? It seems implausible that there were covert sacrifices of animals as large as a goat. This is a small critique though. More often the book succeeds in painting a picture of the ancient world that makes sense to modern eyes. And those are the only eyes that we can use to view the ancient world.