Rating: 4/5

Annie and Richard grew up in the same small town and were always best friends. They marry and honeymoon at her parents' cabin at the lake. He is working as a truck driver. She hates that he has to leave and go to work. One day it is storming when he leaves. On a small road a school bus goes out of control and comes right at him. He makes a quick decision to turn off the road and off the cliff down to the river. His body is never found. Richard is approached on the other side and asked if he will join with a group of warriors who fight evil. He agrees. He is trained and he fights. The time on his side is not the same as that in the real world. One day his leader gives him an assignment to protect a woman who is pregnant with a child who will save the world and evil wants to kill the child. His leader uses magic to disguise him. He looks nothing like his normal self.
Annie is pregnant and working as a teacher. She is fascinated by a young woman in her class named Sara. One day she asks in the office about the girl and she is told there is no girl by that name in her class. The principal suggests she take a leave of absence. A neighbor who is a psychologist, suggests that she get counseling. 
Richard only knows himself as Ren the Warrior and has no memories of his human life. But Annie does not see the disguise, she sees her Richard and is determined to make him remember her and the child she is carrying. When several accidents occur - gas leak, a car nearly hitting her. Ren insists they go into hiding. She decides the cabin is the perfect place and hopes he'll remember their honeymoon there. They are in a row boat on the lake when she remembers she needs to take a vitamin. A storm comes from nowhere and spills all but one vitamin which she takes. The storm continues. The vitamins were replaced by the enemy and her labor starts. Ren worries she may not make it down the path on horseback safely, but they have little choice. Ren is attacked by the evil one he has battled many times before. He tells Annie to go and hide. Sara shows up and helps her hide and tells her the lake can save her. She has to get to the lake. Does Annie lose the baby? Does she reach the lake and it helps? Who is Sara? Will Ren remember he is Richard? Can he defeat this evil enemy once and for all? Will Ren's leader call him back? 
I really enjoyed this unusual paranormal story.