Rating: 5/5

An Excellent Mystery, a phrase taken from the Solemnization of Matrimony from the Book of Common Prayer, is a great name for this episode in the Cadfael saga though there are no actual weddings here to solemnize.

Instead this story deals with a man who becomes betroathed to a much younger girl before departing on crusade. After gaining some fame while on crusade, the man is grievously injured. He breaks the betroathal and joins a Benedictine order as Brother Humilus. His intended bride decides to take the veil as well and journeys under escort to a distant city to do so. 

Three years later and the civil war sees the man's abbey destroyed and Humilis, with a mute young brother Fidelis in tow, appears in Shrewsbury. A mystery develops when it's discovered that the man's fiance never made it to her intended abbey. 

Again, as with so much of Ellis Peters' Cadfael saga, the mystery is secondary to the picture we develop of life in that time. It's a bit like watching as a grandmother assembles a jigsaw puzzle from a box with no cover. While we're uncertain of the final picture, the pieces give their clues and the old woman is confident enough that we have no doubt that we'll see the final picture in the end and meanwhile we're content to appreciate the skill with which she assembles it. 

Of course the "big picture" here, the excellent mystery is never truly revealed and a less than careful reader will probably never comprehend the picture being painted here, but I'm convinced that I now know the true facts behind the mystery presented here and will not spoil it for others. That is the genius of this, perhaps the best mystery in the Cadfael series. Even if I've "solved" the central mystery, other subsidiary mysteries remain. Which characters involved in this tale also "solved" the mystery? It seems that Cadfael had, but had Brother Humilus? What about Brother Rhun? Did Brother Ulrich?

This one was never adapted for television and that's probably a good thing. Suffice it to say, it's worth the time it takes to read the book, and in the company of Cadfael and a cast of regulars that we've grown to love, it's a satisfying and entertaining journey.