Rating: 5/5

I was either going to be 1 star or 5 stars. In the end I went for 5 because this book was bonkers, so utterly bonkers that I was just stunned and amazed the whole time I was reading it. Was I entertained? You bet! Was I enraged? Oh and how...

I think DP was on a bet with this one. 'Diana, I bet you can't write a romantic hero who is so awful, so excretable, so unforgivably horrible that no woman alive would ever in a million years forgive him let alone love him'. DP handed over her beer, rolled up her sleeves, and gave us Marc Brannon.

How do I even begin to catalogue this dude's fuck-ups. I guess it starts with him getting her rapist off so he could go fourth and rape and attempt to murder another women. He chased the h romantically when she was still at school. He forced her into sex because, since she's been raped already, she's no longer 'pure' and therefore easy game. When he discovers her super hymen survived the rape he lost his shit, called her a prostitute, said she wasn't woman enough for him, and dumped her cold. Then he dragged her rape through a murder trial, had her branded a liar, and destroyed the her reputation and lost her father his job. Her father lost hope and died young. 

Years later he's back in her life due to working a case together - and he decides to act like a complete asshole, calling her names, accusing her of being a liar all over again, and then getting*furious* that she is trying to keep him distant. 

She meanwhile shoulders all the blame for being raped (lot of rape apology in this book, it's actually amazing to me that a woman wrote this), forgives the H everything, and when he tries to say sorry she tells him it was all equally her fault and no apologies needed. 

I just... wow. Why did I give this five stars? Because it was one of the most insane, entertaining car-crash books I've ever read. The murder mystery was hilarious too, I knew immediately who dunnit and where the Macguffin was hidden and it was a riot to see our dumb as rocks protagonists fumble about missing the obvious.

Ahh what a mad mess. And that is why I read Diana Palmer books.