Rating: 4/5

I have a certain boredom with the military adventurer novel. The kind designed so you can pick up any book in the series and find a self-contained adventure without worrying overmuch about what came before. Where character arcs only extend a single book except in the most superficial of senses and the hero finds himself in the middle of every important battle of the period, no matter how implausible his role. I am a big fan of the Sharpe series, but moreso through the TV show than the books. Put simply, I consider an hour and a half visual spectacle the best proper medium for such stories. Just look to the X-Files movies to see what you get when you try to expand a story past its proper length.

Which is a roundabout way of saying that, because of his preferred genre, I often forget just how good a writer Cornwell is. This book captures the feel of the outbreak of the Civil War perfectly. It establishes clear and enjoyable characters instantly and handles their conflicting interests very successfully. In fact, one of the most impressive aspects of the book is that it’s often very hard to tell at first glance who will and will not be on Starbuck’s side. Or rather, whose side will be prone to following a compatible path with Starbuck. It’s a tangled web of allegiances, and it’s not often clear to us what people’s goals are.

A novel dealing with a topic that’s still so sensitive naturally needs to tread carefully. Usually books treating the South as the focus chooses a Southern protagonist since fighting to protect their homeland is at least a sympathetic goal that avoids a lot of the nastier aspects of the cause. But Starbuck is from Boston and the son of a violent (and famous) abolitionist preacher. So what could justify his decision to fight against his own people?

Basically, Starbuck’s decision to fight for the South is a private rebellion. He’s not rejecting the North’s principles or supporting slavery, he’s just rejecting his domineering father and a life of unfulfilled potential and resentment. It’s a delicate line, and normally I might be critical of its sophistry, but the contradictions themselves are confronted directly in the book and it’s evident this was not just a way of whitewashing the ambiguities of the Cause. It’s his private journey. It is in fact a rejection of grand causes altogether. It makes emotional sense. And if he’s wrong to do it, he’s often wrong about everything in his life. Starbuck is a screwup and a failure, and this is his one chance to make something of himself.

This is very in keeping with the themes of the book, which have a powerful mixup between behavior and outcomes. Bad actions do not necessarily lead to bad results, and good actions often lead to bad ones. The most personally decent man in the book is responsible for more deaths than all the bad ones combined! The whole war is just a mess of confusing allegiances and compromises. The horror of war is dealt with, but so is the bloody eagerness and innocence of it. Only fallen men, it seems, can truly know what to expect.

So I really enjoyed this book and am looking forwards to the others. It’s an impressive start to a series on a war that doesn’t always get the fictional focus it deserves. Highly recommended.