Rating: 5/5

French writer Colette creates stories that are bold, unique and, at times, laced with scandal. The first story, Gigi, is about a young girl’s journey to become a courtesan and her rebellion against the adults in her life who raise her with strict rules. It is rather a controversial read for this reason, but also in regards to the age difference between a particular suitor and the young Gigi. Although the story didn’t pique my interest entirely, what did jump out immediately is the author’s impeccable and clever writing style which drew me into the scenes quickly. I felt that I was sitting at one of the sofas having tea in Paris at the turn of the 20th century. I was so engrossed in the story because of how beautifully it was written. 

Gigi is an interesting short story and although I was intrigued due to the writing, once I began to read the second story in this edition, The Cat, I was in reading heaven. Colette’s writing style is so real, honest, and eloquent that I wanted to savour every word. Her observations on human behaviour and her ability to draw out the idiosyncrasies—the rather neurotic behaviour of the characters is brilliantly done. The story is set in Paris, perhaps in the 1930s, and focuses on the protagonist Alain and his soon-to-be wife Camille, but the main protagonist seems to be the cat herself, a Russian Blue called Saha, or rather she is the driving force for the upheaval around her. Alain is an only child brought up in a well-to-do family and it seems that he is treated like an earl in his mother’s house where maids are always on hand, and he spends his mornings languorously having his breakfast in the manicured garden where flowers are in full bloom due to his mother’s devotion to tending the garden. Everything is pressed, cleaned and presented to him wrapped with a bow it seems, including his silk pyjamas and his slippers. I felt that he is clinging to his childhood—a time when it was just him and his cat Saha, spending long hours in each other’s company. 

The pages were perfumed with beautiful descriptions of the scented flowers and this ideal garden that was so precious to Alain, through the use of such beautiful prose that I felt as though I was part of this charming ideal setting that meant so much to the character. Long hours were spent musing idly at every detail of his feline companion which immediately highlighted the strong and reciprocal bond he shares with Saha. 

However, we also immediately realise that Camille is not equally included in this relationship that he shares with his cat. Camille represents danger to this safe cocooned world he has built around his cat—a type of chaos which challenges his neat, autonomous world which is in opposition to her wild, dissolute ways. I could feel the trepidation he felt when Camille entered the garden in his childhood home. This apprehension is portrayed in such a clever yet disturbing way. Amongst this ideal garden setting lurks a threat that it could all change irrevocably. I could also feel the fear slowly turning into resentment as each scene unfolded. His marriage seems to be fragile from the onset due to such oppressive feelings. Alain’s apprehension keeps growing when the newly-weds move to a Parisian apartment. It seemed that his obsession with his cat represented his desire to hold on to his childhood, but also his fear of change and having responsibilities as an adult—the cat is his safe world where he is king of the castle. 

Overall this was a beautiful story with dark undertones. I could not get enough of the beautiful sentences which always carried an underlying message and the emotionally charged relationship described. Colette was a very gifted and astute writer and I immensely enjoyed her writing, and the way she brought out the many nuances in these complicated and flawed characters.