Rating: 4/5

I love it when authors take a real life mystery or two and try to provide a plausible explanation. This one is about the unknown fate of Rome's Ninth Legion that marched to Britain and was never heard of again.

So having my curiosity piqued with this mystery and adding to that Sutcliff's easy narrative and absorbing story-line, it's no wonder I was quickly pulled into the book. I thoroughly enjoyed it and was deeply satisfied with the characters and the adventure! If you're looking for a book to offer your boys or a great family read-aloud, here you go!

And as a side note, I don't remember having ever so seamlessly gone from the first book in a series to the second with so little time in between. It was mere seconds - I just couldn't wait!

Cleanliness: contains some fight and battle sequences but they are not described very graphically. Some native men are described as not fully clothed. Mentions the Druids in passing. The Roman gods are referenced and prayed to a few times. Mentions a woman that committed suicide.

*Note: I listened to the audio version of this book so this Cleanliness Report may not be as thoroughly detailed as other reports are. Also, some inappropriate content may have been forgotten/missed and not included in the report.

**Like my reviews? Then you should follow me! Because I have hundreds more just like this one. With each review, I provide a Cleanliness Report, mentioning any objectionable content I come across so that parents and/or conscientious readers (like me) can determine beforehand whether they want to read a book or not. Content surprises are super annoying, especially when you’re 100+ pages in, so here’s my attempt to help you avoid that! 

So Follow or Friend me here on GoodReads! You’ll see my updates as I’m reading and know which books I’m liking and what I’m not finishing and why. You’ll also be able to utilize my library for looking up titles to see whether the book you’re thinking about reading next has any objectionable content or not. From swear words, to romance, to bad attitudes (in children’s books), I cover it all!