Rating: 1/5

I'm going to be honest, I only read this book because I heard that some of the characters from The Russians series (also by Judith Pella) show up in this book. I had been sorely disappointed with the end of that series and was hoping perhaps I could find some closure here. Which means right out of the starting gate, I had a severe bias.

Unfortunately, it only got worse from there.

Look, even if I had just picked up this book, with no expectations whatsoever, I still would have given it one star. It deserves it. It's that bad.

Let's start with the writing which is something you should never have to criticize in something written but there you go. It's not as if the author can't write or string words together, she can and quite well. But nothing clicked together. I never felt anything. I never thought any deeper than the words I read. I never stopped and contemplated how beautifully something was worded (which is my prerequisite for any great book). Every second was pure torture. Every second I was bored out of my mind. I constantly was flipping ahead going, "So when's this thing going to get exciting?"

Answer: Never. Like ever.

Seriously though, this book took me a month and a half to read. And no, I didn't start reading it and then stop and not pick it up for a couple of weeks, I read it every day. I have read books this long in a day. I read Les Miserables in two weeks. Books should never, ever take a month and a half to read. And it goes to show how much of a chore reading this book was for me because when I was done, I was relieved. "Yes! I'm done this stupid book, now I can get back that fifteen minutes of my life I have been spending every day reading it!"

I even started to read the second book in this series until I realized that sometimes I can be a very stupid chick.

But if writing was the only problem then this book would be getting higher than one star. Let's talk about the story which is even more frustrating since it could have been good. I find human drama fascinating so the journey of three American sisters through World War II could have been very interesting. It's not. It's not even close.

First there's Jackie, our stereotypical Christian who has a better life than anyone else just because she is said Christian. She's friends with this Japanese guy whose name currently escapes me (Sam???) and who I hate for his even more stereotyped depiction of being pretty much white in every way except in terms of his ethnicity. Like, the guy disowns his own country, speaks and behaves entirely in an American way, and doesn't ever resent white people for the way they horribly treat him which left me with the unfortunate implication that it's okay to be ethnically Japanese as long as you're white about it. Not only would having the guy hate white people be more realistic, it would also have made for a far more interesting plotline as he and Jackie find themselves drawn to each other, despite their morals.

But we couldn't have had an interesting book, could we?

Then there's Blair and she likes parties or something. There's a guy and she deceives him into thinking she's actually a good Christian girl which I really hate because then we the readers are just waiting for the inevitable reveal of her lies and everyone getting upset. It's pretty boring.

And finally, there's Cameron. She's a reporter and ends up in the Soviet Union and then becomes attracted to this hot Russian Alex guy but she also likes this reporter guy and blah blah blah.

Don't care about any of this. Moving on.

Well, what about The Russians people I was mentioning earlier? Did they ever show up? Yes. But they were former husks of themselves, stereotypes of the author's whim. Like books 4 through 7 of The Russians series, I'm going to pretend this book never happened. Honestly though, it's my fault for thinking it would end any other way. A mistake I won't repeat.

Okay then. Was there anything I did like? Yes, two things. Well, more like one and a half.

One: The scene where Cameron visits that hospital in the Soviet Union. I just thought it was such a cute little scene, especially when this Russian boy asks her out on a date and she says he knows nothing about her and he says he's seen enough. It was cute and lovely and ended far too quickly and was perhaps the only moment in the book where I wanted to read more.

Half: The whole plotline of Cameron having a half-brother who lives somewhere in the Soviet Union and she has to track him down. The only problem? SHE NEVER DOES. She's in the Soviet Union for a long time, reporting and falling in love with those two guys and then sometimes just reminds herself that yup, she has a half-brother currently living in the Soviet Union and then DOES NOTHING ABOUT IT. I'm sorry but if I was her, I would be ripping the very pavement beneath my feet looking for this guy, as she even mentions HERSELF, she is in the same country he is in, he may very well be going to war and could be wounded or dying but does she ever actually try to track him down? Nope. Honestly, I almost did read the whole of the second book just to see if we ever find out who this guy is and what he's doing. The cost of knowing wasn't worth my sanity.

Just...ugh. This book actually sucked some of the life out of me. Judith Pella, you can do better than this, I know you can.