Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars

Looking at this book from a purely technical perspective, I would give it the highest rating possible. Trevor's incredible deftness in constructing this novel boggled my mind on every page. The level of skill it must take to write something like this is staggering. First of all, there is a lot of dialogue going on simultaneously between a large cast of characters, both inside the boarding-house, and in many locations outside of the house. The action and dialogue is not only taking place simultaneously in different places, but also in different times. So for instance, we might have people talking in a room in the boarding-house, also in a restaurant across the street, also in an office, on a train, and in the past - all on the same page. This concept is so difficult to think about, let alone construct a novel around. What is amazing is that Trevor does this with absolutely no confusion to the reader at all. I can't think of another novel like this. And I must point out that the dialogue is top-notch; it is on a level with Patrick Hamilton, whom I was reminded of so often while reading this, as he wrote so much about boarding-houses and their odd inhabitants.

The story itself is so-so. He uses a device that I don't think worked that great, with the late owner of the house having died but having written notes on the tenants. We get to learn about them through his notes. The way the dead owner appears throughout the book, with past exchanges popping up randomly in the book, I did like. It served to show us just how good Trevor was at this interplay between times and places.

Another thing that stands out is the humor. The exchanges between the tenants and all of the conversations are flat-out hilarious. I was surprised at this because I never thought of Trevor as a humorous writer. 

I have read quite a few of his novels but have not found one to rival READING TURGENEV (ELIZABETH ALONE comes close but is a totally different kind of book). I keep reading him hoping to find another one like it. What I have found is that all of his novels are different and seem to even be written in different styles. Not one of my favorite writers, but without doubt a writer of astonishing diversity and amazing skill.