Rating: 2/5

"Can’t you let yourself believe in people like Kris—in fun and joy and love and all the other intangibles?"
 
Kris Kringle may seem like just another resident at the nursing home, but what is so special about him is that he looks uncannily like our image of Santa Claus… not only that, he believes himself to actually be Santa Claus! Sounds a bit batty, right? Well, that’s what many think. Only a few supporters truly believe him to be the real Santa Claus. And Doris and her little daughter, Susan, are skeptics as well. He may be a nice, little old man, but there is no such thing as Santa… right? Kris’s goal is to win these two over, and in the process he gets himself into a bit of trouble that lands him in court. With a little help from believer and lawyer Fred Gayley, Kris will need to prove his identity in order to disprove a case of insanity. 

"If bringing back the true Christmas spirit is a form of insanity, then these are very strange times, indeed!"

Most everyone is familiar with the movie of the same title. What I didn’t realize before picking up this little novella was that the screenplay came in existence first. According to the historical note at the end of the book, Valentine Davies had the idea for the story which he took to screenwriter and director George Seaton, who then turned it into a screenplay which was released in 1947. Davies then wrote a novelization of the story which was published in conjunction with the movie. For the most part, I find that I prefer a book over a movie. Not so here. While I don’t remember every detail of the movie, I have fond memories of watching it years ago. I hoped the book would bring back some of that magic. Unfortunately, it failed to do so. The prose was rather simple and the characters were flat. While I felt sympathetic towards Kris Kringle, he didn’t really stir up any emotion in me. Don’t get me wrong, I adore Santa Claus! There were a few special quotes, but not enough to make the story highly engaging. I wanted to ‘believe’, but nothing here was evocative enough to draw me in and feel much of anything. It pains me to say I just wanted to rush through this and check it off my list. I feel like the Grinch! But really, Christmas is a magical time of year, full of wonder, and I enjoy it as much as the next person. If I want to stir up any nostalgia and feel my heart beat with excitement for the season, I’ll have to stick with A Christmas Carol to get the job done. I can’t recommend this one which I’m rating a mere 2 stars. I’d say watch the movie, and hopefully that will add a bit of sparkle that the written word in this case just didn’t achieve. Perhaps I’m just not a fan of novelizations.

"Christmas isn’t just a day. It’s a frame of mind."