Rating: 5/5

Craxis [n.], Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows
 

Intro 

The House in Norham Gardens  is the kind of book that gives you the uncomfortable feeling of being too old, too young, too conservative, too radical, too... everything. It's like a refreshing cup of mocha: warm-hearted, following Claire, a fourteen-year-old girl navigating her responsibilities, school and history, full of comforting afternoons with rich familial bonding and un-normal normals. At the same time, warm-heartedness is juggled with a sense of infinity, infinite history stretching in both directions, varying from heavy colonial implications to modern-day preservation of past occurences. The book, somehow, also juggles issues of growing up and social expectation.

[Main]Cast of Characters

Claire Mayfield 
Aunt Anne
Aunt Susan
Mrs Hedges
John Sempebwa
Maureen
Liz
Cousin Margaret

General Thoughts

The House in Norham Gardens  is stuffed with antiques and blurred boundaries.

For me, it was just the perfect read to both soothe and tear open my existential wounds. At one point, Claire's 'visions' (of tribal peoples carving shields and living their lives, along with her final hallucination (?) this isn't clarified at the end) stand in for a direct statement of her uncertainty, both about growing up, her family's past and her loved ones. The entire book is a masterwork of indirect, semi-stream-of-consciousness and semi-direct reportage, from dialogue to character description.

There was a strong sense of vicarious life in the house mentioned in the title - an extravagant shell that represents the past, but which need not be an anchor to the past, as the Aunts remind Claire.

Made me want to sit down with a good ol' English cup of tea and wait for the sky pour with rain just for aesthetic effect.

5 stars! Absolutely!

 Favourite Quotes 

Presently the thoughts lost their insistence and the words
won : a strange and distant world moved into the library at Norham Gardens, a world of forests and birds of paradise and
inscrutable beliefs. ~Chapter 3

'I shouldn't think so. There is a rather regrettable tendency
nowadays to fence people off according to age. The "young"—as though they were some particular breed. A misleading idea, on the
whole. Perhaps you are just not good at being fenced off.'
'Oh. I see.'
'The same is done to us, of course. The old. This medicine is quite remarkably nasty.'
'Have a cup of tea, quick. Do you feel fenced off?' ~Chapter 3

She spun, and the bubble spun and the featureless sky spun
around it, and she could not get out, and it would not stop. ~Chapter 10

(I feel kinda bad for condensing my reading into those quotes... There's much more in between, from immigrant elephants, school play jitters, existential dread, absolutely delightful interactions etcetera.)