Rating: 1/5

The novel was fairly interesting, but far from Pressfield's best. I thought he reached his apogee with Gates of Fire or possibly Afghan Campaign. 

This story begins with Alexander's men wishing to turn back from India and go home; they feel they've fought and died far enough from home for long enough. Alexander's in his tent with Itanes, his young brother-in-law, and wants "someone to talk to ... who can listen without judgment and keep his mouth shut...it is my role to instruct you [in the art of war]." He then delivers a book-long series of monologues to Itanes, on that very subject. I had visions of a pompous professor in a gown like an English don delivering very long lectures to a class of one.

Alexander instructs Itanes on his [Alexander's] life, through various wars and battles Alexander has fought. Itanes's presence isn't even acknowledged until 80-some pages into the novel and after that, sporadically. Alexander gives his ideas on what makes a good soldier. The battle descriptions were well done, and Alexander's advice to various officers and his "Maxims on War" were very common-sense. I was reminded of Sun Tzu's writings on the latter.

I didn't like this portrayal of Alexander. He came across as arrogant, devious, excessively cruel at some points, almost wooden; my teeth were set on edge. He came across as a braggart. For the most part, he was unsympathetic until he and his men fought the Persians and he saw the suffering of his men. 

I did like: *his description of how he met Hephaestion, who became his life-long close friend and soulmate. 
 *his description of Babylonian society. 
 *his even-handedness in his appraisal of Memnon, his Greek mercenary opponent in the Persian War.
 *the Chronology at the end of the book 

I did a 'double-take' when he mentioned striking "the bone" in battle to "count the cadence" of marching men. Immediately I thought of the symandron, used to this day. [To those who may not know what a symandron is, it is a special board, struck rhythmically with a mallet to call monks and nuns to prayer in Greek Orthodox monasteries and convents.]

All in all, this book was good enough, but not outstanding. I feel it's basically for people who want to read more Pressfield or for those who devour everything on Alexander the Great. This book has influenced me to dislike anything Alexander the Great! It left such a bad taste in my mouth!