Rating: 3/5

Unfortunately, I wanted to like this more than I did. I struggled to maintain an interest beyond book 1 as the glaringly flat characters never quite achieved the depth I was looking for. The relationships between characters become increasingly tangled, but some of the dynamics suffer for it as they feel introduced without the necessary foundation. Eric, in particular, felt a bit like an island — his introductory chapter was the best part of the book for me, but his return to New York City ultimately feels anti-climactic. He slides back into a familiar relationship with Cass and Vivaldo, but we don’t explicitly learn much about their shared history beyond the central association to Rufus. It makes their relationships ultimately feel flimsy and mitigates the impact of later events.

There are interesting conversations about anti-black racism and masculinity throughout the book, and I can appreciate that this was subversive for the time in which it was published. Yet reading this in 2026, the glaring misogyny and lack of depth in the female characters (particularly their experiences with domestic violence, which leans very victim-blaming) is impossible to ignore. Like other readers, I couldn’t help but revisit Baldwin’s debate with Audre Lorde, where it is clear he misses the point on the uniquely intersectional experience of black women. The book has many important, still-relevant things to say about the unique experiences of black men, but it often does so at the cost of female characters. In showing his strength as a writer, Baldwin ends up inadvertently showing his weaknesses too, and while they don’t exactly cancel each other out, it does feel a little disappointing in the shadow of masterpieces like The Fire Next Time or Giovanni’s Room.

The book doesn’t promise likeable or moral characters, and I don’t inherently have a problem with that, given the central theme of the book is the pervasive, inescapable consequences of systemic racism. I just think how they’re portrayed, notably how Rufus is idolized, and his partners are routinely villainized, ultimately makes this one of Baldwin’s weaker works for me. It needs more brevity and more momentum to keep it going. There’s too much repetition in both the events of the novel and the commentary, and the ending didn’t feel particularly satisfactory.

I’m glad I read this, but also equally glad to be finished with it.
---
It's been a year since I've read anything by Baldwin, and I'm going through withdrawals, I fear.

Substack | Bookstagram | BookTok | BookTube | Bookshop.org Store |  Libro.fm Bonus Offer