Rating: 5/5

In some editions, Sons and Lovers, or Lovers &amp; Sons, is a fictionalized autobiography of D.H. Lawrence's origins and youth.
The main character, like the great writer, was born in the world of the mining country of Nottinghamshire, a sensual father, a drinker, choleric, vulgar nature, and a mother from a higher background, to the puritanical and bourgeois values, was permanently wounded by the unseemly attitude, the reckless acts, and low appetites of her husband. This volume is a fascinating document on the daily lives of miners and their families: hard work, modest joys, and pubs spent on the meager pay on Friday. It bears witness to the development, the precursor to the creation of the Labor Party, of workers 'organizations, such as workers' cooperatives, solidarity funds, women's guilds, and temperance societies. In contrast, feminist consciousness and aspirations emerge in the more developed layers of the population. It is also a pretext for the suggestive description of Nottingham, its monuments, nature, and the surrounding localities. But the primary interest of this story is that of being, without any doubt, the most personal work of Lawrence, where the emotion of the thing lived is everywhere exposed. The Oedipus of the latter made, as well as the atmosphere of growing hatred of children for this father, due to his unworthy conduct, was nonetheless exempt from a few rare moments of peace and relative happiness. David Herbert Lawrence's Paul Morel appears as a gentle child, a thoughtful, temperamental artist, and a conscientious painter with a delicate health, prone to bronchitis. These disorders will prematurely take the writer of tuberculosis. We follow his launch in life as a clerk in an orthopedic appliance factory in Nottingham, the untimely death of the eldest son of the family, the first long-platonic love affair with the mystical, religious, and reserved Myriam, then with Clara, a meeting marked by the seal of fleeting passion and the Dionysian impulse so dear to the artist. The work culminates primarily in narrating the fusional attachment with her mother. This love creates a balance of power, confrontation, the grasping of the mother, and jealousy; finally, the heart-rending agony of the latter and the deep distress that seizes the son at the loss of the irreplaceable provoke in the reader an unusual emotional tension—a troubling, yet moving and poignant novel.