Rating: 2/5

What I learned from Charlotte Lamb's Abduction:

1) In 1981, it was considered perfectly okay to park your baby in his stroller OUTSIDE the store where you were going to do your shopping.

2) A husband who begs you to marry him, can't get enough of you, and showers you with presents is a big fat jerk that you must run away from at all cost.

3) If there is a picture of your husband standing next to an old flame at a nightclub,do NOT investigate. Pack up and leave without any doubt about your perfectly drawn conclusion.

4) While your husband is not allowed to be photographed standing next to another woman at a nightclub, it is perfectly allowed for you to flirt with whomever you want because you are not your husband's possession.

5) Handsome, wealthy tycoons are bored by supermodels and sexy actresses and only fall desperately in love with mousy secretaries.

6) Refusing to mingle with any of your husband's friends and family because they are all stuffy, boring, and mean is perfectly reasonable and a good compromise to continue with your marriage.

7) It is perfect timing to have your husband call you a bitch in front of your eighteen months old baby since that is about the time he is picking up on and repeating words.

8) When you find your wife again after she ran out on you two years ago, and simultaneously realize you have a son AND he has been kidnapped, your most urgent concern is to show said wife the box containing all her jewelry and ask her why she left them all behind when she ran away.

9) Everyone can be a successful armchair psychologist and diagnose/resolve your mental health issue that has plagued you for a lifetime and ruined your marriage in a jiffy.

10) It is not okay for your husband to be obsessed, possessive and controlling over you but it is very healthy to be obsessed, possessive and controlling over your son, the only being you have ever loved and who has loved you. I smell a sequel with the heroine becoming, in her old age, the Mother in Law from hell to some hapless future heroine being forcibly seduced by her entitled son!