Rating: 4/5

I have been a fan for years of "Monday Night Mayhem," the 2002 TNT adaptation of Marc Gunther and Bill Carter's book about the tumultuous early days of ABC's legendary "Monday Night Football" broadcast, with John Turturro's dynamite performance as the most loved and hated sportscaster of his era (and maybe any era), Howard Cosell. But I had never read the book before now, and am glad I finally got to dig into Marc Gunther and Bill Carter's deeply researched, crisply written anatomy of the life and times of arguably the most important regular sports series in network television history. 

The extra time offered by a book's length gives Gunther and Carter the time to dig into many fascinating details and notions that the film couldn't address. Sure, there's plenty of great detail about the love-hate relationship between the "classic" booth lineup of Cosell, play-by-play man Frank Gifford, and folksy color commentator Don Meredith. But the book also digs with great detail into the financial machinations that made ad real estate on the MNF broadcast among the most expensive in television up to that time, the front-office shifts at ABC that gradually, some would say irreparably, changed what the broadcast would be, and the wide range of personalities beyond those three colorful figures that affected MNF in their own ways. It details booth regulars successful (the likable, professionally serious Dan Dierdorf), problematic (the gifted but not-dedicated-enough Alex Karras), and flat-out disastrous (Fred "The Hammer" Williamson, whose nasty style kept him from making it past a handful of exhibition games). And of course, it digs deep into the minds of the men behind the cameras: The sybaritic but innovative director Chet Forte, the savvy but occasional overwhelmed producer Don Ohlmeyer, and of course, Roone Arledge, the production genius whose vision made MNF into a broadcasting and sports juggernaut...and whose loftier ambitions threatened to sink the hottest show in sports television at its zenith.

The book only has one real weakness, but it's a major one: It never quite defines what exactly it is that made Cosell, Gifford, and Meredith such an unbeatable commentating combination. It tells us over and over that the blend of these three men's styles was inimitable, but it never really digs into what MADE it inimitable. But perhaps that's the whole point. Sometimes you can't define magic. You can just acknowledge and appreciate it. And "Monday Night Mayhem" is a fine and compulsively readable act of acknowledgement and appreciation indeed.