Rating: 5/5

“Patriotism is a word; and one that generally comes to mean either my country, right or wrong, which is infamous, or my country is always right, which is imbecile.” 
― Patrick O'Brian, Master and Commander

Over the years I've collected O'Brian's paperback novels at used book stores, sale racks, goodwills, etc., one or two at a time. I almost have a complete paperback set (I also recently broke down and bought a four volume complete set), but didn't yet feel quite ready to attack. I needed a push or a promoting. Last year I finished the The Diary of Samuel Pepys - Complete and with Pepys constant work with the English Navy I was suddenly very interested. After reading a couple other books that spanned the same 'general' period of English naval history, I felt it was time I jumped in. 

I knew it was going to be good. I have a friend who is a writer and has written dozens of New York Times bestsellers (he is a ghost writer so few are penned directly under his name) and he also encouraged me to jump into these books. I saw the Russell Crowe movie (which drew on many of O'Brian's books, but primarily on The Far Side of the World, Desolation Island, and Master and Commander). I think all of these things pushed me towards the series, but the one big pull. The drag. The thing that kept these books at a distance was the fear of the void. I knew that I would adore them from the get go, and once I started there is a certain amount of self-awareness I possess to know that I wasn't going to be able to just nibble at these books. Hell, there are twenty different books in the Master and Commander: 20 Volume Set.

There are many things to love about this book. The characters are amazing (especially Captain Jack Aubrey, Dr. Stephen Maturin, and First Lieutenant James Dillon). This would be a good book if O'Brian just told a good sea yarn, but that is just one piece. His details about the period and ships are amazing. His nuanced and smooth look at power, nationalism, war, men, psychology, science, etc. propels this book into the top ranks of historical novels. Again, I'm only one book deep into this series, but I must admit now that I'm finished with Master &amp; Commander, it was like I imagined and like I feared. So, my sails are set, the rigging is tight. 19 more books to go I guess, and I might just do it before the end of the year.