Rating: 2/5

"One cannot strain pure to change pure".

Perhaps, its adulthood setting upon me or the reflective periods of a looming winter, nevertheless I got the itch to return to one of the only YA contemproary novels that was available to me in my rigid Seventh Day Adventist middle school. 

The first few chapters struck me with why I was smitten by the book in the first place: a desperation for drama. My school had banned most books. Therefore, the Payton Skyy series had descended from the heavens as supplement to my angsty adolescent brain. 

For one, the titular character is not a very likable person. Hey, one could argue that she's contemptible. The amount of judgement she reserves for those she holds dear is wince inducing. Yet, I will begrudgingly say it is very human and even reminds me of the many peers I dealt with who scorned any diverging beliefs. However, its unclear what Payton really values. It may sound absurd to say as she expresses her love for God a great deal in her internal monologues, but the why is every bit as important. 

When pressured by her boyfriend to have sex, Payton undergoes a dilemma where she questions whether or not she should "give it up" and her friends offer advice. She dismisses the one friend who urges her to keep her values, Rain, as a wedge between any relationships, for reasons not well explained. Her other friend, Lyndzi, is seen as misery desparate for company. According to Payton, Lyndzi regrets losing her virginity and simply wants someone to join her team. Eventually Payton throws herself on her boyfriend Dakhari in the most desparate way possible and it left me wondering why the trouble with friends if she wants to do whatever anyway. 

The scene I believe is supposed to be regarded as a stray from God, but God even in the end doesn't seem to be a factor. There is so much emphasis on the crude aspect of virginity (never having intercourse) that morals in a sense really go out the window.

For one, let me warn you that every girl in this book, even when described to be a friend, reads as a tolerable acquaintance or enemy at most. One part is due to the anxiety instilled by purity culture and the other (mostly a criticism of the writing and maybe even the author) being colorism.

Both Payton (and the author) antagonizes every female character introduced. It kinda became laughable at times. In the beginning, there was the UGA recruitment hostess who was despised for being too friendly with Payton's initial boyfriend Dakhari, despite that being her job. Then there was the girls in IHOP who greeted Payton and her friends at their table. Apparently, they can't just say hi! They must have come to oggle at men. Most importantly, there is Starr Love who reads less as a person and more as a vixen archetype. Honestly, I would put her in the same categorty as Lyndzi. Despite not sharing social circles they both fit the bill as "scorned women" (If you could call them that. They're only in high school!) The scorned women must meet some end where she is ostracized. For Lyndzi it was a pregnancy scare and a meltdown during what was essentially Halleilujah night at Payton's Church. For Starr, was her STD status being outed at a debutante ball and being called a tramp by one of the audience members. Eventually these girls were revealed to be envious of Payton in some way. Yet, sadly for the "scorned girls" there seemed to be no recourse for their regrets. Their interpretations of God's love gave the impression that it was conditional with Payton being regarded as the ideal protagonist of the story.

However, Payton shares so much anxiety on keeping a guy due to "what other woman could give him" but not holding on to him too much that it marrs any future social standing. It made me wonder why she even bothered with dating in the first place. 

Contrary to the girls, the guys in this story dont seem to hold themselves to the same standard. Here, you may mention Tad Taylor, Payton's new beau , but he doesn't read as a person. Instead, he's a conduit of the author's preachings. He plays football and he loves god...thats it. No flaws, not even one where he likes pineapple on pizza. I knew great guys who were devoutly religious but they had character. I don't even get the sense that Tad is a teenager. I even wished the class difference between Payton and his family played more of a role in their dynamics, that would have been something but nope! 

Dakhari on the other hand seems to have regrets for dumping Payton but not for his lapse in faith. Or should I say will power? Him and Payton become friends and he learns to confide in her again, but never does he ramble about being impure like his female counterparts! Or Bam, Lyndzi's boyfriend, the serial cheater!

The colorism aspect is notable when significant female characters are described to be pretty. I simply just noticed a pattern that if a girl was defined as beautiful etc. light skin would follow immediately after whether she was a stranger, vixen, or virgin. Even Payton pats herself on the back for being a butterscotch queen. The only character not described that way is Dymond, Payton's other friend who is plus sized darker skinned girl from the projects. Payton thinks shes beautiful but there are always little jabs against Dymond that makes her the "black sheep" of the bunch. Dymond is checked for cursing and gossipping, has a boyfriend named Fatz they describe to be miles less intelligent than her, and is flag twirler instead of a cheerleader cause she was cited for being "too fat". Theres also this weird moment where Dymond says the phrase "high yellow" when referring to Starr, Rain doesn't like the way she says it and says "just because your..." but is cut off. Just becuase of what? Finish the sentence!

If you made it this far, overall, the book was entertaining but I got to deduct major points for misinformation. There was one point where Payton visits a clinic with her friends and they read pamphlets on STDs and breast cancer. She cites this as a reason why she is "staying pure". However breast cancer has nothing to do with marital status and neither does STDs! Even married couples contact venereal diseases (and its not just due to infidelity)! 

There was also hate on some books about "doing it' when Tad visited a bookstore, but married couples like to do it too! 

Payton's character growth also falls flat as thematically the most importance is given to her lack of a sexual status. I believe she becomes forgiving at least towards the end but that value came from her experiences not her ability to keep her legs closed.

All in all I give the book 2.35 out of 5 stars.