Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars (3/10 hearts). I wasn’t very impressed by this play. The whole plot was ridiculous, and I have a hard time accepting ridiculous plots. I mean, really… Henri and his three best friends make a compact to study for three years and allow themselves only the plainest food… and no women. Of course they forget the Princess of France is coming to see her sick father. She arrives with her three ladies-in-waiting and of course the King and his men fall head-over-heels in love... and the girls tease them for it by pretending to be each other. It’s all so cliché and silly, and I didn’t like any of the characters, either. They were well-rounded, but I just didn’t care for them. Having read this almost a month ago, I don’t remember any content, although I assume there was some language and maybe some innuendos. I do remember there was some fun wordplay/punning, and some good humour; also some interesting remarks on pronouncing “debt” as “det” instead of “debt”… 

HOLOFERNES. He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his argument. I abhor such fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and point-devise companions; such rackers of orthography, as to speak 'dout' fine, when he should say 'doubt’; 'det' when he should pronounce 'debt'- d, e, b, t, not d, e, t. He clepeth a calf 'cauf,' half 'hauf'; neighbour vocatur 'nebour'; 'neigh' abbreviated 'ne.' This is abhominable- which he would call 'abbominable.' It insinuateth me of insanie: ne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
NATHANIEL. Laus Deo, bone intelligo.
HOLOFERNES. 'Bone'?- 'bone' for 'bene.' Priscian a little scratch'd; 'twill serve.

Overall I didn’t love the play, had difficulty pushing through, and don’t plan to reread it. It just wasn’t my cup of tea.

Favourite Humorous Quote: 
KING. How well he's read, to reason against reading!
DUMAIN. Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
LONGAVILLE. He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
BEROWNE. The spring is near, when green geese are a-breeding.
DUMAIN. How follows that?
BEROWNE. Fit in his place and time.
DUMAIN. In reason nothing.
BEROWNE. Something then in rhyme.