Rating: 4/5

Re-read. This twisty mystery is just what I remember of "peak Pike": an ensemble of shady yet surprisingly mature teens, dialogue that delights in interrogation, some preposterous but unarguably entertaining high-drama scenes, and the faintest whiff of the supernatural just at the end. This was a satisfyingly quick re-read.

Story is that Melanie Martin is the new girl in small-town Iowa, a somewhat shy actress that gets roped into the school's production of an obscure murder mystery play, Final Chance, by classmate and play's director - and new friend? - Susan. It doesn't take long to notice that the play's characters and story line bears more than passing resemblance to the people chosen to play the roles - which includes beautiful but stand-offish girl Rindy, with whom Melanie has already had an unfortunate run-in and is a rival for former jock Marc's affections. When an on-stage murder becomes a real murder and Melanie is accused, she realizes she has to take on the investigation of her castmates herself.

I had no hope of unraveling who the real killer was by clues left in the narrative. Maybe I'm just not good at solving puzzles, or maybe Pike just likes to really keep readers guessing. I had a sense of who it was based on fuzzy memory of my first read, but certainly I don't think it's ever obvious until right before the climactic scene. This means the end of the book is a little explain-y (both the villain and the police captain that becomes something of an ally to Melanie in the investigation get their own monologues to explain their hows and whys). 

And oh the drama! Not just because this is high school theater, either. The emotions revealed toward the end between some of the characters is soap opera-worthy. But by that point you're too sucked in to roll your eyes at the over-the-topness. 

One thing I had to shake my head about: the idea that these kids would get permission to put on a play with an actual gun in it. Written far pre-Columbine for sure. Also that the police would allow a reenactment of the play, just so Melanie can have a think about who the murderer might be from a different perspective. LOL, but also: I can appreciate the drama.

LAST ACT is, as far as my Googling can tell, one of Pike's earliest novels. I'm trying to re-read them in publication order, but when the author in question publishes sometimes 3-4 novels a year, some of them in series and some standalone, it gets confusing.

Nonetheless this book reminded me why I became such a superfan of Pike in the first place. A fun mystery with a healthy dose of teen romance and interpersonal drama, and a hint of supernatural. *chef's kiss*