Rating: 5/5

The first hundred pages, I didn't know how I was gonna get through it. Names come and go. Things that would be disturbing in the outside world happen on the periphery and "That happened." was often the only commentary. Then there was the prison fire, a magnificent piece of writing taking up a huge chunk of the novel and of our protagonist's psyche. The digression into Jimmy's early life was a welcome break from the endless card games and innuendo, although the prose was standard and predictable. But the novel started to have a cumulative effect. I couldn't put it down. I became acutely aware of the prisoners' humanity, and "that there was nothing in a drug store that would kill them quite as dead as standing inside of a prison, looking out." Or the endless standing and waiting for nothing greater than a plate of beans or a haircut. Or how a phrase in a song can bring up emotions that cannot be repressed. 
I appreciated how, as a writer, Jimmy could happen into a song or a scene in a movie and it would unleash a wave of memories, creativity and anguish that he had to ride until it subsided or the story was finished. And how he could feel touched by all of the laughter, skyscrapers, or normal people he would never know. I've worked with the juvenile probation population and with mentally ill men who have spent much of their lives in prison, and this novel made me question how well I could ever have understood them. Going forward, reading this novel will make me a better person and clinician.
This is probably a four star book but for me, the same-sex romance in the final half pushes it over the top, considering when it was written and how well it still plays. I'm not calling the relationship 'gay' because neither one of the men may actually be gay as we've come to know it. Certainly not our protagonist. The relationship between Jimmy and Rico reminded me, unfortunately, of an important but ill-fated relationship I had in the 90s with someone who was older and carried much more gay shame than I did. 
My criteria for a five star novel are thus: have I learned something about myself, such that I have a different perspective on my past or my relationships? Have I gained a deeper understanding of people who are different from me? Will I approach situations differently, with more maturity and reasoning? Was the novel written in a manner that when I think back on it, it will seem like I am recalling my own memories? Did the novel manage to work its way into my dreams while I was reading it? Would the novel be worth reading again? Did I manage to get more out of the novel than I put into it? Was my only duty to sit down and read the damn thing, and in return I received innumerable riches? And did the form justify the content, and vice versa? Yes to all.