Rating: 4/5

TALES FROM THE VULGAR UNICORN 
With the second book, comes a little more interaction between characters and the beginning of a a philosophy of contention as referenced by C.J. Cherryh in her afterword to Blood Ties: "You write your first Thieves' World story for pay, you write your second for revenge.".
It is admittedly confusing at times but pushing through, even if it means going back and re-reading is worth it. 

Contributions include:
SPIDERS OF THE PURPLE MAGE Philip Jose Farmer This was the week of the great rat hunt in Sanctuary. The next week, all the cats that could be caught were killed and degutted. The third week, all dogs were run down and disemboweled.

GODDESS David Drake “By Savankala and the Son!” Regli swore, “why can’t she bear land be done with it? And why does she demand to see her brother but won’t see me?”

THE FRUIT OF ENLIBAR Lynn Abbey The hillside groves of orange trees were all that remained of the legendary glory of Enlibar. Humbled descendants of the rulers of an empire dwarfing Ilsig or Ranke eked out their livings among the gnarled, ancient trees.

THE DREAM OF THE SORCERESS A. E. van Vogt The scream brought Stulwig awake in pitch darkness. He lay for a long moment stiff with fear. Like any resident of old, decadent Sanctuary his first fleeting thought was that the ancient city, with its night prowlers, had produced another victim’s cry of terror.

VASHANKA’S MINION Janet Morris The storm swept down on Sanctuary in unnatural fury, as if to punish the thieves for their misdeeds. Its hailstones were large as fists. They pummeled Wideway and broke windows on the Street of Red Lanterns and collapsed the temple of ILS, most powerful of the conquered Ilsigi gods.

SHADOW’S PAWN Andrew Offutt She was more than attractive and she walked with head high in pride and awareness of her womanhood. The bracelet on her bare arm flashed and seemed to glow with that brightness the gods reserve for polished new gold.

TO GUARD THE GUARDIANS Robert Lynn Asprin The Hell Hounds were now a common sight in Sanctuary so the appearance of one in the bazaar created little stir, save for the concealment of a few smuggled wares and a price increase on everything else.