Rating: 4/5

What lies closer than to watch the King himself, in his young, wild, completely wasted, and high as hell years, dissect the mechanisms and history of terror, despair, and all our other, beloved story element.
 
I don´t get two of the criticisms of this work, the first one that King writes too long and wordy, what is the same as if one is saying that the sea is too wet, it just doesn´t count. The second one is similar, too much info dump and dry, technical information about the history, development, and state of horror fiction in a nonfiction book which, wait, is exactly the same, although some could have really be shortened. Don´t order fish if you hate it and say that the cook is not good, it´s your fault.
 
Better go with the readers who highly appreciate this work, just as his masterpiece On writing, if they have a special interest in the progress of creative writing or the history of terror in culture and literature. 
 
Of course, close to any nonfiction could profit from slimming and adding fewer hard facts for the general readers and audiences, maybe offering many extra info or links in the addendum, and authors talking about themselves and their autobiographical experiences is often a boring and unnecessary expansion of the work because they don´t know how to write suspenseful about themselves, but it´s the King we are talking about here, we watch the show because we want to absorb any grain of content he secludes. Sounds wrong, however, I am too lazy to edit.
 
Besides, he is throwing Big history and macro socio economical evolution between the lines in the classical Hold my coffee, not beer anymore for Mr. King, mentality, while he is sharply analyzing, mining, and producing pure gold for readers interested in the topic or, even more, aspiring authors wanting to better understand their genre. An extra for them might be to take the idea to analyze the market, nowadays games, movies, and literature, look what has worked, what is underrepresented, which style, length, genre, subgenre, new crossover hybrid, etc. the audience might like and bam, in your bank account. Many of the coolest, most successful, and freshest hits in Sci-Fi, Fantasy, and horror might have grown out this idea of simply making a personal, sophisticated market study.

A wiki walk can be as refreshing to the mind as a walk through nature in this completely overrated real life outside books: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danse_M...