Rating: 3/5

Miss Julia Weston is on the shelf and happy about it. She would far rather write her observations of Society in her journals and hunt for a husband, but her Aunt Sophie has other ideas. Sophie decides that Julia and the Marquess of Brandon would make a fine couple and wrangles an invitation to his country home from his aunt, Lady Sayde. There's only one problem - Julia can't stand Lord Brandon! She thinks he's rude, condescending and insufferable. Their few previous meetings have not been enjoyable at all. Also attending the house party are the beautiful Vanessa and her matronly sister, the sweet but dim-witted Christy and her title-hunting mother. The visit is a disaster from the start. Lord Brandon has eyes only for Vanessa, Lady Sayde appears to be senile and enjoys singling out Julia with her outrageous comments and Julia overhears Lord Brandon accuse her of being a spy! Julia would pack her bags and leave at once if it were not for the kind librarian, Mr. Brixham. To make matters worse, Julia's friend Lord Anthony Devon shows up and becomes friendly with Lord Brandon and sides with him against her friendship with Mr. Brixham. Julia is determined to show Lord Brandon that she's her own woman and far superior to Vanessa. Why should she care what he thinks? There's no chance she will ever marry such an arrogant man! 

This story is told entirely from Julia's viewpoint and the romance is a bit lacking in the courtship department. She is an unusual, modern character and one with whom I could easily identify. I could see myself acting just like Julia in the same situation. I do wish that the story was also told from Lord Brandon's point-of-view because we never really get to know the real him. It's hard to tell what he's thinking and feeling when all the reader knows is Julia's impressions of him. Lady Sayde and Anthony provide comic relief while the other young ladies are fairly stereotypical characters. The plot drags a bit in the middle and finishes up too quickly and randomly. I had hoped for more character development before the story came to a close. I liked it well enough but it doesn't hold a candle to Georgette Heyer's similar plots. It is a nice light read and perfectly clean. There are exactly three kisses and nothing else beyond kissing.