Rating: 4/5

As I made my way through the pages of this book, I became more and more concerned. I reached about halfway, and we were still in France, having departed New York, visited the Azores, Gibraltar, Spain and undertaken a sidetrip to Tangier. As I reached the three quarter mark, and we were in Venice. 
I returned to the title pages, scouring for a clue as to my concern. Rechecking the published agenda of the steamship - yes, definitely a trip to the Holy Lands... Yes definitely a lot of Europe is listed, but, hell we are running out of pages!

So despite no indication to suggest this was volume 1 of The Innocents Abroad, it does in fact end as we prepare to leave Pompeii.

A little about this edition, which, despite being only half the book, is quite attractive. It is a 1910 hardcover edition with an embossed cover and spine, gold leaf on the spine. The embossed pattern is a geometric Art Nouveau pattern, and inside the cover is an amazing peacock artwork, also in Art Nouveau style with a boxed border. Part of The World Library, published by Ward Lock &amp; Co.

I have previously read an excerpt of this book, published as a Penguin Great Journeys book called Can-Cans, Cats and Cities of Ash. It was excellent, and having read the relevant sections of the full book now, can say the excerpts were very well selected, and it really did pick some of the best writing.

As much as I enjoyed this book - and I did - the great writing, the relentless ridiculing of almost anything or anyone, the interesting side-stories, legends and local stories - what I was really looking forward to was the second part of the journey, beyond Europe. Greece, Turkey, Cyprus, Israel, Beirut, Jordan, Egypt, followed by returning again through Europe.

Some quick google found a copy of the book I could download, so the second volume beckons, but it is likely to be a slow burner, as I dislike reading from the screen. Maybe I will print it out...

Volume 1 - 4 stars.

Review of Volume 2 HERE