Rating: 4/5

"I kept a journal to have a record of my early impressions. If I were to try to remember them now I might not be able to do so. They are no longer the same because I myself am no longer the same. India always changes people, and I have been no exception. But this is not my story, it is Olivia's."

************

Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, a German Jew whose family fled the Nazis, moved to London just in time for the Blitz. Marrying a prominent Indian architect, she lived in Delhi for 24 years. Prawer considered herself a lifelong refugee from Germany. She is likely most well known as the screenwriter of many Merchant-Ivory films, and movie adaptions of Ishiguro and Forster novels, which won multiple academy awards. This novel won the 1975 Booker prize, about a woman who goes to India to learn about a grandmother involved in a scandal. 

The narrator, Anne, begins on her arrival in Bombay in 1982 with a stack of letters grandmother Olivia wrote in 1923. She settles into Satipur, a city between Delhi and Lucknow. Olivia had went there to join her new husband Douglas, a British tax collector. Anne visits the abandoned palace of a prince Olivia met at a party. The Nawab was fabulously wealthy, highly intelligent and handsome, and spoiled his guests. Drawn to Olivia, he began to visit her during the daytime, while Douglas was away working long hours at the agency.

Olivia had difficulty adjusting to her new life in India, as did Prawer. Both had followed their husbands there. Anne feels ambivalent towards the natives as well as the foreigners who visit. In the rundown Raj residency British hippies camp out. They had come in search of enlightenment but found only dysentery. The caretaker refuses to unlock their bungalow without a bribe. Anne observes: "I suppose we look strange to them, eating their food and wearing their clothes". Prawer later wrote the poverty and backwardness were intolerable.

The houses where Olivia and the British had lived are now a ramshackle collection of civil offices. Anne slowly becomes accustomed to the culture, learning to speak Hindustani, sleeping outdoors in the hot season and dressing in a sari. She describes personal relations in her landlord's family, an arranged marriage, son and daughter-in-law living with his mother. Spending time with widows from around town, she visits suttee shrines and royal tombs. The writing is like Jane Austin spiked with cyanide, a satire of social conventions.

A family who had forced a mother to burn herself with her dead husband was arrested by Douglas. His dinner guests discussed the custom with paternalistic disapproval. A riot began at a Muslim shrine where Hindus had taken over and the Nawab is suspected by Douglas. Anne rescues a British ascetic who fell ill on pilgrimage. He stays in her room, eats her food and steals her money. Her landlord is incredulous there could be a white sadhu. The events alternate between 1923 and 1982 but the voice is consistently that of Prawer.

Most of the British enclave had decamped for Simla, the hill station resort, but Olivia and Douglas stayed behind in the heat and dust. Olivia visited the Nawab's palace every day. There was trouble in the countryside with a bandit gang, the Nawab probably implicated. Before Anne left London she had met the Nawab's nephew and heir, and his cosmopolitan expatriate friends. In contrast to the beggars and crippled in Satipur, they lived in luxury from treasures smuggled out of India, complaining the government made life unbearable.

Anne visits a shrine with her landlord where women pray to get pregnant. It is the same one where Olivia had gone with the Nawab. Olivia was anxious for a baby with Douglas that didn't seem to come and was willing to test the legend of the shrine. E. M. Forster suggested in 'A Passage to India' that the ways of the east would never be understood by the west, echoed by Prawer's colonists. But when the expectations of either society are transgressed both Indians and the British shared similar ideas of how women could and should act.

'Heat and Dust' is well written, full of wry humor and dry wit. Descriptions of people and places are three dimensional and explain why Prawer was so successful as a screenwriter. Her complex and conflicted relationship with India began during the early years of independence, spanning to a period when there was renewed interest in the Raj among readers and film fans. She used the award money from this novel to buy a condo in Manhattan, in the same building as Merchant and Ivory, and felt more at home on the Upper East Side.