Rating: 4/5

Willowy Amberglass is "the Dowager Duchess of Denver .. cross-wired with Chrestomanci .. one of my all-time favorite characters" (author, inner back cover), and mine. Quotes included to enjoy. 
http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/51... From her first encounter with the wounded Jermain, sorceress Amberglass encourages him to reveal his innermost secrets. She sounds polite, kind, respectful, caring, skilled, blathery, independent, confident, roundabout, vague, clever, dippy, astute, insightful, wise - all at once. 

 I'm so glad you're feeling better. That is, if you are. You haven't said anything about it, so perhaps you aren't, which wouldn't be at all surprising, what with losing all that blood and breaking a rib and so on, though possibly you'd rather I didn't go into detail. Still, I do think it's a mistake not to talk about unpleasant things, even if people are sensitive; after all, if one worried all the time about offending people, one would never say anything, which is some cases would be a very good thing." p11 

Jermaine was royal advisor to King Marreth of magic-less Servaine. Terrel disgraced Jermaine, usurped the position, and sent guards across the border to kill the fugitive. Terrel arranges a wedding between under-his-thumb Prince Eltiron and Princess Crystalorn of neighboring Barinash. When Crystalorn invites Amberglass to attend, the reply is affirmative, apparently. 

 "A great many places are closer than people think. Still, I haven't been anywhere in a long time, and perhaps things have changed, though they don't usually, at least not much. That is, I've been here, which is obviously somewhere, but isn't anywhere else. At least I think it isn't. So I shall quite enjoy it, I'm sure."  

Eltiron's private retreat is a tower identical to the home tower of Amberglass. Five more towers are scattered about the seven kingdoms, built long ago by Galerinth, a sorcerer who tried to fill them only with good power. But since Galerinth was human, and not all good, the towers do not successfully protect their lands. Meanwhile, like centuries before, the Matholych, a Red Plague of dust, surges northward, consuming every living thing on the way. 

  "Galerinth was trying to make the towers totally good, you see, and not being totally good himself he wound up with an exceedingly peculiar mixture" p306 "Galerinth apparently had excessively grand ideas, which isn't at all surprising, because if he hadn't beeen that kind of person, he wouldn't have tried to cast that spell in the first place .. to control all the magic in the Seven Kingdoms" p342  

Of course the plague is the evil split off from the towers, that just wants to re-unite together again, and Eltiron provides the focus in the final magical battle. 

Eltiron is wimpy, lets himself get pushed around. He waits for aunt Vandaris to solve his troubles. In this world, the females are our strong heroic ideals.

Vandaris is a funny, rebellious, outspoken mercenary. She lovingly insults her nephew: "squirrel brain" p27, "numb wit" p66, "crack skull" p86, and "slow bones" p91. Her curses are unique to this world: "Morada's sword" p56 "Arlayne's crown" p182. 

She teaches Eltiron political savvy ettiquette, so he will walk away from Terrel first, instead of permitting the "deliberate attempt to make him look foolish" p67. She is an expert manipulator, admitting "I lied" p87. "I've been causing gossip for more years than you remember, pigeon wit" p91.

 Terrel tries to arrange his own marriage to Vandaris. But long ago, she married a fellow soldier, also neighboring princely heir. Her "sword squire" is their daughter Tarilane. Daring, resourceful, and clever, Tarilane disguises herself as an unnoticed "ash girl" p90 to spy and overhear enemy plotting.

At the formal welcoming ceremony for Crystalorn, Eltiron thinks Terrel looks more regal, in becoming cool "red silk shirt, heavily embroidered with gold" p114, himself in velvet "hot and uncomfortable as well as unbecoming .. neck itch" p114. Again, Eltiron worries instead of acting, sluffs responsibility, feels powerless because he does not assert and take any power "By the end of the afternoon, Eltiron was even more worried than before" p183. He is our example of how not to behave.

Wizard-King Carachel, of yet another unpronounceable kingdom, convinces some kings to join his forces, and searches out Jermain to be his army Commander-General. His meek wife cannot convince Jermain that Carachel has evil motivations. Carachel's desire to preserve the lives of opposing forces, and hold them at bay, is so that the Plague will consume his allies instead of his own country-men. Deceived by Carachel, Jermain loses trust in his own judgement p312.

King Marreth's temper grows erratic. Poison from both Terrel and Carachel's ambassador accumulate to a fatal level. His death is still a shock, suddenly elevating Eltiron to ruler.

Eltiron and Crystalorn muddle through mutual proposals. Finally, "feeling happier than he could remember being in a long time" p323 "... He was still planning when he fell asleep" p324. Although he matures, his sudden transformation to the most powerful in the land is a stretch too far. The couple are satisfyingly quirky, but the happy-ever-after wedding ending feels superimposed. 

Characters are well-developed atypical individuals, difficult with so many important roles. I cannot remember any of the place or people names. This is one of those books I like more in spite of itself than because of itself. Wrede just has a knack for creating people I like and want to follow until they are safe.