Rating: 3/5

The Woman's Bible is legendary in the femi-chrispie scene. Written by women's rights activist Elizabeth Cady Stanton (along with a committee of 26 other ladies), its 1895 publication freaked out the church so severely that some condemned it as the work of Satan. Still, it proved unsurprisingly popular within her gender demographic, fast becoming a best-seller thanks to those who agreed that Christianity's position of subservient women was not actually cool, you guys. 

Elizabeth's booming personality pushes this text forward, ripping the Bible apart line-by-line and analysing every woman of the Good Book to illustrate her well-made points. For us sitting in a contemporary era, the exercise appears a little pointless as our society is well aware of Christianity's systematic oppression of women, designed to strengthen the patriarchy. But Elizabeth was packing dangerous (albeit repetitive) punches during her day, and many were unprepared for such scrutiny. Ultimately, Stanton's mission may have accomplished more harm than good for the author, and the backlash cut her down the ranks of her community. Even members of the suffrage movement turned their backs, as they viewed her blasphemy as detrimental to the broader campaign. 

It goes without saying that I am on Stanton's side, but that doesn't mean the content isn't riddled with shortcomings. The discrimination found in the extracted verses may be undeniable, but her (and her cowriters') interjected commentary is waffly like a personal essay weighed heavy by assumptions and extreme interpretive bias. From what I understood, Stanton even mentioned the biblical sacrifice of firstborn sons as well as male circumcision as somehow negative exclusions of females, which is challenging to get one's head around. To make matters worse, the formatting of my edition was absolutely fucked, reading like someone had generated a book from a Word document, which is probably the case. 

Nevertheless, with 124 pages of big font size, generous line spacing, and related images, it was hardly a demanding text and was worth the short time it took to complete. I extracted slivers of gold for future use, and that's why we do what we do. 

THIS BOOK IS PART OF THE GREATER LAMB PROPHECY STUDIES, book 2 out in 2026!