Rating: 3/5

My first job after college was teaching high school English in a small, predominately Mexican American town on the border. Several of my students were migrant workers who appeared a little later than the others and left a little earlier, but who nonetheless left a crucial impression upon me as a group of young people who were far worldlier, far better at overcoming linguistic and cultural barriers than I was at their age. Now, I am working my umpteenth job since college as an English professor in West Virginia, and this semester I decided to have my students read Helena María Viramontes's Under the Feet of Jesus, about a family of Mexican/Mexican American farm-workers who struggle to keep hold of their humanity while living in degrading conditions. Unlike my students in Texas, my students here are mostly oblivious to the labors Latina/o immigrants have long completed on massive farms in the western United States, as well as to the fights for rights and dignity that were led by people like César Chávez and Dolores Huerta. Recognized as a classic of Chicana/o literature, this book is one of very few that I know about that bring these experiences to life. This is why I decided to have my students read it, and I do think it opened their eyes to injustices and Civil Rights causes that they had not thought about before.

The main character, Estrella ("Star"), is a thirteen-year-old girl, the oldest of five siblings in a poor, Mexican American family. Through flashbacks the author reveals that Estrella's father abandoned the family a couple of years ago, leaving the mother, Petra, a bundle of nerves and requiring Estrella to step up and take care of her brothers and sisters. Eventually, Petra brings home another man, Perfecto, a handyman who is old enough to be her father and has abandoned his own children, who presumably still live in Mexico. Estrella's relationship with Perfecto is strained. On the one hand, in typical teenager fashion, she refuses to accept him as her stepfather and rails against his efforts to exert his authority over the family. On the other, she learns many useful skills from him, including how to read and how to manipulate the tools in his toolbox. At the start of the novel, the family is moving into a shack on a new farm, going through the process of cleaning and unpacking that is so familiar to them. Estrella meets a slightly older boy, Alejo, and develops feelings for him. In one of the book's most vividly rendered scenes, Alejo is coated in a poisonous pesticide being sprayed several days before it was scheduled. When Alejo falls gravely ill, alone and so far away from home, the family must decide what to do with him. As the characters debate among themselves whether or not they can afford to take in another person who may or may not ever recover from a debilitating illness, the author addresses other issues related to the precarious living conditions of poor farmworkers. At what cost to these poor, marginalized people do the rest of us enjoy our shiny, expensive fruits?

Like I said earlier, the book is a classic, and I appreciate that it introduces readers to class- and race-related struggles that are not frequently covered in typical social studies curricula. In this respect, I think it deserves a full five stars. And yet... I just can't help but wish that it were written differently, more conventionally, even, with clearer distinctions between events taking place in the past and present and less reliance upon symbolism. Sure, Viramontes is a talented author with a right to experiment. But at times this slim, "poetic" book verges on being unreadable, particularly in its crucial first pages. When I read the book several years ago, I was not particularly bothered by the way it was written (as you can see in my initial review of the book, which appears below). But as a teacher trying to lead students unfamiliar with Spanish and the experiences related through it, I became hyper aware of the challenges it poses and not convinced that they were necessary. Anyway, do I regret teaching the book? No. It is a necessary read for everyone, even if it is not a terribly easy or enjoyable one.

Previous Review (2008):

I finished Under the Feet of Jesus just a few minutes ago. And already I am forgetting bits and pieces of the plot. But, really, this book's strength is not its plot. Where Viramontes excels is in her creation of stunning images -- the orange peel that Estrella's father slices for her with his fingernail, the unexpected downpour of pesticide that sheets Alejo while he's in a tree, the semen that slides down Perfecto's leg and evaporates when it hits a hot stone, etc. An interesting if not entirely exceptional piece of Mexican-American literature.