Rating: 2/5

So first off, the Goodreads info on this book is wrong. There are not 240 pages, there are 291. 

This is definitely a product of a very different era, when men were not just manly men but MANLY MEN. But even looking at it through that lens I can't wrap my head around how this Horatio Hornblower was held up as such a great heroic figure. Because the guy is a complete a-hole. 

My intro to Hornblower was the A&amp;E series of the late 90's and early 2000's, and how that character was written and portrayed was the books are often described... he's a flawed hero. I loved those movies and the character. The issue is that in the show he's likeable, in the books he most definitely is not. 

Looking past the obvious behaviors of what would be expected from a gentleman and senior navy man of that era is one thing, and that I can do. What I can't accept is his constant terrible treatment of friends and most especially his wife, whom he has cheated on not just once but now twice in the series. Oh but woe is him, always being so harsh on himself about everything he does, and yet he never does anything to change. 

I've read books with unlikeable characters, such as those in Abercrombie's First Law and Age of Madness trilogies, but even those a-hole characters have something you can sink your teeth into. The sort that you can love to hate. Hornblower is just... despicable. 

--spoilers below---

The only reason I give this one two stars is because the first two thirds of the book are acceptable Napoleonic era fare. The final third is infuriating. He gets in a fight with his wife then heads off to shack up with his mistress for a few months, whom he repeatedly says will have heart broken by him and then manages to get her killed with his arrogance! Oh but boo hoo, he's so sad, beating himself up about it... all the while it's perfectly convenient that she's dead so he can go back to his wife without being forced to make a choice between the two. 

The fact that he's saved from execution himself quite literally on the last page by Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo is just silly. I know Forester was a better writer than that and yet that's how he ended it.