Rating: 5/5

Finished the book. Below is an early entry. More later. This is a very fine book, a cross section of Gardner's writing about scientific, cultural, philosophical and religious topics but very little along the lines of the mathematical games or recreational mathematics that is possibly best known for, there is only one essay in that area concerning Dr. Apollomax, student of Bourbaki (that is a hint), that contains a very tricky puzzle and a few apparent paradoxes. In addition, there is one essay that was a negative review of one of his own books under a fake name. (Disclaimed at the very end, yet some still did not buy the book because of it).

Gardner is a theist along lines similar to Thomas Paine, and a realist/Platonist to the extent that he (like I) believe there is a reality that is independent of the mind or any observer. In particular, I liked his essay about the so-called "Anthropic Principle of Cosmology". It is a very sophisticated argument based (loosely?) on modern physics to let in the backdoor a justification for much conventional religious thought about the importance, indeed, centrality of humanity in the scheme of things that is supposedly science as opposed the unconvincing mythology that passed for "theology" (as if in were an actual science) in the past. It springs from an argument of Bishop Berkeley (the great mind that tried to dismiss calculus in its early pre-Cauchy and Weierstrauss form as "the ghosts of departed quantities") who argued that things do not exist without an observer (another form of the old joke about the tree falling in the forest making a sound) therefore there must be a god to serve as the observer of last resort for everything we can't observe. The anthropic argument goes further to assert that not only is human consciousness a necessary and inevitable part of the universe but for various reasons the ONLY one (having more than us would violate some sort of conservation law). It has several sub-theories WAP, SAP, FAP etc. Which Gardner sums up scornfully, and I suspect correctly, as CRAP (Completely Ridiculous Anthropic Principle). [As the dominion principle in right wing religious thought is not just crap, but demonstrable toxic waste.]

But perhaps the most important thing I learned from this book was the important cosmological fact: "It's elephants all the way down."