Rating: 2/5

Okay, disclaimer first - I got this book in a ten-book grab bag of sci-fi/fantasy novels from a used book store for five dollars. I'd never heard of the author or (apparently) series it belongs to and based on this book, would not seek out the author or other titles in this series. 

Second, this isn't a bad book, it just wasn't for me, nor is this particular style of fantasy fiction really my bag. I would go so far as to say I don't know what this book is trying to be. Part Lord of the Rings (with it's epic quest and bumbling, doofy anti-hero main character) part Norse folk novel, it just seems kinda amateurish to me. Or, I guess may said differently, there are a lot of fantasy novels out there and a lot of them are better than this, so why read this one? But I read it, and I'm not worse off for having done so.

The issue for me is that the author seems to have only one or two plot devices in her toolbox. Almost all of the 300 pages is the main character (Brak, a thrall - sort of a servant/squire type guy) doing dumb things and being rewarded for it. Mostly, Brak excels at getting captured. Luckily, the "bad guys" are of the "let me tell you my evil plan then not kill you" type, so it doesn't matter. Brak, often described as cowardly and feeble (but earnest and hardy) is eye rolling in his anti-hero roll. Once the adventure gets rolling, he wanders away from his friends at dusk into a forest and gets lost and then captured (then freed by DEM, see below). About 70 pages later, he does the same thing, this time in a foggy swamp. Don't worry, DEM is there to facilitate his escape, again. And that's basically the entire book. None of the characters ever really grow or learn or gain skills, they're just orchestrated to be where they need to be. The much more powerful villains bluster a lot, threaten a lot and demonstrate their big, bad, evil guy powers and, for most of the novel, have the good guys in their clutches but they "Austin Powers" their way to failure over and over. 

 There is also a flashing, neon green, caps lock'ed DUES EX MACHINA character who reappears (usually to betray the "good guys" in some manner, over and over again) many times from page 50ish to the end who basically controls the narrative and it's no surprise when he turns out to be much more than he seems - and really, this isn't a spoiler because it's that obvious to anyone except the characters that he's more than he seems. So you hit a certain critical mass where you know the plot is driven by this one character and anytime he's not around, we're at either a "fluff" stage of the book, or he's doing something in the background to catalyze whatever happens next.

Again, not a bad book, just not for me. It's obvious early on that while the "bad guys" hold all the power, that they're basically idiots. The good guys are also kinda idiots, but one quickly notes that they're never in any real danger of failure, so there's not much in the way of suspense, just some hundreds of pages to read through while you wait for the inevitable victory.