Rating: 4/5

I got this book from the library as a "playaway", an audio book that is pre-loaded onto an MP3-type device. It's a pretty nifty set up, especially for books that are perhaps a little too much for my children to hear, but that I can listen to while washing the dishes, folding the laundry, etc.

Okay, here's what I like about the book:

A good "murder mystery" fun read, one that gets you thinking and wondering "whodonit". It also gets you thinking about memory and its important role in all of our lives, from our basic relationships to each other (the main character proposes to his girlfriend, but a week later, she forgets all about it!) to work and society problems (a key witness for a murder forgets all the original details and can't remember her original testimony).

The main culprit is a new antibiotic that was engineered to cross the blood brain barrier. The FDA approved it because of it's promise to help solve many meningitis-type diseases and counted it as the next miracle drug. But the main character starts noticing from his own experience and others that short-term memory loss seems to be happening to everyone who takes the drug. As a forensic detective for the NYPD, he travels around the world, checking out different theories and meeting with different professionals about memory loss in past civilizations, meanwhile trying to solve a chain murder case. 

My main reservation with this book is that it is written to a general US Adult audience, meaning life standards that aren't particularly LDS. For example, the main character is living with his girlfriend, but thankfully the author is very tasteful in the intimacy side of their relationship. It just bugs me that this is considered so normal in our society these days. And, to their credit, they decide to get married, however, it's not a wedding with family and friends around, just one of those "quickies" with a friend who is a justice of the peace sort of thing. I actually would worry about a marriage with such a shaky commitment foundation. Anyway, the other thing is with the serial murders, it's on women and evidence points to a lesbian type relationship that connects them. Again, the worldliness of our society, but it's not heavily done like the author is on a soapbox or anything, just included because that's part of our world these days. Unfortunately.

One thing that is nice is that I don't recall much in the way of crude language or anything. I can't stand too much of that.

Anyway, if you like murder mysteries like CSI, Monk, Agatha Christie, then this would be a fun book to read.