Rating: 4/5

I have read many books by Jan Brett, but I have never read a book quite like this one! “Comet's Nine Lives” is a children's book by Jan Brett which is about a cat named Comet who wanted to do more in his life, but is finding it hard to keep his nine lives together. “Comet's Nine Lives” might be a tad bit too confusing, but many children will enjoy this cute story!

Comet was born on Nantucket Island and he grew up wandering around the island. One day however, Comet was eating some fox gloves when he began to feel dizzy and then fell asleep. When Comet woke up, he realized that he just lost his first life, so he decides to find a home in the bookstore. However, when Comet was sitting on a stack of books, many islanders came into the bookstore and knocked down the stack of books that Comet was sitting on and Comet lost his second life!

Although not all that amazing, I thought that Jan Brett did an excellent job at making this book extremely cute. I loved the fact that Comet wanted to find the happiness that he is looking for in life and people who feel the same as Comet will definitely understand his desire to find that happiness at all costs. Jan Brett's illustrations are extremely beautiful and slightly surreal at the same time as there are only two cats in the entire book while the whole world they live in is full of dogs doing human activities. I also loved the beautiful images of Nantucket Island as whenever Comet goes by the sea, the sea is blue and you can actually see the froth coming out of the sea, making the effects seem so realistic! I also loved the image of Comet himself as he is drawn as a handsome cat that is white and orange stripes on his back.

Parents should know that this book might confuse smaller children since some scenes where Comet supposedly lost his life are not quite clear as we do not know whether or not he actually lost his life. Also, the death theme might upset small children who are not used to death, even though it is not clear if Comet died or not.

All in all, “Comet’s Nine Lives” is a great book for children who love reading about cats and are huge fans of Jan Brett. I would recommend this book to children ages five and up since the death theme might confuse smaller children.