Rating: 2/5

I was going to rank this 3 stars as a sort of average amount, but then remembered that 2 stars is "it was okay" which is really the best description for this. I first encountered this book around when it was first published; the disjuncture between the title and the cover image intrigued me. At some point I started reading it, but then traveling to and living in Japan for a time got in the way and I never finished. Reading The Ends of the World reminded me of this and I thought I should revisit it.

It is kind of a disappointing read. It was still interesting enough that I don't really regret reading it and kind of feel I should still give it 3 stars, but it wasn't a very coherent book. The overall structure is a chronological description of Ward's work relating to investigations of the end Permian extinction. This leads to a very episodic structure, with much of the book filled with descriptions of field work in the Karoo desert of South Africa. This is interesting in its own right, and I could further relate a bit having participated in a paleontological dig (albeit for rather unimportant dinosaur bones in the US) as part of a college course. But then later in the book, Ward starts talking about drawing conclusions from the finds, and it seems like a non-sequitur since the descriptions of field work were always more about the personal experience of being out there and never really goes into what is learned from the work. 

Further incoherence is found at the end of the book. In the penultimate chapter Ward seems to reject the conclusion that an impact was responsible for the end Permian extinction and proposes some interesting ideas (albeit one that obviously lacks rigorous testing for the very fact that he first published it in this book of popular/general science writing and not in an academic paper) about how lower than current normal levels of oxygen in the early Mesozoic could have contributed to the rise of dinosaurs and may be behind certain mammalian traits like live birth. But then in the final chapter he talks about the Permian and Cretaceous extinctions being the same sort of thing, coming being the result of extraterrestrial impacts events. I suppose he may have just being going along with the scientific consensus of the time (which seems to have changed to pointing the finger at massive climate change now), but it is jarring to read.

A final issue is with the title. It doesn't really make much sense, and the gorgonopsids from which the title is derived aren't really that prevalent in the book. In fact, the one major excavation of a gorgon skeleton turns out to be an unrelated species. There is a bit at the end about using the term "Gorgon" as a symbol or metaphor, but it isn't a really well developed idea.