Rating: 5/5

The Day of the Jackal is a true classic in the thriller genre and is also one of those rare occasions when the movie made from the novel is almost as good as the book. Set in the early 1960s, it revolves around efforts to assassinate French President Charles de Gaulle.

For nearly 130 years, the French had controlled Algeria as a colony. Resistance by the Algerians led to a war lasting seven years in which the French unsuccessfully attempted to maintain control. Finally, in March, 1962, the French government agreed to a treaty allowing the Algerians their independence. Many people in France were outraged by the decision and blamed de Gaulle for, in their view, betraying France. In particular, elements of the French army believed that de Gaulle had disgraced the memory of the French soldiers who had given their lives to the war effort. The novel takes place against that backdrop.

As the novel opens, several attempts to assassinate de Gaulle have failed. Leaders of the secret army organization (the OAS) that is behind the attempts are in hiding and running out of options. Their organization is riddled with informers and the French government is hunting them down. In a last ditch effort to kill de Gaulle they decide to recruit a professional assassin from outside their ranks to do the job. After a careful search they hire a man who will be known by the code name, "The Jackal." The plot and the Jackal's identity will be known only to three of the leaders of the group who will remain in hiding and under heavy guard until the Jackal completes his mission.

What follows is one of the great cat-and-mouse games in all of fiction. The reader watches as the Jackal makes his preparations and as the French government gradually becomes aware of the fact that some plot against the president has been set into motion. Leading the effort to identify the potential assassin and thwart the plot is a rumpled detective named Claude Lebel, and he and the Jackal will prove to be very worthy adversaries as they act and react to each other's moves.

The book begins a bit slowly as the stage is set, but it then takes off at a breakneck pace. The characters are very well drawn and the actions that they take seem totally plausible. This is not a fantasy like a James Bond novel, for example, but is very much grounded in reality from the beginning to a fantastic climax. Both the Jackal and Lebel are believable characters and while one is naturally supposed to root for the forces of law and order, you can't help but feel some sympathy for the Jackal as well; he is one of the most fascinating characters a reader will ever meet in a novel like this. Even though the book is now fifty years old, it's still as compelling as it was on the day it first appeared. A great read.

 I was going to note that the book is extremely suspenseful even though we know from the beginning that the Jackal will ultimately fail in his mission. But it then occurred to me that we are now a generation and a half removed from the events in the novel. Given the state of education in history these days, there may be any number of readers who might not know that Charles de Gaulle ultimately died a natural death and was not assassinated. I'm trying to imagine what it would be like to read this book not knowing that and thinking that the Jackal might really have a chance to succeed in the end. What a trip that would be!