Rating: 5/5

Technically this wasn't my first exposure to Janny Wurts. I read the Empire trilogy she wrote with Ray Feist back when I was 13 or so; I remember enjoying it, and not much else about it. 13-year-old me had questionable taste in many ways, though, and I've learned not to put too much stock in his opinions.

I also know her from /r/Fantasy, where Janny consistently addresses complicated and difficult questions with thoughtfulness and wisdom, frequently enough that any time an interesting question is asked I find myself automatically looking forward to whatever she has to say. So on that score, I had pretty high expectations going into this. And she certainly delivered.

Though I enjoyed it from the start, it took a while to really get what I would call good. The book is a series of small stories with no clear overall plot direction, at least at first. Structurally it reminded me a lot of Cugel's adventures from Jack Vance's Dying Earth. The first few adventures Korendir undertook felt like very straightforward sword-and-sorcery; fun to read, but nothing particularly memorable. As the story went on, though, there was a gradual shift, so slow that it took me a while to realize it. It went from the chronicle of Korendir's adventures to an exploration of the man himself; what drove him, what his goals were, and his past, and his future.

He's a complicated man, with a great deal going on beneath the surface. The challenges he faced steadily increased in scope and in cost, with the consequences growing steadily more and more tragic. Each gain revealed more about the man, and even more so the price he paid for it. And the more his fortunes rose, the more the dread in the pit of my stomach intensified, because the more he had, the more he had to lose. There was a line from the Dresden Files that kept coming to mind as I read this story: "he was not a man to die in bed."

The ending was as bittersweet as any I've ever read, including Frodo sailing West and anything that heart-wrenching beautiful bastard Guy Gavriel Kay can come up with. It warmed my heart and made me want to cry at the same time.

I've heard great things about many of Janny's books, and if they can match this one, they'll be more than worth it.