Rating: 4/5

The death of Rabbi Steinsaltz several weeks ago prompted me to reflect on the incredible legacy he has left by breaking the language barrier of the Talmud and making it accessible to one and all. For most folks, it’s like the translation of the Rosetta stone times a million – incredible but ultimately stuff for museums. For practicing Jews, his translation allows them to take part in a crucial dialogue which has sustained the Jewish people for thousands of years.

While it would be nice to read his entire translation on the Talmud, that takes an investment of years. So for now, my reflections led me to read to Rabbi Steinsaltz ’s meta-Talmudic work – or at least that’s how I view Talmud for All: It’s not exactly a scholarly work in that you will not find it lined with footnotes, but it is most certainly the work of a scholar. It seems more of his impression, or perhaps his musing on Talmud. This isn’t to say that he didn’t give historical descriptions and summaries of the basic structure and content of the Talmud, but in my mind this book is less about the Talmud and more about what Rabbi Steinsaltz thought about the Talmud. Ultimately, this was a short book, an attempt to distill an essence from all those thousands of pages, and so the choice of words and topics was not trivial. Considering Rabbi Steinsaltz clearly had both a panoramic view and intimate knowledge of the text, as well as the ability to compare it to a backdrop of secular knowledge (at least to some extent), I think he was pretty uniquely positioned to give exactly this kind of commentary.

So what are some interesting insights that I picked up? Well, I feel that I read this book over a span of too many weeks to remember it all, but I really did enjoy the various kinds of enlightening historical and social contexts explained in the book – I really liked his meta more than his summaries of the text (though even the summaries always had some analysis). I appreciated his explanations of the context: the environment in which things were written and edited, the tension between the Israeli and Babylonian Talmud, impactful methods for Talmud’s preservation and exegesis through the years, reasons for topics chosen and topics discarded – to name a few. His esoteric but interesting little nuggets of fun facts also left an impression: e.g. how liberated Jewish women used to sometimes spend their time with small dogs, how a merit-based system of scholarship often meant that progeny of the sages never rose to Talmudic prominence of their own.

I was particularly impressed with his forward-thinking view of women in the chapters that describe the Talmud volumes that pertain to women and their relationship to men. I don't think he was trying to be apologetic (I version of the book that I read was the Hebrew one from 1977). I got the sense he wrote things as he saw them, and obviously we each see things through a certain prism of values and tendencies. 

Rabbi Steinsaltz’s last chapter was his most profound: he argues that the Talmud has not been sealed. I think that’s one of his more important insights. I think he’s trying to say that studying Talmud is not about decoding an ancient text and just trying to walk in the footsteps of others, but rather using it as a springboard for a dialogue about humanity that spans thousands of years and gives us a much wider lens for viewing the world and humanity. Personally, I’m of the ‘midgets-on-the-shoulders-of-giants’ school : I think our 21st vantage point is anything but limited or narrow – accordingly, I have a love-hate relationship with Talmud (but maybe this too is a product of my own narrow mindset). To be honest, Rabbi Steinsaltz’s book didn’t have me running back to study Talmud, but it did give me some good insights into it and may have planted a seed.