Rating: 3/5

Ojo the Unlucky, a Munchkin boy raised in isolation in the Blue Forest by his taciturn Unc Nunkie, finds himself setting out on a quest through the wider world of Oz in this seventh entry in L. Frank Baum's series about that magical country. After his beloved uncle is petrified at the home of the Crooked Magician - the creator of the Powder of Life, first introduced in 
  The Marvelous Land of Oz
 - Ojo, in the company of Scraps the Patchwork Girl and Bungle the Glass Cat, embarks on a mission to track down the ingredients necessary for the antidote to this magical mishap. But where will he find a six-leaved clover, the left wing of a yellow butterfly, a gill of water from a dark well, three hairs from a Woozy's tail, and a drop of oil from a man's body? And how will the other residents of Oz that he encounters - the Shaggy Man, the Scarecrow, Princess Dorothy, Princess Ozma, and the Tin Woodman - react to his quest...?

Although by no means a favorite, when it comes to Baum's Oz books - that honor goes to the first, 
  The Wonderful Wizard of Oz
, and to the third, 
  Ozma of Oz
 - I have always enjoyed The Patchwork Girl of Oz, finding both Ojo and Scraps engaging characters, in their separate ways. I suppose that as a girl I identified with Ojo's rebellious resentment, in the matter of the six-leaved clover - not understanding the purpose of the law against picking it, he thought it grossly unfair - while I enjoyed Scraps' thoroughly amoral joie de vie. I imagine that readers of the time, horrified at the prospect of no more Oz books - in the previous installment, 
  The Emerald City of Oz
, Baum declared that Ozma had made her kingdom invisible to the outside world, and that there would be no more stories from Oz - were overjoyed at this return to the beloved world of fairy and magic. As for me, rereading this as an adult, I'm struck by the negative depiction of cats - Bungle here, and Eureka in 
  Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz
- so far in the series. I wonder if perhaps Baum disliked them...?