Rating: 5/5

I thoroughly enjoyed the book from start to finish. It was a masterful retelling of why Operation Desert Storm was such as military success. Why we didn't finish the job by toppling Saddam in 1991 was not a decision made by the military. (That's for the civilian policy makers to decide. Different discussion!) Nevertheless, General Franks commanded the "left hook" that was so successful in crushing the Iraqi army. And as Franks argued rightly, that success came not in 1991 but in the 1970s and 1980s as the Army had to be reborn in some many different ways.

Yes, the tech upgrades like the highly superior M1A1 and controversial but still successful M2 Bradley and AH-64 Apaches. I'm talking about the Army only at this point. What I did not know was how the training was completely revolutionized too - like Battle Labs, freedom to experiment new tactics, new equipment, and above all, new training and doctrine. The refusal to succumb to "Not Made Here" syndrome rather by watching and asking the Israelis about the 1973 Yom Kippur War - what worked, what didn't, what could be improved, etc. 

I was reading the blurb to another book - the  The Generals' War about the disagreements between Schwarzkopf, Yeosock, and Franks. I didn't get that sense. Was Franks trying exonerate himself? I didn't get that sense. Was Yeosock as "incompetent" as he was made out to be in another book? Possibly, but Yeosock was the Third Army commander and did one thing well as a manager, not always as a general and that was to parse his superior's intents, shield his subordinates from unnecessary and perhaps unwarranted criticism from the top, enable his subordinates to do their job, motivate them to give 115%, and defend them to the hilt when they are right. 

The other aspect which I enjoyed was how Franks insisted the Army not rest on its laurels of Desert Storm but continue to transform to fight in the 21st century. We saw how well it worked in OEF and OIF's opening phases. 

Thus, 5 stars, no regrets for such a long book.