Rating: 3/5

For most of the book, I wasn't sure how I felt about it. Master of Whitestorm is written well, and it has some interesting ideas, but I think that mainly just didn't like the style of the storytelling. The third-person point of view used here combined with the personality of the characters made it so that I just didn't care about them. I never really knew how they ticked, and the one point in the story where we get more of the Master Whitestorm's back-story, it didn't make me like him more. He had a hard life before and during his time as a galley slave, but it didn't mean he had to be such a douche bag for the rest of his life. It was just so hard to feel for and route for the main character, that I was frustrated for a lot of the book, even when he succeeds, moments that should be at least slightly happy. I did like the idea of the story, where it was almost like a literary version of a video game, with the Mercenary always taking on new quests. It's also well done, but in the end there wasn't much of a point for it all. There isn't a whole lot of worldbuilding, other then there being a group of magic users that draw on the power of an alternate universe, where demons reside and can sometimes crossover if the mage isn't careful. There's also some random creatures (were-leopards) that are kind of cool, and elementals, which were interesting but not developed very well other than something to conquer/use to complete quests using guile instead of strength of arms. What's weird, is that even though the reader sees almost all of the Master of Whitestorm's life, you never see how he became a master swordsman and tactician, he just is. I'll repeat that I did relatively enjoy reading the book, even though it took me a little long to finish since it was easy to put down since there was really no overarching story or character growth. Ultimately, I still considering giving the book 4 stars if I liked the ending, but when I got to the actual ending, I absolutely hated it. It was one of the worst endings to a book that I've ever read, and it was a complete letdown that to me made the whole journey of the book completely worthless. I won't spoil it, but I'll say just say that it's not a good ending, and the reason it happens is ridiculous, and the epilogue with the one side character made it even worse. I guess that the whole idea of the book is that no one changes, and if that's what's the author was going for she succeeded, and while it's not a bad book, I just didn't love it, and would not recommend it, although your mileage definitely might vary.