Rating: 3/5

You do have to give credit where it is due. As a fan and student of the "Radium-Age" of science fiction (to borrow a term coined by the HiLo Brow blog), which is the era of genre work from the 1900s to the early 1930s, it has become clear to me that there were a few writers of that time that were responsible for the content, style, and popularity of the Golden-Age. Doc Smith was one of the big ones, and "Skylark of Space," being his first published work, was what started it all. Scifi from that era does not largely consist of escapist pulp, though there are some notable exceptions like the writing of Edmond Hamilton and Edgar Rice Burroughs. Instead, it tends to involve quite a degree of intellectual exercise, with heavy philosophical, political, economic, and sociocultural themes cloaked in allegory, metaphor, and fantasy. Books like "We," "Voyage to Arcturus," "Black No More," "The World Below," "Last and First Men," "The Napoleon of Notting Hill," "The Iron Heel," "The World Set Free," and Belloc's Parliament trilogy are hardly light entertainment. But then along comes some jock trying to get a PhD so he can make tastier doughnuts who gets the idea to write a crazy adventure story with another man's wife. And the first space opera was born.

Having read a lot of pre-Golden-Age scifi, I can honestly say that Doc Smith had a truly original vision when he was writing this story, because there really was very little out there in the literary world like "Skylark" in which to emulate. Sure, there were some stories and novels involving space travel, but these tended to be as speculative as possible on what real technology could achieve, and so were grounded in as much reality as they could be for the time. But nothing took on the sense of wonder and endless adventurous possibilities of space exploration like "Skylark." This nicely took on a less weighty, less philosophical, and less prophetic tone than its contemporaries and gave readers a sense of optimism, humor, and excitement, setting the tone for early superhero comic writing. To give you an idea of how groundbreaking it was, "Skylark" was released in the same magazine in which the first Buck Rogers story appeared, but Buck (then called Anthony) was not flying around space at that time, being solely in a story grounded on Earth and fighting Mongolians. "Skylark," on the other hand, was taking the reader to distant planets and meeting alien civilizations. 

This being said, "Skylark" will likely unpleasantly surprise and disappoint many readers. The many negative to mediocre reviews about this book out there on the Internet is a testament to the fact that the writing found here is quite juvenile and clunky. I do take issue with some criticism of the book having too many dated idioms and much early 20th century slang. So what? Is Shakespeare irrelevant because of the archaic language? Not that Doc Smith is Shakespeare by any stretch. The Doc's prose is purely pedestrian and functional, as well as amateurish. But the "old-fashioned" language certainly helps immerse me in a different world and a different time as would any good historical novel set during this American era. 

The dated bits of the book that actually were more cringy for me were things like the portrayal of the faithful Japanese servant who speaks in broken English and of course knows martial arts. And the kidnapped women who kind of think their kidnapper is hot for being such a manly brute. But such were the times, and we can't and shouldn't erase it or even judge by our modern sensibilities, only appreciate where we come from and how far we've gone. 

But nonetheless, the writing does bring the rating down significantly from an otherwise fun and imaginative adventure that is an important slice of literary history. It did not put me off wanting to check out the other entries in the series to see where else the Skylark brings us.