Rating: 4/5

4.5 twinkling, sparkling stars!

In my early days on the internet I was excited to find a Georgette Heyer message board. I didn't last long there as most of the posters hated Regency Buck &amp; loved Lady of Quality! While Regency Bucks has it's flaws, my memory of Lady of Quality is that it was a reworking of Black Sheep only with a really obnoxious hero. 

The message board didn't last long either.

I might as well get the issues I had with the book out of the way first. I first read this book when I was very young (probably only 12/13) so I wasn't too familiar with some of romance writing's conventions. So at the start of the book I was quite confused as I preferred Bernard to Worth at first &amp; then later, on I preferred Charles Audley! 

The other problem for me is Worth threatening to beat Judith. Ok, he was in a towering rage the first time but he said it again! Given that my memory of Judith from An Infamous Army is that she was dull &amp; matronly, my overactive imagination has Worth carrying out his threat! 

From memory, GH also has the Brighton Pavillion in its present form earlier than was actually the case. In Regency Buck, Beau Brummell talking about his age makes it clear that events in this book are happening 1812. (&amp; there are also some dated letters) Brummell's debts drove him into exile 1816. However, the Brighton Pavillion alterations were done 1815-1823. Doesn't bother me but it did bother a perfectionist such as GH.

No matter,GH's other research uses events of the time &amp; the writing is very good. The detail of Regency customs, dress &amp; historic events means this should be the first Regency anyone reads. &amp; GH shows, not tells, very cleverly.

The romance is very well done. A wonderful flirtation (&amp; the feelings are obviously stronger on Worth's side in the beginning), until it is derailed both by Judith being his ward &amp; The Big Misunderstanding, so important to all romances.

&amp; there is a wonderful, vivid cast of supporting character, Lady Albinia being my favourite.

&amp; I loved this book so much, that when I first visited England in the 70's of course I visited Brighton Pavillion. Here are a pack of playing cards I bought there.

 
  
    
  

  
    
  

Edit; Nearly forgot but as usual the Arrow edition is full of typos! &amp; is that meant to be Worth holding that fan? Seriously? 

  
    
  

Edit; Notes from reread 6 Jan 2018

First thing that struck me was the long time frame - unusual in GH's Regencies &amp; mysteries. This book took place over a year.

Some of the language Austenesque. GH still finding her voice.

Lot of background detail. Maybe GH wasn't expecting to become the Regency romance writer. A plus is that we have all that info now. GH never went that far overboard again. The clothing description was quite definitely overkill.

I skimmed the prizefight, (I hate boxing) but gritted my teeth &amp; read the cock fight. I wanted to understand how Farnaby forced the duel on Perry.

Loved GH's affectionate portrayal of Brummell. 

Loved the humour, especially Worth  outmanoeuvring Judith over the Brighton rentals &amp; Perry's reaction to both being kidnapped &amp; Worth's proposal to his sister.

What I didn't like other than the boxing &amp; the cockfight - same as last time - Worth threatening to beat Judith.