Rating: 4/5

Don’t You Know There’s a War On? Is a historical fiction novel set in Brooklyn, New York during world war 2. The story takes place in 1943 and is narrated by a fifth grade boy named Howard Crispers. Howard prefers to go by Howie. Howard’s life has been tough since his dad has been in war. His mom works very hard at the Navy yard to help with the war effort. Howard tries to do helpful things too, he mostly likes to collect scrap metal and follow the war news. Howard’s best friend is a boy named Denny. They have a lot in common, like both their dads are in the war, they listen to the same radio series. Also both boys very much love their teacher, Miss Gossim. She is kind, fair, and makes learning very fun, even during a scary time in the world. And Dr. Lomister is the school’s strict principal, who Howie thinks is a Nazi spy. It begins with Howie and Denny’s mission to prove the strict principal is a Nazi spy. A plot worthy of the radio series they both enjoy listening to. While trying to spy on the principal Howie overhears a conversation that reveals a scary secret: He is trying to fire their favorite teacher, Ms. Gossem. The story shifts from a silly childish fantasy of catching a spy, to a reality of saving their beloved teacher, Miss Gossem. Howie finds out personal information while in Miss. Gossem’s apartment. He finds out about her feelings toward the war, and how her husband is in the war, and how worried she is that her husband might die in this big world war. Which would leave her here alone. From hearing this he feels the need to intervene to help her, save her, whatever he can do. 303 
	I really enjoyed reading the awesome novel “Don’t You Know There’s A War On?” by Avi. This is because I loved how the kids helped the adults with their problems, and in the world right now we, kids are supposed to mind our business. The author did a really good job in keeping a 1943 like vibe going in the story, it felt like someone from world war 2 was actually talking to me, and I also loved the writing style of the author. Avi did a great job of telling how people in world war 2 might have felt during that time period. 104

	My favorite scenes from the book are all of the blackouts, blackouts are basically lockdowns for the whole town. The whole street including businesses, houses, apartment buildings’ all lights are supposed to be off and people are not supposed to be outside. They do this because the small town is supposed to be hidden from enemies so if there is a suspicious plane or something off they will go into this protocol which will keep the people and the whole town safe. During the first blackout the author talks about how Howie likes the sky, because I like the sky also. 101

	I would rate this book a 4. I would recommend this book for 11+ of age because the words could be confusing for younger kids. Overall I liked this book. 30