Rating: 5/5

Read this during a rainy spring week in my freezing walled-up patio room on Edgehill Road in Kingston, ON (the steep slope of it calling for such an artful architectural dodge on the part of my college digs' landlord) in 1973. I was cruising for another overdue psychiatric bruising with the stress of my courseload.

Henry Kissinger's overkill up the Mekong didn't help either.

Anyway, Invisible Man was the last of my required reading for my Modern Novel course towards my degree. As if I didn't need someone else to shake me brutally awake! 

Invisible but deadly, the book was unintentionally an overdue addition to the planned adult demolition of my autism. I didn't think I needed another reason to hate myself...

Though apparently I did.

Now the modern world has turned blind. For the comfortable it is a blessing. In my autism (the world, as you know, judges it as immaturity) it is a curse. 

I should have been comfortable, but kept peeking at life's underside - the side more obvious to the autistic.

In Elison's Harlem in the fifties (the world being blind to racial difference) it was obscene. Furthermore, the polite operative word for American blindness is now gentrification. Internet Gentrification comfortably screens out all differences.

Sex is the glue that holds all its comforts together.

The comfortable are blessed for life. The Aspie's jerky antsiness under sedation merely hides a traumatic nightmare. The nightmare is real. Elison's angry violence is a reflex reaction to a comfort that has never existed in his total nightmare.

It says GET REAL to the moral majority. Like, wakey, wakey. So which view is right?

Well, being autistic still (so many retreating segues later) I think the dream is in fact a nightmare, perhaps a total nightmare as in this book. That, at any rate, it was for me, awakening at 5AM this morning.

In that dream, its appalling debacle was, a voice said, the key to the bipolar curse in my life. And no, I don’t remember what the key was, except that it was deceitfully political in nature, like in the doomed political action of Elison’s novel, and intensely nightmarish.

The face of Medusa itself. Perhaps that's when I remembered Invisible Man!

***

This book was a winner of the National Book Reward in the early fifties.

Since then, for some reason, it has been dropped from published circulation in Canada -

Perhaps because the plot may be perceived as inciting racial violence -

And I am strangely not unhappy about this Medusa’s demise…

For reasons of public safety:

And my own.