Rating: 4/5

A masterly specimen of the sensation novel

Although in his foreword J.S. Le Fanu remonstrates against “Uncle Silas” (1864) being classified as a sensation novel, claiming rather to be inspired by the great and noble writings of Sir Walter Scott, this novel is actually one of the best examples of the kind of fiction so vehemently rejected by Le Fanu.

The sensation novel, having its heyday in the 1860s and 1870s, focuses on dark and heinous crimes such as murder, abduction, or rape, and on themes like lunacy, and sinister family secrets, placing them – unlike the classical gothic novel – not into a romantic and remote, but into a familiar and contemporary setting. It can therefore be said that sensation novels are forerunners of our present-day detective stories.

“Uncle Silas” deals with Maud Ruthyn, who is the heiress to an immense fortune and who lives together with her recluse of a father, Austin Ruthyn, in a vast old mansion. The family reputation suffered considerably from Austin’s brother Silas. A rake and a gambler, he finally got married to a woman of lower rank and, finding himself reduced to abject poverty, he eventually incurred the suspicion of having murdered a man he had invited into his house in order to get hold of this man’s money. As years went by, Uncle Silas seemed to have reformed his ways and taken refuge to religion. His brother, intending to prove that he never doubted Silas’s innocence with regard to the murder charge, announces his will to place Maud as a ward under his brother’s guardianship after his death.

After Austin Ruthyn has died of a heart attack, his last will is effected, and Maud comes to live at Bartram-Haugh in Derbyshire, the mansion allotted to Uncle Silas. This transaction causes much dismay among Maud’s cousin Monica and Dr. Bryerly, a friend of her father’s, because they still believe that Silas had a hand in the sudden death of his guest all those years ago.

Unfortunately Silas Ruthyn has never mended his ways and still stands in need of money so that at first he tries to marry his ward to his son Dudley, but, this plan failing, he does not shirk from meaner plans to take possession of the family fortune, availing himself of the services of Maud’s former governess Mme de la Rougierre and of other blackguards.

The novel has a very straightforward plot and uses a limited set of characters, which makes it very suspenseful. Le Fanu’s descriptions of empty and abandoned mansions, dark nights and, above all, the demonic Uncle Silas, who never leaves his chamber and, vampire-like, seems to thrive on the fear with which he inspires Maud, make this novel an extremely beautiful treat. The few characters that there are are depicted very graphically, especially the evil, grotesque Mme de la Rougierre, Maud’s nemesis, and Maud’s boorish cousin Dudley.

Le Fanu chose to write his story with Maud as a first-person-narrator, which has the advantage of creating a nightmarish atmosphere, because Maud has a strangely incoherent way of telling things at times, leaving empty spaces in the narrative thread which have to be filled up later. On the other hand, Le Fanu is stuck with Maud’s point of view, which makes it necessary for him to have other characters tell her about certain episodes essential to the narrative – this creates a rather awkward effect.

Another shortcoming of the novel is the naivety of the heroine, who really is artificially blind to the net that is spun around her. In other situations, however, Maud is very energetic and self-confided, which ranks her way above some unbearably childlike heroines of Dickens’s.

But for all these little critical points I can fully recommend “Uncle Silas” because of its dense and eerie atmosphere, the magnificent drawing of its characters and the suspense the novel creates.