Rating: 3/5

(I'm no longer updating my books-read-on-the-commute-count with every single post. I may periodically do it on nice round numbers. Or not. We'll see.)

Thieves' World is a book I've been meaning to read for ages. It's an anthology of fantasy short stories edited by Robert Asprin, who wrote a series of books informally known as the "Myth" books (they were comedies about a demon named Aahz and a sorcerer's apprentice named Skeeve and the books' titles all had puns in them: "Another Fine Myth", "Mything Persons", "Myth-adventures", etc.) - I read a few of the "Myth" books in high school and they were pretty entertaining. It's not that they weren't entertaining enough for me to want to read all of them, it's just that the publisher wasn't very good about marking them in any way to indicate what order they were written and should be read in, and I get pretty anal about stuff like that. So after three or four I gave up because I was worried I would read volume 6 before volume 5. Anyway, the "Myth" books I did read all had some notice somewhere on the cover to the effect of "by the editor of THIEVES' WORLD" and so I was always thinking "I should check that out."

Now, my little digression above about continuity frustrations actually is relevant here because the high concept of Thieves' World is that all the short stories take place in the same imaginary city and reference the same characters, places, institutions, etc. So there are criminal syndicates and magical orders and pantheons of deities and whatnot, and one short story might focus on a priest from the church of a certain god, and another on a slumlord who at least makes passing reference to the church, and another on a mage who makes reference to the slums, etc. Each story is written by a different author, so Asprin's job as editor is to make sure that it all hangs together with internal consistency.

Does he succeed? I believe so. Nothing jumped out at me as glaringly self-contradictory. Is the final, continuity-bound product any good? Meh. It's all pretty standard fantasy fare. A rogue rescues his beloved from an inescapable trap. A madam outwits the prince of the city who is trying to shut down her brothel. A fortune teller changes the future. Maybe the standards for fantasy were pretty low in the late 70s/early 80s (whores! drugs! this sure ain't Tolkien, yeeha!) but Thieves' World seemed less than amazing to me today. I suppose that's a hazard of going back to the trend-setters after decades of reading the various imitators, some of which ended up outdoing their progenitors.