Rating: 3/5

Jessica is an heiress. Her inheritance is a very valuable library of rare books. There may be a play with notes by Shakespeare. There are original works by Francis Bacon. To someone who is a book lover, the library is an absolute treasure trove.

But, because of her father’s will and her uncle’s lack of interest, Jessica has limited access to this library. She can barely get in the door, and when she does she sees that the books are slowly being damaged by a lack of care and attention.

The librarian is a man who intends that Jessica will never inherit the library and he will be able to continue to be in charge of everything. He is a man who has become obsessed by an idea to the point of wanting to damage Jessica and her entire future.

John is a book and art specialist who acquires things for the Prince Regent. In a former life he might have been a smuggler, in fact, he might have been many things. He has been given the title of baronet and in most circles he has become almost respectable.

Jessica and John love books and history and slowly but surely they learn to care for one another.

This book has a mystery of sorts about what may or may not be part of a hidden treasure in the library. Jessica wants John to help her take charge of the library and John wants to find out exactly what is a part of the hidden treasure in the library.

I am a fan of Regencies. And this one is a well written story.

The plot is well developed and the characters are well rounded with human qualities. There are flaws in both Jessica and John which made me like them very much. Both find that they have a sense of adventure and both of them expect to be in charge. All of that makes for an interesting relationship. 

The secondary characters add to the story and as the story moves along it is evident that some of those characters have affected the future for Jessica and John. 

At times everything slows down, but within a few pages the pace picks up and the reader can get right back into the flow of things. I would recommend this book to anyone who enjoys a Regency romance with adventure thrown in.