Rating: 3/5

First I'll finish happier Travelling Matchmaker Hannah Pym series https://www.goodreads.com/review/show.... Re-read for sake of completion, not enjoyment. UK is still incomparable to Canada with sense of belonging for generations in a single place. Perhaps plot loses impact because I've never known anyone suffering as Beverleys do. 

Favorites are Poor Relations https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... and Edwardian Mysteries https://www.goodreads.com/review/show..., even contemporary Agatha Raisins https://www.goodreads.com/review/show... and Hamish Macbeths https://www.goodreads.com/review/show..., published as M.C. Beaton alias. 

Not as individual or focussed on social issues as other series. Not as funny -- quips or people. Romance limited to kisses. More black vs white, bad vs good. Hero, not even given first name, does play practical joke , poses as ghost in tower, that ends up more cruel than intended. 

Isabella 19, "exceptional beauty" p 16, eldest of six sisters, fails to find a beau at her first London season, because Lady Beverley and family are too full of "arrogance and pride" p 20, in love with the 1750 Mannerling estate. Sir William gambles all away to sly Mr Judd. Mrs Kennedy and her nephew, rich Irish Lord Fitzpatrick 30s, are the only neighbors to be kind and friendly, offering homemaker lessons and fast galloping Satan respectively. 

Judd pretends to woo Isabella, only to announce his betrothal to "toad-eater" vicar's daughter Mary at ball, where he also explodes ruin landscaped by Charity Brown, causing the neighbors to all walk out and snub Judd, mother, and Mary thereafter. After wedding, replacing ancestor portraits and former light furniture, rebuilding ruin, Judd still loses luck, hangs self on chandelier. 

Next oldest sister Jessica sets cap for new owners' son Cornish Harry Devers. Isabella hates Mannerling now, does not even want fiancé Fitzpatrick to buy old home, weds, sets sail for Irish wealthy estates. Odd-job Barry, friends with Isabella, sees youngest sister Lizzie, who jumped in river to drown after fan painted with Mannerling was stepped on, pretend serving tea. Despite losing symbol, she still yearns for "bricks and mortar" p 26.