Rating: 4/5

Definitely had some dry parts but for the most part I was engaged. Some of the studies were particularly interesting. It’s interesting in the same way a Malcolm Gladwell book is interesting.

I grew in my conviction that the West and the East seem to both offer something very different and valuable to the world. One’s not “better” than the other. I learned a lot!

“Westerners are the protagonists of their autobiographical novels; Asians are merely cast members in movies touching on their existences”

Thoughts on how Easteners and Westerners view human rights: 
“Westerners seem inclined to believe there is only one kind of relation between the individual and the state that is appropriate. Individuals are separate units and they enter into a social contract with one another and with the state that entails certain rights, freedoms, and obligations. But most peoples, including East Asians, view societies not as aggregates of individuals but as molecules, or organisms. As a consequence, there is little or no conception of rights that inhere in the individual. For the Chinese, any conception of rights is based on a part-whole as opposed to a one-many conception of society. To the extent that the individual has rights, they constitute the individual's ‘share’ of the total rights. When Westerners see East Asians treating people as if they had no rights as individuals, they tend to be able to view this only in moral terms. Whatever the moral appropriateness of the behavior of East Asian officials—and I share with most Westerners the view that there is such a thing as individual human rights and that they sometimes are violated in East Asia—it is important to understand that to behave differently would require not just a different moral code, but a different conception of the nature of the individual. A different conception of the individual would in turn rest on an inclination to think about the world in terms of individual units rather than continuous substances at the most basic metaphysical level.

It is also important to recognize that East Asians and other interdependent peoples have their own moral objections to Western behavior. When East Asian students become comfortable enough to speak out in Western classrooms, they will often express bewilderment at how much disorder, crime, and exposure to violent and sexually explicit images in the media Westerners are willing to tolerate in the name of freedom. They perceive these issues as entailing human rights because rights are perceived as inhering in the collectivity rather than the individual.”