Rating: 5/5

ANGST. THIS ONE WAS DEFINITELY PACKED WITH A LOT OF DRAMATIC ANGST. SO IF YOU ARE NOT A FAN OF IT, PLEASE DON'T ATTEMPT THIS. 

IF YOU LOVE IT LIKE I DO, NO MATTER THE STUBBORNNESS OR STUPIDITY OF THE CHARACTERS, THEN YOU HAVE TO READ THIS! 

OUR HERO is a man who has held onto revenge since he was 10, having watched his father being beheaded before his eyes. Due to that determination, he basically threw his life away paying no heed to danger, romance or even his family. His blindness and rage to pursue this bitter revenge against an older man has made him into an almost cold, ruthless man except when a woman he's planned to ruin becomes his downfall, he is extremely torn. The moment he heard of the Lord Hughes's niece, he decided to kidnap and use her as ransom. Throughout the story, Devlin proves his unshakeable drive to ruin the man who ruined his family, by sleeping with the man's wife for six years, for crumbling the man's business and estates and now he wants the man to pay a King's ransom for his niece. Said niece is not only spirited and beautiful but she managed to capture his heart even if he denies it vehemently. There are moments aplenty where you wish to slap him and encourage the heroine to move on but, then again Devlin's a haunted fellow who has been gripped by revenge for too long to let go. It was the only thing he knew until our heroine.

OUR HEROINE has a heart of gold. That's my summary of her after all the pain Devlin caused her. An innocent and a virgin, she's orphaned when her parents were killed in an accident. Now, ward to her uncle, the man has put up her family plantation up for sell. No way in hell will she allow that. Up and over she goes sailing the seas to England only to be kidnapped by a handsome naval pirate who has more agenda with her family name than her. Except she is a victim in all this. When Devlin stokes the fires of passion within, he may have awakened a siren in her that lusts only for him. Their relationship became real complicated when she fell for him and all he does is reject her over and over again. Luckily, she has his brother and family who are supportive of her. I think she is a strong girl who eventually grew up the moment she faced many harsh realities of life within a year. 

OVERALL this was a really dramatic romance that I really did enjoy. The angst kept me up all night, turning page by page to know what the ending was. Truly magnificent!