Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars only
The first half was slow and very uneven, but the second half picked up the pace with a nice rhythm .... until the pages of info-dump of "what really happened' by Marlowe. This could have been peppered throughout the book for far more enjoyable reading. My least favourite Marlowe so far, even worse than Farewell, My Lovely

 As usual with my reviews, please first read the publisher’s blurb/summary of the book. Thank you. 

Brasher Dubloons

Marlowe chases Mrs Murdock's Brasher Dubloon and gets entangled in a highly improbable timing of events. In the first half-book, I felt manipulated, which I hate. Too many coincidences of timing and place, with prose lacking much life or tension. Just a laundry list recipe, leavened by some shallow characterisations.

The second half comes a bit more alive with witty reparté between Marlowe and the cops, then between Marlowe and Morny. Unfortunately this does not last. There are more unlikely coincidences, plot-driven characters, and an over-clever ending driven by a laughably unlikely photograph, never explained.

Throughout, there's precious little snappy dialogue or philosopher-detective quotataions.

There were two moments of very surprising charity by the hard-boiled Marlowe, which did make him far more human, less of Don Quixoté and more of Sir Galahad.

I sighed, retrieved the envelope, wrote its name and address on a fresh one, folded a dollar bill into a sheet of paper and wrote on it: "This is positively the last contribution." I signed my name, sealed the envelope, stuck a stamp on it and poured another drink.

Pinkerton's Detectives 

I found the rhythm of this book to be forced until about halfway, as if Chandler were imitating himself, trying too hard, and then the rhythm of the story becomes more natural and alive and interesting. 

Some quotes

She let me get to the door before she growled at my back: "You don't like me very well, do you?" 
I turned to grin back at her with my hand on the knob. "Does anybody?"

This is by far the best quote of the entire book -
After a moment I pushed my chair back and went over to the french windows. I opened the screen and stepped out on to the porch. The night was all around, soft and quiet. The white moonlight was cold and clear, like the justice we dream of but don't find. 

.