Rating: 4/5

I found this book through reading Alice Waters. As a gardener, I was grabbed by the subtitle. Almost every vegetable gardener dreams of a healthy and beautiful garden that produces plentiful harvests. This book was interesting. It has a lot of standard garden advice, but then a few unusual suggestions. Its advice falls into several different categories for me: things that I already do, things that I will probably try, things that I am unlikely to try and things that I will never do. In that sense, it isn't so different from a lot of self help books and books about how to do different practices or live in a particular way. 

I have always paid a lot of attention to improving my soil, but though it is recommended by nearly every gardening book, I have never double dug. It always seemed like too much work and too hard to get around roots and pipes. But now I think that I really have to try it. If I get a flat-bladed shovel and a spading fork that will help. And then there is composting. I have never been hugely successful at home composting, not paying attention to the layers and composition of the pile, not watering it or turning it enough, and then I had to give it up entirely because in my neighborhood the compost pile was a rat magnet. I guess I could try composting in a closed drum. That would also help me with the turning. Composting is the most essential single part of the method described in this book. Mr. Jeavons wants all farming to be self sustaining, to be done in way where the only fertilizer and soil amendment required is the compost produced by the garden itself. He opposes even organic fertilizers, arguing that any commercially purchased organic fertilizer comes from robbing some other place of its essential nutrients. That makes sense to me, but I'm afraid that I will probably continue to fail on this score unless perhaps I move to a place with a bit more space and less rats. At least I can stay away from chemical fertilizers and poisons and look for organic products that are produced with as little envrionmental damage as possible.

There is a lot of discussion about companion plants - those that grow well together and those that don't. I have never given this much thought in my own gardens. I only ever devote a few square feet to any single kind of plant, and I do think a bit about planting in a way that will not rob neighbors of sun or moisture, but it goes deeper than that, and I have read enough about how plants' root systems interact with each other and with fungi and animals in the soil to believe that this deserves more consideration.

The one place where Mr. Jeavons lost me was his advocacy of planting by the phases of the moon. I suppose it can't hurt and certainly many farmers and gardners swear by it, but, I'm sorry, I'm not a believer, and I feel a little foolish even thinking about trying it.