Ivan Turgenev's 1862 novel Fathers &amp; Children is a striking political story of intra-generational conflict and resolution set in provincial Russia during the late spring and early summer of 1859 (ie shortly before the emancipation of the serfs). Arkady Kirsanov returns to his father's estate with his friend and idol Bazarov (and so a father figure in several ways), the two idle about there and in a couple of other places before the novel ends extremely peacefully  I laugh  "However passionate, sinful, rebellious the heart buried in this grave, the flowers growing on it look out at us serenely with their innocent eyes: they tell us not only of that eternal peace, that great peace of 'indifferent' nature; they tell us also of eternal reconciliation and life ever lasting..."  

Turgenev was the first international success of Russian literature, this novel was translated into German as soon as it came out in Russian an English translation followed within a few years. He spent much of his life in western Europe - he was in Paris during the 1848 revolution, and he began this novel while on holiday on the Isle of Wight. He was admired by Henry James and by Joseph Conrad, though during his own life he was relatively controversial in Russia for political reasons. If Dostoevsky wants to grab his reader by the throat, and Tolstoy to clobber the reader over the head, then Turgenev preferred to try to be subtle. 

the reason why
I was driven  or maybe compelled, forced, or obliged  to reading Fathers &amp; Children (frequently Fathers &amp; sons) by Hermione Lee's Penelope Fitzgerald: A Life, Fitzgerald, naturally, was a fan of Turgenev (writers often are, readers perhaps less so), the only Turgenev the library had was Fathers &amp; Children,  and the county catalogue showed me that there was barely anything else by Turgenev in the entire county from shining sea to glistening motorway I had read it before so I was some way from being enthusiastic about reading it again, as it happened since I had creatively misremembered quite a bit of the novel - condensing some parts and stretching others - reading it again was more fun that I had expected. I tried to read with imagined Fitzgerald spectacles on.

The first thing that I noticed was how comfortable Turgenev was to break off his narration and to give brief histories of his characters - at only point apparently a speech that Arkady declaims to Barazov, but it is in the same voice as the omniscient narrator. It is a confident move by the author, and one which helps compress the text - revealing the same facts through conversation would take longer - and this is a short book - around 160 pages.

Realism for Turgenev is a technique that does not constrain his style, there is a marvellous movement when after a tense and emotional conversation between Bazarov and Odintsova  other forms of conversation are possible, Odintsova is left alone and as she sinks into thought "Her braid became undone and curled around her shoulder like a dark snake" (p.80) this is pure symbolism.

It is an economical and geometrical text, there are three locations (four if you include 'the town') the houses of Kirsanov, Odintsova, and Bazarov senior. And all of these are groups of rooms or room like spaces in which there are either certain people or certain activities take place. This gave me the impression of a book about place and finding one's place -appropriately enough for a novel centring on two young men returning from university, their wanderings and wonderings show that this is a Goldilocks novel - where is their seat? Their (marital) bed? The porridge that really satisfies them? A essay in this volume prefers to see the connection with the story of the Prodigal Son.

That was probably the most I was able to imagine with Fitzgerald spectacles on.

The Title
Generally this novel has been known as Fathers and sons which focuses attention on the two sons and their father's, Fathers and Children is the more precise translation and that shifts the focus to include Odintsova, her sister Katya and their absent (dead) father. Including him the fathers are all flawed or insufficient in different ways and it is natural that they will be replaced by the children. In this process of generational change we see a range of relationships from conflict to accommodation to co-option.

a duel
This novel includes a duel - and duels are always great fun for writers. On the one hand they provide a ready source of drama and tension on the other an opportunity to subvert the readers' expectations of drama and tension. It is particularly nice to see how Turgenev handles it here in relation to his ending.

this edition
It is a relatively recent translation that does not quite provide the reader with death by footnotes, but in addition it offers a range of secondary materials including letters to and from the author (about thirty pages) and some contemporary criticism (another thirty pages) - both of which are interesting from the point of view of the moral panic the book caused in its day - but also tertiary materials - a selection of 20th century criticism and analysis (around 180 pages). All of which completely overwhelms the novel at a mere 160 ish pages - from which I learn that a Norton Critical Edition is a case of a slim novel trapped inside a fat book.

Points that interested me from the criticism was David Lowe's discussion of Turgenev's relationship with his illegitimate daughter Pauline -pp240-247. Turgenev discovered her when she was eight on his mother's estate in Russia  the girl's mother had been packed off to the city for her immoral behaviour in becoming pregnant by the mistress's son, from where he took her to France and sent her to boarding schools, later he was surprised that she shared none of his interests
 and their relationship was distinctly bad tempered. Lowe argues that Bazarov is mostly based on on Turgenev's daughter( which suggests an extra significance to the novel's title Fathers and Children, unlike Bazarov  Turgenev was not able to kill her off so easily.

Nina Nikitina (pp 247-254) discusses the manuscript to the novel which surfaced only in 1988 in London and was sent back to Russia (apparently without full military honours) there are in the region of 10,000 differences between the manuscript and the printed edition.

There were a couple of pieces by Jane Costlow that I liked Odintsova's Bath and Barazov's dogs (pp289-299) in which she shows how Turgenev depicts Bazarov as Actaeon ripped apart for his political and sexual transgressions - it's a nice example of how Turgenev is maybe over subtle  or if you prefer he is just right and some readings are over forced as though they were rhubarb and Odintsova as woman alone in Fathers and Children (pp 304-317) in which she explains the significance of the character's name from Odin the Russian for One, in the sense of a woman on her own rather than The One of romantic fiction.

Elizabeth Cheresh Allen caught my waning attention with Time in the Novel (pp 300-303) in which she shows characters exist with separate temporal fixations - most of the elder generation to the Past, Odintsova to the present, and Bazarov to the future, this renders them all fragile and breakable.

Other essays pick up on the use of language, the novel as an Acardian story, Hegel and dialetic, scientific metaphor, and that this is a novel in which passionate romantic love is something dangerous and in which we see the triumph of domestic, family love.

I remember once either hearing or reading something in which various people were asked if they preferred the writings of Dostoevsky or Tolstoy - the premise being that all people are either Tolstoyians or Dostoevskian, rather as in Isaiah Berlin's essay 'The hedgehog and the Fox', eventually the interviewer came to Dennis Healey - then a retired politician who replied that he preferred Turgenev.