Rating: 2/5

Damn. I had high hopes for this paperback. Like a junkie chasing my Image of the Beast/Blown high, I had this pegged for another gonzo read. At least, that's how the paperback blurb sells it. As a reading experience, however, it's inexplicably dry and way too tame for the story it wants to tell. 

Starting with the positives, this book has a GREAT hook. It centers on a planet called Dante's Joy, where every seven years (I think that timeline is right, I have to admit I glossed over a lot of the fictional theology), the citizens must make a choice: to take "the chance" and go through the Night of Light or to anesthetize themselves within their fortified homes and wait it out. Those who take the chance find themselves wandering a surreal hell scape, where vaguely described sci-fi influences cause the person's unconscious thoughts and desires to take physical form. People are transmogrified into beasts and all manner of Purge-like conduct ensues. At the conclusion, there's a complicated religious battle between the forces of good and evil to determine whether the god of Light (Yess) or the god of dark (Algul) reigns during the next cycle.

Our story begins when Carmody, a notorious criminal, has been recruited by the Catholic church to infiltrate the ritual and put a stop to the growing influence of this "heretic" religion currently spreading throughout the galaxy and undermining the church's power and influence. Instead, Carmody goes through a wholly religious awakening culminating in some very 60s-esque bizarro goings on. 30 years later, he then must return to face the Night once more...

Anyway, I really wanted to love this book. It starts out as a strong mix of new-wave sci-fi and horror. Carmody brutally murdered and then dismembered his wife; as he prepares to face the Night, horrific events begin to take place which involve a good deal of gore and body horror. However, the book eventually collapses under the weight of its mystical mumbo-jumbo. There's entirely too much fictional religion in it and I just stopped keeping track of it all after a while. Meanwhile, the book never really fulfills its gonzo premise. Farmer alludes to some fairly insane goings-on, however, the book doesn't do much more than that. It's all very tame, possibly reflective of the time period, and somewhat quaint considering the subject matter. 

Not for me, but if you like a healthy heaping of invented religion with your new wave sci-fi and can handle some gruesome early scenes of violence against women, this might be a good read for you.