Rating: 5/5

The Mayor of Casterbridge: The Life and Death of a Man of Character 
 and one of my all-time favourite books, with possibly one of the most fascinating book characters.

The Mayor of Casterbridge is the unsympathetic portrayal of a man unable to control his own temperament, doomed by his own insensitivity, cursed by his own pride, and tormented by his own past. 

A man who ruthlessly sells his wife and child in a drunken episode and then in the depths of despair and full of remorse promises to refrain from alcohol for 21 years. It is these past transgressions that shape everything in a book where cruelty is outshone by kindness, malice is met with forgiveness and good is often eclipsed by wrongdoing and evil. A story where opposites are in constant flux, and the flawed cast of characters never seem to end the perpetual cycle of suffering. 

Malignant, tormenting, and tragic but a masterpiece in storytelling, with superb character development, and an intriguing plot, where morality, fate and redemption play a huge part. 

The Plot

During one of his drunken binges and encouraged by his wife to stop drinking away their livelihood, Henchard sells his wife to a sailor for 5 guineas. Remorseful, he stops drinking and goes in search of the wife he cruelly sold, but to no avail. Turning his attention then to wealth, Henchard becomes a successful corn trader and Mayor of the fictious town of Casterbridge. 

Almost two decades later, Susan returns with their 18-year-old daughter, when her husband dies and in need of financial support. Meeting Henchard again leads to an arrangement where he remarries Susan so his ‘stepdaughter’ can take his respectable name. To claim her as his own would mean reputational ruin and his past secrets exposed, and so he decides against this course of action, with far reaching consequences.

Meanwhile Donald Farfrae arrives in Casterbridge with modern ideas for corn production. However, blighted by a series of bad business decisions, Henchard moves closer to financial ruin while the dashing Farrare weaves his way in the upper circles of Casterbridge’s elite, into the hearts of the women in Henchard’s life and then ultimately replaces Henchard as Mayor. 

In an unpredictable twist, another woman who Henchard had promised to marry moves to Casterbridge and befriends his daughter and vies for the attention of his archrival, Farfrae. However, where each of the characters have their own plans, destiny has another.

Review and Comments

All of Thomas Hardy’s books weave threads of fate, social culture, and nature into the fabric of the story so well they equal the role of the key protagonists who themselves are likeable and detestable characters. However, this book does it best in my opinion.

To read the Mayor of Casterbridge is to immerse yourself in the period, the environment, and the surrounding nature, all of which play their part. To read this story is to empathise and to despise the attitudes of people, but all of it felt authentic and was so vividly depicted. Even that the fictitious town of Casterbridge is portrayed as “an old, hoary place o’ wickedness” is incredibly symbolic. 

Hardy’s ‘melancolic’ style also matches the various and shifting moods of the seasons with the everchanging nature of his characters and their lives. However, it is his play on fate that fascinates me with Hardy’s writing.

I have often toyed with the idea that Hardy does not believe in fate, but instead uses it to question our own beliefs about who is ultimately responsible for our destiny? While factors such as social rigidity, Christian values and the role of women influenced the lives of the people in the story. I think Hardy was proclaiming that people should not be shackled to the notion of ‘destiny and fate’ but they themselves are responsible for their actions and the treatment of people around them and are the key architects of their own fortunes and misfortunes. 

In fact, Henchard’s cruel treatment of his wife, and throughout the story - his daughter and the deception and contempt shown towards Farfrae all came from a man who was egotistical, immoral, and selfish where his own stubbornness shaped his downfall rather than fate. Even when you think the immoral man had found redemption, he fails again by lying to his daughter with the worst sin of all. A character I loathed but also pitied for the hand he played in this heart breaking story of self destruction. 

In a very poignant moment, Henchard expresses his wish to be forgotten evident that he had finally come to terms with the wretched life he led and the man he was. This utter damnation of himself expressed in his final will and testament displayed the moral compass and conscience that the reader had wanted, but did not, see during his life.

A true masterpiece in classic literature. I can’t think of any author who betters Hardy and Dickens in characterisation and in the character development throughout a story.

It is Hardy’s somewhat gloomy outlook with quotes like “happiness was but the occasional episode in a general drama of pain.” that has built his reputation and has led readers to look elsewhere for lighter reads. However, I would encourage anyone to embrace this author as someone who is absolutely superb at developing his characters, the evolution of the stories and the lives of the protagonists is just brilliant and the writing style?. Well elegant, tormenting, evocative, and simply stunning.

And the message? Destiny is not tied to some invisible force, but our lives are shaped mainly through our own actions, inactions, from flawed and great decisions and our ability to subdue our own temperament and embrace the people around us. For those things we can’t control - well maybe that’s ‘fate’. 

Written in the 19th Century with such relevance today. That is what I call timeless and puts 'class' into classic. Just wonderful.

An easy 5 stars for a story that is tragic and tormenting, but with love, redemption, forgiveness, and tolerance the wonderful themes.