Rating: 4/5

somewhere between 3 and 4 - say 3 1/2
 

Who King john was (History behind the play)

John was the youngest child of King Henry II (ruled 1154-1189) and Eleanor of Aquitaine. Henry and Eleanor had six other children (plus another son who died in infancy):

-	The first male heir, Henry “the young king”, who Henry II actually caused to be crowned King of England in 1170. This Henry is considered a titular king only, since Henry II continued as the recognized ruler throughout his son’s “reign”, which ended in 1183 with the “young king’s” death.
-	Matilda, who married Henry Duke of Saxony and was the mother of Emperor Otto IV
-	The second male heir, Richard, who when Henry II died in 1189 assumed the crown as Richard I “Lionheart” (1189-1199)
-	The third male heir, Geoffrey, who became Duke of Brittany, and died before his father, in 1186. Geoffrey and his first wife, Constance of Brittany, had a son, Prince Arthur of Brittany. Remember him.
-	Eleanor, who married Alfonso VIII, King of Castile.
-	Joanna, who had two husbands, the first William II, King of Sicily.
-	The fourth male heir, John.

This is a history. So let’s review the history leading up to King John’s reign. Here’s an overview of the prior two kings of England: Henry II, John’s father, and Richard I, his brother.
Henry II was one of the more accomplished monarchs of the middle ages. He had his faults of course (only saints didn’t), but he read books, seemed to care about the common people, and was concerned about getting England to function as a system governed by laws (at least compared to his predecessor, Stephen).

When Henry II ascended to the throne in 1154, he held dominion over what has been called an ‘Atlantic empire’ (of the Angevin Empire). This included parts a Wales, a small part of Ireland, and a whole lot of territory in France. Some of the French territory became his by virtue of his marriage to Eleanor. Most of it had come under English control earlier, and included basically the entire western half of France except for Brittany.

In 1169 Henry made plans to divide up this kingdom among his sons. “Henry the Young King was to take Normandy, England and Anjou; Richard was to have the duchy of Aquitaine, his mother’s lands; Geoffrey was to hold Brittany as the vassal of the Young King … John was excluded from the equation.” (PC, 125)

In 1173 the young Henry, along with John and the other brothers, rebelled against these plans, with their mother’s support. A plot was hatched with Louis VII of France. Henry was able to defeat these machinations within a year. 

But, Winston Churchill writes in his history that Henry’s sons were “typical sprigs of the Angevin stock. They wanted power and well as titles, and they bore their father no respect.” (HESP, 213) So, in various combinations and with varying, though slight, degrees of success, the sons rebelled against Henry three more times in the over the next several years, right up until Henry’s death in 1189 – always with the support of both Eleanor and either Louis VII or his successor (from 1180) Phillip II.

Henry had a forgiving spirit, and seemed to treat these rebellions as simple instances of “boys will be boys”. In later years, however, he seemed to throw most of his hopes towards his youngest son John. But when Henry II finally was defeated by the last rebellion against him at Le Mans in 1188, he found among the list on conspirators John’s name also, and “he abandoned the struggle for life.” (HESP, 214) 

Richard, the eldest surviving heir, attended his father’s corpse at Fontevrault Abbey, shed hardly a tear, and became King. Of course Phillip II wasted no time in turning Richard, his former ally against Henry, into a new adversary. Of course! It was now Richard who was the ruler of England and the western half of France. 

But while this new relationship between them began heating up, Richard made clear that he had no immediate interest in these petty struggles, because …

In 1187 Jerusalem had been taken by the army of Saladin, ending the so-called First Kingdom of Jerusalem, which had been established at the conclusion of the First Crusade in 1099. 

Churchill says, “The shock … resounded throughout Europe… [The Pope’s] legates traversed the Courts enjoining peace among Christians and war against the infidel … The kings of France and England agreed upon a joint Crusade.” (Though in the case of Philip &amp; Henry, they didn’t stop fighting.) (HESP, 227)

Soon after Richard I had ascended to the English throne, he resolved to fulfill this promise made by his father. In 1190, before leaving for the Holy Land, “he bound his brother John not to enter England while he was away and declared his nephew Arthur [of Brittany] his heir.” (OX, 159) Phillip II resolved to fulfill his crusading oath also, though one senses that he had far more interest in affairs closer to Paris.

At any rate, they set out more or less together, and spent the first winter in Sicily, bickering about this and that - including in particular Richard’s decision to marry Berengaria of Navarre, breaking off his long-standing betrothal to Philip's half-sister Alys. In the spring of 1191 they left Sicily separately for the Holy Land.

Richard’s legendary adventures on the Third Crusade cemented his place in the history of Europe. For example, when Richard arrived at the siege of Acre, in June 1191, he immediately took charge of construction of siege engines (Wiki 1), which reduced the fortress such that a month later it surrendered. Shortly afterwards, Phillip II left the Holy Land for France, partially because of ill-health but also because of incessant quarrels with Richard.

In the fall, and winter of 1191-92, various leaders of the Crusader forces, and two adversaries for leadership of the “Kingdom of Jerusalem”, were involved in various disputes, with reasons not only connected to local events, but also stretching back to things taking place in Europe. (What else would be expected of these “leaders”, always looking out for their own interests?)

The third Crusade was only partially successful. Later in 1192 news reached Richard that Phillip II and his brother John were again making trouble in his French provinces. Anxious to get back, Richard concluded in September an agreement with Saladin which allowed unarmed Christians to enter Jerusalem, while the Muslims would remain in control of the city. This section is largely based on Wiki 2.

In October Richard left the Holy Land for Europe. The ship he traveled on with a few retainers was wrecked, and he set out across Central Europe by land. In December he was arrested and imprisoned by Leopold V, Duke of Austria, for offenses he had committed to Austria in the Holy Land. A few months later Leopold handed Richard over to the Holy Roman Emperor, Henry VI, who viewed Richard as a cash cow and demanded 150,000 marks as ransom.

This ransom was raised largely through the efforts of Eleanor of Aquitaine, Richard’s mother, by taxes and confiscation of church treasuries. While it was one its way to being delivered, Henry VI was approached with a counter-offer by John and Philip: 80,000 marks to simply hold Richard captive until Michaelmas of 1194. This offer the emperor turned down, and Richard was released in February of 1194. Philip sent John a message: “Have a care - the Devil is unloosed.” (HESP, 236)

The warning was unnecessary. When Richard returned to his realms, he forgave John, and in fact named him as his successor, changing his mind about his nephew Arthur.

Well, let’s wrap this up. Richard spent his remaining years uninterested in England, except as a source of funds for his struggles defending his “empire” on the continent against Philip. In 1199, Richard was apprised that a treasure had been unearthed near the castle of Chaluz, back in England. Richard hied off to collect this prize. The lord of Chaluz resisted, and as Richard rode around the castle, a bolt from a crossbow struck him in the shoulder by his neck. Churchill relates,Gangrene set in … He arranged his affairs … declared his brother John to be his heir, and made all present to swear fealty to him. He ordered the archer who had shot the fatal bolt … to be brought before him. He pardoned him, and made him a gift of money … now he received the offices of the Church with sincere and exemplary piety, and died in the forty-second year of his age on April 6, 1199 …

The archer was flayed alive. (HESP, 240-41)

The play

Just a few comments here.

My Introduction says that the source of the play is a 1591 play printed in two parts called The Troublesome Reign of John King of England …  (the title going on and on and on). Shakespeare changed the dialogue entirely, with the exception of a few phrases and a single line, “but followed the plot very closely and repeated the episodes in the same order”. 

The character of the Bastard is compared to both Edmund in King Lear and to Falstaff… “he is an important character in the development of Shakespeare’s art. Hitherto Shakespeare had treated history very seriously … In King John he successfully thrusts a comic character into the highest scenes of the play.”

In conclusion, the Intro says, “… it is not a great play; for indeed the reign of John Plantagenet, though exceedingly troublesome, was not well suited for a play of any kind.”

I’m currently reading my second history, Richard II. In that Intro, it’s stated that “Shakespeare here presents history “the personal conflict of two individuals”. When I read that, I immediately thought back to King John, the next history Shakespeare wrote after Richard II. We can see the a similar theme in King John, where the two individuals are in fact two mothers. Queen Elinor (that is Eleanor of Aquitaine), King John’s mother; and Constance (that is, Constance of Brittany), the mother of Arthur, King John’s nephew, both of whom promote their sons as the rightful king.

Because of course Philip, the King of France (another leading character in the play), who had allied with John against Richard way back when Richard was in the Holy Land, became John’s antagonist once John himself became lord over England’s French dominions. And the instrument Philip used in this conflict was John’s nephew Arthur, and the promotion of Arthur, by his mother, as the rightful king of England, Arthur being the issue of John’s older brother Geoffrey. (Got all that?) 

Why did Shakespeare write this play?

The reign of King John occurred four hundred years prior to the Elizabethan age of Shakespeare’s time. None of the other monarchs he portrayed reigned more than about half that far in the past. Students of history remember King john for only one thing. It was King John who was forced to sign the Magna Carta, which is now enshrined as an almost holy document in the history of England, and of modern Western society.

But in Shakespeare’s time, the Magna Carta was seldom mentioned in England. And in his play it is not mentioned at all! The signing of this document plays no part whatsoever in the story. 

I thought the play was sort of an up and down affair. Parts of it interested me a lot, from a purely historical point of view. But I also sensed that most readers, and myself also at times, would just not care much about the events and people portrayed. 

References for the historical spoiler:
HESP -  History of the English Speaking Peoples, Vol. I The Birth of Britain.
PC - The Plantagenet Chronicles
OX - The Oxford Illustrated History of the British Monarchy
Wiki 1 - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_C...
Wiki 2 - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard...