Rating: 3/5

In 1986, Superman was relaunched alongside Batman and Wonder Woman following the epic Crisis on Infinite Earths. While Frank Miller reinvented Batman and George Perez mythologized Wonder Woman, John Byrne, a Marvel writer, did something...readable.

This book is 30 years old. So I give it some contextual leeway. And in the book's defense, I haven't read any Golden or Silver Age Superman. In fact, Crisis is as far back as my reading goes. But I feel like those nearly 400 pages adequately acquainted me with Supes, and I don't remember him being this...Shy? Weird? Disapproving? Naive? It's hard to pinpoint what's off. 

Needless to say I'm not a huge fan of John Byrne's characterization. Lois Lane is kind of a crazy bitch. She manipulates Supes into saving her so she can get an interview. Because she's an army brat she somehow has the combat training necessary to do things like neutralize a dozen armed terrorists. And against all odds Supes has a crush on her. She really seems to hate him yet obsess over him, and he goes out of his way to be nice to her and save her. They're like Sam and Diane, except Sam owns the bar because he got their first, and Diane constantly insults and connives to steal the bar out from under him. Sounds like romance to me, what about you? It just feels like Byrne is forcing the "romance" on the reader. Or he really doesn't understand romance. 

Oddly enough I like Clark Kent. Maybe because he's so easy to write. Superman interestingly calls Clark Kent his "fortress of solitude" because it's a place he can disappear into. And his disguise is based on Jonathan, with slick hair and round glasses. Which I never knew! Clark gets his job at the Daily Planet with the first Superman interview, he's a nice guy, he loves and visits his parents. He's just enjoyable to read about. But I don't know why the hell he does what he does to Lana Lang and falls head over boots for Lois Lane. Must be the Ls. 

John Byrne also doesn't know Batman. Superman rags on Bats and threatens to arrest him for vigilantism. Excuse me, Supes, your irony is showing. Then Bats threatens him with a death trap which will kill an innocent bystander. The one thing everyone knows about Batman is that he never, ever kills because of his damn origin story. So yeah. Byrne doesn't know Bats. At all. 

Apart from some unusual characterization and simple plots, it's not bad. In fact it's perfectly readable. The Kents are lovable. The origin story, which I've read a thousand times, is pretty cool, though the reason for Krypton's demise is vague. The classic characters are there, Luthor rules Metropolis. And we get to see Bizarro.

This feels like good-hearted small town boy meets big brawny bruiser fights the baddies. There's depth, action, and emotion. Dick Giordano's artwork is actually pretty good for the time. So a decent read overall, definitely dated, but not a classic in my opinion.