Rating: 5/5

Well...let me firstly warn temperaments such as mine--those hyper-vigilant folk no less that this book is not the best book to read if you are in a kind of self-imposed lock-down for several days. I found myself at the library and two books appeared out of nowhere and beckoned me to take them out..one was 'How to build a time machine' and the other was this one i'm reviewing. ( I had borrowed them the day after the horrifying news, albeit predictable, so really are we shocked? of Trump's victory...and the world's doom)
It's not a literary masterpiece, nor is it poetry...and thanks to a good editor and writer it is not... or this book would provide more harm than good if one had to decipher/delve/or deeply ruminate on how to survive a car-jacking, plane crash in the ocean or jungle...through poetry. Can you imagine...

1 metre between the cars
is all that I need
to make a break
panic, eyes wide
I metre is all I need
behind
in-front...........................anyway I'm digressing with my terrible poetry.

So despite the tendency for me to be ultra hyper-vigilant....( note well...yes I had decided that a man sitting outside our house on the opposite side of the street and then getting up and moving around was suspicious as he was there for over an hour.....he probably was right?) Yes..I made myself invisible...and only wished for binoculars. Other things..I did end up buying a fire extinguisher and a first aid kit..and practised some self-defence moves on my obliging partner. In a way...I could have turned into Manny from Black books. 
Did you know you are more likely to survive in you sit at the back of the plane..so first class aint all that. Did you know you can make flotation devices from your clothes if you land in the freezing water after a plane crash ( would one have the energy after the shock?)
Thus...its a mighty fine read because it alerts your mind to the ingenuity and determination of how humans have passed on knowledge for survival. That in itself makes this book exceedingly remarkable.