Rating: 4/5

Fortunately Stolz did not ruin the series that began twenty-five years earlier with A Dog on Barkham Street and continued in 1963 with The Bully of Barkham Street. 

This picks up the story of Martin Hastings (Edward Frost, the main character of the original book, is only mentioned briefly) one year later - although, oddly, there are references that place the action in a time much later than the early 1960s of the first two books. Mentions of M*A*S*H on television and of kids with word processors tell us this must be the early 1980s. I kind of wish Stolz had found a way to write this book without those (basically irrelevant) details because they do jar a bit. Almost all of the story, though, deals with matters that aren't tied to a particular time period: babysitting, school, friends, sports, family. 

In this book, Martin becomes more and more likeable, and we as readers are more sympathetic to his situation. In some ways, this feels like a first book for him - it's so different, but it's wonderful that Stolz was able to develop such depth of character through the two previous books. We get to see how thoughtful Martin is, and how he has matured - grown through his angry phase - although there are still challenges for him to face. His interactions with his parents, his sister, Edward, young Ryan, his friends (especially Otto), and others are realistically depicted and give readers a lot to think about. 

I suppose Stolz could have continued writing about Martin (I suspect that this book resulted from two decades of readers asking what happened next), but I'm glad she didn't.

The pen-and-ink illustrations by Emily Arnold McCully are OK. I'm not the biggest fan of her work. I don't know if the choice was made to give the illustrations a more modern look than Leonard Shortall's traditional ones in the first two books, but I wouldn't be surprised. This book has a very current 1980s feel all around. They probably didn't think it was "dated" at the time, but thirty years on, things change.