Rating: 5/5

What do you get when you take the vice president of Getz International, who is an atheist, and drop him into rural China with his old roommate, who is a staunch Christian? In this book, we meet Ben Fielding, who from the outside has the world by the tail. He is the vice president, is on track to be CEO, and has everything that money can buy. What he also has is a divorce, a broken family, and a feeling of desperation. No matter how hard he works, he is never happy. Even when he gets the things that he thinks he wants.

Jump across the globe to China, and we meet Li Quan. He comes from a long line of Christian martyrs. After denying his father's faith as a teen, and going to Harvard, he becomes a Christian when his roommate, Ben, invites him to Bible study. Once that fire was lit, it soared out of control. Now, twenty years later, he is risking everything to tell others of Yesu. He has been in jail, has been persecuted, and has almost lost his life. Yet every day he continues to speak openly about Yesu and the lies of Mogui, knowing that this might cause him to lose his life. 

These two roommates, who used to be best friends, meet after twenty years while Ben is on a business trip to China. Ben has everything that Quan dreamed of, yet as he sees his friend, he is jealous of him. He is happy. He has a loving wife and an adoring son. Why is this the case? Ben Fielding, future CEO of Getz International, could not be jealous of a poor Chinese locksmith with a "primitive" religion. 

This was one of the most amazing books that I have ever read. It beautifully portrays the gospel, and gives us a glimpse of what heaven might be like. It was shocking to read such an accurate portrayal of Chinese society, especially as an American, but it was eyeopening to see just how strong the church is in China to endure the persecution. I thought that the end was going to be really sad, but it turned out to be one of the most beautiful endings that I have ever read. 

Join Ben, as he experiences what true Christianity looks like, goes to an underground church, is expected to teach about a religion that he no longer believes, and learns for himself the truth about China.