Rating: 3/5

This was something different from the other 2 books in the series, it involves Andre and Ali meeting and bonding for a long time during their travels and building a strong relationship. I enjoyed the times where Ali was so curious, positive and tried to bring happiness to Andre’s life. I felt that part, where the 3 of them; Andre, Ali, and Jo-jean traveled together, was the best part of the book before it kinda downhill when Andre decided to send Ali back to England against her wishes and they were separated for a long 5 years.

As I found it easy to love the characters in the 2 previous books of this series (except Lily in No Sweeter Heaven), I am sad to say that I could not find it easy to love Andre as he comes off as an ass twice. The first time was how he refused to speak or spend time with his parents, Pascal and Lily, from the previous book and I can imagine how heartbroken they must be, separated from their son Andre. As I enjoyed Pascal’s and Lily’s love story in No Sweeter Heaven, I disliked him for treating his parents horribly. I know it had something to do with Genevieve’s death but early in the book, the truth of it was not revealed yet why Andre ended up estranged from his parents. (I wrote this review when I was halfway through the book)

The second time was when he finally came back to England and believed Ali had changed for the worst and called it a travesty, which hurt both his godparents’ and Ali’s feelings. I did not like how he discredited the efforts of both his godparents and Ali’s to make Ali a proper English lady. Yes, he may be harsh with his words but actually really care about people deep down in his heart but I do not appreciate him hurting other people’s feelings with his words. I did not like him coming back to insult everybody then taking Ali by the lake as if he did nothing wrong.

However, he redeemed himself by treating Ali well after they married by buying her a house and giving her all the things she wanted even if he could not give his own heart. He slowly fell for her overtime, showing her more of him, laughing more but a bit of part was still held back by Genevieve. Yet, he is very protective and loving around Ali even if he did not realize he was falling in love.

I must say I’m not fond of the part where Ali thought that by leaving Andre, all the problems with Wellesley would be solved miraculously. I felt she could have consulted with him on the problem and took it on together as a couple. As a result of her leaving, she left him heartbroken and I don’t like seeing that. That shows the lack of communication between them, which is usually what happens between couples and I dislike it.

The reason for the estranged relationship between Andre and his parents finally came out in the last chapter of the book which felt wayyy too long and dragged out and it was something I kinda expected. But still, I can’t help but think, really Andre? 9 years being angry at your parents and not hearing them out? Could have saved a whole lot of time and pain if he had just given stopped running away and given Pascal a chance to explain.

Despite my issues, I did enjoy the first few chapters of the book and the appearance of Georgia, Nicholas, Pascal and Lily in this book. Seeing them grow old, with children and grandchildren, Georgia and Nicholas being 75, and Pascal and Lily being around 50ish, made me feel sad and teary, as I felt time flies so much for them and with how the books are written chronologically, the characters also followed the timeline, thus growing old. It felt as if I was with the characters and grew old with them, even though I read this series over a span of only a few days. 

This book was a somewhat enjoyable read, even if I did not like Andre until the last few chapters of the book. 

It would have been nice to see everyone Georgia, Nicholas, Pascal, Lily, Jo-jean, Andre and Ali just together in the same place celebrating in the last chapter. On a side note, I was surprised that Jo-jean was the miracle child that Pascal brought back to life. also, i think i have had enough of reading about God in books. this was the first time i ever read an author whose books have so much of God in them. i am not a religious person, unfortunately.