Rating: 1/5

In short: 🤮

A little longer: Pessimism, capitalism, entitlement, adults having sex with children, children having sex with children 😱😨🤢🤮

Much longer: The book starts half way into an 8-year-long mission in space to find an alien food factory. The crew consists of two adults, an old geezer, and a child. They are a family, a very weird family.

The old geezer Peter was a member of the Hitler youth when he was young. Because of course he was, he's German! I don't know how that is supposed to fit into the time line of Gateway ... but ... he was a Nazi ... and maybe still is?

The 14-year-old girl-astronaut Janine is Lurvy's sister and horny for Lurvy's husband Paul. I am not sure if this is incest, technically, but it is wrong on soooooo many levels. And, as if our constantly horny 14-year-old Janine wasn't gross enough, you have to remember that she started the voyage as a horny 11-year-old! W-T-F?!?!

All of the adults care about one thing: Money 🤑🤑🤑 OK, sex is in there somewhere, but money is priority #1. One can have different opinions about capitalism, but when any possible question about a character's motivation can be answered with "Because ... MONEY!!!", things get boring. PAINFULLY BOOOOOOOORING!

The four of them enter the ominous food factory that is supposed to rescue a starving earth ... *ahem* ... make them rich as fuck. They meet the 15-year-old boy Wan. Like most children in Pohl's universe, he only thinks about sex. When Wan meets Janine, the first female human he gets to meet in person, he ... masturbates in front of her. The only positive thing to say here is "At least he didn't rape Janine" ... because a dead man told him there is a chance Janine would ruin his orgasm ... because most women don't like to get raped. He also ejaculates spontaneously when talking to Janine.
It can't get any more gross than this, can it?!
Oh my, it can. Later in the book, 15-year-old Wan is forced to "breed" with Janine's sister.
14-year-old Janine gets forced to experience "virtual reality sex", old breeding experiments conducted by the Heechees. Apparently some of that was pretty horrible to live through. And what did she learn from all this? It made her horny for Wan and they "breed" immediately! 🤢🤮🤮

Does goodreads censor explicit content? It feels so weird writing these lines. What I describe is actual content of the book! Pohl had these disgusting and sickening thoughts and put them in writing for everyone to see!
I don't know if Pohl tried to be funny. But a grown man fantasizing about children in an explicit sexual way is not my kind of humor.

Well, at least we also get to see an old acquaintance again: Robinette. He exchanged Sigfrid for Einstein. His crippling guilt did not prevent him from building his very own Broadhead empire. I can't imagine how he did it. Robinette is as "likable and intelligent" as ever.
He is filthy rich, and his only motivation is ... money ... more money. Did I mention that "money" is a terribly boring motivation for any character? At one point, he (Pohl) actually tells the reader that even actions that might look selfless, like protecting the environment, are financially motivated.
Sometimes it seems as if Bobbyrobby also cares about his wife and the girlfriend he abused violently and then left "in" a black hole. But then we find out that it is really about him and how he can cope without too much trouble.

Robinette, like all of Pohl's adults, is terribly stupid and/or lazy. Einstein and Sigfrid do _all_ the thinking. Everyone seems to feel entitled without any reason. And, they are all pessimists and spend a lot of time thinking about what could go wrong and kill them.

Wow, Pohl did not manage to invent a single character that I would not punch in the face, had I the chance to meet them in real life. Yes, I would even punch the children, Janine and Wan! I have a suspicion that Pohl shared traits with his characters: Feeling entitled, being greedy, being horny, and being pessimistic. And just for the repeated description of child sex and abuse, I would punch Pohl in the face, was he still alive today. Really hard. Harder than Robinette punched his girlfriend in the previous book. Much harder!