Rating: 4/5

I'm stunned!

I don't read poetry, I knew nothing about poems and poets. Yet I can identify poetic lines in every pages of this piece. Nope, not just regarding Inez herself, but Fuentes wrote everything from the language, the symphony, the war, even to the Nazi, poetically.

Most condemned Hitler, but Fuentes condemned the Fuhrer with a style, at least for me, '... Your horror is true horror, it lacks grandeur, it's niggardly horror, because you don't understand , you will never be capable of understanding, that immortality, life, death, and sin are mirrors of our universal, internal soul, not your transitory and cruel external power...Faust places an unfamiliar mask on the man who doesn't recognise it but ends up adopting it. That is his triumph.'

Ahh Inez, who are you actually? I always relates you to Marguerite. It's easy to know who is she -- 'I sinned, I pleasured, I suffered, I was forgiven, but I will not renounce the glory of my pleasure, the integrity of my freedom as a woman to enjoy sex, I have not sinned, you angels know it, you may be carrying me to paradise grudgingly but you have no choise but to accept the sexual joy I found in the arms of my lover..'

That's when I remember Coelho's four classic archtype of women .. but no, Inez/Marguerite is not one of them. She's the Bitch type which defined by a friend of mine, Lamya, as: her search comes from her independence and aggression in pursuing her spiritual path. She fights for her cause with no care about the common opinion and lives off people's resentment and jealousy. She ridicules the Virgin, Saint, and Martyr, because she does NOT sacrifice herself; she expressed herself freely but sacrifices those who condemn and judge her.

And who is Gabriel? He's a maestro, a conductor, an eminent one. He was a legend, yet arrogant as most famous artist did. He refused to record his pieces so there were only live performances. But is that really him? Or the boy who played the rough-made, ivory flute? .. 'A woman knows more about life, an sooner, than a man, who is slow to give up his childhood. Perpetual adolescent or, worse, age child. There are few immature women, but many children disguised as men.'

***

Sungguh membaca karya ini membuatku tertegun, antara kagum dan kebingungan bagaimana untuk bereaksi. Belum pernah aku membaca kutukan atas Hitler sepuitis yang dituliskan Fuentes, '..Horor yang kau ciptakan adalah kengerian sebenarnya, namun tanpa kebesaran, hanya sebatas horor karena kau tidak paham dan tidak akan pernah mampu untuk memahami bahwa keabadian, hidup, kematian, dan dosa adalah cermin dari keberadaan jiwa internal kita secara keseluruhan, bukan kekuasaan eksternalmu yang sementara dan kejam ... Faus menempatkan topeng yang tidak awam pada seorang pria yang tidak mengenalinya namun malah berakhir mengadopsinya. Itulah kemenangan utamanya.' 

Kebingunganku berlanjut saat Inez muncul, yang mana Inez yang mana Marguerite? Keduanya berbeda tapi terkadang mereka sama. Pribadi yang mengingatkanku pada empat tipe perempuan yang disebutkan Coelho dalam buku The Witch of Portobello .. tapi bukan salah satu dari empat itu, namun tipe kelima The Bitch yang menurut temanku Lamya, pencariannya datang dari kemerdekaan dan keagresifannya dalam mencari jalan spiritual. Dia memperjuangkan apa yang dia percaya tanpa mempedulikan opini umum dan hidup dengan kebencian dan iri dengki orang-orang di sekitarnya. Dia menertawakan tipe Virgin, Saint, dan Martyr, karena dia TIDAK mengorbankan dirinya sendiri; dia berani mengekspresikan diri dan mengorbankan mereka yang mengutuk dan menghakimi dirinya.

Mungkin tepat bila menyebut buku ini tentang musik, kehidupan, kematian, cinta, yang disampaikan dengan cara membingungkan!