Rating: 4/5

Why I chose to read this book:
1. I remember seeing this lovely story reenacted as a musical play by some middle-school students several years ago and was impressed by their performance; and,
2. I wanted to end my "Classics Month" with this book that my GR friend, Isabel, recommended!

Positives:
1. I appreciated the believable growth of various characters, going from sour dispositions and downright rudeness to being filled with hope, joy and empathy. After just reading a book about another orphan (Heidi), I was introduced to the polar opposite of that loveable character to this book's main character, Mary Lennox. With parents like hers, it's no wonder that Mary (and later, we learn, also Colin), have such disagreeable personalities! Luckily for these two children, fortunate circumstances, such as understanding adults, good friends, especially Dickon, at first, I thought that he was an angel or ghost! and exposure to nature, changed and enhanced Mary and Colin's lives;
2. speaking of which, I couldn't get over the similarities between the "sickly" children, Colin (The Secret Garden) and Clara (Heidi). Both have a deceased mother and an absentee father who travels extensively, leaving his/their child(ren) behind for long periods of time, both cannot walk, and both have friends (Mary and Heidi, respectively) who help them recover by believing in themselves;
3. since I had also recently read The Wind in the Willows, I was amused/pleased at how the animals featured in that story also make appearances in The Secret Garden!; and,
4. as a flower gardener myself, I could highly relate to Mary and her friends' happiness while gardening, from weeding and pruning to experiencing the ecstasy of all the sensory delights emanating from such a sanctuary. 🌹🌷🌳

A couple of niggles:
1. Colin's ramblings about his intentions for self-improvement went on a little long for me 🥱; and,
2. I cringed (on page 252 of my edition) when Colin expressed support for domestic abuse! 😱

As a parent, grandparent and teacher, I loved the overall message that good food, exercise, fresh air, unstructured play, socialization and engagement with nature are what young children need to grow and thrive. A wonderful story about trust and friendship!