Rating: 1/5

COUNTDOWN: Mid-20th Century North American Crime 
BOOK 237 (of 250)
There is a good reason the 2 library systems I utilize (City, County) has one copy of this book. Read on, if you will:
HOOK - 1 stars: &gt;&gt;&gt;"Your name, please?"&lt;&lt;This is a sub-standard opener: a woman goes to Nero Wolfe's office for help, as her husband has been kidnapped but, naturally, she can't go to the police. But by 1961, we have 2 overused cliches here. And nothing much happens for several chapters.
PACE - 1 star: Stupendously repetitive lines and plot reviews. The problem is this is novella material, maybe even an idea suitable for a short story, but Stout drags it out...
PLOT - 1 star: You'll know, absolutely, 90% of the story halfway through. There is one element - the why - that is so ridiculous one wonders how this actually passed through a publishing house to book and library shelves. This is THE most ridiculous reason to kill 2 people I've run across in all the crime novels I've read.
CAST - 2 stars: Yes, Nero and Archie and Fritz are here...but I don't believe for a moment Nero wouldn't have just laughed out loud at the silliness of it all. Oh, there is this family and a secretary and 2 of them die...pretty much pointlessly.
ATMOSPHERE - 2:Fritz's cooking skills are abundantly clear and let to my own home snacks which surpassed this book. Archie has a good line when describing a ladies bedroom: "...one glance told me [it] would suit my wife fine if I ever had a wife, which I probably wouldn't because she would probably want that kind of room...soft lights, soft grays and pinks, soft rug, soft drapes." We already know about Nero's brownstone and his sumptuous roof-top glass house for growing...oddly...nothing Nero can eat. Food talk and not much else. I do like to visit Nero's home, but nothing new is added here.
SUMMARY: 1.4. Stout should know better: this story is NOT novel material at all. Must have been some kind of novel-delivery deadline involved. Skip this Nero outing and go for...well, any other Stout/Wolfe novel as I found this one to be the weakest I've read. And that explains the singular copy in the library systems. This #35 was just phoned in work by Stout.