Rating: 4/5

As an unrefined youth (up until last year or so) when someone said Jane Austen’s novels were all about manners, I’d wonder how it was she could have filled whole books with talk about fork placement and ballroom protocol. It finally dawned on me that they must have meant manners in a broader sense – prevailing customs, ways of living – that sort of thing. ;-) If my new interpretation is indeed correct, I can state with confidence that this collection of twelve Anthony Powell classics is also all about manners. The setting is England between the wars where stylized manners abound. Plenty is happening, of course. Mutation both within and between classes is de rigueur. The narrator, Nick, is somewhat upper-crusty in a semi-Bohemian way. He’s not a bad sort, really; just a tad slower than we are to recognize romantic turns and new social orders. As a narrator he’s not so much unreliable as he is resistant to the tides of change. 

Nick has a good education as well as a novelist’s eye for detail. He’s great at observing quirks and he describes them well. We quickly get to know the three other central characters through Nick’s powers of observation. They all went to the same top school (Powell himself was an Eton chap) where the patterns were set early. Nick’s friend Stringham was the brash aristocrat, their friend Templer was the raffish womanizer, and their colleague off to the side, Widmerpool, was both oafish and ambitious – an awkward combination. A whole host of other characters played supporting roles. Each one was described with care and sometimes with a bit of fun. For instance, Nick said of his Uncle Giles: “He was also habitually unwilling to believe that altered circumstances might affect any matter upon which he had already made up his mind.” Someone else was said to have “transmitted one of those skull-like smiles of conventional friendliness to be generally associated with conviviality of a political sort.” In fact, much of the collection that I’ve read so far (the first 3 of 12 volumes comprising what they call the First Movement) seem like character profiles and dialog tied together not by plot but by dinner parties, art shows, and dances. The people come in all varieties: twits, ditzes, toffs and cads among them.

The writing is lush; teeming with commas and semicolons. On average, there’s one more clause per sentence and two more words per clause. Once you tune your ear to it, though, it sounds pretty good. Strike that. With Powell’s command of the English language, “pretty good” doesn’t pass muster. It’s filled with little aphorisms, too. For example: “Being in love is a complicated matter; although anyone who is prepared to pretend that love is a simple, straightforward business is always in a strong position for making conquests.” In the main, the humor is like a fine claret – subtle, dry, and well-balanced. There’s a reason the Modern Library listed it as the 43rd best novel in English in the 20th century and Time Magazine included it in their top 100 English-language novels from 1923 to 2005. 

Since I’m only a quarter of the way through the series, I can’t comment yet on the full epic sweep. It extends into the 60’s. Evolution is inevitable, if not revolution. 

There’s a fabulous documentary film series that began in the early 60’s in England. It started with a cross-sectional profile of 7-year-old kids from all different backgrounds called 7 Up. Seven years later they returned to these same kids as 14-year-olds to see how they’d changed. Was their future foretold? How had they changed? They’ve repeated the process every 7 years since, so far up to 49. It was fascinating to see how their lives turned out – their professions, their relationships, their worldviews – sometimes as you’d expected, other times not. Anyway, Powell’s series has that same potential. I’ll report back later once I’ve read more.