Rating: 5/5

I spent weeks with this book and still go back to it often. It's amazing how much of life and the world are packed into this book. Mostly it's about the process of analysis--the work and effort that goes into transformation by both an analyst and the person in analysis. There's so much to ponder here about how we relate to one another, to reality, to ourselves. 

Although I was most interested to read this book to explore how Dr. Singer, a Jungian analyst, would interpret and explain some Jungian concepts--which I am always interested to read and explore--I found an interesting comment in her chapter on 'Individuation: The Process of Becoming Whole,' that describes what a person entering analysis ought to consider: 

"If it appears that he is not able or willing to sustain the additional burdens of increasing consciousness, he ought not to subject himself to the rigors of the individuation process in analysis. That discipline is a personal discipline, and those who undertake it must do so on their own responsibility, and not expect to be made whole at the expense of their friends or wives or lovers."

This book is beautifully written by a wise woman, and it incorporates theory and much material that invokes thoughtful reflection. With regard to the passage quoted above, I've recently encountered this concept in a different context: in the Steven Covey 'Seven Habits of Highly Effective People' teaching series. Although Covey does NOT leave out the need for inner reflection, his program emphasizes DOING something: and the first three habits he presents as bedrock to what he calls 'the private victory' are analogous to Jung's term 'individuation.' Both center on intentionally accepting personal responsibility for making choices, gaining insight about oneself (without depending on others to develop your 'self'), having empathy (first for our own selves) and acknowledging that we each have a large stake in bringing purpose and meaning into our own lives. Dr. Singer's guidance through this book to understanding the process of personal development and the valuing of one's own life--which must be met and known in order to be more fully appreciated--is accessible and illuminating. And mostly, inspiring. It's a comfort and delight to encounter oneself as 'NOT ALONE' by sharing what she presents about fellow humans' experiences with encountering their best selves and shadow sides and embracing reality and integrating reality and imagination to build a better life.