Rating: 4/5

A Dance to the Music of Time: First Movement comprises the first three novels in Anthony Powell's 12-volume series. These first three books cover the early 1920s to early 1930s. The work is structured in the form of a memoir, with the narrator Nicholas Jenkins reflecting on past events. First Movement, also called Spring, covers the meeting of the core group of friends at boarding school and university, London's social seasons, and the beginnings of the characters’ personal and professional lives.

  A Question of Upbringing:
 Published in 1951, Book One takes place in the early 1920s. This novel introduces our narrator, Nick Jenkins. Since he is looking back on events, he often cites examples of times when he was naïve or unaware of the real reasons and motivations behind the characters’ actions. Nick tells us about meeting his group of friends at Eton. They later attend Oxford (which they call "The University"). One of the standout characters is Widmerpool, who is somewhat of a misfit. This volume is episodic and there is little to no traditional plot. 

  A Buyer's Market:
 Published in 1952, Book Two moves to London’s social scene of the late 1920s and early 1930s. The title refers to the social and romantic "market" where the characters’ position themselves for advantage. Widmerpool continues his social climbing. Jenkins observes the shifting alliances and relationships around him. The novel captures the hedonistic atmosphere before the economic and political upheavals of the 1930s. The characters' years of youthful possibilities are dwindling, and they must now figure out what to do with their adult lives.

  The Acceptance World
: Published in 1955, Book Three is set in the early 1930s, and provides more detail about the characters’ personal and professional relationships. The "acceptance world" refers to both the financial term and the social acceptance that the characters are seeking. Several characters marry. Some get divorced. Jenkins becomes more established, though he seems rather discontented with his lot. The novel shows how the characters' educational and social relationships continue to influence their adult lives.

First Movement is based on the idea that social class shapes individual destiny. I am not British, but I presume it is portraying how power dynamics were operating in British society of the era. Where it excels is in its character development, especially in identifying the gap between public and private personas. It is a slow-paced series that often requires the reader to “stick with it.” There are many characters who come and go. It starts as a group of men, and gradually introduces a few women, mainly family members and relationship partners.

Powell writes with an eye for detail, sometimes meandering into topics that seem to have little to add, and I trust that there is a reason for bringing them up (which I hope will become apparent later). I particularly enjoyed the author's dry wit. I am intrigued enough to continue the series, as I imagine the pace will pick up a bit once we get to the lead up to World War II. There will likely be more tensions and challenges for the characters to tackle in future volumes.