Rating: 4/5

Rowan laughed. "How does a goat thank someone?"
"By not crapping on your foot."
I was not entirely won over by the first book in this series, The Steerswoman, but something about it made me want to go on even if I was a bit lukewarm about it. And then this book solidly won me over by tickling just the right spots in my brain, and it did end up going in the direction I did not anticipate as Rowan’s desire to find out more about a strange jewel that got wizards all concerned leads her to see how her world may be more than she knew, and her intuitive conclusion about the Guidestars in the sky is the first step to figuring out the puzzle of this place.

To me this was a book of slow revelations about this world, with our protagonist slowly noticing more and more strange things about her medieval-ish world — the clues that will eventually, I assume, lead her to see that it’s a partially terraformed world, bridging fantasy and science fiction. And I really want to see how she puts the clues together, reconciling the world of “wizards” and space stations through application of logic, observations and scientific principles. In a world where dynamite is considered magic, how can you reason out satellites and solar panels?

“Wizards are legends, so I had always believed,” the seyoh said. “I thought this merely made by men with strange knowledge.”

 
Overall it was almost a leisurely travelogue through the outer edges of this world’s civilization, meeting nomadic “barbarian” tribes whose strange lifestyles have quite solid logical explanations, who casually throw out world like “debriefing” and “rendezvous”, and whose leaders title “seyoh” (as Anna pointed out in our group read) likely comes from good old idea of military “C.O.” And don’t even get me started on the “Routine Bioform Clearance” part!
 
These clues become more and more clear as the story progresses, but the tension comes from our steerswoman Rowan figuring out how to put things together to arrive at the hints of the things for which her world doesn’t even have rudimentary concepts. And then there’s a quiet satisfaction of Rowan letting go of her preconceptions and wholeheartedly embracing the strange tough world she’s thrown into, making mistakes and learning from them — all while we see things through her analytical and sometimes almost scarily rational viewpoint. 

Really, it feels like the landscape and the land are more prominent characters than the actual characters, somewhat reminding me of the feeling I get when I read Kim Stanley Robinson’s books. Landscape is the true protagonist here, and I’m very much ok with it. Kirstein somehow takes the sections that should by all reasoning be tedious - that endless journeying! - and yet somehow makes it interesting, like an odd but fascinating travelogue. Something that I anticipated being just a brief detour in the story actually ended up as a wonderful adventure in its own right, with focus on cultures and customs and societies and even ecology.

Although the plot unfolds slow amidst all the traveling through the Outskirts, there’s that something that happens at the 81% mark that I’m still so unhappy about — but in a good way, since I should have seen it coming but I did not. And the final part of the book - that Rendezvous weather - was done with such wonderful tension that I really loved it. 

And now, about to move on to book 3, I’m getting a bit nervous that this series is still unfinished and that it’s been almost 2 decades since the most recent book was published. Am I getting myself into the masochistic reading situation knowing that I’m getting into the series that might never be actually completed?

Solid 4 (Guide)stars.

——————
Buddy read with Anna, Carol and Phil.

——————
My review of the first book in the series, The Steerswoman, is here: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

——————
Also posted on my blog.