Rating: 4/5

The first half, on whose strength this rating is based, was a masterpiece. It hit the sweet spot in prose, content and more so in clarity. Koestler included an often ignored line of thought; how religion influenced early understanding of the universe. Since the divorce of religion and science, this fact has been conveniently ignored resulting into a one sided story. The idea of the universe with walls can be traced to the Bible, similar to the idea that heavenly bodies having ladders and pulleys can be traced to the angels visiting Jacob. Without this background, the holders of these views sound like deluded idiots. In addition to this, in the first half Koestler traced the views of the universe from the ancient world, the middle ages through the Ionian school up until the age of Newton.

The second half,which makes up the bulk of the book, will depend on your tastes. If you are more interested in the people behind the ideas then you will enjoy it but if you are like me who is more interested in the ideas with marginal interest in the people behind it, then you might not enjoy it so much. To further his thesis on which the book draws its title from, the idea of the early universe 'fathers' making cancelling errors which somehow resulted into the right thing, Koestler told us about their lives and in great detail. We are told about Copernicus, how he was reminded a million times to get rid of his mistress, we learn about how Tycho was stingy with his data, how Keppler might have had slight delusions on his reality and who will forget the controversial Galileo who called people who did not believe in Copernicus' heliocentricity half humans. This history is all good but when it becomes too much the tide turns. We are given letter correspondences in verbatim, dozens of letters, book excerpts are quoted in great detail, copies of Galileo's judgement are quoted, large chunks in verbatim! It will take a very interested soul to remain hooked on the subject.

Unfortunately this deluge of information vindicated a hypothesis I have, any non fiction book no matter how good, once it exceeds 450+ pages, it turns into a wind bag spewing hot air to pad the extra sheets. To guard against this and the 'large' books gumming up my reading list, I normally read them concurrent with other "friendlier" books and over several months (i read this over a four month period). I would advise the reader to do the same, if you read it as your primary read there is a good chance you will shelve it after the umpteenth letter telling Copernicus to get rid of his mistress.