Rating: 4/5

“The Mayor Of Casterbridge”, an intrusive third-party omniscient narration, swamped with psychological issues, and poignancy, calling out for intermittent perusals throughout, belongs to the 19th century England, revolving around the county town of Casterbridge (fictional name for Dorchester, in south -western region of England)!

It is about the rise and fall of the fortune and mental health of the protagonist, Michael Henchard (MH), who becomes penitent, every time he muddles up situations for himself. For me, he is
   a self-sabotage expert!
 But soon enough, he falls into remorse and deep despair. So this cyclic pattern of self-sabotage and falling into despair, enwraps the plot in entirety. The story is about his journey from 0 to 1 (with his past lurking him, throughout his success), and then again from 1 to 0!

The part of his rising graph from 0 to 1, was bearable for my puny brain, but the gargantuan and convoluted plot-twists in the second half of his journey from 1 to 0, blew away my mind! I literally felt exhausted and restive, upon completion of numerous, fast-paced exhaustive plot twists, which felt a tad contrived to me!

It is inundated with a labyrinth of events, around Michael Henchard, and I have few innocuous points to make, maybe this is what Thomas Hardy, wanted to bring to light. So, sharing a few-

-The plot starts with the inebriated Michael, selling his wife (Susan) in a fuddle of alcohol (turning out to be his own nemesis), becoming a victim of public ignominy, and letting the wife, and child (Elizabeth-Jane) emigrate with the sailor, Newson, all in a drunken stupor! 

This opening scene clearly portrays, how alcohol can prove as a devastating nemesis for anyone, and sets the foundation for the novel! I admire, Thomas Hardy for reflecting on a topic of social well-being.

-The following day, coming out of stupefaction, penitent and in deep despair, he takes an avowal of giving up on alcohol for 21 years. Here, I have a doubt, when one gives up on something, it is either forever or never, why Hardy, selected the figure 21? Was it some superstition?

-The story moves forward to 18 years, when post the death of the sailor husband, Susan along with Elizabeth, returns to Casterbridge, seeking help from ex-husband Michael, and realises that he has become affluent, wealthy and the Mayor of Casterbridge. The daughter is kept in dark and informed about Michael being a relative. Need to ponder, why all these years, Susan never wished to meet Michael, or enquire about him? 18 years is a long period, and now when in need, she returns back.

-Meanwhile, another character, Donald Farfrae, helps Michael with the bad business dealings in selling sprouted grain, and gives suggestions on making the grain usable. Donald becomes his general manager and a confidant!

-Michael and Susan, decide to re-marry in a respectable manner, keeping their previous marriage furtive, and hence re-start courtship and finally re-marry. Had Michael stayed a shredded rag; would Susan have agreed to marry? The timid, Susan, flinging a coin onto his face, when she was sold in the fair, and after 18 years, agrees to re-unite, just because her current husband, is no-more, and the ex-husband in swamped in wealth!! I was infuriated!

- Donald, is becoming a favourite of the townspeople, because of his adroitness. Both Michael and Donald, gradually develop differences, Michael envious of Donald’s popularity, dismisses him as his manager. Searing in jealousy, all Michael can do is fire him, but cannot control his destiny!

###############################################

Till, this point the plot was bearable and non-convoluted. But from this point on, the twists and turns, blew away my mind, leaving me dazed and exhausted!!
To stay back from spoilers, the second half discusses about events, which lead Michael to losing everything, and returning back to square-one, “desolate and lonely”. Elizabeth-Jane, takes the centre-stage in the second half of the novel.

The novel not only deals with entrenched psychological issues, but also the societal norms. To begin with, Michael breaks the society-rules, by selling his wife in a drunken stupor, and faces ignominy (sets the tone for the novel, and builds on the pathos). It also poses a question on the opportune society, where when Michael, becomes a Mayor, then the society bows down to him. But when he cannot keep pace with the latest agricultural methods, then even his partner Donald, bypasses him. The society, who raised him to the position of Mayor, rejects him. He is left alone, as a destitute. The seeds of tragedy are sown from the start, and bloom towards the end, when even his own daughter (though the reality is a bit twisted), gets absorbed in her own life with her husband. There is a tad of romance with a female, Lucetta, which I felt was contrived, and could have been easily omitted. 
I personally felt, a common trait among all the characters in this novel, and that is, SELFISHNESS!

Without any further belabouring, the first-half of Michael’s rise, reaching the crescendo, and clearly foreshadowing the devastating and ominous events of the future, unmitigatedly deserved a 5-star, but the second half with the contrivances and few conundrums unsolved, left me fatigued, exhausted and dissatisfied!! 

So, docking a star, to ornate this work by Thomas Hardy, with 4-stars. It is commendable that the grave concerns of alcoholism, and baring the labyrinth of human and society psychology, surpass the convoluted contrivances of the second half! (I so much wish, if second half had few episodes omitted, to allow few breathers!) It is a very plot-heavy book, characters and atmosphere take a back-seat!!