Rating: 4/5

This is actually the fourth book in a series Dorothy Garlock started with Ribbon in the Sky. The first book is Lettie and Mike Dolan's story. They are the parents of Duncan Dolan, who is the oldest of the Dolan brothers and MFC Kathleen Dolan's deceased father. Duncan's brothers Tom and Hod have their own stories in With Hope and With Song respectively.

MMC Johnny Henry was first introduced in Tom Dolan's story - which I read over four years ago along with Hod Dolan's book. When I stumbled upon this story, I was anxious to read about Johnny Henry again. It's 1938 and Johnny is now 25 and resides in a house on land in the Rawlings, Oklahoma area. He breeds and trains horses, participates every year in the Rawlings Rodeo, and works on the side secretly helping the Federal Bureau. In addition to the introduction of some good new side characters in this book, the reader is also reunited with some characters from the two previous books.

FMC Kathleen Dolan is Tom and Hod Dolan's niece. She's a beautiful 26 year old woman with bright red hair who has just purchased a partnership interest in the Rawlings, Oklahoma Gazette. In the beginning of the book, Kathleen is in route to Oklahoma from Liberal, Kansas to begin work at the newspaper. She's feisty, has a quick wit and even faster temper. These attributes don't bode well with a few of the town's citizens.

Even though Johnny knows Kathleen's uncles, he's never met her in person. When they do finally meet, he's just saved her from having her car hijacked and money stolen just outside of town and not far from his ranch. He sees her again at the newspaper office and thinks she's beautiful. He is immediately smitten. But... he suffers from the "I'm not good enough for her" syndrome. Johnny is part Cherokee. He is the son of a white prostitute and what everyone in town said was a drunk Indian. He was raised by a kind man named Ed Henry and that's the last name he goes by. The reader eventually learns the truth of his parentage when his biological father's search for him is successful.

Throughout the course of the book, Kathleen and Johnny's chemistry takes hold. She thinks he's kind and wonderful when he's not being jealous of seeing her in the company of Barker Fleming, one of the owners of a local hide tannery. He also tries and fails to stay away from her thinking he's not good enough for her. Johnny left school after finishing the fifth grade and doesn't believe a woman with Kathleen's educational background could ever love a man like him. But she does. Kathleen knows Johnny's street smarts and tracking skills more than make up for his lack of a formal education.

Since danger seems to always find Kathleen, Johnny continues to keep an out for her as a courtesy to her uncles. The danger results from her investigating shady activity surrounding Dr. Herman's medical practice (he's also the mayor), and a young woman's murder that's ruled an "accident" when clearly it wasn't. It's a good story that is an exciting mystery with some romance wrapped around it.

When Kathleen finally convinces Johnny of her feelings for him, it's well worth the wait.

Johnny tells her one night after they return from the McCabe ranch to his house, 
  "This is a big step. Once I get you in there, I'll not be able to let you leave."

  "I won't want to go."..."I've waited all my life for a man like you and for a moment like this."

 
Dorothy Garlock's books are like comfort food for me. And I'll be ready for another serving when I read After the Parade, the sequel to this book.

Fall bingo square #2 - Location/Setting starts with a vowel: 
  Oklahoma