Rating: 4/5

Ah, Treachery! is the twenty-fifth and, sadly, the last novel from Ross Thomas who was one of the great crime writers of the late Twentieth Century. Thomas wrote novels in a variety of subgenres, including political corruption and skullduggery, which is where this story fits for the most part.

The novel takes place in the wake of the election of 1992, and the main protagonist is Edd "Twodees" Partain. Partain was a career military man who served in Vietnam and later in the more-or-less secret war in El Salvador. He was forced out of the service after nineteen years, one year shy of his pension, after he punched out a superior officer who richly deserved it.

As the book opens, Edd is working for basically minimum wage at Wanda Lou's Weaponry in Sheridan, Wyoming. On Christmas Eve, one of his old nemeses shows up at the gun shop and tells Edd that the shit is about to hit the fan regarding some of their activities in El Salvador. The nemesis, a colonel named Millwed, doesn't want Partain talking to anyone about said activities and urges him to get out of town. Millwed reaches out to Wanda Lou's daughter, and on Christmas Day, poor Edd is fired and sent on his way. 

Through a series of circumstances, Partain winds up in Los Angeles working security for a very wealthy and somewhat eccentric woman named Millicent Altford. Altford is a political rainmaker who raised a ton of money for the Democrats in the recent election. Sadly, though, $1.2 million of that money has been stolen from the safe in her home. Millicent is hiding out from her opponents, whoever they might be. She's also hiding out from the new administration, in fear that they might want to name her ambassador to someplace like Togo in return for the help she provided.

Twodees signs on to protect Millicent and to try to figure out who stole the money. It's a great romp with a terrific cast of characters, including Millicent's daughter Jessica, a group of unsavory military men trying to save themselves from being exposed for the crimes they have committed, a hit man, and an actor who doubles as the doorman at Millicent's home. The plot races along in true Ross Thomas fashion, and once you get into the book it's almost impossible to put it down.

I am still trying to find the last few Ross Thomas novels that I don't already own and so at least this is not the last of his books that I will have to look forward to. But no one else wrote novels of the type and quality of his, and he is sorely missed.