Rating: 5/5

"My childhood in Corfu shaped my life. If I had the craft of Merlin, I would give every child the gift of my childhood."
 —Gerald Durrell

Corfu, Greece, as seen through the eyes of Gerry Durrell, had me digging around for my passport. What a breathtaking world when viewed through his eyes. The animals and other creepy crawlies were enough to keep me reading, but when he delved into the riotously rich characters, I was captivated.

"The island lies off the Albanian and Greek coast-lines like a long, rust-eroded scimitar."

"That August, when we arrived, the island lay breathless and sun-drugged in the smouldering, peacock-blue sea under a sky that had faded to a pale powder-blue by the fierce rays of the sun."

Birds, Beasts and Relatives is the second book in the trilogy. Yes, I started with this book instead of the first one. I should be banned from reading any series. I always start somewhere in the middle! Still, I had no trouble diving right in and polished off all 294 pages in the space of an afternoon. I simply couldn’t stop. The writing is deliciously cinematic. I could hear each character as I basked in the sights, sounds and smells of the island. Gerry allowed me to accompany him on his daily ventures, watching him as he absorbed himself in the discovery of nature. His free-spirited escapades were to the vexation of his family, who wanted no part of the zoo he was building in his room.

 'I don’t think it’s a good idea for you to write this book, Gerry.'

 'I second that,' said Larry. 'If you publish we’ll sue you in a body.'

Faced with such a firm and united family, bristling in their resolve to prevent me at all costs, there was only one thing I could do. I sat down and wrote this book.

The humor, intertwined with the family theatre, and the island natives' intriguing ways had me rolling with laughter. The characters are full of life and I feel that I know each of them personally.
 
I will admit that the bugs on the cover gave me pause. However, to my delight, it's not just about the creatures, and I learned more about the beasts of the earth than I ever imagined. This boy’s curious mind had me interested as well. It took me back to my youth when the world seemed magical. It’s something we lose as time marches on, and it’s a shame. 

Gerald Durrell’s prose is gloriously vibrant, his dialogue on point. I couldn’t have asked for more. I left the last pages wrapped in the warm fuzzy glow of this family’s splendid life.

Heart-warming, deep and hilarious, the story reminded me to see the magic in everyday things with a childlike curiosity and to laugh often. As a result, I will forever be a fan of Gerald Durrell.
 
I recommend Birds, Beasts and Relatives to readers of any age. It's absolutely charming!