Rating: 2/5

Introduction:

As I have taught teenagers the art of writing an essay, and they have taught me the art of detecting a shortcut, I will apply it here (the shortcut, that is), for honestly, the deeply hidden teenager in me tells me that I should not, under any circumstances, waste too much time writing a review of this book. To search for a reasonable plot, characterisation, or purpose (except for cheap voyeurism and violence) is quite futile. I should, however, mark it as read and forgettable before I forget it again. So here is the review, with quotes and all:

(Teacher’s note and feedback: "Do not speak of yourself and your experience in the introduction, remain neutral!" Student’s reaction: “I am not neutral!”)

Main Body: 

(Teacher’s note and feedback: "Do not call the main body of your essay main body, come up with something more telling!" Student’s change: “The Novel”) 

For my essay, I will use two significant quotes from the novel and paraphrase them to match my reading experience. (Teacher’s note: "Try to find a more subtle transition from introduction to main part!" Student’s question: "Why? And how?")

Quote 1 from the text:

“She sleepwalked from moment to moment, and whole months slipped by without memory, without bearing the faintest imprint of her conscious will. ” 

Paraphrase to explain reader’s experience:

“She sleepwalked from page to page, and whole chapters slipped by without memory, without bearing the faintest imprint of her conscious will. ” 

(Teacher’s note: "Can you explain that more in detail, please?" Student: "No, I have forgotten the rest!")

Second reference from the text, as required in the rubric:

“What tended to happen, to Colin and Mary at least, was that subjects were not explored so much as defensively reiterated, or forced into elaborate irrelevancies, and suffused with irritability.” 

Paraphrase:

“What tended to happen, reading McEwan at least, was that subjects were not explored so much as defensively reiterated, or forced into elaborate irrelevancies, and suffused with irritability.” 

Conclusion:

I think this student has studied Ian McEwan enough to make the decision to give it up entirely for the time being, and to explore other realms of literature from now on. There is not much to hope for! His novels are a mixed bag, some are tolerably good, others are interesting at least, and some are just plain forgettable. The last two or three I read were of the forgettable kind, and there is just too much good stuff to read out there to repeatedly engage in “reiterations of elaborate irrelevancies”. Ten or eleven of Ian McEwan’s novels are more than enough!

Note from student to teacher: "I fulfilled the rubric, so you will have to give me the marks. And it is okay to present your own opinion in the conclusion. You said so yourself!"

Note from teacher: "Be careful to consistently use formal language. Grade and individual, detailed feedback will be returned after Christmas break!"

Student: "Oh, come on!"

Teacher: "I am a human being as well, and need my weekends!"

Student: "Unreliable statement, lacking evidence!"

Teacher: "These kids nowadays leave me speechless… but they are more entertaining than the novel I just read! I wonder if my Student Alter Ego even read it?"

Student: "No, Teacher Alter Ego, I did not. For if I had, I would have told you that it is not for students: gratuitous violence, unmotivated, random story lines, superficially shocking…"

Teacher Alter Ego: "Fair enough, is would not have been possible to make a proper characterisation or plot analysis either, as the protagonists are completely unrealistic: who would follow a stranger to his house and listen to his stupid life story and then return despite clear indications that he is brutal and manipulative…"

Student Alter Ego: "My point precisely. I stopped listening to him and went home before it got creepy!"

Teacher Alter Ego: "Good, then we don’t have to add spoilers. How are we going to rate it?"

SAE: "The book I haven’t read, you mean?"

TAE: "But I have, unfortunately, - side effect of the profession. So?"

SAE: "Give it 2 stars, then. It is not as bad as The Alchemist or The Da Vinci Code."

TAE: "Good point. 2 stars. But no recommendation."