Rating: 3/5

The Bad Beginning - 4/5

I enjoyed this a lot more than I was expecting to. It's surprisingly dark and gritty yet filled with witty prose and morbid humor to go along with it. Seeing a group of young, ordinary orphans with no powers of any kind working together to humiliate and bring down an evil man willing to abuse them and manipulate them to gain access to their family fortune was highly satisfying. Count Olaf really reminds me of the classic gothic-horror villains such as Dracula, Carmilla and Mr. Brocklehurst. A fun book for a young audience that isn't afraid to be dark and depressing.

***
The Reptile Room - 3/5

Not quite as good as the first book, but still an enjoyable little adventure nonetheless. This tale starts with a much brighter opening, the Baudelaire trio are adopted by their zany and caring uncle Monty after spending a long time in the hellish domain of Count Olaf. Uncle Monty is a brilliant herpetologist and he shares his passion of snakes with his three adopted children. The fun doesn't last long as Count Olaf makes a dastardly return in the form of Stefano, Olaf wearing a not-so-convincing disguise yet somehow manages to trick all of the adults.

This is where the book started to frustrate me a bit. The fact that everyone is so condescending to the Baudelaire orphans, especially considering how awful an experience it was for them trying to escape from the clutches of Olaf. 90% of the of the issues in this book could've been avoided if the adults would just let the ophands finish a damn sentence and listen to what they have to say. Why is everyone so reluctant to believe them after what was revealed about Olaf in the first book? Mr. Poe got on my nerves most of all, he should've believed the children right away but he kept up his denial until the very end despite knowing what the orphans have been through in the recent past.

It was frustrating to see the adults act like blithering idiots throughout the book, but it was still fun to watch the Baudelaire children work together to overcome a deadly situation that could've very easily ended with their gruesome murder. Three heads are better than one, and it's nice to see the clever and tragic trio of orphans triumph over some nasty adversaries. 

***
The Wide Window - 3/5

It had its fun moments but overall it felt like an identical repeat of The Reptile Room. The Baudelaire trio moves in with a new caretaker, Mr. Poe acts like a clueless idiot, Count Olaf shows up in a new disguise and gets somebody killed while getting away to scheme another day. The story and setup was a bit weak but I actually found the finale to be enjoyable, the escape scene on the ocean when the Baudelaire's were being pursued by killer leeches and the kids finding comfort in each other's company despite their tragic circumstances. Not bad, but I hope the series tries to change things up in future installments.