Rating: 5/5

Let's say it right away: every morning, every week, I had to put this book in my bag because the train was entering the station. It was painful. So the only thing left for me to do, as I walked, was to go over what I had just read, to relate it to me, possibly to my childhood, and to associate these memories with what I knew about Simone de Beauvoir.
How some autobiographies I have read recently seem bland and empty to me now, in the face of this one! Simone de Beauvoir jumps on each evocation of her childhood to dissect it, explain it, and draw from it the substance of what will build her over the years.
Her ungrateful adolescence, questions about faith, and young emotions in the first years of her life led to her enthusiasm as a precocious little girl and her tantrums when she tore off at a captivating moment. Then, her fierce desire freed her from the bourgeoisie in which she was entangled like many friends. These meetings would forge her and direct her unceasingly towards discoveries and reflections always in motion.
We will remember his friendship with his sister Poupette and Zaza, his childhood friend, his love for his cousin Jacques, his admiration for Herbaud, and finally, Sartre, who will prove to be the one who will remain in his life forever.
Simone de Beauvoir never judges herself; she analyzes and describes the development of her thoughts as a child and adolescent, sometimes resorting to her newspapers from the time and letters received.
This correspondence, let's talk about it, revolves around an aspect of the upper bourgeoisie forgotten today: marriages arranged around dowries and the respectability of families. Young girls suffering from thwarted and impossible loves, boys encouraged to get their hands on low-income young women before entering into marriage. In the 1920s, however relatively independent, passing aggregation, already a teacher, Simone still asked her parents permission to go to the theatre. Losing her virginity before marriage is unthinkable, and a girl still studying at 20 wastes her time. Who will want her?
The whole bourgeois context of this time gradually gave birth to De Beauvoir's feminist ideas, whose ambition to be someone was commensurate with his intelligence.
Finally, we discover a young Jean-Paul Sartre philosopher to the end and very endearing.
A key reading.