Rating: 3/5

Perhaps no author can claim such a golden decade of novel writing in the 19C as Wilkie Collins. In the 1860's Collins published The Woman in White (1860), No Name (1862), Armadale (1866) and The Moonstone (1868). There is no more than a flat chance that he could repeat himself, and, indeed, he did not. The Law and the Lady, published in 1875, does not reach the standard of its predecessors of the 1860's; nevertheless, The Law and the Lady is an important book for many reasons and deserves to be recognized more than it currently is. 

The novel features a female detective. The character of Miserrimus Dexter is obscenely hideous, the plot intriguing as it rests on a Scotish Verdict of Not Proven. Caught midway between guilt and innocence, Valeria Woodville's husband received this verdict on the charge of murdering his first wife prior to marrying Valeria. Naturally, as any good Victorian novel would have it, Valeria was unaware of her husband's past until after her marriage to him. Through dogged determination and Collins's exploration of early forensic and other investigative techniques Valeria attempts to prove her husband's innocence. A rather bizarre plot, with bizarre twists and turns seems to be the stamp of a Collins novel. Other tropes of Collins are found in the novel as well. Dexter has no legs, and thus we have the character with a disability. There are various nods to other authors and novels. In The Law and the Lady a dust-heap (a nod to Dickens's Our Mutual Friend?) contains the central clue to proving that Valeria's husband is innocent. Dexter's helpmate's name is Ariel and in a grotesque twist of detail one feels the shadow of Shakespeare's The Tempest. 

In an interesting commentary prior to the novel Collins includes rules for readers to remember when reading fiction, and I presume, pointedly, his The Law and the Lady. Suspend disbelief, accept the character on the page comments Collins. 

This novel does have its weakness, and an editor's pen would have been useful, but that would rob the Victorian nature of this novel. Many will find the ending dissatisfying. Some readers may call "foul" at its seemingly almost dismissive tone. While I would not begin a reading and discovery of Collins with this novel I would not dismiss it either. I think Collins was constantly innovating, pushing boundaries, experimenting and exploring the novel. That he was in the centre of the Sensation Novel craze and credited with being one of the first, if not the first detective writers, would be enough to guarantee anyone's legacy. That he did not rest on his laurels is a testament to the fact that he needs to be read and appreciated more.