Rating: 4/5

This is a witty, funny and traumatic memoir of Robert Drewe growing up in Perth in the 1950s &amp; 60s. There are some incredibly funny bon mots and turns of phrase that had me cackling in my seat. It is evocative of an Australia that is not more (actually a world that is no more).

Until the iron ore mining boom, Perth was an isolated oversized town on the edge of the continent. Drewe writes: a city of branch managers for companies with head offices over east. And that would sum up the upper business echelon of Perth; so small fish in a smaller pond.

It is a city of conservative niceness: of worrying about your public face, especially with any scandal such as a police record for public drunkenness or teen pregnancy and marriage, mixed religious marriages and so on. In actuality, this would sum up Menzies' Australia and would equally be at home in any of the larger southern Australian cities. The difference is the open living - the huge time devoted to being at the beach- and to the fact that quickly everyone knows each other, especially if you are middle or wealthy class. Connections made at school will permeate into your adulthood.

And it does in Drewe's case. He knows a serial killer personally; the man used to work as a lower employee for his father: he has been to the house to deliver furniture for a company function. And he has grieved for one of the murdered victims - someone he knew at school and had met in the street a few days before the murder. In such a claustrophobic society as Perth, it is easy for many people to have a personal connection to the violent crimes committed. The killer is good at covering his tracks, and only due to a misunderstanding with his wife (she accepted his womanising &amp; thought he was visiting mistresses) that he managed to escape capture for so long.

The writing is light as we follow the growing pains of Drewe &amp; the transition to adulthood &amp; the inevitable change in relationship with his parents. All is done with wry humour and good writing. My only complaint, and it is a minor one, is the jerky nature of his jumping around 6 months to a 12 year in cases. I listened to this &amp; I suspect it is more jarring than when read.

Surprisingly, Perth still has retaining some aspects recorded by Drewe - in particular the obsession of living near the sea, the healthy sized sub group that stay behind &amp; stay connected, so other peoples affairs are easily gossiped &amp; spread, and their hatred for the eastern states.