Rating: 4/5

Two Good Mysteries from a Great Writer

Wanted: Someone Innocent:
In this story, written in the first person, twenty-year old Gillian Brayton, brought up as a lady, but now earning a very precarious living as an assistant milliner, attends her school reunion as the old headmistress is retiring. At that reunion she meets up with Rita Fayre, who was classes ahead of her at school. Rita greets Gillian as if they had been close friends and chats about how they did this and that, when Gillian knows they did nothing of the kind. Then Rita offers Gillian what seems to be an easy job for an extremely good salary. Of course, the reader is now suspicious, but Gillian is very naïve, for all that she thinks she is cynical. Even her landlady, the cockney Mrs Austin (splendid characterisation and one I wish had a bigger role), is suspicious, until Gillian tells her that they were at school together. It is when they arrive at the house that Gillian feels the first stirrings of uneasiness. The main protagonist, strangely enough, wasn’t my favourite character. If Rudkin, the butler, is a great character, then Mrs Munsen, the housekeeper, is a wonderful one, but the most marvellous character in the story for me is Superintendent McNaught, and it is a pity he didn’t get his own series, or at least a full-length novel. This is a well-thought-out story that fulfils all the requirements of a satisfying murder-mystery.

Last Act:
This story is told in the third person from the point of view of the main protagonist, Margot Roberts, a young actress. The opening paragraph draws the reader in immediately, and one must simply keep reading. Mathilde Zoffany, a French actress took Margot in as a one-year old infant, after the death of Margot’s parents. It was Genevieve, Zoff’s maid/dresser, who actually loved the baby and brought her up, and it is Genevieve whom Margot thinks of as Maman, although she is very fond of Zoff. Zoff has two grandsons, Denis, the elder, whom she loathes, and Victor, who she wants to marry Margot. As the story begins, Margot has broken her engagement to Victor upon her return from a successful tour of America, and she is hurrying to tell Zoff before Victor can get in first, but she is too late, as Victor is already there. Zoff is murdered and the number one suspect is her elder grandson, Denis, but…it soon becomes apparent that all in the house had a motive, apart from Margot. Inspector Lee is in charge of the case and his methods are unorthodox, to say the least, in fact, he is a bully. Margot was my favourite character, and for me, the most likeable, with Sir Kit a reasonably close second. The solving of the mystery is quite startling, to say the least.

The writer gives marvellously evocative descriptions so the reader can immediately visualise the surroundings, inside and out, as well as the characters. Allingham had a quirky sense of humour that really tickles me, and she used it to good effect in these novellas. These two mysteries are not merely curtailed novels, but purpose-written novellas and as such they perfectly fulfil the requirements of a novella. Recommended to those who enjoy Golden Age mysteries/crime that are shorter than a novel, and two in one is a great deal. Although I really like these two stories, I did prefer the first one.