Rating: 5/5

"A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away, people made movies with people in them, and some of those movies made sense. Then something happened, and the people started to vanish from the movies, along with most of the sense."

Thus begins Anthony Lane's review of The Phantom Menace. He goes on to note:
"It is, of course, profoundly gratifying that The Phantom Menace should emerge as a work of almost unrelieved awfulness. It means, for one thing, that the laugh is on all those dweebs who have spent the last month camped out on the sidewalks beside movie theatres, waiting for the big day...For the first ten minutes you think, What the hell is going on?, and two hours later you want to cry out, 'Is that it?'"

Nobody's Perfect cemented a place on my bookshelf nearly ten years ago, shortly after I subscribed to The New Yorker and discovered the gigglefest that awaited me in Anthony Lane's reviews. In fact, it was common practice at my workplace to read his reviews aloud, excerpted or whole, to bring relief to our otherwise tedious and frustrating day. And to this day if I need an erudite larf, I can count on pulling out this tome and flipping to nearly any page.

It is important for a newbie to note that readers of The New Yorker generally fall into being a vehement fan of Anthony Lane, or a naysayer of Lane and ardent fan of David Denby. And this reader is no exception! While Denby's work is arguably more nuanced, his reviews also tend to be horribly boring. If I'm still awake by the end, I feel like I've eaten a serving of particleboard wrapped in electrical tape. Blech.

It's tempting to spoil the whole book by serving up zinger after delicious zinger. There are so many laugh-a-minute reviews: Indecent Proposal, Poetic Justice ("The main character is named Justice, and she writes poetry. Get it?"), The Mummy, Charlie's Angels. Instead though, I will share just a couple more excerpts from Lane's review of that sexy, schmaltzy classic, Showgirls. First, Lane educates his readers on the art of lap dancing:
"To lap-dance, you undress, sit your client down, order him to stay still and fully clothed, then hover over him, making a motion that you have perfected by watching Mister Softee ice cream dispensers."
And finally, highlighting an actor showcasing his craft:
"Zack is played by Kyle MacLachlan, a real actor, who, for the purposes of this movie, graciously sinks to the level of the other performers. Still, I got the feeling that he was trying to hide behind his long, curving forelock in the unactorly hope that he might not be recognized. But that's him alright—buck naked in the swimming pool with Nomi, sipping champagne beneath the quietly tasteful dolphin-shaped fountains."

Anthony Lane, I love you so hard.