Rating: 1/5

He'd truly loved Elaine, was shattered when she died, so why did he still feel this aching need for Sharon?

Hrm...because he's a two-timing narcissist incapable of human decency? Just guessing.

The wife (Sharon) discovers her husband has been having an emotional affair with a colleague (Elaine) at his law office and divorces him. Fast forward to five years later, and the ex-wife is accused of murdering her lecherous supervisor at work. (Returning to his office to retrieve her purse after they had a heated argument, she discovers him on the floor with a letter opener in his chest. Thinking to help, she pulls it out and his blood gushes all over her clothing just before his secretary and a client walk in.) Her cheating ex is a successful criminal defense attorney, so her awesome roommate tracks down his unlisted number and asks him to represent the heroine, who has been taken into custody and denied bail.

The murder plot is unimportant and handled ridiculously. Other than gathering forensic evidence at the scene, the police did no investigation. The ex-spouses uncover the real killer themselves, then the ex-husband offers to serve as the real killer's counsel, which is a clear conflict of interest since he is currently representing the woman falsely accused of the crime. 

Back to the infidelity plot. 

To understand the full extent of the husband's awfulness, we have to go to the end of the book, where he reveals that he and Elaine had been in a relationship before he met the heroine: "'There was no formal commitment. It was a comfortable arrangement, but I suppose you could say we were drifting toward marriage.'" Then he met, had sex with, and married the 19-year-old heroine. 

So, first he cheated on Elaine with Sharon. Then he found his marriage with the younger woman emotionally unrewarding. They had nothing in common but sex. She wasn't interested in hearing him drone on about law and his job; he wasn't interested in her college activities. Frustrated outside of the bedroom, he began having lunch or going out to drinks after work with Elaine to discuss their cases. Eventually, this drifted into more personal discussion, a deeper emotional involvement, and some kissing. When the husband tells the OW they have to stop meeting, she confesses her love to him. Recognizing that he won't leave his wife, she takes a job in another state. The wife, who had been receiving anonymous notes about the affair, shows up at the OW's house and sees them exchange a passionate (goodbye) kiss in the book's first chapter.

The husband denies any adultery (*eyeroll* lawyers), and Elaine verifies that they "'haven't been intimate, although I've let him know that I'd be willing.'" Because he's having sex with his sexy wife and only wants you as a mature emotional crutch, Elaine. Have some self-respect. (Later in the story, the cheating husband muses, "Although there'd been an instant attraction between them from the time they'd met, he'd always known that it was more cerebral than sexual.")

When the wife asks her husband if he's in love with the OW, he prevaricates. She demands the truth, and he finally admits, "'Elaine and I have a close relationship. I care deeply for her, but you're my wife --'" The wife declares, "'I can't live with you knowing you're not totally committed to me'" and files for divorce.

The cheating ex-husband drifts into marriage with the OW. They can't have been married more than three years, because she dies of an aneurysm two years before the murder/arrest plot begins, but we do learn they didn't have children because wife #2 didn't want kids. (Which is vintage romance code for "evil woman." So, since we never learned who sent the notes to the first wife informing her of the affair, I nominate Elaine.) The heroine moves to another city and, of course, discovers that she is completely disinterested in sex with any other man.

Now the cheating and widowed ex bursts back into his first wife's troubled life to play white knight, repeatedly declare his unchanged and undying love, and make some really awkward seduction moves. In response, the heroine keeps making bitter remarks and immediately apologizing for them: "'I'm sorry,' she said, for what must have been the hundredth time." (I didn't count, but I'll take the author's word for it.)

In a particularly vulnerable moment, after her first courtroom appearance when her case is remanded for trial and the heroine confronts the strength of the evidence against her, they do have sex. But the heroine insists it can never happen again. He pouts. They do their sleuthing and find the real killer, and the charges against the heroine are dropped. He asks her to remarry him, and she rejects him, saying everything I think about this "hero":
"I believe you love me as much as you are capable of loving, but it always comes back to the same dilemma. How can I trust that love, when it wasn't strong enough before to keep you from being attracted to another woman?"
This is the point at which the ex reveals his pre-heroine past with Elaine and recounts the weakness in their first marriage, but the heroine is not convinced he is capable of fidelity and sends him on his way. Two months later, she ruins everything by chasing back to Chicago after him and proposing marriage because "So what if he didn't love her as much as she loved him? Where was it written that love had to be weighed in equal measure?" Not in this book, obviously.

So, to recap: the husband cheated on the OW before he was married, cheated on the heroine when they were married, and then married the OW while still retaining his passionate love for the heroine. He blames the problems in his first marriage entirely upon the heroine's youth, which is fortunately no longer an issue, so he doesn't have to grow or change or acknowledge his failings. The heroine gets to settle for a guy whose "unchanged" love would by definition include the possibility of infidelity. 

This book needs to go sit in the bad book corner and think about everything it has done wrong. And when it is ready to apologize, it can fling itself on a bonfire in shame.