Rating: 4/5

I must admit that after this second reading of A Virtuous Woman by Kaye Gibbons my thoughts have changed and improved my rating from 2 to 4 stars. The reason I will surmise, having not written a review back then, is that I was younger and unable to connect on any level with the characters and I wasn’t reading this type of literature as I am now. I must have felt harshly with such a low rating but at least at this reading, I can understand why this worked this time around.

This is Kaye Gibbon's second novel, her debut being Ellen Foster which was a heartbreaking and sometimes painful coming of age story of a young girl. This time, Gibbons tells the story of an unlikely marriage between 40 year old Jack Stokes and 20 year old Ruby Pitts Woodrow Stokes. They tell their story in alternating voices and shed light on their troubles and their joys. Ruby and Jack come from completely different backgrounds. She is a wealthy farmer’s daughter and Jack is a tenant farmer who has never owned a thing in his life. This improbable pair meet after Ruby has spent a couple of horrible years married to her first husband. Throughout their telling of their story, we learn that Jack and Ruby long for companionship and fall into a marriage in which the two people learn how to live life learning each other’s faults and capabilities. Despite all of this, they have a good marriage. 

Jack can be short and to the point the way he talks and sometimes what he says can come across as hurtful to outsiders. Ruby has learned his mannerisms and language and knows just how to handle him and love him. He loves her and when she dies of cancer at 45, he has to figure out how to get on with life. 

This is not a pretty love story or one that will make you feel good. This is written in each of their voices and can be pretty bleak, but it’s realistic and raw. I liked Ruby and the woman she became with Jack. She was preparing meals to put away in the freezer for Jack so he’d have something for a few months after she was gone. I don’t know many women who’d think of another at such a time as this. We also hear the stories of Burr and Tiny Fran and their children June and Roland. Burr is Jack’s boss and he’s married to a demanding, lazy wife who treats June poorly and lets Roland do whatever he wants. He’s uncontrollable. Jack and Ruby bond with June and she becomes like the daughter they never had. 

Kaye Gibbons writes a sparse story in plain and simple prose. Her unsympathetic and quiet style here is definitely enough to see the picture of a woman’s love and concern for her husband and his welfare. 

It took me a long time to learn that mistakes aren’t good or bad, they’re just mistakes, and you clean them up and go on.

…I can honestly say that before I married Ruby I’d felt like a boy on the outside looking in, but Ruby, when she loved me, I said, This is what it must feel like to be a man.

Sometimes I feel like everything started with Ruby.

I did want somebody to take care of me. I needed it. And when I felt all that goodness coming from Jack, it didn’t matter what the person looked like that sent it out to me.