Rating: 4/5

Probably my favourite and the most emotionally resonant of the Heian period books I’ve read so far. 

Lady Mayfly, as I’d like to call her since it seems a shame to name such an influential woman only by her relation to men, which is usually how she’s referred to, is a depressed, reflective woman in an unenviable position. 

She loves her husband, but he’s an entitled asshole who has many unofficial wives and only pays them attention when they’re brand new. Poor Lady Mayfly, who really does love him, is left with her loneliness, despair, and her righteous indignance at the way she’s treated. Her husband spends all his time dodging her messengers, parading his newest wife past her door unnecessarily, ignoring his son by Lady Mayfly, and answering her accusations with myopic, selfish justifications and rationalizations and a general refusal to be accountable for his own action. So basically men haven’t changed in the past one thousand years, like at all. 

Lady Mayfly’s perfectly capable of being catty and pointlessly petty (rejoicing over the misfortunes of her husband’s innocent other wives), she’s also clearly got a good heart. Not only does she love her husband, she truly loves her son and readily makes sacrifices on his behalf. She also loves the girl she adopts, who is the daughter of her husband by another woman, and treats that woman kindly, not with jealousy (either because the other woman had it even worse off than Lady Mayfly herself did, being even more neglected by their husband and put in a remote area and forgotten about, or because Lady Mayfly had, by then, matured enough to recognize that she and her husband’s other wives had a common enemy: their dicky husband). And she spends a lot of time worrying over the little girl’s future and trying to protect her from the world. 

“Each new year in turn has failed to bring happiness. Indeed, as I think of the unsatisfying events I have recorded here, I wonder whether I have been describing anything of substance. Call it, this journal of mine, a shimmering of the summer sky.”

Lovely.