Rating: 5/5

Honestly, I completely fail to see why everybody hated this novel upon release (and seemingly continues to hate it today). I found the writing was stunning, very lyrical, downright poetic in places. The deep-dives into the mechanisms and idiosyncrasies of memory and emotion were fascinating. The characters were engaging and funny and vivid, particularly the narrator's (adoptive) father, S.L., and his older (adoptive) sister, Nonie. I didn't even mind the extremely long sex scenes (although, to be fair, I LOVED Parallel Stories by Peter Nadas, a book also criticized for the length of its sex scenes, so I have a high threshold for that kind of thing). The pacing was somewhat languid, but I don't mind slow movement if the writing is compelling, which in this case it was. 

I went into The Runaway Soul expecting to read one of the great failed novels, this of course based primarily on what the critics said about it back when it first came out (and, to a lesser extent, based upon the mixed things later reviewers had to say about it on websites such as this one). But what I actually got was something else entirely: a powerful, unique, beautifully written take on the "coming of age" story, full of sex, death, tragedy, humor, and deep psychological/emotional insight. 

My verdict: unfairly overlooked/dismissed, but very much worth your time. Read it.

- - - - - -

UPON REREADING (July-August 2024)

What an incredible thing. There are many tremendous novels, but there is (and always will be) just one The Runaway Soul. It stands as a devastating indictment of short-sighted, uncomprehending, impatient, half-assed—perhaps even jealous—literary critics everywhere. I see it as an artistic achievement of monstrous proportions, and no amount of arguing will dissuade me. Its prose alone guarantees it a spot in my personal pantheon of great texts, not to mention the amazing cast of characters, the psychological incisiveness, the slow and careful pacing, etc. If this isn’t the proverbial “real thing,” I don’t know what is.

Twice is simply not enough. I’ll be reading this again and again until I am no more.

For now though, the second trek has been completed and I remain in total awe. I’ll end with the very fitting final lines:

“But, for a moment, let us pause. Let us be still. Or, rather, let me be quiet in her memory—and in memory of me—for a little while.”

Amen, Mr. Brodkey.