Rating: 3/5

The Illustrated Story of England is an extremely dense overview of the basics of English history, at least from the perspective of elites in English history. To say it is "illustrated" is a bit of a stretch, there are illustrations, but not really enough to devote the title to advertising the illustrations. At the expense of being simple-minded, the book would have been vastly improved with more illustrations. I would challenge anyone with artistic ability to consider making a graphic novelization of some of England's legends and historical events. 

Anyway, onto the book. It attempts to cover approximately 10,000 years of English history in less than 250 pages. Certainly, a better strategy would have been to condense the first 8,000 years or so (Neolithic times through the end of the Roman era give or take a few centuries) to when England first defined itself as England and provided more detail on those events and the monarchy. As it is written, it roughly marches along in a linear way from start to finish, but reading it feels as though English history is an anvil and Hibbert is a cartoon villain attempting to drop the anvil on your head, thus filling you with as many names, acts, and events as possible in the most condensed, fast way possible. Needless to say, I found myself rereading sections.

I did not become overly critical of the book until it glossed over Colonialism and England's role in shaping many twentieth-century geopolitical problems. For example, the Iranians did not just suddenly decide they were angry with the west in 1979. That was the result of a long, drawn-out post-colonial process over the possession of oil resources. I am curious to read more about Hibbert's poor opinion of Queen Elizabeth I, to whom he claims gets undeserved kudos from posterity. The final chapter on the end of the twentieth and beginning of the twenty-first century was poorly organized and reflected more about the author's political leanings than actually providing useful information. The book also somewhat skirted World War 2, which clearly is perhaps one of the most significant events in recent history. Further, the masses, or the people of England, are also barely mentioned throughout, as though they were just kind of there while Cromwell and Charles I vied for control of the government. 

I suppose I am being too critical, but a condensed, single volume of English history may not have been the best strategy. The book suffers a bit from false advertising and too much cramming of information. It would have been better executed as a series of three to five, more heavily illustrated books, perhaps dividing into a "Prelude" including the Neolithic through Roman times and so on. As an expatriate, looking for the broad strokes, I would recommend with some reservations.