Rating: 4/5

As with most “hit” TV shows/movie of the 60’s, 70’s, 80’s, (and even the 90’s/00’s) – books such as Knight Rider (#1) are TV/movie “tie-ins”. Usually they’re the novelization of an episode or movie seen on TV or in the theater, sometimes from the script or a rough draft of a script (which apparently this is).

Books such as these have been done since the days of StarTrek: The Original Series; even shows such as Starsky &amp; Hutch. Sometimes the books feature a few facts that missed production or the writer/producer decided to add. They act as a supplement to the particular episode/movie. 

Some stick close to the actual episode/movie that aired, some not so much (ie: Starsky &amp; Hutch).

Knight Rider (#1) is no different. 

This is the novelization from the pilot – “Knight of the Phoenix”. But, there are quite a few differences between the novel and the finished episode /pilot that aired. 

“Knight of the Phoenix” introduces us to and shows us how LAPD Detective Lt. Michael Arthur Long comes to be Michael Knight. 

As many viewers/fans of the TV show know, LAPD Detective Lt. Michael Arthur Long was in Las Vegas on an undercover assignment when Tanya Walker fired the shot that was supposed to have killed Michael Long; however it only disfigured his face due to a metal plate in his head. Billionaire and philanthropist, having had his eye on Long for the Foundation’s program, arrived in time to save Long’s life. 

Michael Long was declared dead, and Michael Knight emerged. At first he only wanted revenge for what Tanya and her group did in the Nevada desert. Once he gets what justice he can, he decides to take up Wilton Knight’s mission. 

This novel gives readers a more in-depth background of Michael Long’s past – family history, military history (especially his Vietnam exploits and time as a POW), along with his early police career. All of which I wish had been explored during the series run from 1982-1986. Having read the novel, I am disappointed that there was so little known about Michael Long’s past in the series – it would have helped to know more about him and I think it would’ve given the character more depth. 

The novel deviates from the finished pilot, or the pilot deviates from the “script” which the novel was based on. 

In the novel, Detective Lt. Michael Arthur Long was born in Reno (not Los Angeles) and returned there after a three (3) year stint in the Army and Vietnam (where he got the metal plate in his head) – it was the Reno Police Department (not Los Angeles) where Michael Long served. And, in the novel it is Reno in which the end of Michael Long’s life is – not Las Vegas. However, the “Las Vegas” plot is used in the final chapters of the story. Over all, I think Las Vegas worked as a better setting for the pilot and TV series. 

In the book Tanya Walker didn’t die, however in the pilot she did. I think this was a good idea as she had figured out who he was, thus he’d have always been a target for her and thus defeat the purpose of what Wilton Knight did. 

The book does not contain the sub-plot with the car thieves as it was not part of the original script. However, fans who may have watched “Knight of the Phoenix” with the commentary by Glen Larson and David Hasselhoff learned that the sub-plot was a last minute idea since the “spec”/pilot was about six (6) or so minutes under running time. Larson thought of the idea to give the pilot more running time as required. 

Between production and airing, the sub-plot was filmed concurrently with another episode to fill the gap. That is why I LOVE watching episodes with the commentary, and appreciate the “behind the scenes” videos whenever they’re presented – it gives the viewers more information as do books like this by the creator or the person who write the script. 

Most everyone enjoyed the car thief plot (again, according to the commentary) – and it made the pilot appear less dark. It also gave the series a bit of “humor” which seemed to work throughout its run. 

All in all, this book does what it was intended – it is a supplement to the movie/pilot/TV series.

If you’re a fan Knight Rider, I highly recommend the book.