Rating: 5/5

History can be written in different ways. Barbara Tuchman, for example, chooses a theme (The Proud Tower) or a person (A Distant Mirror) around which to tell of the times. School textbooks simply follow a timeline, a guarantee not only of boredom but that the reader will learn next to nothing. Eric Hobsbawm writes with the intent of a comprehensive understanding of the times. His technique is to look upon history as a jewel of many facets, each of which is worth viewing and all of which are necessary to approach understanding of the whole.

I've never read a better history than this one. The subject matter, the times in which I have lived much of my life, offers the chance to compare my own take on what I have known with the far more comprehensive understanding that Hobsbawm provides.

Feminism, plate tectonics, quantum theory, fascism, video entertainment, the Cold War, free-market economics and so much more are served up fully, but are never bogged down with too much detail. The intimate connection between society, the individual and the ideologies of the 20th century are put together deftly with a clarity that allows deep but quick reading. Not a single page is boring because Hobsbawm's breadth of knowledge leaves nothing hanging unattached, out of context.

He terms the period he covers "the short 20th century", bounded by the October Revolution in Russia in 1917 and the dissolution of the USSR in 1989. These boundaries mark the end of one era with the First World War and the end of another with the collapse of the only remaining challenge to capitalism. 

How well did capitalism do over this period? Could communism have been called a success at any point? What was the single thing without which there would have been no Hitler? What is fascism and how is it distinct from totalitarianism? What explained the popularity of Ronald Reagan? Is Mick Jagger an artist in the same way as was Renoir? What was Dada and Bauhaus?

What a shame this book could not be a text in schools below college level - yet it could not be because an adult reader can bring so much life-knowledge to the reading, about which a young person would be clueless.

For the adult reader, the many pages will fly by. This book is a rainbow at the end of which is a pot full of understanding. Thank goodness there are such people as Hobsbawm, whose wisdom and intelligence has been applied to historical work that benefits us all.

Oh - there is one thing that he misses that is a major oversight, maybe because it is so all-encompassing - and that is the pace of life has increased tremendously since the early horse-drawn carriage days of the early 1900's to today. It isn't just professional athletes, though they are symptomatic, the whole developed world is on steroids with no letup in sight.