Rating: 4/5

Some other reviewers think this book is too Anglocentric. I disagree. The book is dedicated to the author’s aristocratic French cousins, and in the foreword he sets out his belief that “England did France a great wrong.” I think it’s impossible for any objective historian to disagree with that (and I speak as an Englishman).

This is not an in depth treatment but it is a fluent narrative with a good feel for the sweep of events. I found it helpful to have some useful pen portraits of the French monarchs – Philip VI (“no match for Edward III, but left France bigger than he found it”), John III (“useless…blind rage, and a tendency to panic”), Charles V (“one of France’s greatest kings, he used guerrilla warfare to regain much territory”), and Charles VI (“pleasure loving, pugnacious, and unbalanced…he went mad”). 

 There are also some interesting descriptions of the non royal French such as Bertrand de Guesclin, “an obscure Breton hedge knight”, who was made Constable by Charles V. According to Seward, he was an ugly plebeian and a useless battlefield commander but also a good strategist.

There were some magnificent English victories against the odds but so often these were marred by the killing of prisoners – Agincourt being the most famous example. And the Black Prince may have been known as the “Flower of Chivalry” but he was also responsible for the murder of 3,000 civilians at the sack of Limoges. One of the most shameful episodes is of course the English burning to death of poor Joan of Arc. Seward downplays her a bit – I think mistakenly – and makes the point that lots of people, both French and English, assumed she must be a witch. I think his point is that burning someone at the stake because you are convinced she is a witch is marginally less evil than doing so because you have made a cynical political calculation to carry out a judicial murder, but either way, it was a shameful episode, painful for any Englishman to recollect. 

I think the biggest disaster for France was not so much the English as the civil war between the Burgundians and the Armagnacs. The war ended, of course, in a French victory – though the Battle of Formigny, being a catastrophic English defeat, is almost unknown in England, whereas Agincourt and Crecy are household names. 

The past, alas, was never as chivalric as romancers then or since have liked to imagine.