Rating: 5/5

Originally posted at A Novel Idea Reviews

Rating: 5/5

Modern Dalemark has come a long way from the time of Tanaqui and The Spellcoats. It is now a bustling industrial nation, with north and south united for over 200 years. Maewen Singer, whose parents are divorced, is on her way to visit her father in Kernsburgh for the first time. As the train makes its way through the landscape of Dalemark, which has changed but still possesses the grandeur of ages past, Maewen has no idea what lies in store for her. Because the young man her father hired to guard her on her passage is not who he says he is, and she herself has more of a role in history than she could ever have guessed. Two hundred years ago, a young woman called Noreth Onesdaughter declared herself the rightful Queen of all Dalemark, and embarked upon the Royal Road. However, Noreth disappeared from the pages of history, and Maewen finds herself discovering firsthand exactly what happened. Joining her are Mitt and Moril, whose roles in the tale of Dalemark are far from finished.

AJSDHFKSJDHF I LOVED THIS BOOK. I always talk about how much I enjoy meeting characters again, and this book brought all of them back for one last journey together. That cast of characters spanned all three other books in the Dalemark Quartet, which pleased me to no end. I didn’t really realize how absurdly fond I had become of all of them until I saw them all in this final book and found myself so excited that they were all in the story in some shape or form. True sequels bring closure, and this book really tied up all the threads. It gave me a sense of the big, big, big picture that is at the heart of these books. Each individual journey told of in the first three books was a step towards what culminated in the Crown of Dalemark, so that its history unfolded before my eyes. Maewen was a pretty decent heroine, but her faults were more than made up for by HOW MUCH I LOVE MITT. And while the ending was bittersweet, it still had me completely satisfied. In fact, I wish she would write more, even though I know there isn’t really a better way to end the quartet than the way she ended it here. Did I mention my omnibus edition had a glossary/guide to Dalemark in the back? It had little tidbits about what happened to some of the characters even beyond this last chapter of the saga, which really had me thrilled. I was happy with most everyone’s endings, except possibly Hildrida, because I never could decide if she was likeable or not. (DOESN’T MATTER, MITT IS MY FAVORITE)

If you have yet to discover for yourself the insanely epic world of Dalemark, I will warn you that it is not always an easy read. It has taken me several re-reads to make sense of a few pieces here and there (Moril’s story in Cart &amp; Cwidder was really very abstract at times, but with good reason), but each one is a worthwhile read. Diana Wynne Jones can certainly do lighthearted fantasy full of dashingly handsome wizards and comical fire demons, but she can also create truly amazing high fantasy that gives even The Prydain Chronicles a run for its money. The world she creates is complete, down to the last detail, and it’s really worth admiring how all her characters (even the ones that aren’t supposed to be all that important) never fail to reach your heart in some way. The series couldn’t get a higher recommendation from me.