Rating: 5/5

I read this book when it was first published, and I loved it. I remember reading it more than once, probably before I read books 2 and 3 upon their release. I remember taking over the Science Fiction &amp; Fantasy thread at Readerville for about an hour to debate the merits of this series. 

Imagine, if you will, my disappointment when I picked up this book 20 years later for another read and discoveredthat it wasn'twhat I remembered. Now, I can say that I don't like Jan Siegel's writing style. At all. At times, the book is both over written and underwritten, if that makes sense. The first half of the book reads like a British child's adventure story--although there are enough references to the end of childhood that it becomes clear that this book is set in a liminal moment when Fern is both child and adult. The second half reads less like a child's adventure and more like a fantasy novel. That said, it is very frustrating because the reader knows more than the characters.

The thing I found most frustrating was probably what I loved 20 years ago: Siegel's use of language. She clearly wanted this book to feel poetic, but it mostly felt frustrating. With a proper amount of detail, I felt like this book could have either been twice as long or half its current length. To explain: there are lots of moments when the story is told essentially through dialogue, not action. In those moments, the setting fades away. With better attention to exposition, I feel like this book would have been twice as long. The other route would be to shorten the dialogue and strip the story back to its main plot points. That would have cut the novel in half.

This book was published in 1999, before the Indonesian tsunami of 2004 or Hurricane Katrina in 2005. (This is a book about Atlantis. I don't think it's a major spoiler to say that there's a major water disaster in the plot.) Whatever research Siegel did, she would not have had the "benefit" (if you want to call it that) of video footage of a disaster of their magnitude. While she does imagine what this would have looked like, I don't think her ideas got close to reality.

I'm not going to change my star-rating of this book, in honor of that young woman that found it so compelling 25 years ago. That said, I always disliked book 2, so I'm not going to reread that.