Rating: 4/5

Never using another motel shower!

I always loved Hitchcock’s 1960 masterpiece and enjoyed the Bates Motel series – it was time to read the classic that inspired them both. It didn’t disappoint.

I was completely hooked despite knowing the outcome. Bloch expertly created an ominous atmosphere and strong sense of foreboding that got under my skin. The writing was tight – no words wasted here. Everything served the story and helped build the menacing vibes and suspense that lingered throughout.

  “I think perhaps all of us go a little crazy at times.”

In some ways, the novel felt more intense than the film. Bloch transplants the reader deep into the mind of Norman Bates – a disturbing place to be. He’s such an intriguing character – particularly multi-layered for villains of the time. Despite a different physical appearance in the book, I kept alternating between picturing him as Anthony Perkins and Freddie Highmore.

Mary Crane was another well-written character. In a single chapter, Bloch made us feel sympathy for her and placed us effortlessly in her corner. It was hard not to root for her after learning her backstory. This provided great context for why she would steal $40,000 from her employer and seek to forge a new life with her lover, Sam Loomis. 

  “Now she had missed her turn and it was raining; the night had come down and she was lost, on a strange road.”

Mary’s sister, Lila, was quite likeable too and I enjoyed her interactions with Sam while they pursued answers for Mary’s disappearance.

Somehow the infamous shower scene managed to shock and surprise me all over again – both with its placement and brutality. Superbly written, it delivered the chills, while simultaneously making me feel the rug was pulled from under me.

  “Maybe Mother should be put away. It was getting so he couldn’t handle her alone any more. Getting so he couldn’t handle himself, either.”

The closing chapters were excellent – perhaps better than the film. The final chapter was especially jaw-dropping – a fitting end to the roller coaster journey. I can understand Hitchcock wanting to purchase all copies of this book prior to his film’s release, hoping to prevent the audience from knowing plot points. It’s the perfect story to enter blind. 

Psycho is well-deserving of its iconic reputation. An engaging, fast-paced read that held me in suspense, while delivering memorable scene after scene. Recommend. 

  “Why, she wouldn’t even harm a fly…”