First of all, this book is very... CBT. So that should be noted for those who prefer to work with different or certain approaches to psychological issues.
I have some technical issues with the book, such as describing anxiety and depression as "feelings," rather than actual disorders (statements such as "when you feel anxiety," "when you are feeling depressed some days,"). As someone who suffers from both I find that a bit frustrating, as anxiety/depression/OCD/BPD are not ways to describe feelings, but genuine mental disorders that people feel they are in bondage to and struggle with throughout their lives. So it seemed like very typical language, which was a bit offensive especially considering it comes from a mental health expert. That's just semantics though.
If you are suffering from some serious mental problems, I don't believe that just reading that "you shouldn't punish yourself"will help. I see this book as a great tool to use in conjunction with your own personal therapy or counseling. For me personally, my thinking patterns are a bit more deep set that they won't change just from reading one book and not by working through narrative therapy, EMDR, or other counseling. 
One of the most practical parts of the book, however, was a section where there is a way to order tasks/things in your life as urgent+important, urgent+not important, not urgent+important, not urgent+not important. I found this as a great way to manage time and I've incorporated it into my bullet journaling (another thing that's helped a lot). [sidenote: if you're someone who takes on a lot of projects, is always writing lists down, keep a messy agenda, bullet journaling is a great thing that has helped me a lot]. So the book offers a lot of different techniques, and I think you can pick and choose what will work best for you.
As a whole, it is a useful book to read. It hasn't changed my life, and it hasn't completely altered my way of approaching the world. However, there are great techniques in there that can benefit a great majority of people.