Rating: 4/5

I figured that I absolutely had to read this book during the first year of my PhD.

The project I’m working on is in the field of cancer immunology, a field that Steven Rosenberg played an enormous role in establishing, and therefore forms the main focus of this book. Although cancer immunology is a big area of research at the moment, in the 1970s and 80s, it was a branch of science that few dared to venture into to - skeptics were abounding and acolytes were few and far between. Indeed, Rosenberg recounts the uphill struggles he faced in settling up a lab dedicated to studying how the immune system might fight cancer.

In essence, his work proved that one could take immune cells from a person with cancer and reinfuse them into the patient (having expanded them by several orders of magnitude) to produce an strong immune response against the cancer. He then went on to take this further with specifically isolating immune cells found in the tumours of his patients, expanding them and then reinfusing them to produce even stronger anti-cancer activity.

In this book, Rosenberg takes us through the experiments which underpinned these discoveries, sparing no detail along the way. The strong translatability of his work from the lab bench to the clinic seems apparent post-hoc, but it is particularly impressive to build up from the crumbs of how immune cells function to a tangible therapy for patients.It’s interesting to see how when Rosenberg was working with the fundamental science behind the movement of immune cells, he was already envisioning how he could use that knowledge to treat patients. He impresses upon the reader the tao of the clinician scientist and his insatiable urge to translate one’s laboratory findings to the clinic as rapidly as possible. 

Beyond his inherent motivations for pursuing cell transfers, Rosenberg’s strategic thinking is laid out clearly to the reader, in particular, his 5 “ifs” which guided his work to prove that the immune system could fight cancer form an excellent framework to grasp the nature of the research his lab was doing at the time. Moreover, his linking of all of these “ifs” across chapters was very impressive - Rosenberg weaves a complex but easily understood web of links between what would initially appear to be very disparate experiments, showing us the logic behind his hypotheses and how specific experiments could validate aspects of each of them.