Rating: 5/5

﻿Having just returned from New England and my first time seeing the Atlantic, it seems a fitting time to review this maritime tale—﻿one of my all-time favorite classics and one I’ve read multiple times since my early teens. I’m not sure if this book engendered my interest in sailing ships or if my interest in sailing ships engendered my love for this book, but either way, it’s a fascinating, gripping, approachable look at life at sea. It’s one of those books that can be enjoyed just as much by an adult as by the younger audience for which it was written.

Nathaniel Bowditch is an amazing historical figure, and Latham brings him to life with finesse. There’s no glossing over the sad and hard parts of Nat’s life, of which there are many. As a younger reader, I don’t think I absorbed the full gravity of the many tragedies he endured. Rereading this as an adult, I’m more aware of the resilience he showed and the soberness of a time in which death was even more a fact of life than it is now.

But despite all of that hardship, there’s a great deal of courage, determination, and humor in this book. I love the supporting cast, especially the crewmen whom Nat sees as potential navigators when no one else believes they have any talent. There are so many great lines of dialogue, and it’s such fun to see Nat being a genius and learning how to handle it: “It’s like a chair—you trip over it in the dark, and it’s not the chair’s fault, but you kick it anyway. Your brain is so fast, and you trip over other people’s dumbness, and you want to kick something. Only people aren’t chairs.”

Facts about navigation, seamanship, and mathematics are woven seamlessly into the story alongside all the history and biographical information. And how many of us have wished we could casually pick up a new language with little more than a Bible and a grammar, become experts in maritime astronomy with little more than a notebook and an encyclopedia, then go on to astound arrogant British captains, chart courses through bewildering fog, find errors in books by royal astronomers, and revolutionize navigation for generations to come? This is the quintessential American story of can-do grit and a man’s gift making a way for him.

So, for whatever reason, Nat Bowditch, Captain Prince, Polly, and Lem Harvey will always have a fond place in my memory, and this book will always remind me that history can make some of the best tales. Highly recommended.

Join my email subscribers here for monthly book recommendations, plus a free short story, author updates, and more.