Rating: 4/5

In this book there is a girl named Jasmine. Jasmine lives with her mom and dad and has two friends, Krista and Becky. She does tai chi and they do karate. One day, on tai chi Thursday, the roads were slippery and wet. Jasmine’s mom had a car crash. She was still alive but didn’t get to the hospital in time and died. All this happened while Jasmine was in Tai chi. Her death affected her a lot-especially the dreams. That night the dreams began. She dreamed of Bright Jade, someone who has possession of the white jade tiger. It is considered just a story but it just might be true. The amulet is very valuable but dangerous. It could be used to protect Bright Jade, but only Bright Jade. If it is in someone else’s possession, it will bring an awful curse to their families. Since Jasmine’s mom has died, there is not enough money. Her father got a job in China and left Jasmine to stay here while he went to China for a few months. Jasmine is staying at her aunt Val’s in Victoria. She will not be switching schools. Jasmine is very angry. In her words, her father had ditched her. She hated him. However, she came to grow to love Victoria. One day, their school had a field trip to Chinatown. This is where she first met Keung. Through the magic doorway in the never ending shop. This doorway led to Chinatown in the 1880s. There were a bunch of coolies. The store clerk gave her a dragon, a lai see envelope, and a coin. The weird thing was she didn’t know the coolie’s Chinese dialect but could still speak and understand it through the doorway. She met Keung, a boy coolie wanting to find his father and earn some money. His goal was to go to Yale and do all that. However, all of a sudden, she was out of the doorway and back in her own world. She tried again to get in the doorway a while later but it didn’t work. The third time it did however. Probably something to do with her clothes then. Soon, she decided to accompany Keung on his journey. However, it was nothing easy. Working for the Canadian Pacific Railroad was hard work. Plus, they had to restore the white Jade tiger amulet to bright Jade since it has left her possession and is now bringing an awful curse to Keung’s family. A lot of people have died. And they had to find Keung’s dad who they think has the white Jade tiger amulet. But is he still alive? To add on, there is a wealthy evil merchant going crazy for the tiger amulet and chasing them through the places. Can they escape that merchant, find Keung’s long lost father, and restore the white Jade tiger?