Rating: 5/5

Western Front battle books can be hard to read. They often quickly dissolve into an indistinguishable shell-pocked moonscape (mudscape?), littered with bits and pieces of thousands of soldiers. Horne's history of the great 1916 battle has plenty of those elements, but he elevates the story by focusing on various individuals (French and German), from warlords to common soldiers. He also does an admirable job explaining the questionable Why of the battle (both French and German). On the German side, the intent was not so much to gain a smashing victory as it was to bleed the French army. To some extent that was accomplished on a physical level, but both sides bled. The French army, though it was considered the winner, was damaged to the point of being broken. The final break would occur with, after Verdun, a new French offensive that would (again) needlessly sacrifice French lives in pursuit of victory and glory (the title of the book is meant to be ironic). 

The German army was also staggered, but in a different way. As bad as Verdun was for the German army, it was never quite the national crucible that it was for France. (A majority of the French army would cycle through Verdun's hell hole.) But Germany's losses were irreplaceable, making her ripe for the coming American intervention and the allied offenses of 1918. The long-term consequences for the French would extend (Horne argues) up to that devastating year of 1940. On surface that may seem a bridge too far, but Horne establishes a national context through France's enormous suffering at Verdun - and beyond. Military lessons were not learned, but repeated, while the suffering always remembered. The book's rather long (but eloquent) coda, especially as it pertains to Petain, is a tragic one. A national scar that may have faded, but will never totally go away. Highly recommended. (Though I was often annoyed by Horne's frequent use of French without supplying a translation.) A must read for Lost Generation junkies. The haunting quote from F.Scott Fitzgerald's from Tender is the Night that fronted Price of Glory blew me away, and left me feeling that I need to revisit that FSF effort.