Rating: 4/5

Far more interesting than the first installment of the series. So far, Ringworld and Ringworld Engineers are the only books I've read set in Niven's "Known Space" universe. The first book may have taken certain things for granted that weren't sketched out fully enough for me to appreciate the nuances of characters, places, events, whereas I felt this book did a better job of introducing ideas from the background shared by the Known Space books. 

There's especially one ancient alien race that is introduced that I could definitely tell is more fully fleshed in some other effort specifically about the discovery of that race, but which is introduced briefly here, with a lot of gaps filled in quickly, but effectively. So, including previous material in this book was done well enough for readers who aren't already intimately familiar with the Known Space Universe. There is one major figure from the first book that is re-introduced at a time and place in the novel that won't have quite the impact it ought to if you didn't at least read the first book, but otherwise, the effort here to tie in previous works is done more gracefully than in the first.

Moreover, I felt the first book merely presented an IDEA that was very compelling, but no narrative arc worth investing in. There's this THING out there, our characters go to look at it, they crash on it, and they have to find a way to get off. The meat of the story is simply describing the THING: the Ringworld itself--it's physical characteristics and a tiny bit of its how, but very little delving into the why of it all.

This book, to a degree, rectifies that. The Ringworld's origins are explored a little bit and a connection is found with the origins of humanity AND this connection plays into the narrative climax where the characters must save the Ringworld (and its 1.5 trillion inhabitants) from destruction. We learn a lot more about the cultures of the Ringworld, the social strata, and have many more cues besides mere measurements to give us a sense of the scale of the whole thing. Our characters have personal challenges they must overcome to grow as characters, and those eventual triumphs play into how the end unfolds.

There's much at stake, and we learn something profound about the nature of galactic civilizations. It's still not among the best science fiction I've read, but the Ringworld construct itself has always been a compelling notion, and this book places the artifact at the center of an interesting story, as opposed to the previous effort, where the construct was the story itself.