Rating: 2/5

First and foremost - Who is Mark McCormack?
Mark Hume McCormack (November 6, 1930 – May 16, 2003) was an American lawyer, sports agent and writer. He was the founder and chairman of International Management Group, now IMG, an international management organization serving sports figures and celebrities. 

McCormack was featured as one of the Forbes 400 Richest Americans in 1995, 1998, 2001. In 1990, he was named the "Most Powerful Man in Sports" by The Sporting News. His impact on the Sporting World was so great that even today they even have Awards named after him. 

The Mark H. McCormack Medal is awarded to the leading player in the World Amateur Golf Ranking after the U.S. Amateur Championship and the European Amateur Championship.

The Mark H. McCormack Award is awarded to the player who has spent the most weeks at number 1 in the Official World Golf Ranking during a calendar year. The first 13 of these awards after its inception went to Tiger Woods.

About the Book
When I had read this book 18 years ago, I was completely mesmerized by the wisdom distilled in its pages. However, at 37 years of age, in the year 2014, now when I read it - the magic no longer is present.

Lets get down to understanding the book. 
What They Don't Teach You at Harvard Business School came out in 1984 and was a New York Times Bestseller. Personalities like Robert Anderson (Chairman, Rockwell International), Christie Hefner (President and COO of Playboy Enterprise), Herbert J. Siegel (Chairman of Chris-Craft Industries) and even Rupert Murdoch (Chairman of News Corporation) were full of praise for this book. 
I suspect the reason this book became a best seller was primarily because of the impact, influence and the position of power Mark McCormack had on the Sporting / Celebrity Endorsed World - at that time. If you need an example of such authors from today's day and age - Barack Obama, Richard Branson and Jack Canfield come to mind. They are some of the many authors who talk anything from simple boring mundane stuff to absolute nonsense and end up having Best Sellers - because they leverage the sales based on their Brand Persona. 

So coming back to Mark McCormack Book - The title is pretty amazing. But the content is pretty ordinary, useless and at times nonsensical. 

The book is divided into 3 sections:
Section 1 - People
Section 2 - Sales &amp; Negotiations
Section 3 - Running a Business

Section 1 - People
1.	Reading People
2.	Creating Impressions
3.	Taking the Edge
4.	Getting Ahead

Section 2 - Sales &amp; Negotiations
1.	The Problems of Selling
2.	Timing
3.	Silence
4.	Marketability
5.	Stratagems
6.	Negotiations

Section 3 - Running the Business
1.	Building a Business
2.	Staying in Business
3.	Getting Things Done
4.	For Entrepreneurs Only

What Mark McCormack has done is given his day-to-day examples like having Tea, going for a walk, playing golf, having dinner or meeting the family of Superstars (of those days) like Arnold Palmer, Bjorn Borg, CEO's of Companies, Vice Presidents etc and then throwing in a nugget of wisdom he learnt from that episode. Personally, I felt he was using the book to not only give us his gems of wisdom but also to advertise whom he knew and how close he was to the top names in the industry. (More of the latter and less of the former)

In fact, some of the techniques like 'give less than your best' or 'doing something for their children to get their business' would be seen more as a Con-Artists or a Insincere Approach (How to Win Friends and Influence People - Remember?) rather than the Genuine Approach.

The examples were not very interesting. But what really got to me was the long-drawn-out, old fashioned approach of writing Mark used to communicate his ideas. I think if you remove all the unnecessary words and sentences, this book could come to around 10 pages. 

Moment of Truth. 
Techniques like admitting "I don't know," "I need help," and "I was wrong", McCormack's advice on negotiation, the need to be organized, and the power of silence in interpersonal communication are today outdated. With the dawn of Information Technology, Social Media and Free Online Education - such ideas which were thought to be 'Secrets' are no longer fresh - if not useful. 

I felt Mark McCormack's main purpose of this book was nothing but to advertise his ego, brag about his achievements, keep advertising those big names under the pretext of preaching a worthwhile gem of wisdom. 

Overall the pointers mentioned in this book are definitely not the kind of stuff they would teach you at Harvards Business School.
After all when did Harvard's Business School start teaching you outdated, boring and useless stuff?

Overall Rating
3 out of 10

Loy Machedo
loymachedo.com | whoisloymachedo.com