Rating: 4/5

LOVE UNREQUITED AND A DREAM SQUASHED

David Leavitt is a prolific writer with more than sixty books to his credit, probably best known for The Lost Language of Cranes. The Page Turner is an older novel published a quarter century ago. It is an unremarkable story in that there's no great mystery or crisis to be solved. Yet, this unrequited romance about a boy's journey into manhood, accepting his sexuality, and then falling for and losing his virginity to a much older man he idolizes, drew me into its reality. And that is the strength of this story. It is so highly relatable to real life.

Leavitt's prose is remarkably realistic. What I mean by that is his characters are fully three-dimensional, the situations they find themselves in are true to life, the dialog is totally authentic to the scene, and the outcomes are devoid of any overly dramatic "happy" resolutions. His ability to capture and describe mundane, routine events in our everyday lives really places you within the moments he's creating. You understand the choices his characters are making because at some point in your life you have made the same choice in a similar one.

As example, there is one scene where a principal character has to euthanize his fifteen-year-old dachshund. Leavitt, in excruciating detail, describes him coming home to doggie bowls with water and kibble still in them, an empty dog bed, and pet toys whose "squeakers" now lay silent. The man can't bear it and has his housekeeper remove these painful reminders of his lost love while he is away. Anyone who has lost a dog in this way (over my lifetime, I have lost three) keenly feels this pain.

My one criticism is his ending. I didn't understand it. We're left with our protagonist lying across his bed, his overbearing mother beside him, pondering what is next in his young life. Then, in a few brief paragraphs, we are taken to a scene on a Ferris Wheel where his college roommate and boyfriend, both minor characters in the story, profess that they are in love with each other. That's how the book ends. What's the point of this seemingly scene coming out of nowhere? Is Leavitt suggesting that our protagonist too, will eventually find a long-term romance? Seemed like Leavitt was wanting to somehow give his narrative a soft landing.