Rating: 4/5

The short story of "Gone to Sea" from within the White Horse of Zennor book was read with my year five class, whereby activities were undertaken using the story.

The book focuses on William who has a deformed left foot. Because of his disability, he is unable to walk properly and unable to join in with his four brothers when they run through the fields and when they climb down the rocks to swim in the sea. Therefore, William is rejected by his brothers.

William's father also does not have much time for him as he feels he is to blame for William's disability. William's mother is the only character who shows loves and attention towards him and they would often spend time in the fields together, with the mother telling William about the creatures that live in the sea such as mermaids and witches.

William is the victim of bullying at school and the children have a nickname for him, "Limping Billy." The children taunt him and pretend to have a deformed foot themselves as they mimic how William walks. The teachers also victimise William as they feel he is ineducable, because of his foot.

Due to the bullying he receives, William walks home alone through the fields. As time progresses, he begins to run faster and faster and this catches the attention of "Sam the Soak." Sam is a fisherman (who rarely catches any fish) and a resident nearby. Nobody knows his background, except that he has a troubled life and that he is an alcoholic. Sam encourages William to take up swimming in the sea, like William's brothers do. William however is unsure because of his foot.

Nonetheless, William proceeds to climb down the rocks to the pool next to the sea. Once he is in the pool, he looks down at his foot and it is no longer deformed. He begins to notice a seal and he follows the seal. William's confidence in swimming increases and he has made a new found friend with the seal. William goes home and informs his family. Not only do they laugh at William because they believe he has a wild imagination and made it all up, he is punished by his father and sent to his room. Above all, his mother does not believe him which hurts him the most. William however, returns to the pool daily and makes friends with more seals and his confidence increases and he begins to swim further out to sea.

William decides that he will go to live in the sea with the seals and leaves a note for his parents. The village carry out a search for him and he is nowhere to be seen. His father finds William's clothes by the rocks and secretly buries them. The village then holds a memorial service.

Time has now passed and Sam is fishing and he notices his nets are full. Suddenly William appears from the sea, claiming that one of the seals helped Sam to fill his nets. Sam is shocked and asks several times if it is really William. Sam is also convinced as he has abstained from alcohol since William's "death" so therefore, he cannot be hallucinating. William states he is now happy living in the sea and requests that Sam informs William's mother he is now happy of which Sam does.

This book is an excellent resource to discuss the effects and consequences of bullying. Morpurgo challenges the children almost on every page with the vocabulary. He is also extremely effective with describing the setting of the Cornish coast line. Morpurgo is very creative in the twists of his stories. 

It is very unclear whether William is dead or alive, and he leaves this up to the reader to make their own minds up. The author also leaves the reader wondering why William's father did not mention he found William's clothes. Morpurgo is also good at capturing the emotions of characters, especially the way William was bullied. The children also became sad to hear that the one person William could rely on was his mother, but ultimately, she did not believe his story of swimming with the seals. Some children noticed this was ironic, considering his mother used to tell him stories of the mermaids and the witches that live in the sea.