Rating: 5/5

A PHYSICIST CRITIQUES CREATIONISM

Willard Young "holds B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in physics... [and] works as a physicist in high technology research and development."

He wrote in the Preface to this 1985 book, "As a scientist I am disturbed by the gross misrepresentation of both scientific theory and the method of science which Creationists dispense to the public in the guise of 'true science.' Science is a search for knowledge and understanding... and it will remain productive and intellectually exciting only as long as it is conducted in the spirit of free inquiry unbound to any preconceived system of belief. The 'Science' of the Creationists, however, is little more than a mechanism to rationalize religious dogma, and is anything but scientific. By being represented as true science, it will only heighten the already considerable public misunderstanding of science in general. As a parent and citizen concerned about the quality of education I am also disturbed by the possibility that young people may be confused or misled by the teaching of Scientific Creationism in schools, as if it is really a 'scientifically valid' alternative to modern (evolutionary) science.... It is these concerns, coupled with a fascination for both the discoveries of science and the fallacies of Creationist pseudoscience, that persuaded me to write this book."

He argues, "It is not necessary, nor possible, for a human or human-like eye to 'evolve' from a non image-forming light-sensitive organ in one great leap, as the Creationists claim would have had to occur to avoid non-functional intermediates. Certainly, no animals were ever burdened with half-finished eyes, with complex retinas but no lenses, or fine lenses with no retinas, or focus control mechanisms, or whatever. Although it may SEEM intuitively obvious that the entire 'finished' human eye must have been constructed (designed?) before any of it could serve the function of 'vision,' there is no basis for this belief. Apparent design is a natural consequence of ANY adaptive process, such as natural selection and there are an infinite number of ways adaptation can be achieved. Therefore there are no logical grounds on which to claim that a complex eye... cannot arise by progressive steps from a simple light-sensitive patch of skin, without the need to ever cross a gulf of non-functionality." (Pg. 157)

He concludes, "The misconceptions and fallacies of Creationism are largely obscure to the layman who does not have a substantial background in science. To such people, Creationist arguments may appear to be reasonable, and worthy of serious consideration. Most legislators are laymen as far as science is concerned, and they are often obliged to make important decisions on matters of scientific import with less than adequate understanding of the issues. For these reasons there is a significant chance that the Creationists will achieve more of their goals in the future, unless 'laymen,' as well as scientists, recognize that, as SCIENCE, Creationism is a fraud." (Pg. 272)

Not the most "detailed" critique of creationism available (cf. 'Science on Trial: The Case for Evolution'), this book will interest those looking for critiques of Creationism.