Rating: 4/5

Simon Wiesenthal is in a Nazi Concentration Camp in Poland and performing physical labor at a local hospital when a nurse comes up to him and says, "Are you a Jew? Come with me." She leads him to a room, in which a catastrophically injured young man lays. The injured man asks Simon to sit and listen to his story. 

The young man is a Nazi. He was raised very Catholic and hoped to become a priest before diverting from his plan and becoming a member of the Hitler Youth. He then joined the SS "as soon as he could" and became a soldier of the Third Reich. He'd been happy (I presume) with his existence until his company moved into a tiny Russian town, rounded up all the Jews left (almost entirely the old, the infirm, women, and children) and locked them into several houses along a street. His company then proceeded to set fire to the houses, throw grenades through the windows, and shoot anyone who tried to escape by throwing themselves out the window. This experience affected the young Nazi so badly that he froze during the next skirmish and was shot through the stomach and horrifically burned. The young man, Karl, now on his deathbed, wanted forgiveness from a Jew for what he had done.

Simon Wiesenthal listened to the whole story, although he tried to leave several times. He listened to the entire story, and when Karl asked for his forgiveness at the end, Simon got up and walked out. So begins the philosophical question around which this story revolves. Would you have forgiven the young Nazi? After the prose section of the novel, letters from religious leaders and other interested parties are printed and examined.

What would you do? Each letter offers a slightly different analysis, even if the writer comes to the same conclusion as others. Each one has something interesting to say about what he or she thought Simon should have done. It an insight into several of the world's major religions, and into the minds of people who have survived genocides. The likes of the Dalai Lama and Desmond Tutu write in to advocate their views of forgiveness, and others advocate against. The letters sometimes get redundant or overly utopian, but this book is extremely provocative. 

I probably would have forgiven him, and regretted it. I was raised Catholic, and so the idea of unconditional forgiveness is ingrained into me. I think that in the situation Simon was in -- being in close-quarters with a dying man -- I would have said what I thought I should say. However, I do not believe that Karl deserved forgiveness. There were several points in the story (albeit this is written and remembered solely by Wiesenthal) where Karl's story of remorse did not add up. Primarily, he only apologized for that one horrific act. Also, he actively participated in the act. One of the letters was written by Sidney Shachnow, who is both a Holocaust survivor and a Vietnam Vet. He's seen some awful things in his life, and he pointed out that there are always soldiers who are so sickened by what they're being ordered to do that they become incapacitated by it and vomit. Even if he couldn't have saved the Jews, he could have not taken an active role in the action. Further, even while talking with Simon and begging for forgiveness, Karl never wanted Simon's name. He started to ask for it and then said, "Nevermind, you are a Jew and that's enough." There was some debate in my class about whether this negated his protestations of remorse. Some said that people raised to be racist can still say racist things while being remorseful. I disagree wholeheartedly with that. 

My main issue with the story is not whether Simon should have forgiven or not, but whether Karl should have asked. While I have never been in a situation where this belief has been tested, I really believe that there should be some self-guilt that keeps you from asking for forgiveness until you've properly atoned for your wrong. Forgiveness isn't something you should ask for lightly, or demand out of a person on your deathbed. That's not fair to the other person -- who has no evidence of your sincerity or your willingness to change at that point. Who's to say if Karl wouldn't have gone right back to being a Nazi if he had been miraculously cured? One good point brought up by several writers is that he asked for a Jew for forgiveness, he didn't ask for a Nazi to convert. He could have called to his fellow Nazis in the area and explained his remorse and conviction that they were doing the wrong thing, yet he didn't. 

The letter that struck me the most was written by Albert Speer, one of the architects of the Third Reich and a high-ranking Nazi. He was presented at the Nuremberg Trials and sentenced to twenty years for his activities during WWII. He's also the only one from the Nuremberg Trials to express remorse at what he'd done. He wrote that he's continued to regret his actions, but maintained that he didn't want any forgiveness because he didn't deserve it. There may be a time when Speer has atoned enough that he will ask for forgiveness, but that time is not now. I respected that attitude because there are things for which you need to forgive yourself before you ask others to forgive, and there may be things for which you can never forgive yourself.

A final note I'll leave you with regarding this novel is that many of the genocide survivors balked at forgiving their torturers, because forgiving paves the road to forgetting. My professor posited that America is still dealing with the repercussions of the unconditional forgiveness Abraham Lincoln gave to the Confederacy. It was a century before African-Americans were given the rights the Civil War was ostensibly (I'm grossly simplifying U.S. History here.) about. It's entirely possible that this fear is true.