Rating: 5/5

Charles Wood
INFO 683 w/ Professor Morris
Resource Review #4
May 31, 2009
Reynolds Naylor, Phyllis. All but Alice, New York: Aladdin Paperbacks, 1949. 88 pages. Paperback. ISBN: 0-448-09526-2. Recommended for ages 10-14.

This installment of Phyllis Reynolds Naylor’s realistic fiction series “Alice”, finds Alice Kathleen McKinley in the seventh grade. There is no need to start with the first book in the series; young readers will instantly relate to Alice as she goes through the daily life routines of children her age, with grace and a sense of humor. 

The setting for this story is divided between home and school. At home, Alice lives with her father and older brother Lester. Alice’s mother died when she was four or five, and she doesn’t remember her much, but misses her. She does have many other women in her life, that she embraces as part of the “sisterhood” that she feels a part of, especially now that she is a ”half-grown woman” (Naylor, p.33). There is her Aunt Alice who she calls on for advice, her teacher Miss Summers, her brother’s girlfriends, and her friends her own age. She wants to support them all as her “sisterhood” ideal implores her, but gets confused about whom to support when conflict arises between them. 

The plot quickly moves through many issues and rites of passage that interest middle school girls. A major crisis develops early on when all her friends are getting pierced ears, and she wants them too. Alice joins a new earring club, which excludes her friend Elizabeth because she doesn’t have pierced ears. She becomes part of the “beautiful people” crowd, only to realize how shallow it is, when she cannot always go along with their pranks. Young girls will identify with the feeling of wanting to fit in and be like others her age, while at the same time enjoying the silliness and humor that Alice finds in these situations. 

The plot also delves into sex and romance, which are subjects that come up when tweeners start to go through puberty. Alice has a sex education class called “Our Changing Bodies”, and it brings up some awkward, but funny moments. She observes her brother’s relationships and wonders about her father’s involvement with her teacher. She talks about sex, love and relationships openly with her family and friends. This sometimes embarrasses others, but she asks because she wants to know, not because she is a problem child. 

This is the aspect of the book that provokes challenges to its placement in public and school libraries. Some parents believe that it brings up these topics too early to children. Kids this age are going through the same things that Alice is, and can find support in her questions. Sex is everywhere, like Alice says, “in the words of songs, the unit on Our Changing Bodies, Ann Landers…” (p.72). If some parents want to protect their children they can, but they should not censor materials for everybody else’s children. Many parents are excited that there are books like this, that help their children understand what is going on with their bodies and emotions, and educate them about their lives and the world in which they live. Books such as this promote maturity and understanding in place of awkwardness and ignorance. 

Phyllis Reynolds Naylor understands young people, and young girls in particular. Children will laugh along with the story while learning important life lessons. Parents can remember what it is like to be that age by reading this book. The book ends with many different possibilities for Alice, which is how it should be for all children.