Rating: 3/5

3 stars. REVIEW FOR *LAST APRIL FAIR*

3 Stars. I skimmed most of the book and overall it didn't quite hit the mark for me.

this is the one where the beautiful h is tired of her pompous boyfriend and needs a change. she packs in her nursing job to be a private nurse to a sick girl whose parents are taking the girl on a cruise. the parents dump the nurse and girl off the ship when the girl gets too ill. the girl dies and the nurse is left stranded abroad. luckily the H sweeps in to help her in her moment of crisis, befriends her, and even accompanies her home to England.

GOOD points:

1. I liked how the H swept in to save the h when she was abandoned abroad after her patient died. he was a friend to her from the start and it was sweet to see him watch out for her.

STUFF I DIDNT LIKE:

1. it never made sense why the H kept flinging the other woman Marena in the h's face when he was hoping h would fall for him. Betty sometimes has her Hs use other women to make the h jealous but in this setup it made no sense because it seems in the end the h was arrogantly confident the h loved him so there was no need to let the OW cling to him like a limpet, was there?

2. her family going on holiday to the H's house. I like it when Betty puts the h into the H's world and she gets to meet his family. but here, taking her parents on holiday with her made her seem like some naive little girl who needed her chaperones. I just didn't enjoy that set up I prefer it when it's the h testing herself in a new world and being independent.

3. the ending where he was waiting in his car for her to come to her senses was just too smug. the ending made the h out to be some stupid creature who had been silly to 'not realise the H loved her'. how was she supposed to know that when he played so many games? it didn't work for me in this book. plus he didn't even properly confess his love and explain when he fell for her. meh 

overall, this book made the heroine seem wishy washy and helpless and silly and I didn't enjoy it.

-------------‐------------------
REVIEW FOR *THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE*

I had read this book before and have put my review for it below:

3.5 stars. this was good but not the greatest. 

this is the one where big and beautiful h Claribel meets the H Marc when she injured her foot in London while catching a bus. he is very high handed and bossy and drives her home and tends to her foot, telling her he is a doc. she thinks she will never see him again, gladly she tells herself, but happens to see him again soon afterwards at the hospital where she works as a physiotherapist. he is a RDD and visiting consultant.

he keeps turning up to see her and it's clear he likes her even though she resists liking him due to his high handed bossiness and his occasionally cold ways. he even told her at their first meeting that he thought she was the most beautiful girl he's seen. but she's a naive old fashioned girl so she doesn't realise he is coming to see her an awful lot and coming out of his way for her. (She doesnt realise his interest in her even when he comes all the way from Holland for a weekend just to see her and spend time with her even after having no sleep.) this guy really goes out of his way to spend time with her and unashamedly so, making all manner of excuses when he randomly turns up at her apartment.

SPOILERS
The main conflict of the story is that a young woman the H rescued from a road traffic accident starts stalking him; turning up at his house and home and following him everywhere, walking along with him, refusing to be put off. so he asks claribel to be his fake fiancee to help scare the girl off. but also so that he can take claribel to all sorts of nice dates nearly every night of the week and have an excuse to see her every evening.

he even ends up taking her to Holland using the stalker excuse because the stalker is darn persistent.

in Holland he leaves the h with his grandma and doesnt come to see her for days. she is so disappointed, thinking he really was just using her to fend off the stalker. so when he does finally come to see her, she has her dawning realisation that she loves him and he sees it on her face and is smug about it. I hate it when the men are too smug. she is horrified at falling for him because she thinks he doesn't care for her and plays it cool with him. she tells him she is going to find a new job somewhere v far away etc. he lets her go back to his grandma and doesn't come back for a few days...

ENDING SPOILERS

the climatic scene was a bit lackluster for me as it lacked the drama of a fleeing h and a frantic H chasing after her. this time, on her last day in Holland she goes to visit a tower, goaded into it because she had defiantly told him she would be busy doing stuff including seeing that tower, but really she is afraid of heights. Once she gets to the top via the lift she can't even bear to look at the view because it terrifies her. the lift breaks down and everyone else goes down the stairs but she is in a panic attack daze and doesn't notice them leave. when she realises what has happened, she is trapped up there because she can't go down the steep spiral staircase that doesn't even have a handrail.

Marc goes to his gran's house to see the h and is worried to hear she was due home hours ago. he goes looking for her and finds her in a panic at the top of the tower and singing poetry to herself to try to stay calm. he tells her he loves her and that they will be married etc and he soothes her and lovingly takes her down the stairs. the end.

CONCLUSION

this one didn't have much going on in the story and was a very average middle of the road Betty book. it was perfectly interesting and engaging and never boring at all, and I enjoyed the hero's snarkiness, but I didn't find it as satisfying as other Betty reads. I could easily have skipped it and spent my time reading something else and yet my first instinct was to give it 4 stars until I realised that it was a merely okay read.