Rating: 2/5

"On Christmas Eve, would you believe?
 And yet I think it shocking,
 not one of all the guests who came
 could hang a Christmas stocking."

 —From A Christmas Party by Carolyn Sherwin Bailey

 Thirty-eight years before Miss Hickory won Carolyn Sherwin Bailey her Newbery Medal for the Most Distinguished contribution to American Literature for Children of 1946, A Christmas Party was published in 1909, a simple poem about a forest graciously inviting all its animals to gather as friends for a Christmas celebration. The forest would not have any animals left out of the festivities, and so the greatest and smallest happily congregate beneath its boughs for an evening of laughter and dancing, games and cheerful conversation. Whatever else may be going on in the world under the star-studded sky, on this night in these woods joyfulness reigns, and the forest would want it no other way.

 "She lit the skies to charm their eyes
 with many Christmas tapers.
 She spread the ground with snowy rugs
 to help their merry capers."

 —From A Christmas Party

 Credit for the poem as presented in this book should be divided equally, I believe, between Carolyn Sherwin Bailey and illustrator Cyndy Szekeres. Though the artwork bears a copyright of 1975, its homey, old-fashioned style fits right in with the author's poem and the world as Carolyn Sherwin Bailey would have seen it in 1909, before two world wars shook the confidence of humanity in itself, in those early days at the turn of the century when we were just beginning to think people as a whole may have turned the corner and peace could now rule indefinitely. A Christmas Party captures that warm optimism, not only in the story but in Cyndy Szekeres's drawings, too, the animal guests at the forest's party free for tonight, at least, of quarrels or vanity, hurt feelings or selfish ambition. On this night on this Christmas Eve, it's enough for them to be together enjoying each other's company, a few hours of pure brotherhood preserved forever between the covers of this wonderfully hopeful book. I would at least consider giving two and a half stars to A Christmas Party, and you can bet I'll be pulling it out to read for many Christmases to come as a new and welcome holiday tradition. It is my hope many other families will do the same.