Rating: 3/5

Re The Lost Lagoon - AW is back with what I think she wanted to be a exploration of the 80's social debate of women having career's vs marriage and kids. We even get a little pop science book quote epigraph about how women's careers are affecting the negotiation of duties and compromise on career discussions when a couple discusses marriage. I am not quite sure she succeeded, but it was socially relevant for the time and made an interesting premise for HPlandia.

The h is a 27 yr old English interior designer who wants to be an international designer and is self-described as a Successful Careerist (in just that way too.) She is currently in Vancouver doing a big hotel revamp project for a very big name indeed and she is in the habit of taking a morning walk around Vancouver via Stanley Park. Where there is a little man made watering hole named Lost Lagoon after the works of Pauline Johnson who was a late 19th century writer and the daughter of a Mohawk Chief and an English immigrant. ( AW gives us the full back story on this in the book as part of the HP travelogue. )

Anyhows, the h is doing her morning walk and she likes to think about various meet a mate ads in the newspaper (no internets, so no dating site profiles, but the premise is the same only in the newspaper with a letter being sent to a po box for interested responders.) She contemplates what her own ad would say, something along the line of 'Career woman, widely traveled needs unemotional but enthusiastic lurve clubbing companion for occasional dates and mutual passion. ' 
The h isn't a virgin and not adverse to a love affair without marriage, in fact she had a live in relationship for two years that did not work out cause of career conflicts etc, and has been going through a dry spell since. 

Then she sees a jogger going by, and judging by his fabulous backside, his ad would read' Hot man seeks occasional mistress for good times with taste and possible relationship.' Then when she sees him every day after, she reckons our mysterious jogger is so over all fabulous he wouldn't need to advertise, women would line up like lemmings to be with him. He is definitely top ranked eye candy. Eventually Mr. Fab Hiney introduces himself. 

He is the son of a Quebec pianist mum and Scots heritage but Canadian businessman dad. He was born in Paris, lives in Hawaii and is a Marine Geologist. He is hanging about in Vancouver visiting his grandma. Needless to say he and the h hit it off. They start spending some time together, tho the h has reservations because she is really only in town for 6 more weeks, she is very career focused and doesn't want kids and she senses that she could totally lose her heart to the H. They finally become lovers on a wonderful weekend trip and the H proposes.

The h turns him down after a very long discussion of what a woman has to sacrifice and give up for marriage while the H doesn't have to give up anything. Things take a really negative turn when the H tells her it isn't like her career is brain surgery or anything. Plus the h decided long ago she wasn't particularly maternal. 

Her parents were aesthete intellectuals and she was an only child. When they died she went to her Aunt's house, which had two parents and 8 kids in a five bedroom house and the h hated it. She had no privacy and nothing but hand me downs. The h likes space, quietude and household organization and she likes solitude but she DOESN'T like surprises or messes, all of which come with kids and her ambitions for her career would definitely suffer, cause mothers can't travel and be gone at the drop of a hat for weeks on end. Sure hubby's say they will help, but the domestic engineering is full time career and the h already has one that she likes more. 

The H on the other hand, had a mum who was a concert grade pianist and put her career before everything else. His father tried to adjust to being the house hubby, but it really did not work out and he started drinking and then they divorced. He wants to marry the h and have her do little apartments in Hawaii while they wait for the patter of little feet. The H's grandma is very much on the H's side of things, she thinks only love should count and since the H is wealthy, the h should just chuck her job and start knitting baby booties. Needless to say, they can't reach a compromise and when the H starts in on how little her career matters, the h ends it. 

Then the guy she is doing the hotel revamp for shows up and the h winds up going off with him to Hawaii to check out the luxury hotels and how they are decorated. The h's Hotel Man wants the h to give up her own design studio and work exclusively for him all over the world doing the interior design for his various businesses and hotels. The h isn't sure she wants to do that, she likes being her own boss, but she is missing the H horribly and since he is now back in Hawaii, she agrees to go with Hotel Man.

The next 30 pages are all about how she regrets turning down the H and now she does a complete about face on her career etc and chases the H down to catch her man. The H was convinced that Hotel Man and the h were an item, and Hotel Man does offer the h marriage cause he wants kids, but the h explains about the H as she rejects Hotel Man, and then Hotel Man goes and sets the H straight.

They reunite in a big Hawaii rosy sunset and avow mutual love with the h moving her studio to New York City and the H being a Marine Geologist at Cape Cod. We leave them happily lurvin it up and deciding the future can be discussed another day cause the tides of passion are running high for the HPlandia HEA. 

This one was okay, but it was rather jarring to have the sudden 180 of the h on marriage and kids and her career. I think if AW was going for modern 80's social commentary on ladies with careers and marriage, she did not quite succeed - Daphne Clair did it better in A Ruling Passion and so does Leigh Michaels, (to a limited extent, I still don't like her much but she does good career ladies). 

AW for all her muscled up love scenes and relationship moments, really is an old fashioned HP author at heart and marriage and motherhood should be all her h's needs. Still, it is a decent story and worth the read if you run into it or like AW and the H was believable in devotion as was the HEA.