Rating: 1/5

I approched this book expecting new insights into Jesus' burial and resurection as suggested by above title. Instead, I found a long and far-fetched esoteric theory based in obscure geometry with reference points which are totally arbitrarily set by the authors. An hypothesis that is merely plausible will become a certainty in the next chapter and a whole new certainty is built on a completely erroneous and inexistant evidence. The book is a waste of time. I do not doubt the esoterism may have some lost wisdom somewhere but to hail a 'solution' to Jesus' mystery and then proceed with such lacking of basic proof leads to disappointment. It becomes worse when they try to connect the Priory of Sion, the Knight Templars, Leonardo da Vinci, Mary Magdalene etc all into the same pool with their esoteric measurements and geometry. The "truth" that they proclaim becomes so impossible to swallow that reading it further is nauseating.

Such amount of non-sense made me curious to why two people would take the trouble to waste so much time. The book is just one of the many trying to explain the 'mystery of Rennes-les-Chateua' (a priest in the end of the XIX century became suddenly very rich. The priest named "Sauniere" probably robbed graves in the courtyard of his church or, in any case, found some sort of buried treasure). With the time, especulation and fantasies started developing and a whole lot of books were written, each one built on the improbable findings of the previous, giving origin to a huge chain of unbased fantastic theories.

Dan Brown's "The Da Vinci Code" ows part of its plot to 'The Tomb of God' as well as to another book called 'Holy Blood, holy Grail', where most of the material for its story is rooted. Buried knight templars, Mary Magdalene, Sauniere, grail, secret organizations and hidden obscure esoteric clues in paintings all ring a bell as "Da Vinci code". Easy to see the links?

Unfortunately quite far away from the theological breakthrough the catchy title may suggest.

Example of how the reasoning goes :)

page 14: "but what exactly was the nature of the parchments? this is a question not easily answered, for they may not be seen. They are not to be found in any museum or library accessible to the public; indeed their current location is completely unknown. Some doubt the parchments ever existed..."

and then, page 15: "At some time [...] the Prieure de Sion [...] leaked two of the parchments [...]. Although illustrations of them have been published in books, no author has claimed to have held the original parchments".

page 16/17 "But for the moment we have chosen to ignore the question of authenticity..."

page 19 "This slab dalle of stone(the Dalle de Coume Sourde)survives only in the drawings [...] There is good reason to doubt it ever existed, but for now we ignore this..." The authors even say that it is a "conspiracy theory that may gain credibility as they investigate".

This approach is a continuous in the book, page after page. When they start drawing lines, triangles and cirles over parchments and paintings and "correcting" them to make it fit their assumptions it is really difficult to carry on reading. The authors go on like this:

"We have no knowledge of the relative scales of the diagrams in the two Parchments, so let us therefore make the simplest possible assumption: that the smaller square (and for that matter the large one too) and the equilateral triangle are to have the same centre; also, that the side of the square and the side of the triangle, which are at 45 degrees, are to be brought into coincidence. This apparently vague assumption was found to yield a clear and surprising result."(page 91)

I do not wonder that - after above level of assumptions - any piece of paper "talks".

More interesting is the speculation that Jesus could have "survived" the crucifixion (and, of course, walked all the way to Rennes-les-Chateau). That was something I had never heard as theory, meaning, that Jesus was badly wounded but with the care, balm and bandages he was up and running 3 days later...Plausible.

For the authors, in one way of another (Jesus himself with Mary Magdalene pregnant, or, at least his body - via Knight Templars) ended up in this little village in Southern France and should be found buried under Mount Cardou... No one seems to believe them enough to start an excavation of the site :))
It seems rather that any type of excavation is now curbed by local authorities since fr. Sauniere most likely found richness robbing some of the local graves and - reality seems to be more sober - inspired many others to try their luck in the same business until no stone was left unturned.

Finally, their summary of 'history of the church' and praise of gnostics against the main stream christianity seems to serve more for the purpose of their book than to present an accurate and valuable account of it.