Rating: 5/5

4. When I first laid my hands on “My Turn at Bat” by Ted Williams I thought it was going to be just like any other simple biography you pick out for anyone, but I was definitely wrong. This biography of Ted Williams, written by himself, goes beyond what I expected for what I thought would be a simple biography of a baseball player or anyone in general. The book was well written, organized from start to finish in an easy timeline. What I like about the biography itself is how detailed it went into his life. The book didn’t just include his baseball career, it gave extensive detail of his childhood, his life as an avid fisherman, his daily life, and his time in the military as a pilot. In the book Ted Williams also goes into detail of what it takes to be a great baseball player in a kind of life lesson form as if he was your own father speaking. Before reading this book I just knew Ted Williams as a Boston icon who just did everything effortlessly, but after reading “My Turn at Bat” I learned of the major struggles in life both on and off the field as well as even learning that the Boston writers of his OWN city hated him to the bone and did everything they could to ruin his career, but failed. 
5. As I read “My Turn at Bat” by Ted Williams I felt like I was being taught life lessons throughout the book not only for baseball, but for life general. I felt inspired by how he grew in fame in baseball and left as a legend even with all the immense challenges he faced throughout his life. These challenges included; the Boston writers just absolutely despising him, the draft in two wars, his social life, his continuous injuries, and much more. Although Ted Williams continuously faced these problems head on he still pushed on and strived in what he was doing. One example was in the early 1950’s when the Red Sox were so close to winning the World Series multiple times, but loss at the last minute. Although he had to face this issue himself he would still do extremely well in this period to the point that he started winning awards such as the Most Valuable Player Award. My recommendation for this book, besides baseball fanatics and players obviously, would be for anyone that loves dramatic stories with action and up and downs throughout a book. I would also suggest it for anyone that needs some inspiring in any form, because this book holds countless inspiring stories and lessons for everyone to enjoy.