Rating: 4/5

second read – 12 April 2024 – ****. The Voyage of the Space Beagle is a 1950 A. E. Van Vogt fix-up novel of a series of his 1939-1943 stories. In fact, it seems he invented the term “fix-up novel.” It is set aboard a 1000-man intergalactic space ship dedicated to scientific exploration. On board, most of the crew is organized by scientific discipline, much like a university, and with a small military attachment. And they are all male. I do not believe that to be a statement of any kind, just an assumption of the times. Unlike contemporary science fiction, sexual activity or identity is simply not a topic of the writing. The adventures involve the crew of the Beagle dealing with attacks by alien species and civilizations, and a conflict of power within the “democratically” elected leadership of the mission.

In particular, two crew members represent specific scientific themes that Van Vogt pays attention to. Grosvenor is the department head of the science of Nexialism, an intersectional study of other scientific disciplines. Korita is the department head of anthropology, and a proponent of the early 20th century cyclical model of history of Arnold Toynbee and Oswald Spengler.

Grosvenor’s scientific discipline involves extreme mental training, and produces new findings and capabilities in weapon systems, but also in psychology, hypnotism, and mind-influence of both humans and aliens. He is portrayed as socially isolated, hyper-logical, and brilliant. In many ways, he appears to be a forerunner of the Spock figure and the Vulcan civilization of Star Trek. And like in Star Trek, sometimes his choices seem more oriented towards advancing the plot towards Van Vogt’s desired speculative concepts, than in actual logic. But still, a great character.

Korita interprets both humans and aliens according to their stage in a cyclical interpretation of human history. After a stage of revolutionary development, civilizations grow into big cities with increased specializations, but eventually settle into a stage of stable stagnation and peasantry. The strength of “big city” civilizations and individuals in them is brilliant and flawless knowledge within a discipline. Their weakness is an inability to see the big picture. The strength of “peasant” civilizations and individuals in them is powerful personal motivation. Their weakness is a prioritization of personal legacy and reproduction over the ability to understand changing social trends. This is all within a greater cyclical model of the physical universe. Grosvenor and Korita use their sciences to overcome alien attacks, even as their fellow crewmembers are hindered by the current cyclical state of human psychology. Korita is not developed as a character, but serves more as a lectern for Van Vogt’s exposition.

In all, the novel is a significant SFnal work of its time, that takes some effort to appreciate in modern times. But is still quite readable.

first read – 7 December 2009 - ***. Imagine a 1000-man starship, whose five-year mission in space is discover strange new worlds, seek out new life, to boldly go where no man has gone before. On board are a collection of scientists organized by department - among them a single Nexialist, whose science is the interconnection of all sciences, and whose singularly logical thinking saves the ship and crew from strange aliens and psychic threats. No, not the Enterprise, but the Space Beagle. This is a fix-up of four episodic stories written in 1930s through 1950, when they were assembled into a novel nearly 20 years before Star Trek. The similarities end there, and this is in fact a different universe than Star Trek, but I have a feeling I know what Gene Roddenberry read when he was a kid. Reading this book was a strange experience, as the prose is clearly leaps and bounds ahead of other space opera from that era, and yet the characters are very flat, the society is rigidly hierarchical, and there are no women characters at all.