Rating: 4/5

✰ 3.75 stars ✰

  “... it was written by a boy who wrote honestly about something he knew and had strong feelings about.”

┏━•❃°•°❀°•°❃•━┓

I was in the fifth grade when my school library hosted the first ever Battle of the Books tournament between the fourth and fifth graders. Our grades were divided into two sections, so the four sections were each given one list of library books that would be featured in the competition. Unanimously, my class voted me as the leader of our six participating contestants. ✌️📚

*thank you thank you very much* 

The funny thing is - while I have a distinct memory of the actual day of the competition, I have only a vague recollection of the list of books provided to us. However, what my memory remembers with vivid clarity is the name of the two books that almost cost us the competition, simply because I was not that familiar with, and none of my other classmates was as voracious - obsessed - politely invested a reader as I was to save us from that fumble.

In case you were wondering, though - we still won. 🥇⭐

As if there was any doubt. 😤 I mean, c'mon - I'm on the team, I would never be able to live it down if we had lost!!! 😆😆

*ahem*

Yet, even with that sweet taste of victory, the name of those two offending books that I had been stumped by would forever be engraved in my memory - ones that I would do whatever it took to finally read them no matter what - Up a Road Slowly by Irene Hunt and Dear Mr. Crenshaw.

It would be a few more years before I would finally chance upon reading both of the culprits, and now I can proudly say that I am an owner of Beverly Clearly's Newbery Award winning book. 💪🏻

┗━•❃°•°❀°•°❃•━┛

As someone who grew up on Beezus and Ramona's sisterly theatrics, Clearly has always had a gift for writing with heart and humor and relatable realism, from a child's perspective, which I've always enjoyed. Leigh's letter-exchange with Mr. Henshaw made me laugh and smile, for how it reminded me of my own brief exchange with two authors, who I admired as a young adult reader (blame the internet for giving me email access)! 😅

  “I suppose I could pretend to write to Dad, but I used to write to him and he never answered.”

I liked Leigh Botts; I liked his humor, his honesty, his openness and his genuine just yearning to somehow take a literary figure he respects and admires to somehow fill the void that is life by his father, when he's still in this quasi-state of not really coming to terms that his mother and father are no longer together. 🥺 To cope with his absence, to understand that he's not always going to be there. It's that quiet innate realization that the reader picks up on, but gets to see Leigh grow as a person and a writer in humorous and wholesome ways that makes you relate to his pain and connect to him as a person.

  “I still feel terrible. If Dad loves all those things so much, why can’t he love me?”

And Mr. Henshaw is that kind of mentor who exists afar, but in his own way is teaching Leigh to learn from his sadness and channel it into constructive outlets. Writing out his thoughts and emotions and feelings is a challenge for Leigh, but it really does help him voice his frustrations and anger he feels towards his father, his concern for his beloved dog, Bandit, as well as the most illustrious, if not amusing ways of signing off his letters, venting his annoyances with Mr. Henshaw's disregard encouragement of his writing. 🥲 And I think that's why this simple middle-grade book speaks still to readers is the way Leigh sees the changes in his life and finds a way to live with it, without being hurt by it. 

  “Dad looked tired and sad in a way I had never seen him look before.”

Besides it's not only about feelings either; it's really fun to see Leigh tackle his way through being a real writer, the fuddles and bumbles, and the quirky ways in which Mr. Henshaw evades Leigh's questions, all the while still encouraging and motivating Leigh to read, look, listen, think and write and be inspired from it. And Clearly captures Leigh's growth in a believable and relatable way that left me feeling hopeful of what awaits him. ❤️‍🩹❤️‍🩹 I felt sad and a whole lot better at the same time. Not only around those who care for him, but also believing in his own written prowess to someday maybe be the one a young reader will write to as their favorite author.

P.S. I do want to point out that maybe in the 70s when it was published, this term was alright, but $500 FINE FOR MOLESTING BUTTERFLIES IN ANY WAY? really threw me off in a children's book. 😕 I tried looking up if it was the correct way to describe it, but came up empty; but if it is alright, then no harm, no foul. 🦋

P.P.S. OMG, I didn't know this had a sequel with Leigh having another dog, Strider! Ah, time to find it and read it!! 🥹

┏━•❃°•°❀°•°❃•━┓

So ever since that day in 1999, our school would host an annual Battle of the Books for the fourth and fifth graders. And whenever I passed the plaque that was displayed in the library with the winning section's grades engraved, it was always with a flicker of pride and fondness that washed over me. That even in a small amount, there was something that I played a part in - especially for something that means so much to me - reading. 📖

┗━•❃°•°❀°•°❃•━┛