Rating: 5/5

Ancient Israel: A Short History from Abraham to the Roman Destruction, edited by Hershel Shanks, consists of eight essays by noted biblical scholars. They use as reference material the findings of biblical archaeology and the Old Testament. Unfortunately there is no obvious archaeological evidence that the events in the Torah happened. The Torah consists of the first five books of the Old Testament: Genesis to Deuteronomy. This is more than a little distressing, because the Jews consider the Torah to be the most holy part of the Old Testament, which they call the Holy Scriptures. 
 
Nevertheless, most bible scholars believe that many of the events in the Torah did happen, if not precisely the way they are described in the Torah. Much of ancient Egyptian writing survives to this day. There is no mention of Joseph, who according to Genesis rose to a prominent position in the Egyptian government, or of Moses. The Egyptians did not like to write about slaves and military defeats. If a large number Hebrew slaves escaped into the Sinai Peninsula, and if an Egyptian army sent to bring them back drowned in the Red Sea of the Reed Sea, the Egyptians would probably not have written about it. They may have scrubbed the historical record of early mention of the Israelites. 
 
Linguistic evidence indicates that the oldest part of the Bible is “The Song of the Sea,” which is found in Genesis 15: 1-18. It celebrates the drowning of the Egyptian Army, and appears to have been composed by an eye witness. 
 
The oldest archaeological evidence of written Hebrew dates back to about 1000 BC. Nevertheless, the oral tradition can remember events happening centuries before they were written down. 
 
Archaeologists believe that the Trojan War did happen. Shortly after the Trojan War the Greeks forgot how to use the Linear B script they had invented. They were illiterate for about four centuries until they invented a new alphabet, which like Hebrew, had been developed from the Phoenician alphabet. During these centuries stories of the Trojan War were remembered and told by troubadours, who embellished on them, until some of them were written down by Homer and Hesiod. The oral tradition survived long enough to inspire the tragic dramas of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides. 
 
The Nibelungenlied was written in Germany about 1200. The Volsunga Saga was written independently in Iceland at about the same time. Together they inspired Wagner’s Ring Cycle. They both mention events that we know did happen six centuries earlier. A character in each is Attila the Hun.
 
The earliest mention of Israel outside of the Bible has been found in the Merneptah Stela, which dates to the early 13th century BC. By claiming inaccurately, “Israel is laid waste and his seed is not,” it reminds me of early Egyptian accounts of the Six Days War of 1967. 
 
Ancient Israel does not mention this, but the phrase “Yahweh of the Shasu” has been found in Egyptian writing the the 14th and 13th centuries BC. Yahweh was later on mistranslated as “Jehovah.” The Shasu were people similar to modern day Bedouins. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Jacob’s sons can be recognized as Shasu.
 
Beginning with the reign of King Saul the Old Testament appears to be essentially historical, and based on reference material written during or shortly after the events described. Events and Israelite kings mentioned in the Old Testament are also mentioned in writings of the Assyrians and the Babylonians. 
 
King David conquered Syria, and three nations who lived in what is now Jordan. These were from north to south, Ammon, Moab, and Edom. His son Solomon built the Temple of Jerusalem. Solomon’s son Rehoboam needless provoked a revolt of the northern Tribes. The Northern Kingdom came to be called “Israel.” The Southern Kingdom, which consisted of the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Levi, and which included Jerusalem and the Davidic Dynasty, came to be called “Judah.”
 
With David’s kingdom divided it could no longer hold onto David’s conquests. Syria, Ammon, Moab, and Edom became independent. They were frequently at war with Israel, Judah, or both. Sometimes Israel and Judah fought each other. While this was happening, the nation of Assyria, which lived in what is now northern Iraq, was becoming more powerful. Eventually it destroyed Israel and conquered Judah.
 
Another nation conquered by Assyria was the Chaldeans, whose capital was Babylon, in what is now southern Iraq. The Chaldeans, AKA the Babylonians, successfully revolted from Assyria, and destroyed the Assyrian capital at Nineveh. The Old Testament book of Nahum celebrates the destruction of Nineveh. Those celebrations were short lived. The Babylonians conquered Judah, destroyed Solomon’s Temple, and began the Babylonian Captivity. 
 
That Captivity was ended when Persia conquered the Babylonian empire. Cyrus the Great, emperor of Persia, encouraged the Jews in Babylon to return to their homeland and rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem. By doing so he earned a lot of good ink in the Old Testament. With the return of the Jews to Jerusalem the Old Testament ends.
 
 The Apocrypha was written during the time between the end of the Old Testament and the beginning of the New Testament. The Apocrypha describes the successful revolt of the Jews from a hybrid empire of Macedonians, Greeks, and Syrians. Once the Jews were independent they began re conquering the territory earlier conquered by David. The Jews gave the Gentiles in the land they conquered the choice between converting to Judaism, leaving, or being killed. That was the only time Jews have used force to achieve conversions.
 
The growing empire of the Jews was conquered by the larger and much more powerful Roman Empire. The Romans demonstrated their power by crushing two Jewish rebellions. That ended Jewish occupation of their homeland until the twentieth century.