Rating: 5/5

GORGON - Paleontology, Obsession, and the Greatest Catastrophe in Earth's History
 by professor Peter D. Ward is a book about time. Deep Time. 250 million years ago.

There were 5 major mass extinctions in our planet's history: the Ordovician, Devonian, 
Permian, Triassic and Cretacious. These events were believed to have been separated 
by 1,000,000 years each. This was over a period of 5,000,000 years. So, good planet, 
bad luck ? Killer asteroids striking earth on an almost predictable schedule ? All life 
snuffed out all at once and miraculously just starting all over again? 

This book appears to chronicle a quest to find the fossil remains of the end-Permian 
protomammal, The Gorgon. A rare fossil named after a mythical horror. A nightmarish 
ancestor of mammals. Possibly even man.
It is not.

So, many readers were disappointed at how little of the book was actually spent on the 
beast or its related contemporaries. Annoyed at the "travelogue" it appeared to be,
they probably skimmed a lot, missing the final chapter where Ward explained that the
Gorgon was his metaphor for the giant comets racing through space with murderous 
intent. A metaphor for the great Permian extinction 250 million years ago. Except he 
found no evidence of an asteroid strike that time, no singular calamity. He does posit
several "smaller" events called "climate change" wth a poisonous atmosphere being
the gorgon all the while.

Ward's book was a pleasant discovery in itself. He is a storyteller, capable of explaining 
paleontology as a profession and a personal obsession. He recounts his years of hard 
work in a hellish landscape. He describes coworkers and contemporaries as a novelist 
might, as rounded characters with personalities and appearance and as narrator, 
colored by his own views and experiences. Not a braggart; self deprecating. A follower, 
not a leader. An everyman. 

GORGON is a very personal tale of an obsessive journey, over many years to track 
down and slay a monster. A tale rich in the telling of the hardships and they who 
shared those years with him. Perhaps not in the same league as THE ODYSSEY or 
MOBY DICK, but in the fine tradition thereof.