Rating: 4/5

An enjoyable, funny adventure [5 stars].

The romantic part took place more behind the scenes, I would have liked to see more (also past) encounters. Still, the love between Gareth and Hester was believable and mature. [4 stars]

The characters were splendid. It was great how Hester braved finally. Gareth was a perfect gentleman. And the rest of the characters were as they should be.

I am not sure why I don't feel like rounding 4.5 stars up. Perhaps because I would have liked to read more about Hester.

------ the review after first reading ------

What will I do when I read all of Heyer's books?! Or at least all of which I can find a copy. It will be a nightmare! Where does this thought come from, you may ask? Well, when I start to read the next Heyer's book I almost always think: "She couldn't create so many original characters and plots. There will be surely the same like in other books." However, it turns out that she can!

"Spring Muslin" is funny, witty, enjoyable. There is so much Heyer. I was laughing many times.

  "But perhaps I might feel strange, and unlike myself. It wouldn't be comfortable, not to be acquainted with myself."
 ;-) I just love her sense of humor. 

  "I too have been badly deceived in myself," he said, shaking his head. "Would you believe it?—I had no notion that I was such a monster of inhumanity as I have proved myself to be"

And these scenes which I see through the eyes of imagination. 
  "Amanda raised her brilliant eyes to Lady Hester's gentle gray ones, and suddenly smiled. The effect of this upon the assembled gentlemen caused Lady Widmore's already high colour to deepen alarmingly. Mr. Theale, who had been regarding the youthful beauty with the eye of a dispassionate connoisseur, sighed soulfully; the Earl's indignant stare changed to one of reluctant admiration; and Lord Widmore was moved to adjust his neckcloth, throwing out his narrow chest a little. However, as he caught his wife's fulminating eye at that moment, he was speedily recalled to a sense of his position, and altered a somewhat fatuous smile to a frown"
 I love it! 

And of course, there is this tension between lovers. This feeling which is in the air. This feeling which finds a happy ending often at the end of a book. 
  "The sight which met her eyes held her frozen on the threshold, and the thought flashed across her mind that she knew now how it felt to die"

Amanda, Joe, Hildebrand. I don't know what I like more, her spirit and ideas, Joe making sweet eyes at her, quarrels between Amanda and Hildebrand. And there are more funny characters in the book. Heyer - you are the best!

I don't give it five stars. It is hard to explain. It isn't Devil's Cub or Cotillion or The Grand Sophy. I think, that the two main heroes weren't as engaging in my opinion how they could be.