Rating: 5/5

Dr. Stephen Jay Gould, author of the thirty-four natural science essays collected in 'Dinosaur in a Haystack' (most of them originally published in Natural History magazine) was a genius in my opinion!

Many subjects interested him: history of science, literature, biology, plants, zoology, geology, paleontology, religion. Despite the depth and density of his knowledge, he was able to explain scientific and philosophical theories, ideas, concepts, inventions, research, and history in a plainspoken manner. He connected seemingly disparate topics into a cogent historical timeline, often with a playful tone and a wide-ranging intellectual walkabout. He often reprints the poetry and literature written shortly after historical science discoveries were being publicized which incorporated those new science concepts as topics for their literary imaginations.

I enjoyed reading these essays very much. I am a retired secretary, but I was able to follow Dr. Gould's discussions and explanations perfectly. He discusses fossils, eugenics, fungus, ancient leaf DNA and flower sex, and extinct animals. There be examinations of snails and snail illustrations, banknotes and Kings, and of course, Evolution. He discusses ears and hooves, dinosaur skulls and whale legs. The movie 'Jurassic Park' is taken apart with affection.

These essays are a delight! However, gentle reader, they are meant to be savored and gradually absorbed. Each essay is dense with information. Read them slowly. Take your time. It is worth it.

There is an extensive Bibliography.

From Wikipedia:

"Stephen Jay Gould (/ɡuːld/; September 10, 1941 – May 20, 2002) was an American paleontologist, evolutionary biologist, and historian of science. He was also one of the most influential and widely read authors of popular science of his generation.

Gould spent most of his career teaching at Harvard University and working at the American Museum of Natural History in New York. In 1996, Gould was hired as the Vincent Astor Visiting Research Professor of Biology at New York University, where he divided his time teaching there and at Harvard.

Gould's most significant contribution to evolutionary biology was the theory of punctuated equilibrium, which he developed with Niles Eldredge in 1972. The theory proposes that most evolution is characterized by long periods of evolutionary stability, which is infrequently punctuated by swift periods of branching speciation. The theory was contrasted against phyletic gradualism, the popular idea that evolutionary change is marked by a pattern of smooth and continuous change in the fossil record.

Most of Gould's empirical research was based on the land snail genera Poecilozonites and Cerion. He also made important contributions to evolutionary developmental biology, receiving broad professional recognition for his book Ontogeny and Phylogeny. In evolutionary theory he opposed strict selectionism, sociobiology as applied to humans, and evolutionary psychology. He campaigned against creationism and proposed that science and religion should be considered two distinct fields (or "non-overlapping magisteria") whose authorities do not overlap.
Gould was known by the general public mainly for his 300 popular essays in Natural History magazine, and his numerous books written for both the specialist and non-specialist. In April 2000, the US Library of Congress named him a "Living Legend"."