Rating: 4/5

I've owned my copy of this book for many a year now, and until now held no compelling desire to read it. However with the advent of the recent Ken Burns series on PBS TV in America, I thought it would be opportune to visit this book and see what it had to say re country swing musician Bob Wills..

Instead of being what I expected, 'Lone Star Swing' was far less of a deep dive in the Texan music history that circled around Wills and his Playboys, but more a highly personal yarn of a man who is trying to decode the culture of a world far alien to his, even though he nominally 'speaks the language'. McLean traverses the roads and tracks, ghost towns and bustling cities of Texas with an immaculate knowledge of the facts surrounding Bob Wills and western swing. However, like an academic anthropologist who knows what symbols mean and can talk to the natives without need for a translator, he doesn't really 'get' what the world he submerges himself into until he has either found those who share his passion, or he detaches himself from the fantasy of his expectations.

There is no doubt that this is an enjoyable book, both in terms of the prose (with its attendant wry observational humour and occasional personal genuflection) and the general narrative. McLean writes with some regard for the details of his travelogue, however he doesn't get bogged down into pin point accuracy except when it comes to describing a specific point about the musical heritage he is exploring or the people he meets and connects with (who are usually his aides in exploring said musical heritage). Like so many of the best travel writers Mclean writes less of a nagging monologue of exact memories but instead offers painterly sketches and short conversations that capture the spirit of place, of time, of people.

'Lone Star Swing' also follows a narrative that has a logic that sustains itself and the reader's passage with it. From the earliest chapters where Mclean is not quite achieving what he sets out to do, to the final segment of the book where he attends the Bob Wills festival in Turkey, Texas, it's obvious that McLean has plotted his journey with unplanned precision. Those pages where he describes the build up to meeting some of The Playboys band members in person, chatting with those who knew the long dead band leader and yet still live in the geographical and social space Wills did are brilliant.

It can also be said that 'Lone Star Swing' is a paean to a part of the American experience that is, if not dead, then seriously mutated. The book itself is now over 20 years old, and even in the context of its then contemporary composition it definitely maps a bifurcation of the old south west. More and more what was once real and heavily populated in the old country towns is shown to be on the precipice of oblivion, whilst the newer, more prosperous and highly urbanised Texan cities are unwelcoming, unhappy, unreal.

There really is a lot to like about 'Lone Star Swing' and whilst it may appeal to readers of the niche subject it is nominally focused on, I'd suggest it goes further than just a 'fish out of water' traveller's tale. McLean is affectionate and critical, idealising and cynical, and overall it's his own authorial character that helps make this book a great read. Give ita go folks.