Rating: 4/5

During the golden Tang Dynasty renowned for its arts and culture in old China, lived a famous magistrate ( Di Renjie, A.D. 630 to 700). Called Judge Dee in this book, he was an unusually honest man, noted for solving crimes later worked in the Imperial Court, in the capital, Luoyang. Became chancellor, a celebrated and effective official for the Empress Wu. You can still visit his lordship's tomb, that's history. Robert van Gulik loosely based his mystery novels on him......Our story begins in northern China, in the mountains. A sudden violent storm strikes Judge Dee's entourage, torrential rains fall, strong winds, thunder and lightning light up the sky. The wagon breaks an axle on the bad road and the judge with his three wives with him. The soaked Dee and his people need shelter and help quickly, nearby by good luck is a mysterious Taoist monastery, said to be haunted, they have no choice. The Morning Cloud Monastery is the biggest in the province but recently , three unfortunate young, pretty women have died there, the Judge has been too busy to investigate. He can only stay overnight, official business requires him to get to a certain city without delay. The monks are celebrating the 203rd anniversary of the glorious founding of their religious edifice. The huge old building is full of actors performing plays, animal acts, acrobatics, sword skills shown and the lively female dancers with the monks playing the music. Even an impudent poet, Tsung Lee, reciting rude words to the Abbott, while being taken to his rooms, Dee sees something strange that cannot be real. Since he is catching a disagreeable cold, Judge Dee dismisses it as a hallucination or were they, the images of ghosts? This is a superstitious age, a hundred years before, rebels had taken over the monastery, government soldiers slaughtered all of the outcasts. It was said the ghosts of the rebels still walk the dark passages of the building only lighted by an occasional lantern. True Wisdom, the abbot seems rather nervous, why? Sung Ming the famous Taoist scholar lives here too and helps the judge with the very strange happenings there. The curious vanishing of actors and others, Dee has only his lieutenant, Tao Gan with him. The magistrate, hates walking up and down all the many stair steps ( and he's still a relatively young man). Kuan Lai, director of the theatrical troupe needs to be interviewed, a vague, supernatural atmosphere, drenches the ancient, creepy monastery. Something evil will soon occur people can feel but can't stop it. They wait....for what? Superb murder mystery set in an exotic locale, in a distant, long ago time by a master writer at the top of his abilities....