Rating: 3/5

I love travelogues, but this one took a while for me to get into. Obviously, I am not that interested in the arid sandy deserts or in the lives of the people who live there. But Thesiger draws me into his story gradually. His respect for the people who guided him around the Sands at the height of colonialism, his acceptance of cultural differences, and his ability in adapting comfortably, all endeared him to me, despite his crotchety attitude at times.

Wilfred Thesiger was given an assignment to go into the deep deserts of Oman and find out whatever he could about desert locusts. He took on the assignment reluctantly, being more of a fan of African deserts. But it gave him an opportunity to experience the Rub' al-Khali, or the Empty Quarter, an experience not many outside the local Bedu tribes have had. 

There is nothing gripping going on nor is there much cultural activity to be described in this book about a place that should technically be devoid of much interest. However, Thesiger's interactions with the locals make for captivating anecdotes, and the friendships he makes with the members of the Bedu tribes drives the narrative forward with ease. The desert is there in the background, a formidable foe that this team has to take down, and they do it.

One very interesting aspect of this book is its time period. Ibn Saud, the original Saud, was finally taking control of the region. Reading about the battles and skirmishes taking place between the different tribes at this time gives a real strong feel of the formation of Saudi Arabia, which is still being governed on tribal lines. The British interference in these disputes also make for interesting reading and give a real understanding of the history of the region.

Despite my complete lack of interest in deserts, this book kept me interested till the end. There are far too many good things about it for me to pass up on recommending it. You can combine it with watching Wild Arabia, a BBC documentary, to see how much things have changed (or remained the same). It worked perfectly for me!