Rating: 5/5

If surrealism had not existed, Bosnia would have invented it.

This book has been sitting on my shelf for a long time. No doubt, it was one of those books that I bought over 15 years ago when I was about to get on a plane and head to work at an international court that was set up to make belated and paltry judicial amends for the war that destroyed Yugoslavia and thousands of its people. I guess I let it sit on my shelf because so much of my day is already taken up with mucking through the endless tall weeds of that war - no need to read about it on my down time. I am glad I finally picked it up. It's a fantastic journalist’s account (I want to specify that because now there are so many fantastic first-hand accounts by those who lived through the war that should be read). 

This is a tough book to get through. The accounts Maass gives of the horrors of the war are startling - as they should be. I have had many moments in my professional life of going through testimony of victims and being utterly dumfounded at the level of violence for violence sake that was perpetrated. Maass truly captures that level of brutality in the accounts that he details in the book. Too often, with the level of news dump that we receive on a daily basis, there is a willingness or need, perhaps, to turn away and not see past numbers to names and stories. Maass really tries to get at that heart - every number of dead is a person with a history and a life that had been full of those details that make up our own daily existence. He tries to personalise the war while recognising that his job as a journalist has also led to a level of sensationalism of the atrocities that were being committed. 

Beyond the brutality, Maass also strives to breakdown the absurdities of the war, often comparing real-life characters he meets with the fictional characters of Catch-22. I really liked this aspect of the book because he is not wrong - the absurdities I have heard from friends and loved ones here in Bosnia are astounding. I can't say this war is unique, but there is definitely something Heller-esque about this war that pitted neighbours, friends, and loved ones against one another. Not to mention the "leaders" who waged this war - Milošević just wanted personal power, nothing else, and he fanned the flames of nationalism and killed thousands to get it. He no more believed in a greater Serbia than I believe in the tooth fairy. 
 
And, of course, the huge absurdity of the international community twisting like a pretzel to not get involved while inadvertently tripping over their own feet and ending up helping oppress and kill those they were meant to protect. Maass rightfully calls out the UN:

Integrity is like virginity; you can't get it back once it is gone, and the UN lost it in Bosnia.

and the western leaders like Clinton, Major, and Mitterand who utterly utterly failed Bosnia. 

Bosnia, in many ways, has been forgotten. A war on European soil that barely registers a blip in the annals of history in many parts of the world. Maass sums up in the epilogue the danger of this ability to shutter, compartmentalise, and forget this war:

What happened in Bosnia is not a Balkan freak show but a violent process of national breakdown at the hands of political manipulators. The dynamics of fear and loathing between people of different backgrounds - ethnic or religious or economic - are not as unique or complex as we might believe. Violent breakdowns can occur in virtually any country during times of economic hardship, political transition or moral infirmity; such troubles create opportunities for the manipulators, and the manipulators create opportunities for the wild beast.