Rating: 4/5

I really liked the premise and approach he used: important plants, their products and influence on history. As a biologist, I imagine this concept could be taken further; Animals of ...; Snakes of ... (politicians included); Lakes that Changed the World. But I digress.

The author draws interesting conclusions about human history from the roles that he infers these plants played. Since most of the history he illuminates, I have long since forgotten, it was informative although perhaps not as provocative as some might think. Of course, the section on Cotton and the U.S. South will no doubt raise some hackles since the issues are still too close to the quick. Most of it was fairly straight-forward argument but this is not a forte for a certain part of the American psyche. 

I found the Potato section most interesting. His thesis about free trade theory and the famines of Ireland were insightful and thought provoking. 

Each plant section was short enough to be readable in one sitting. However, the author writes elongated sentences with structures that were frequently difficult to disentangle without re-reading (see Quotes below p. 156 for example). I found this style to be reminiscent of Victorian writing. This is why I didn't give it a 5-star.

Quotes
p. 21 "...damning with faint praise,..." ah yes indeed, the art of the feint

Sugar p. 45 "Candy is dandy, liquor is quicker." attributed to Ogden Nash (news to me but of course completely believable)

p. 51 "Though Arabs had and still have a very low opinion of actual physical work, they were excellent planners, managers and agriculturalists." Dubious in Dubai; Stop at the comma and insert Academics instead of Arabs.

Cotton p. 156 "The distinct feature of American life is not the nobility of the Founding Fathers, nor freedom from the arbitrary rule of kings, nor escape from the tyranny of Europe, both secular and religious. Nome of these desirable attributes would ever have been achieved if the key had not existed: a relatively empty continent. ... Cheap, virtually empty, fertile land had more influence upon the early settlers than all the rhetoric of all the politicians who have ever inspired, amused, or saddened an American audience, and has shaped the American character more than any other factor."

p. 161 "...the American South the first self-supporting, self-breeding slave system the world had ever known." ...well speaking of faint praise ;-)

p. 165 "There is a certain school of historians in the United States that sets out to prove that slavery was more efficient than free labor." debunked by " a fivefold increase in the value of the slave against that of the bale of cotton."