Rating: 4/5

****1/2

One of the most consistent, high-quality collections of short fiction I've ever read. Several five-star stories, and most of the others are four or four-and-a-half.

“Gypsy Moths,” Ann Beattie. A woman and her brother-in-law, with whom she’s grown closer of late, go by her ex’s to pick up her daughter. The man has fallen into a deep hole of collecting; boxes and shelves full of rubber stamps clutter his place (the field of expertise he figures Andy Warhol would have found himself in, if things had gone differently for the famous artist). When it’s suggested that he might want to move to the farm, be with the family, he looks at his visitors incredulously: “And move all these things?”

“Falling and Ascending Bodies: Four Passages,” Harold Brodkey. Life passing by as a series of considerations and snapshots, as a kid heads downhill on his bike.

“A Good Deal,” Rosellen Brown. A man visits his father in a nursing home, and learns that the old man is thinking about getting hitched to a woman he met there—only, it comes out, the two of them met years before and carried on an affair while each were married.

“Boxes,” Raymond Carver. No one is having a good time in Raymond Carver stories. This guy here is trying to move his mother out of her house.

“At the Prado: a Short Story,” Nicholas Delbanco. Pretty interesting method of keeping kids interested in an art museum: give them an object hunt, list of things to look for.

“Fireworks,” Richard Ford. A man is disgruntled when his wife calls him from the bar telling him she’s having a drink with her ex. He eventually makes his way to the bar, meets up with his wife, and she tells him of her conversation with her ex and makes fun of the ex’s new girlfriend (who misspeaks and advises that it’s a “doggy-dog world” out there; is there any chance Snoop Dogg read this story in the 80s and got his famous phrase from it?).

“Over the Mountain,” Gail Godwin. I liked this one quite a bit, though I may need to re-read or have a smarter person explain the ending to me. A woman reminisces on her childhood and her strange home life with an eccentric, demanding grandmother and a mother who’s mind is a bit in the clouds. She herself would like to remember an overnight trip she and her mother took once, but her memory is unable to conjure up any details.

“Nebraska,” Ron Hansen. Brief overview of a town and its residents.

“The Pacific,” Mark Helprin. Moving story about a woman taking a job during war time in a Pacific coast town, while her husband travels across the Pacific to fight.

“Lawfully,” Robert Houston. A woman drags a drunk up from her porch to go get married, and they have a heck of a time of it, with him near-feverish with drink, pulling at imaginary ticks as they make their way to a quickie wedding chapel service.

“Apache,” David Huddle. A prostitute takes her potential john to meet her husband, who may or may not really be her husband. Some humor in this one, and a great lead character. One of the best stories in the collection.

“Trying to Save Piggy Sneed,” John Irving. A disturbing memoir, as described by Mr. Irving in the introduction. The story tells of a mentally handicapped man who loves pigs, and his tragic end, while also detailing how the author became a writer (if any of this can be believed, which he suggests in the intro, that it should not be).

“The Fall of Texas,” Joyce Johnson. In this case, “Texas” is the name the protagonist gives to a spot on her ceiling, which caves in while she’s in bed with a new lover. The story is her reflections on this time in the sixties, 1962 specifically, on a date someone once predicted would be the end of the world.

“Willis Carr at Bleak House,” David Madden. In the 1920s, a man describes how he always felt that he’d “missed the war,” before going on to tell a story wherein he may or may not have sharp-shooted an important general, then got himself mixed up and switched sides becoming a rebel, before switching back and killing a fellow who, decades later, he isn’t deserved to be shot. An opportunist, more or less, with one or two regrets as he nears the end of his life.

“The Lure,” Mary Morris. A young-ish man and woman go on an ill-advised vacation with the guy’s father and the father’s new wife. Tension from page one. And then the story climaxes with the two men freeing a gull caught in fishing wire—and I will need my smarter friends to explain to me the meaning of the end.

“Surf City,” Joyce Carol Oates. Vivid writing that almost makes you wanna look away as this slob of a man wins eleven hundred bucks at the lottery and then sets out to find someone upon whom he can take out his anger.

“The Things They Carried,” Tim O’Brien. A lieutenant in Vietnam worries about a girl back home and eventually realizes these thoughts are preventing him from doing his job. He straightens up once one of his men dies, accepting blame whether or not it is his. I’m going to need to read the episodic novel this story eventually turned into.
 
“The Shawl,” Cynthia Ozick. One of the saddest stories I’ve ever read, and I’m glad it wasn’t longer. Nazi atrocities are committed casually, as a woman tries to hold on to her infant.

“Other Lives,” Francine Prose. I like stories about two couples who force themselves on one another, and the terrible things that tend to come out of such a situation.

“The Painters,” Lynne Sharon Schwartz. Maybe my favorite story in the collection. A woman who’s recently left her husband moves into a new apartment, where across the way two children daily come close to falling off their balcony. She hires two painters, who are a couple and are artist-type painters but also paint houses and apartments for money, and the three of them strike up a friendship.

“Poker Night,” John Updike. A man learns he has cancer and will need chemotherapy, and wants to go home and tell his wife, but it’s poker night, so he stops at his buddy’s to play poker first and consider his diagnosis.

“How Poetry Came Into the World and Why God Doesn’t Write It,” Nancy Willard. An alternate version of the Christian creation story, in which a well in the Garden provides Adam and then Eve with inspiration for metaphors, poetry, and stories. (Also, the reason God doesn’t write poetry is that God exists outside of time, and a finite lifetime is necessary in order for poetry to be written.)

“Mother,” Hilma Wolitzer. A woman gives birth but is kept from her child and has no memory of the birth. Against all advice she gets up one night and wanders downstairs to find her baby.