Rating: 3/5

A SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS OF VARIOUS UFO SIGHTINGS

Paris Flammonde (1927-2013) was the longtime producer of the Long John Nebel radio show. He wrote in the Introduction to this 1976 book, “[This book] is a companion to its predecessor, ‘The Age of the Flying Saucers… The earlier effort was the initial comprehensive, chronological exposition of the ‘modern age’ of Undefined Sensory Experience (USE)---which… is regarded as having begun … with the [1947] Kenneth Arnold sighting… In contradiction, [this book] is intended to accomplish four major purposes: 1. To offer for the first time a concise, sequential, consistently relevant history of … what came to be known as Unidentified Flying Objects (UFO)… 2. …. By cautious and thorough analysis of several of the ‘classic’ cases… depict the original incidents as explicitly as possible, and offer the reader the … widest range of hypotheses from which he might draw his own inferences and conclusions; 3. To make inescapably evident that the contention that ‘the age of flying saucers’ … had diminished and dissolved into oblivion is wholly false… 4. To leave no doubt that the American citizenry has been intentionally and deliberately deceived about virtually every aspect of the most impenetrable mystery of our time… It is the author’s anticipation that both the novice and the scholar will find this work stimulating, for if few things are demonstrable in the apparently perceivable universe, one is that UFO exist!” 

He cites Ezekiel 1, stating that “the FULL relevant verses… are far more persuasive and suggestive of an interplanetary episode…” Of 1:10, he comments, “Initially, the depictions sound unusually imaginative, even for an allegory. Still, that may well strengthen the case for the extraterrestrial theory, rather than weaken it. That is, moralists have no need to compress all of their symbolism into a single sentence, or only one head---if we interpret that four visitors all had the same appearance. And such seems to be intended.” (Pg. 34-35)

He notes, “Amateur ufologists rely heavily on the miscellaneous material collected by Charles Fort, and such disciples tend to accept his notes unquestioningly. Such confidence is no more justified in this instance than in most. To induce students to seek out ORIGINAL material, one example of Fort’s reliance on erroneous secondary sources is cited. The inaccurate version of the Bonham, Texas, incident has appeared in so many articles and books it is regarded as the original by many scholars. Yet, it is third-hand misinformation.” (Pg. 66)

Of the airships of the 1890s, he observes, “Curiously, when the 1896-97 complex stopped, for all practical purposes it stopped cold. Various sightings continued to be recorded through the years, but this particular phenomenon reached a dead end at the shores of the Atlantic. No byproduct reports, virtually no new sightings emerged from the areas over which it had soared. It was all over. The country, perhaps the world, was not tuned to whatever had happened, to whatever it implied. It came, sailed to a climax, and evaporated into the atmosphere of ultra-altitude and legend. Its like would not be seen again for fifty years.” (Pg. 117)

He recounts, “The year [1941] also saw the reappearance of theology in the field of extraterrestrialism. ‘Jesus, the Savior of the Worlds,’ a religious tract, demonstrated that there are, and will continue to be, other populated planets. All of these, as with Earth, were or are destined to be spiritually serviced by Jesus Christ.” (Pg. 133)

He states, “The best descriptions of UFO are the result of many personal and impersonal aspects of the sighting and the report; the character of the phenomenon or phenomena noted… When and where seen…environment… altitude… shape… appurtenances… secondary structural characteristics... color, composition… expulsion… speed… course… as well as a number of other attributes and behavioral patterns, are vital variables.” (Pg. 151)

Of Capt. Thomas Mantell’s fatal UFO ‘chase,’ he cites several accounts, then comments, “Much of the general picture is conceded, but the discrepancies are sufficiently great to give the impression that various individuals are dealing with different episodes. One could easily conclude that the primary file did not contain… the original news story.” (Pg. 219)

He notes, “Simple still representations of UFO are most difficult to come by. Even the best, unless they contain undeniable points of reference, may be subject to attacks which are difficult to totally dismiss, for, as the historical maritime, science and horror motion pictures have made clearly evident, simulation is a highly developed technique. The characteristic of spontaneity seems inherent in the rare examples of cinematically recorded unknowns; therefore, a full and careful analysis must be demanded in the case of such movie film.” (Pg. 311-312)

He says, “[J. Allen] Hynek’s book on his personal investigations and evaluations of numerous varieties of UFO sightings and aftereffects, in contradistinction to [Donald] Menzel’s ivory-observatory solutions, was published a decade later than his colleagues’ commentaries. Therefore, in addition to his nearly unique expertise, the former advisor to officialdom had all of the supporting data and clarifications of earlier errors ten years can provide.” (Pg. 343)

He concludes, “Is it inconceivable that somewhere people who know something you should know about what has been happening in the skies across our land for a quarter of a century are---only obeying orders? There are Unidentified Flying Objects, there are Unidentified Aerial Objects, there are Unidentified Atmospheric Phenomena. Something is happening up there. It is about time you know what.” (Pg. 423)

This book will be of keen interest to those studying UFOs.