Rating: 5/5

Title: Miss Bindergarten Gets Ready for Kindergarten
Author: Joseph Slate
Illustrator: Ashley Wolff
Genre: Concept Book, Alphabet Book
Theme(s): Alphabet, Kindergarten, animals
Opening line/sentence:
“It is the first day of kindergarten, and—oh, oh, oh!—Adam Krupp wakes up.”
Brief Book Summary:
Miss Bindergarten prepares her classroom for the first day of kindergarten. Her students, who each begin with a different letter of the alphabet, are also getting ready for the big day at home. Emotions are high, as the students and Miss Bindergarten anxiously prepare in this humorous alphabet book. 
Professional Recommendation/Review #1:
The Horn Book Guide Online
(http://www.hornbookguide.com.ezaccess...)
 "In an ingenious alphabet and animal-identification book, Miss Bindergarten (a dog) and her new students (animals from 'A' to 'Z') get ready for the first day of school. There's much to look at in the cheerful, detailed, contemporary illustrations, and the internal rhymes in each short sentence and the recurring refrain of the title make the book a natural for reading aloud (and for chanting along with)."
Professional Recommendation/Review #2:
CLCD (Children’s literature Comprehensive Database)
Trina Heidt (Children's Literature) 
(http://www.clcd.com.ezaccess.librarie...)
"The first day of kindergarten can be a time of anxiety, excitement or even fear. These emotions are all addressed as Miss Bindergarten and her soon-to-be students each prepare for their upcoming first day of class. Children will be entertained and educated along the way through rhyming text and humorous, lively watercolor and gouache illustrations. The book serves double duty as a highly entertaining alphabet book and as a guide to what children can look forward to on their own first day of kindergarten."
Response to Two Professional Reviews:
Both of these reviews take note of the well-done illustrations and the humor in the book. The first review makes a good point in saying that it is a great book to address both alphabet and animal identification, while the second review focuses primarily on the emotions that go along with the first day of school. I would agree with both of these reviews; the story would be a great read aloud. 
Evaluation of Literary Elements:
The illustrations are colorful and detailed. Every animal is given their own spot on the page, and is surrounded by color, which makes it easy to identify each letter and animal. The rhyming and repetitive phrases leading up to the end goal (the first day of school) make the simple plot easy to follow along with. 
Consideration of Instructional Application:
This read-aloud book could be used to practice rhyming and letter and animal identification. Printing out the rhyming words, letters, or animals onto paper could be used to play an identification game as the story is read aloud. Students may also enjoy writing or pointing to the correct rhyming word, letter, or animal on a whiteboard.