Rating: 5/5

This book was an enjoyable one, as it is one that I was loaned by a friend.  It is the sort of book that would likely not be made nowadays for a variety of reasons, although it is still a very interesting book when it comes to its approach to relative chronology.  As someone who views chronology as a deeply important aspect of setting the stage for history and also views geography as very important in this regard, this book manages to succeed in both of its most important elements.  That said, there are at least two sorts of people who will likely not appreciate this book, namely those who do not view biblical history and geography as very important or worthwhile on the one hand, and those who think that the book is useless because of its focus on ancient Middle Eastern history and geography and then European history and geography (as well as that of European settler colonies) rather than focusing on fashionable peoples in Asia and Africa and the Americas.  Those who find this book's contents enjoyable, though, will treasure this look at a better time when knowledge of comparative history and historical geography was greater.

This book is a quick one to read, to be sure, but also a fairly engrossing reference source that one can enjoy through much longer and repeated focus.  The fact that the book includes a large amount of references to political coups and transfers of power, such as in South America, suggests that the author is not looking to whitewash history by any means.  The first part of the book contains a historical geography that examines the world according to Genesis 10 and 11 as well as a look at the divided Greek and Roman Empires and medieval Europe.  The second part of the book then contains a fascinating and lengthy series of charts that looks at the comparative chronology of the history and rulers of various nations extending from ancient history to a period only a few decades ago, allowing the reader not only to see the notable leaders of state and government for various nations and empires, but also to see how those nations split up into various independent countries and whether the change in governments that resulted came about peacefully or through coups and assassinations.  The book is therefore a fascinating picture of our world and its history.