Rating: 5/5

[Following Alan’s previous adventures with Anthony Kiedis in Inferno, found here]

I opened my eyes. I wiped off my face, wet from tears that I may have shed when I dozed. Anthony Keidis prodded me. Little one, he said, it’s time. Purgatory awaits.

Anthony used his silver tongue charm to convince Cato of Utica, the guardian of the shores of Purgatory, to allow us to pass through. He fixed a stern gaze on Cato. It’s His bidding, he said. Alan needs to pass through to meet Him. Are you really going to go against those holiest of wishes? Cato stepped aside. I wiped the tears off of my face. We went forward.

Plunging forward, I saw a sight that confused me beyond explanation. Is that… DJ Khaled? On a jet ski?

Anthony nodded. That is The Angel Boatman who ferries souls to the base of the cliff. Soon we will start our journey proper. Humility is required, butterfly. We held fast to Khaled, who whistled and howled as he sped us forward.

We reached the base and began our climb up this region known as the Ante-Purgatory: it contained all manner of souls, all Late Repentants. We came across the Contumacious, who surrendered their souls to God in their final moments. We saw the Indolent, who were late to begin their journey of being saved. Through this climb, souls approached us aplenty. They mentioned that only prayer could save their souls, allowing them to make the climb up with ease. I was frightened. I asked Anthony for reassurance, wanting to clarify the mechanism through which Prayer would save these souls.

Prayer is prayer, sugar, and that is all that matters, he said. Righteous and the wicked of the war and peace, The killing fist of the human beast, P.O.P, Prodigies of Peace P.O.P, Hear me when I'm callin' you from my knees, Praying for a better day anyway.

I bowed my head.

Eventually, we pushed on, coming to the Gate of Purgatory itself. Here stood a fantastic sight. An Angel Guardian. I thought I had seen his beatific face before in such motion picture classics as Elf and Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy. I was wrong. It was not him. It was one even better.

He walked up to me. I fell at his feet. My lips were dry and I was unable to speak. He leaned forward, propped up my face, and carved seven symbols into my forehead.

He looked at Anthony and smiled while wagging his tongue, allowing us to pass through. I cried.

We entered the First Cornice, a place for the Proud. Looking around, I saw Ayn Rand. I was not interested in a 3-day lecture about the benefits of looking out for yourself. As we walked past, I thought I saw a familiar face carved into stone. Anthony, I asked. Is that Cyrus the Great? It is, pumpkin, he answered. Motherfucker, I thought. Where is management? Who do I speak to about this? Before I could do anything about my dashed pride, I was led on by the man who had been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2012.

Climbing to the Second Cornice, I looked around. The Envious. It must be. Their eyes were sewn shut by way of punishment, seeing as they had envied all others in their lifetime by using their eyes most of all. I saw a figure in a wheelchair and looked at Anthony excitedly. He allowed me the freedom of movement, so I ran forward. It was Antonio Salieri. I did not speak Italian, but I knew his face. So distinct. So Salieri. Or was it indeed F. Murray Abraham? I was sure it could not be the latter. Regardless, I shed tears and jogged back. We had quite a way to go.

Cinnamon, Anthony said to me, your forehead! I felt it immediately, filled with terror. What was wrong?? Calm, calm! He said. The asterisks on your forehead… there are no longer 7! Only 5 remain. I surmised that an asterisk was wiped for each Cornice.

We came to the Third Cornice, where the Wrathful resided. Reader, I cannot possibly explain how many rivers I shed when I saw Zack de la Rocha. 

Was it possible that the Divine Powers had made a mistake? I mean, he was not really that angry in reality, was he? I had to show faith. We pushed on.

At this point, I knew the drill. We were headed for the Fourth Cornice, where the Slothful rested. I began to feel the dull agony of being still. Precious, said Anthony, we have to keep going. We go. We move. Keep going. I had no choice, so I wiped my tears off. From the corner of my eyes, I spied Marlon Brando.

I had thought him prolific, but maybe those above disagreed. Passing the Cornice, we rested. Anthony took out a guitar, which was confusing. I allowed him to be as I passed out for a nap. The dream that I had! Almost too surreal to depict, but I shall try. I dreamt of being suspended in a vat filled with molasses-like warmth. I did not want to do anything but remain there for eternity. Even the thought of exerting effort for food and water was too much. A voice thundered from beyond the warmth. Life shouldn’t be a struggle, it said. Life should be a flowing smooth thing. I woke up. Cold sweat.

Push on we must, and push on we did. I decided to stop looking at the faces of the souls in the Cornices. Grant them respect. Save myself the torture and confusion. Passing through the Fifth Cornice (for the Avaricious), I felt the very ground below me shake to its core. What was that?! I asked Anthony. Cookie, he replied, you will soon see. A soul is ascending.

Right he was. Just ahead, I saw a face that gave me the shock of my life.

John Mayer?!?!?! I yelled. He turned around. Oh, hi folks, he replied. John, Johnny, Johnnoooo. Yes. That’s me. A recovered ego addict. Your name? He asked. I am a nobody to you, sir, I replied. We are all brother, he said. I agree with you. He gave Anthony a knowing smile, shaking his hand, but not asking for his name. Acquaintances, I suppose. Mind if I tag along with you folks? He asked. If we are headed where I think we are headed, I am also headed there. Shall we head?

The rest of the journey was a fever dream. We passed the Sixth Cornice (the Gluttons) and the Seventh Cornice (The Lustful). I followed behind Anthony and John, hoping to overhear some of their conversation. They spoke of shows past, relationships squandered, respect gained. John seemed to be going on about a song he had written previously. You know, he said, the thing with the song is… the story of the song is… it’s not saying I am out of here, you know? It’s actually saying I am just gonna stay here until it gets good. Which is very sweet. There is so much hope in saying I am gonna stay right here. I don’t always put out albums that the world wants to hear. But over time, they become important pieces of a catalogue. At some point, you look back and go, thank God I have those songs! Sometimes they don’t do very well, but who cares about that! If you have works, you should put them out. I realized I wasn’t crazy for wanting to write these songs. This song was not a commercial race horse, but an ongoing document of how I feel and how I felt. You know? Anthony was nodding. I was confused.

Before long, we came to the top of the Mountain of Purgatory. The first thing I saw was a roaring Wall of Fire, taller than any free standing structure I had seen in my life. As we approached this monstrosity, I found myself thinking, there is no fucking way. The script writer for this moment is taking too many artistic liberties. Is that Gala Rizzatto, the singer/songwriter who put out the smash hit and enlightenment anthem Freed From Desire? It was. She was the Angel of Chastity, telling me to step through the fire, in order to be freed from desire. I looked back. Anthony and John were smiling. I walked through, knowing that doing so would purify my mind and senses. 

I came out on the other side to an Earthly Paradise, a vast green space with a beautiful castle in the background.

In front of me stood a final Angel Guardian, ready to remove the last asterisk from my forehead.

With this task done, I turned back to look at my guide and my newfound friend. Anthony smiled and nodded. Don’t Forget Me, he said. You are the master of your own impulses now, Buttercup.

I turned around and walked up to the steps of the castle. Here it was that I heard a deafening noise, the unrestrained feedback of an amp. A Heavenly Pageant was approaching. It was led by 7 golden candelabra. Behind them came 24 elders, each holding a jar of sand. Behind them followed 4 beasts, guarding a triumphal chariot. This chariot was being drawn by an immense beagle. At the right wheel of the chariot walked three middle-aged men with dyed black hair and a punk-rock look to them, while to the left of the chariot walked two men, though both were sporting alien-esque, technology/space-age masks that hid their faces. Behind them walked a single individual. Tall enough, scrawny, almost sleepy. A short but yet still ragged beard. He approached me slowly, asking me the most undecipherable question. Do you know Killer Mike and El-P? He whispered. I nodded slowly. The procession stopped in front of me.

Overwhelmed by awe, I turned to share the moment with Anthony. He was gone. I fell to the floor, weeping. Before I could get too carried away, sweeping guitar notes rang out from the sky. A white glow blinded me. I shaded my eyes, and upon their acclimation to the source, slowly peeked at the sight from between my fingers. This is what I saw.

This magnificent figure descended, landing in front of me. I was speechless.

He said one thing and one thing only: I feel that when you talk about something, you know, you just ruin what you’re talking about. He grabbed my hand and walked me over to an electric guitar set up. There stood a 1962 Fender Stratocaster. He motioned for me to sit down. I was unable to keep track of my movement, but found myself staring up at him. He began.

Tears.

I rose, “perfect, pure, and ready for the stars”. Time to enter Paradiso.