Rating: 5/5

What a lifesaving book!

Like many first-time parents, I started off pretty darn ignorant. I did everything wrong regarding my firstborn's sleep habits for the first about 9 months. I became a miserable being surviving on almost no sleep and lots of frustration. My baby turned into a sullen little thing, too. I knew something had to be done when I realized he hardly smiled or giggled at all.

I researched different sleep-training books and liked the reviews from Amazon.com on this one, so I bought it.

I recommend you read it with a highlighter and mark everything you want to be able to easily find again. Weissbluth doesn't format his writing very well and he often repeats himself or gets off track. But the INFORMATION contained is empowering!

I applied the techniques and principles he teaches and WOW! It worked wonderfully. My marriage to my husband improved, I became a normal person again, and Brady became a sweet, happy baby again (instead of cranky from being sleep-deprived).

I suggest you don't "cheat" when teaching your baby how to sleep because - I'm here to tell you - you will pay later on, and it will be even HARDER to fix. I applied everything from the book except ONE thing: sleeping through the entire night without a bottle (or nursing). Brady got to a point where he was taking two long naps a day and sleeping all night... except for one night nursing, which I couldn't give up. Then when I weaned him at 14 months, I gave him a bottle each night. WELL... it would've been easier overall if I had just weaned him from his night feeding at 9 months. My mind was telling me to, but my heart was saying the opposite. I thought it was fine until the reprocussions started appearing. It's worth it to do it right (completely) the FIRST time, and not prolong even a small part of the problem. 

Any new parents or moms, I highly recommend this book! It has worked wonders in our family. Our 18-month-old now ASKS for his nap when it's naptime. He does the same with bedtime as well! Life is wonderful. I'll apply this book from birth on with the rest of my children.