Rating: 5/5

Book #1: Open House (1941) 

In "Prognosis" Roethke uses these lines to show the impact of parents: 

Though the devouring mother cry, "Escape me? Never---" 
And the honeymoon be spoiled by a father's ghost, 

Again in "The Premonition" he speaks of his father: 

But when he stood up, that face 
Was lost in a maze of water. 

And here is his famous poem about a bat: 

The Bat 

By day the bat is cousin to the mouse.
He likes the attic of an aging house.

His fingers make a hat about his head.
His pulse beat is so slow we think him dead.

He loops in crazy figures half the night
Among the trees that face the corner light.

But when he brushes up against a screen,
We are afraid of what our eyes have seen:

For something is amiss or out of place
When mice with wings can wear a human face. 

And finish off his first book with this one called "Night Journey": 

Now as the train bears west,
Its rhythm rocks the earth,
And from my Pullman berth
I stare into the night
While others take their rest.
Bridges of iron lace,
A suddenness of trees,
A lap of mountain mist
All cross my line of sight,
Then a bleak wasted place,
And a lake below my knees.
Full on my neck I feel
The straining at a curve;
My muscles move with steel,
I wake in every nerve.
I watch a beacon swing
From dark to blazing bright;
We thunder through ravines
And gullies washed with light.
Beyond the mountain pass
Mist deepens on the pane;
We rush into a rain
That rattles double glass.
Wheels shake the roadbed stone,
The pistons jerk and shove,
I stay up half the night
To see the land I love. 

Book #2: The Lost Son and Other Poems (1948) 

Roethke has several memorable poems in Part I about helping his father in with gardening. 

Then in Part II one of his greatest poems: 

My Papa’s Waltz

The whiskey on your breath 
Could make a small boy dizzy; 
But I hung on like death: 
Such waltzing was not easy. 

We romped until the pans 
Slid from the kitchen shelf; 
My mother’s countenance 
Could not unfrown itself. 

The hand that held my wrist 
Was battered on one knuckle; 
At every step you missed 
My right ear scraped a buckle. 

You beat time on my head 
With a palm caked hard by dirt, 
Then waltzed me off to bed 
Still clinging to your shirt. 

One of my favorite opening lines of his is in "Dolor": 

I have known the inexorable sadness of pencils. 

Book #2: Praise to the End! (1951) 

In this collection, Roethke wrote mostly what I would call today WTF poems. 

Book #3: The Waking (1953) 

It includes this great poem: 

Elegy for Jane
(My student, thrown by a horse) 

I remember the neckcurls, limp and damp as tendrils;
And her quick look, a sidelong pickerel smile;
And how, once startled into talk, the light syllables leaped for her,
And she balanced in the delight of her thought,
A wren, happy, tail into the wind,
Her song trembling the twigs and small branches.
The shade sang with her;
The leaves, their whispers turned to kissing,
And the mould sang in the bleached valleys under the rose.
Oh, when she was sad, she cast herself down into such a pure depth,
Even a father could not find her:
Scraping her cheek against straw,
Stirring the clearest water.
My sparrow, you are not here,
Waiting like a fern, making a spiney shadow.
The sides of wet stones cannot console me,
Nor the moss, wound with the last light.
If only I could nudge you from this sleep,
My maimed darling, my skittery pigeon.
Over this damp grave I speak the words of my love:
I, with no rights in this matter,
Neither father nor lover. 

And, of course, probably his most famous and perhaps best poem: 

The Waking

I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow. 
I feel my fate in what I cannot fear. 
I learn by going where I have to go. 

We think by feeling. What is there to know? 
I hear my being dance from ear to ear. 
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow. 

Of those so close beside me, which are you? 
God bless the Ground! I shall walk softly there, 
And learn by going where I have to go. 

Light takes the Tree; but who can tell us how? 
The lowly worm climbs up a winding stair; 
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow. 

Great Nature has another thing to do 
To you and me; so take the lively air, 
And, lovely, learn by going where to go. 

This shaking keeps me steady. I should know. 
What falls away is always. And is near. 
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow. 
I learn by going where I have to go. 

Book #4: Words for the Wind (1958) 

An unusual collection of children's poems and love poems and death poems. It does have this great love poem: 

I Knew a Woman

I knew a woman, lovely in her bones, 
When small birds sighed, she would sigh back at them; 
Ah, when she moved, she moved more ways than one: 
The shapes a bright container can contain! 
Of her choice virtues only gods should speak, 
Or English poets who grew up on Greek 
(I’d have them sing in chorus, cheek to cheek). 

How well her wishes went! She stroked my chin, 
She taught me Turn, and Counter-turn, and Stand; 
She taught me Touch, that undulant white skin; 
I nibbled meekly from her proffered hand; 
She was the sickle; I, poor I, the rake, 
Coming behind her for her pretty sake 
(But what prodigious mowing we did make). 

Love likes a gander, and adores a goose: 
Her full lips pursed, the errant note to seize; 
She played it quick, she played it light and loose; 
My eyes, they dazzled at her flowing knees; 
Her several parts could keep a pure repose, 
Or one hip quiver with a mobile nose 
(She moved in circles, and those circles moved). 

Let seed be grass, and grass turn into hay: 
I’m martyr to a motion not my own; 
What’s freedom for? To know eternity. 
I swear she cast a shadow white as stone. 
But who would count eternity in days? 
These old bones live to learn her wanton ways: 
(I measure time by how a body sways). 

Book #5: I Am! Says the Lamb (1961) 

Filled with fun nonsense poems like this one: 

The Donkey

I had a Donkey, that was all right,
But he always wanted to fly my Kite;
Every time I let him, the String would bust.
Your Donkey is better behaved, I trust. 

Book #6: The Far Field (1964) 

Great animal poem: 

The Meadow Mouse
1 

In a shoe box stuffed in an old nylon stocking 
Sleeps the baby mouse I found in the meadow, 
Where he trembled and shook beneath a stick 
Till I caught him up by the tail and brought him in, 
Cradled in my hand, 
A little quaker, the whole body of him trembling, 
His absurd whiskers sticking out like a cartoon-mouse, 
His feet like small leaves, 
Little lizard-feet, 
Whitish and spread wide when he tried to struggle away, 
Wriggling like a minuscule puppy. 

Now he's eaten his three kinds of cheese and drunk from his 
bottle-cap watering-trough-- 
So much he just lies in one corner, 
His tail curled under him, his belly big 
As his head; his bat-like ears 
Twitching, tilting toward the least sound. 

Do I imagine he no longer trembles 
When I come close to him? 
He seems no longer to tremble. 

2 

But this morning the shoe-box house on the back porch is empty. 
Where has he gone, my meadow mouse, 
My thumb of a child that nuzzled in my palm? -- 
To run under the hawk's wing, 
Under the eye of the great owl watching from the elm-tree, 
To live by courtesy of the shrike, the snake, the tom-cat. 

I think of the nestling fallen into the deep grass, 
The turtle gasping in the dusty rubble of the highway, 
The paralytic stunned in the tub, and the water rising,-- 
All things innocent, hapless, forsaken.

And another: 

The Pike 

The river turns,
Leaving a place for the eye to rest,
A furred, a rocky pool,
A bottom of water.

The crabs tilt and eat, leisurely,
And the small fish lie, without shadow, motionless,
Or drift lazily in and out of the weeds.
The bottom-stones shimmer back their irregular striations,
And the half-sunken branch bends away from the gazer's eye.

A scene for the self to abjure!-
And I lean, almost into the water,
My eye always beyond the surface reflection;
I lean, and love these manifold shapes,
Until, out from a dark cove,
From beyond the end of a mossy log,
With one sinuous ripple, then a rush,
A thrashing-up of the whole pool
The pike strikes. 

Finally ends with Uncollected Poems. A collection of poems by a master.