Rating: 3/5

2021 Review
Like, it is bad, but here I am again reading it? 

2020 Review
And I read it again. 
Something about this book keeps me coming back and I think I can finally put my finger on what it is. Despite and yet because of how horrendously '90s feminist this book comes across, it manages to provide a (pseudo) Regency romance without the usual alpha-asshole hero. Or heroine who goes weak in the knees because a guy gave her a second look. I mean, it is borderline there for the heroine. But she remains strong and in command throughout. And the hero somehow pulls off tall, dark, and brooding while still remaining likable, kind, and shrewd. And even with the insta-romance, the fact that both characters manage to come across as flawed yet perfect for one another makes it...swoon worthy. 
I am not excusing this book. It probably deserves its 3 star rating. But I am rapidly finding this book holds a special place in my heart and it is mostly because of the very things that drive me crazy about it. 

2019 Review
I can't honestly give a good reason for re-reading this book except...I wanted to. The main characters are perfect and progressive., the insta-love overwhelming, and the plot itself somewhat corny. By my usual standards, I ought to want to shred this book to pieces.
But I enjoyed my re-read immensely. For all its faults, the book manages to capture the spark of a good, dreadful romance novel without stooping to the same bedroom levels. I feel quite ridiculous giving it another read and yet at the same time, don't regret it in the slightest! 

2018 Review
What an unexpected romp! The book started off somewhat vulgarly and maintained a slightly ribald tone throughout that only slowly tailored off as the story concluded. However, despite that, it remained "clean" throughout and had a couple plot elements that actually saved the story.
The title is "Three Lords for Lady Anne"...but that doesn't mean three lords are throwing themselves at her feet. Or rather, two of those lords are 10, and pretty dang adorable. 
The actual love interest doesn't meet "Lady Anne" till almost halfway through the story. The author really builds up the tension. She also creates some predictable misunderstandings and then undercuts the one Lord Leatham quickly realizes she isn't sleeping around with the lecherous relative and downplays the other Her theory that he has a mistress doesn't actually get angsted over as much as I expected
The villain and accompanying cast are rather stupid and some of the POVs are definitely borderline unneeded...but overall a pleasant story. I kind of expected to tear it to shreds but it improved as the story went, and even engaged my interest. Not one I'd go out of my way to recommend, or probably ever re-read, but if you stumble upon a free copy and find yourself in the mood for something light hearted and not very historical, could be worth a try.

I SHOULD ADD THOUGH: this books suffers horrendously from '90s progressive feminism. Well, I guess it could be worse, but Anne barely opens her mouth without raging about men or giving some modern day speech to her charges. She's teaching servants to read, hobnobbing with Native Americans, and scorning marriage most of the book. I recommend skimming those portions.