Rating: 1/5

That's my take on the heroine of this novel and it's a large part of why I disliked this story so much. She's portrayed as a stereotypical radical feminist who is starchy, unfeminine, unattractive and a bit obsessed with her "cause". I guess this will appeal to a lot of female readers but it just didn't appeal to me personally. I like heroines who are strong but who are also soft, feminine and pretty. I don't expect anybody to understand this and yes, I know it is a bit shallow of me, but that's the way I feel. The H was another reason I hated this book. He's the opposite of the heroine: he's a whiny, golden pretty boy ( as pretty as she's plain ) and he even tells her he finds her unattractive and there's even a scene where he hits her. That is not my idea of romance. The other thing that I found objectionable was that the heroine eventually became best friends with the H's former mistress ! I can understand ( even though I don't share it ) the heroine's radical feminist zeal but becoming best buds with her husband's former mistress is taking the whole sisterhood thing too far. Or, maybe I'm a very backward type of woman who ( as I'm sure some readers will be thinking ) is failing the feminist cause by not buying into the whole "sisterhood at all costs" motto. Whatever. 

The heroine also irritated me because she's so insecure about her lack of good looks that she refused to wear pretty clothing or fix her hair in an attractive manner. She thinks that people will see that she's still not able to look attractive and will laugh at her. That level of low self esteem is too fucked up for me. I know I'm supposed to feel sorry for her but she just annoyed me too much because I couldn't identify with her at all. I am not even gonna waste time writing about the rest of the storyline. The storyline started off in a promising manner but everything just flatlined for me when I found it impossible to like the MC's. I didn't think they were suitable for each other and the H was like a sniveling little boy instead of a sexy adult male. Plus I didn't appreciate the fact that the author needed to stereotype the heroine by making her unattractive; was it so hard for the author to create a radical feminist who is actually pretty ? The heroine was more of a caricature than an actual character. I should've taken a nap instead of reading this: