Rating: 5/5

Sailed the Seas with Captain Cook, Thrice! 

This is not just a biography. This is in fact a portal. A portal that will take you from your room in the 21st century to the decks of the Endeavor and later, the Resolution, in the late 18th century. Richard Hough has described so brilliantly the life of this sea faring legend, that it feels like you're circumnavigating the Earth with the man himself. Captain James Cook is a legendary figure. He probably has millions of scholarly articles archived to his name. I find myself in awe of the author of this book. Because simply reading up the historical data is not enough to write a book of this caliber. Writing this opus must have required heavy research and critical analysis of the available facts, after which he compiled all the information and bound it in such an interesting narrative that it was impossible to put it down. 
The book covers every important aspect of Cook's life from his early years as a shop apprentice in the small village of Staithes, where he first felt the lure to the sea; to his last days in the island of Hawaii, where an unfortunate series of events led to his early demise. The book not only covers Cook's main three circumnavigation voyages that put him on the map (figuratively, although they did put a lot of islands on the map) but also explores his earliest sea faring days of the Baltic sea and his subsequent enrollment into the Royal Navy. You will start this book with only some or no idea about the man and put it back into the shelf saying goodbye to a guide who showed you the world. 
Richard Hough delved deep into Cook's character. He described his concern for his crew's well-being, especially for their defense against the deadly scurvy, which was prevalent at that time. The reader also witness the transition of Cook's frame of mind from his first to his last main voyage and get an idea as to what was going on in the Great Sailor's mind. The book is as much about the crew, sailors and supernumeraries that sailed with their captain, as it is about Cook himself. It really is a journey into the vastness of the unknown waters of the pacific ocean that defined Cook's life. How he and his crew stumbled upon numerous undiscovered islands while searching for the speculated 'Terra Australis' or the Great southern Continent is a wondrous historical account in itself. His subsequent discovery and charting of New Zealand and the Eastern coast of Australia (including the great barrier reef) is probably one of the reasons why some may call him an over achiever. 
The optimum way to best enjoy this book as well as to walk through the portal that I talked about earlier is to keep Google Earth handy with you while you peruse through the pages. This is what I did myself. Throughout his many voyages, Cook visited already discovered yet exotic places and located countless more himself. I located all the major landmarks that he passed through on Google Earth and scrutinized them myself. Looking at the images of these places really brought every aspect of this book alive. Indeed I traveled on the heaving decks of Endeavor and Resolution along with my captain. From the impregnable waters of the Antarctic,to the tropical beauties of Tahiti, to the marvelous coasts of New Zealand and to the snowy wastes of the Arctic...it'll be a journey long and harsh, but it too will be filled with its share of beauty. I'll see you on the other side then. But come quick, we're about to make sail!