Rating: 5/5

This is the racist one. The Tempest is racist. Merchant of Venice is the anti-Semitic one, Titus Andronicus is the slasher one, Much Ado is the vagina one, this is the racist one. Caliban is a “Man of Ind,” the West Indies, where Columbus first set anchor, and he is
A devil, a born devil, on whose nature
Nurture can never stick: on whom my pains,
Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost!
And as with age his body uglier grows,
So his mind cankers.

Birmingham Royal Ballet gives him a snail shell, rad, but he’s still black

Shakespeare pulls a dirty trick on Caliban by making him an attempted rapist, just to make sure we don’t accidentally end up on his side. And you can see how it might happen otherwise, since Prospero the slaveowner is a massive dick. He treats his slaves, Caliban and Ariel, brutally. And he’s extremely obsessed with his daughter Miranda's virginity. As he’s giving her away to Ferdinand, he gives this really long speech about premarital sex:
Worthily purchased, take my daughter. But
If thou dost break her virgin knot before
All sanctimonious ceremonies may
With full and holy rite be ministered,
No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall
To make this contract grow, but barren hate,
Sour-eyed disdain, and discord shall bestrew
The union of your bed with weeds so loathly
That you shall hate it both. 
Ew. Earlier Prospero just straight up called her a slut - she sees Ferdinand, right, who by the way is a tool, but she instantly falls for him - there are those wonderful lines:
O, wonder!
How many goodly creatures are there here!
How beauteous mankind is! O, brave new world
That has such people in’t!
One of my favorite passages. And Prospero’s like oh shit, I know what that means. My daughter’s a slut!
This swift business
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
Make the prize light

Miranda's just gazing out across the sea, in this painting by John William Waterhouse, dreaming of dicks
But this is trifling
And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
The bigger bulk it shows
She says to Ferdinand, proving that it’s not in Prospero’s head. Ferdinand, for his part, seems concerned solely with her virginity. Literally the first thing he asks her is “whether you be maid or no.” First thing. 

This was probably Shakespeare’s last decent play. It has some wonderful lines - “Hell is empty,
And all the devils are here!” not to mention the whole “As dreams are made of” speech, which is definitely “To be or not to be” light but that’s still pretty good. It has the ambiguity in it that we expect from his mature work - for one thing, it really is hard not to sympathize with Caliban and Ariel. But you can’t explain all that racism away with ambiguity: it is racist, and also very weird about virginity. It’s very, very poorly aged. 

On the other hand, there’s this one scene where Stephano the drunken butler threatens to pour booze in “thy other mouth,” so I think Shakespeare’s invented buttchugging. It was all worth it!