Rating: 4/5

I thoroughly enjoyed this book. It's OOP and very hard to find in the UK, but the libraries came up trumps and found me a copy from the wilds of t' North!

It tells the story of Verity Jollife, rather plain, twenty-six and unmarried, and Gabriel, Earl of Sherington. She is almost a generation younger than her older siblings and is regarded by them as a source of unpaid labour and generally treated as the poor relation.

Gabriel has a reputation for being a cold-hearted, calculating bastard. He's incredibly rich, having made his fortune in trade, but knows, having inherited his title, that society will nonetheless flock to his door. He doesn't get on well with his family either - although in fact, it turns out that those he had thought his relatives are not; at the beginning of the book, his aunt maliciously reveals that he may not be his father's son at all.

He is mistrustful of pretty much everybody, especially women, all of whom he believes are crafty and deceptive and only want him for his money and his title. He knows he will have to marry at some point, but is reluctant to select a bride from the ton, believing she will eventually reveal herself to be a manipulative harpy who seeks to change him and his lifestyle.

So when he meets Miss Verity Jollife and reluctantly agrees to take her up in his carriage, he is constantly surprised by her reactions to him, which are never what he expects them to be.

Having spent a little more time in her company, he decides she is exactly the sort of woman he could marry - she is quiet, sensible and her definition of love indicates to him that she would be content to leave him to his own devices after marriage.

Thereafter, he sets out to win her affections - little suspecting that she has already fallen hard for him.

To be honest though, I have to wonder why, because throughout almost the whole of their early acquaintance, he is rather cold and off-putting! He is actually angry when she doesn't declare her love for him after a week, which makes him seem rather like a petulant schoolboy who isn't getting his own way.

But when his history is unfolded, it becomes clearer why he might act that way; he was sent away from home and into the Navy at the age of 8 and spent much of his early years separated from his mother, so he has never been shown love or affection.

As the story progresses, Gabriel is shown to be a good man at heart - even though he denies this and insists on reminding people how ruthless he can be, it's clear by his actions that he is fair and straightforward, treating his servants as people rather than objects.

It also seems to me that, although his aim is to have Verity fall in love with him so that he can marry her, he is hardly indifferent, even though he doesn't admit it. He misses her on the days he doesn't see her; where he had at first thought her plain, he finds more to admire in her ever time he sees her; and he understands her well enough to know that she will enjoy the gift of a book on housekeeping (which is also a generations-old family heirloom) more than one of valuable jewellery.

He gets angry with Verity for letting her relatives treat her as a dogsbody - and even though that is true, she is not diminished by it. Somehow, Dolan has written her character in such a way as to make her tolerance of their behaviour towards her into a strength rather than a weakness. But I was glad when she finally realises that although she might love her family - she doesn't necessarily like them, and when she finally stands up to her overbearing sister; something Verity admits her acquaintance with Gabriel has given her the fortitude to do.

I rattled through the book in a few hours, eager to discover more about the protagonists and to watch their relationship develop.

It's a lovely read and the ending is just perfect.