Rating: 4/5

The film adaptation of ”Don’t Look Now” is regarded by some as one of the best pieces of British cinema. It has long been a favourite of mine and I am delighted to say I enjoyed the short story it is based upon very much, incredibly well-written. It grips you from beginning to end, slowly building that sense of foreboding. It was the opening tale in this collection of four short stories.
It follows a couple - John and his grief-stricken wife Laura, who are holidaying in Venice after the death of their daughter Christine. Whilst sitting in a restaurant, they spot a pair of middle-aged twins. One of them is blind and claims to be a psychic. She informs Laura that she could see the deceased Christine sat with the couple and even describes outfits that Christine wore. They also believe that John has psychic powers - specifically the ability to see the future, and that the spirit of Christine is trying to warn them that they are in grave danger if they stay in Venice. 
The couple later receive a telephone call and are informed that their son, Johnnie, has been taken ill back in England and has to have an emergency operation. Laura leaves via plane to return to England, but not long after her departure, John spots his wife with the twins on a vaporetto. He is certain it is his wife, wearing her red coat. The red coat is the iconic imagery that makes you think of Don’t Look Now (you will see why upon its conclusion). 
But, when he telephones to see how his son is doing in England, his wife Laura is there on the other end of the line. So who exactly did John see on the river, and what does this all mean?

Following Don’t Look Now there are four other stories: Not After Midnight, A Border-Line Case, The Way Of The Cross, and The Breakthrough.

DuMaurier’s short stories are best when it follows a main character’s grief. This is very prevalent in A Border-Line Case, where a young girl of nineteen, Shelagh, has recently lost her father. This grief, and honouring her late father’s wishes, are the driving force behind the plot.
All of them reach a satisfying conclusion, and I look forward to reading more of her short stories in the future, mainly ”The Birds”.

I give the collection as a whole 4.4 Stars