Jules fights with his brain. Well, he's always talking to his brain, probably too much, but sometimes, yeah, the duke it out. Like now - while he's standing outside Gen's door, his dad downstairs with her parents getting ready for a barbeque dinner. After two years, he came to dinner again like old times, before he moved away with his mom. Now it was Dad's turn to have him for a bit, and well, Gen was not the girl he remembered...not the friend he remembered. She made him, well, a bit crazy. So there he is, hand poised to knock, and he thinks:
I can't. He pulls his hand back. (reading from page 11 mid)
Chicken, his brain said. Chickenchickenchicken...
Thanks for your support brain, said Jules to his brain. As soon as they invent brain transplants I'm becoming a donor.
Oooooh, I'm scared! said his brain.
and suddenly, Jules is in. In Gen's bedroom - and she's acting friendly and like the old days and everything's going to be fine, he knows it is, but he still has to ask her out...it's kind of a dare...and he really really wants to anyway. So he fights with his brain for a while longer and talks with Gen, then finally - FINALLY - pops the question and asks her to go to the movies and BLAM. or rather, fizz. Definitely fizz...as in fizzled out - because Gen? Gen hadn't even heard him. She was staring at the guy in the middle of the room - a guy with hair that danced in color on his head, with writing running up and down his jacket. He hadn't been there a second ago, but now there he was, mumbling to himself.
Wurk, hate mil 3. Hang on. Is that a TV in the corner? Woosh, I could find out what's on! mumble...mumble..Frankly I'd rather sit througha meeting of the Committee for the invention of o the Wheel than hang around with this pair! What is wrong with them? Their eyes keep follow me around the room just like those creepy portraits on the Rembrandt jump."
Gen and Jules watch him matter and mumble and ramble around, until he finally stops talking and really looks at Gen and Jules, instead of just talking about their bad clothes, and how horrible Mil 3 is. 
"Oh my DNA," he whispered, "I'm present!"