Rating: 4/5

I really enjoyed this one! The premise is pretty simple, four kids are stranded at a spooky house and someone is playing games with them. There's a thematic element of magic thrown in. And really - that's all you need. 

Some of the Nixon tropes are there -- it's middle of nowhere Texas. All of the kids are obsessed with what they're going to do post High School. And girl realizes her feelings for a guy half way through is there. But the heavy Christian themes are not. It also doesn't have that same period atmosphere as the other books. And really, with a few tweaks, could totally be a modern novel. (I mean - Johnny Carson is playing on the TV when they arrive at the house.) 

It's not the most revolutionary concept - but the house, the idea that someone is there with them, and the mystery behind what happened to the old lady who owns the house (old lady alert!) is captivating enough that it sustains the novel. 

The kids, as characters, are decently drawn, if not standard stock teenagers. Lisa, our MC and the most interesting one, wants to be a magician. Then we have Tina, a black girl (!!), who wants to get into law; Bo, a jock who wants to be more than just a football player; and Julian, Lisa's love interest, a guy who would rather be a dancer than be a doctor. There's a whole theme of illusion - heavily handed as the kids realize that who their parents and society want them to be are different than who they are themselves. It's not the most in depth character work ever drawn, but it works for what is essentially an upper middle grade read. Plus - the interaction between the kids - who start off the book as adversaries due to their difference, and learn to appreciate each other by the end, is really quite nice. 

I think what really works for the book, though is the suspense and mystery. And I'm reminded why I wanted to read these books in the first place. The kids are spooked by something following them around the house. Lights go off. Mysterious dogs show up. And there's a whole backstory about a woman running from her abusive, magician husband. And a haunting back room that none of them want to go into. The whole story takes place during one night, and while the ending is a little on the silly side, it at least closes up all the loose threads in satisfactory way. 

Out of all the ones I've read so far - this one I'd actually recommend (as long as you keep in mind, it is from 1983, and is meant to be for 13yos.) 

Rating: 3.75 stars