Rating: 1/5

I have to say with regard to all things Cornelius, I am either a simpleton, or these stories are needlessly complicated and convoluted for naught but their own sake.

I have literally been trying to get through this book since the 80's. I cannot do it. There is simply too much going on. Too many logic jumps. Followed immediately by too much abstraction and freelancing babbling about nothing in particular. I know many other people who swear by these stories but as Moorcock novels go I can only conclude that the simplicity of the Elric, Corum, Hawkmoon, Count Brass, etc. series is made up for by making this series into the fiction equivalent of the Dead Sea Scrolls.

In fact, the entire End of Time thing that Moorcock did has to receive an overall score of tepid from me. Elric at the End of Time was entertaining for a short period, and it was doubly exciting to recognize the hook in Sailor on the Seas of Fate from the Elric saga which could only be what this book expands on. But in the end, I was left, as with Dancers at the End of Time which was my third attempt at this series, with no idea what the point was besides parading extreme decadence and the boredom and ceaseless philosophizing that accompanies it in front of the reader's face.

I get that everyone at the end of time is running things "like a boss", and that I guess they are the ultimate Lords of Chaos, so nothing is ever ordered and everything is decided by whim. Cool story. The problem with this is that such realities are those of the characters and do not require such whimsical and random writing style as is used here to authenticate it. Everything goes off on these random tangents. Plotlines and situations start up and then suddenly pull off enough 900 degree flips to scare Tony Hawk onto roller skates. The end result, at least for me, was that nothing stuck and I quickly lost interest in figuring out what was happening.

I can only give impressions, and not plot synopsis, because I literally never grasped the plot. Sorry. Perfect for hipsters who get a kick out of being and understanding "cryptic", anyone looking for a story that engages and goes somewhere tangible would be better off leaving this on the shelf.