Rating: 4/5

Brenda Joyce is one of my favourite authors of all time. She has written one of the most Epic Romantic Tales over the years and many of them are my all time favourites. With adventurous Alpha-heroes and strong beautiful heroines who dare to tame them Joyce just succeeds with entertaining...its Romance afterall and i love it!

"The Prize" is the fourth book in the "DeWarenne Dynasty"-series (i love these series so much) where it starts with Devlin`s and Sean`s father being killed right in front of them. That terrifying sight traumatized the 10-year old Devlin so badly that he grew up that day into becoming a warrior who lives and breathes for need of vengance...as in obsession of it. Now at the age of 24,our hero,the infamous Sea Captain Devlin O`Neill abducts our spirited 18-year old heroine Virginia Hughes, niece to the man who brutally killed his father. Little does he know that the moment he watches her on the ship with a gun pointed at him, that their fates were united into a Forever...

Devlin O`Neill and his brother Sean O`Neill are the descendents to Liam O`Neill (Hero from "The Game") so i already knew that i would fall in love with these Golden Haired brothers. I can truly understand why many REALLY disliked Devlin throughout the story, he had after all taken every means to carry on his heartless revenge against his fathers killer. Taken on his wife as his mistress (that`s pretty coldblooded) and even stole his sons mistresses and even ruined him economically,he is a very cruel character who lives in this deathly obsession only being 24-years old, which is too much for a young man like him. It was like he had the whole world`s populations hate on his shoulders so much that it had become a part of him and who he is. From seeing Virginia for the first time he never physically hurts her or even tries to rape her for the sake of the memory of his dead sister and that he had been raised by his parents to respect woman. He never seduced her first (so don`t worry about forced seduction) but she does seduce him. Even while he always hurt her mentally and declaring that she shouldn`t expect anything from him. For his revenge he taunts her openly as his mistress for the whole England to see, THREE times he left her bed after making love with her without saying goodbye much to her heartbreak, and he pushes her to his brother for him to marry her. Also at the same time not standing the sight of them together, as it was clear with his jealous outbursts.
But all that time he also suffered himself. He had been succumbing to the darkness of hate and revenge almost all his life that it had become a destructive obsession that had made him into who he is, so much that he denied himself the happiness of loving Virginia and being loved in return. That causes a whole lot of angst in this story, even after their marriage. 

Virginia is a brave heroine Brenda ´Joyce created. It must have taken a lot of courage to escape that school to her plantation and even defying Devlin at every turn and simply and selflessly fought for his love...even thinking that it is a lost cause. Many heroines of BJ usually are proud spitfires against the heroes,but Virginia are a young woman who had her heart on her sleeve and i just simply adored her. It was no wonder Sean Ò`Neill also had fallen in love with her (much to Devlin`s disgust) and i so badly fell in love with him too. I know he will find his soulmate in "The Stolen Bride" which i am SO EXCITED for! We also get to meet Devlin`s stepbrothers: Tyrell deWarenne, Cliff deWarenne and Rex deWarenne-All these three are such flirts and i LOVE them,meeting Cliff again was so fun as i have read his book in "A Lady at Last" and i am such a sucker over him. I know that Tyrell has his book in "The Masquerade" and Rex has his book in "The Perfect Bride" and i SO plan to read them-gosh these deWarenne men are so MALE and SEXY!

There was that connection between Devlin and Virginia from the start that only grew deeper together with their sexual chemistry and blooming love. He was tender towards her and very passionate. When she would slap him after a horrible deed done from him he accepted it and said that he was sorry. He apologized when he saw that he had deeply hurt her-and it was so heartily said that i as a reader could see that he was slowly killing himself with the means he took to his revenge-knowing that Virginia also suffered. The conversations they had, slowly getting to know each other until there was nothing more to know and the passion was there simmering and dangerous... always burning and consuming me as a reader.I love Devlin and Virginia, and i love their Epic love-story in "The Prize".Devlin Ò`Neill will have come to the ultimate devastating point in the end where there will be no return to the darkness of unending anger and death, but instead the biggest realization that he can`t live without Virginia, finally surrender...in the name of love. Oh how i cheered and cried at the same time!