Rating: 5/5

Like so many others , I've been thinking about Elie Wiesel with the news of his recent death. Thinking about what he endured and how he turned the horrific experience of the concentration camps into a lifetime of standing up for the oppressed by teaching us that we cannot forget . I thought I might reread Night in tribute to him and I know that I will read it again one day. What I decided to do now was to read this memoir that I was fortunate enough to obtain from Open Road Media because we need all the reminders we can get that the holocaust never should have happened and should never happen again.

Beautifully written . I was hesitant to say that . How can one write so beautifully about unspeakable loss, horrendous treatment, hatred, about the death of millions of innocent people? I can say this because the writing is almost poetic in these brief "fragments" of the horror , the hunger , the death, the depth of sorrow and yet fragments of hope in this diary like memoir by Isabella Leitner. Isabella , her mother and five siblings were among the Jews were evacuated on May 29, 1944 from a small town in Hungary to Auschwitz. Her father was in America seeking papers to bring his family there.

Like other memoirs of holocaust survivors, this is a difficult read, taking the reader to this unimaginable place in the camps but also the unimaginable place in her heart and soul. This is short in length and I could have read it in one sitting but I found myself stopping at times because it is gut wrenching, heartbreaking (cliche terms , I know but I can't find other words). 

Isabella and her sisters sustained themselves with their mother's belief in humanity despite the hatred . "And when this is over .... With your lives, you can create other lives and nourish them. You can nourish your children's souls and minds, and teach them that man is capable of infinite glory. You must believe me." I find it almost incredulous that after all she endures that she does believe her mother. When she has her sons , "Mama, I make this vow to you: I will teach my sons to love life, to respect man, and to hate only one thing - war."

In the camp she was also sustained by a pact with her sisters - that they must all survive together . Then a new pact since the burden of trying to survive is too great . "Somebody will have to live. ....We cannot all die.... Some body must live to tell the tale." We are so fortunate that Isabella did live to tell the tale . This book needs to be read.

I want to thank my Goodreads friend Sue . If I hadn't read her review ( https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...) I would have missed this book. I also want to thank Open Road Media for making available these previously published books in electronic format . 

 Thanks to Open Road Media and NetGalley.