Rating: 4/5

This was a fascinating opportunity to get to know Booker T. Washington better - he was mostly just a name to me before reading this autobiography. Up from Slavery is his 1901 story of rising from his childhood as a slave to becoming a well-respected thinker, orator, and the founder of the Tuskegee Institute. Washington doesn't know his birth year for sure, let alone his birthday: he surmises it to have been 1858, or perhaps 1859 (after he died, evidence suggested he was born April 5, 1856). He doesn't know who his father was, having only rumors to suggest that it was a white man from a neighboring plantation who almost certainly impregnated his mother by force (he doesn't attempt even that level of euphemism for the act, and his mixed parentage surprisingly doesn't come up again - Washington is for all intents and purposes Black). He was only ever called "Booker", and when he was prompted at school (post-emancipation) to give a last name, he reflexively adopted "Washington". He later learned that his mother had given him the surname "Taliaferro", which he kept as a middle name.

Washington gives us plenty of details about his rise to the top: his struggle for education, his willingness to work hard, the indignity of sleeping under a bridge, the embarrassment of not being able to buy a change of clothes, learning the importance of taking baths, the frustration at finding a dropped 10-dollar bill (only to have to turn it over to the owner of the establishment). He credits his persistence, hard work, and honesty, and exhorts every one else "of our Race" to do the same. This pulling-up-from-the-bootstraps attitude, plus his refusal to assign blame or recrimination on white people, is where Washington has been a controversial figure. While his contribution to Black education is undeniable, many find it troublesome that he lays so much pressure on "the Negro" (a phrase used constantly in this 1901 book) to perform above expectations, given the numerous disadvantages and setbacks. Washington was a dynamo of a man, massively intelligent and highly motivated: not everyone can live their life with such rigor. Granted, Washington also did publicly speak out against lynching and voter suppression (and did even more privately), but his basic demand was that Black Americans be given a fair shot to accomplish everything their white counterparts were doing, and he knew they could. He recounts many stories from the development and operation of Tuskeegee, and the schedule alone is intimidating. The wake-up bell was just after 5 AM, and the day was tightly regimented with study time, physical labor, classes, more reading, and zero time for dilly-dallying. One of his idols, apart from Lincoln, was General Armstrong, a white former soldier who taught self-control and sober living at Hampton Institute. The two became long-time friends.

Constantly in demand for speaking engagements, Washington has much to say about his public addresses and how they were received. There's a fair amount of humble bragging, which is kind of fun to detect through the florid prose so representative of the era. He interacted with influential figures of the day, including multiple presidents (McKinley accepted an invitation to visit Tuskegee), Mark Twain, Susan B. Anthony, and Queen Victoria. He was perhaps so requested a speaker because he lived by a commitment to never say anything in the North that he would not say in the South, and worked hard to keep relations between the races constructive. He felt that applying blame or rehashing the sins of the past could accomplish nothing good. He advocated for natural, slow growth, and was perhaps a bit naive about the prospects. For example, he predicted that robbing the Black vote was a problem that would solve itself, as the same restrictions placed on the Black population could just as easily target poor whites. Alas, history has not borne that particular prediction out.

There are lots of funny and interesting asides. Washington talks about how many young black men would dramatically get filled with the Spirit in church, falling to the ground and proclaiming that they'd received their calling to the ministry. He was grateful he never had such a calling. To earn his way at Hampton, he applied to be a janitor. On his trial evaluation, he dusted and cleaned a room four times over, and it passed the withering inspection by the instructor. He got the job, and the education. He was "the first of his race" to receive an honorary degree from Harvard, let alone any elite school on the east coast. After his speeches, many white men would shake his hand and proclaim it was the first time they'd addressed someone like him as "Mister". He had hilarious observations about cranks and time-wasters, which he could spot a mile away. The former was greasy, lean and narrow, with a long beard and black coat, and easy solutions to difficult problems. The latter had no sense of propriety, such as the white man who summoned Washington to the hotel lobby because he'd really enjoyed his speech the other day, and was hoping Washington could say more just for him. He had much to say about his personal work schedule and ethic, down to how to achieve the letter-writing equivalent of "inbox zero". He was an impressive individual, whatever you think about the universality of his ideas, and his name has rightly lived on to the present.