Rating: 1/5

This book combined my favorite trope (girl disguised as boy) with my all time most hated trope (NO ONE CAN COMMUNICATE) and the result was enraging. There doesn't even feel like any kind of resolution at the end. I thought there was a problem with my kindle....I thought SURELY there were another pages left. But no. That's how it ended.
 
Spoilers ahead!

So I think the entire point of this book was how Jonty's grandma was the fucking WORST and single handedly ruined her daughter and granddaughter's lives. If she had let her daughter be with Jim then they could have gotten married and Jonty wouldn't have been a bastard. Oh but Jim was an outlaw, we couldn't possibly allow that! Really? Jim was no good but you decided to raise your granddaughter in a whorehouse? Seriously? So now Jonty is basically an orphan forced to disguise herself as a boy because god forbid they leave the whorehouse. I mean, 18 entire years is PLENTY of time to find literally anywhere else. But no, her grandma has a penchant for terrible decisions so they stay. Of course the grandma refuses to tell Jonty that the man who visits frequently is her father and just pawns him off as 'Uncle Jim'. A charade that goes on for 99.9% of the book for some god forsaken reason. Can you imagine the psychological issues and dilemmas Jonty would have from being forced to be act and behave like a boy and have short hair and dress like a boy for her ENTIRE FUCKING LIFE. But that's never addressed because literally nothing in this book makes any sense. Don't worry, Grandma kicks the bucket...freeing us all. Before she goes though, she makes her final mentally challenged decision. Hey Jonty, you know that gruff man who bangs all the hookers in the whorehouse? You're going to be his ward and he'll take care of you from now on. What a fabulous idea. You have literally forced Jonty into hiding her sex to protect her from men who visit whorehouses and now you have given her up to a man who visits the whorehouse. HAHAHA!

Now, the entire next part was bizarre and yet very humorous. The hero, Cord *eyeroll*, thinks Jonty is a pretty, sissy homosexual. Strangely no one will clarify that Jonty is in fact NOT a gay man and that Uncle Jim is her father. That would have cleared up almost all the tension in this book. 

"Are you fucking Jim?" Cord asks
"Ew gross, he's my dad." Jonty says.
THE END!

So Cord decides to work Jonty to death so he isn't such a pretty gay boy. Hard grueling labor and excessive amounts of verbal abuse. Once again, congratulations Grandma. You picked a real winner.
Now because Jonty is just oh such a pretty boy, other men start lusting after her. This is of course ALL Jonty's fault. I think Cord Mcbain is actually struggling with some repressed desires of his own and is taking it out on Jonty. Also, can I just say I hate the name Jonty. I also hate the name Cord. 

After the big reveal that Jonty is a woman, they get sexy together. He decides the right thing to do is 
to pretend to bang and be in love with another woman so that he can remain honorable to Jonty. Yes, a brilliant plan Cord. This of course makes Jonty hate him...but not hate him enough to prevent him from impregnating her.

Yada yada. She runs from Cord, he eventually finds her after she has his baby. He of course accuses her of having some other mans bastard kid. Tells her he doesn't want her. Kind of rapes her. Then runs off again. Jonty of course couldn't verbally explain that the kid is his. No no, that is too logical. No one makes rational decisions in this book. 

A year later Cord sees her kid and realizes it's his....because apparently you can do that by looking at a one year old. Hahahaha. Cord demands they get married, so they do. He brings her back to the ranch and literally the rest of the book is him refusing to tell her that he is not banging nor in love with Tina. YOU COULD JUST TELL HER YOU AREN'T HAVING SEX WITH HER!!!! Jonty of course assumes that he is totes banging Tina and that he loves her so so much. He is too mentally challenged to refute this and it's awful. Just awful. Uncle Jim comes to find her, get's wounded by some character who keeps lurking around but is never dealt with for some reason. In his wounded state he finally tells Cord that he is in fact Jonty's dad. Cord forces Tina to explain to everyone that she is in fact NOT boning him. Jonty thinks 'Wow...Jim is my dad...and Cord DIDN'T fuck Tina.'......AND THAT'S IT! THAT'S THE END!!!! ARE YOU SERIOUS?????? No! I rebuke this book.