Rating: 5/5

When someone says Business schools, everyone looks up to the top ones like Harvard, Stanford, Wharton etc. with a view of having the top class education system, that creates corporates who would rather be competent in any environment or rather are just prepared for any top level posts right from the start of their MBA education. But the author has a bit of a different take on this thinking. Well, he doesn’t completely disagree with education, but he doesn’t hesitate to state what these prestigious schools actually can’t teach you inside the four walls of the college. To be very honest, the title seems more like an attraction, because once you start reading the preface you would see that the author himself makes a note that the book is about what the schools “can’t” teach you rather than what they don’t! To state, the book is not about what the schools lack, but its more about why they can’t teach you! And what those are exactly! And lastly how to actually inculcate them. 
Before we hop in about the book, let's first talk about the author of the book. Mark Hume McCormack (November 6, 1930 – May 16, 2003) was an American lawyer, sports agent and writer. He was the founder and chairman of International Management Group, now IMG, an international management organization serving sports figures and celebrities. McCormack wrote several books, including The Terrible Truth About Lawyers and What They Don't Teach You at Harvard Business School, which spent 21 consecutive weeks at #1 on The New York Times Best Seller list. His annual publication The World of Professional Golf, first published in 1967, included an (unofficial) world ranking system. 
The book is divided in three parts, titled – people, sales and negotiation, and third running a business. These in general sense are the topics or the concepts which even if found in business books can’t be taught, as these require a highly practical approach and the will to actually step forward and work. Over the next 230 pages the author goes on discussing certain things which require practical knowledge as well as experience to gain expertise in. These include sales domain skills like strategy, negotiation etc. When I went through this book, one of the major things which I felt was that this book is majorly for the people who are aiming at the fields of Human Resource and Marketing, there isn’t much to talk about the domain of finance, operations etc. But surely the book in its first and the third section helps out in general to any domain. 
To summarise and give you a good view of the book. I would say, the language of the book is easy, anyone with normal vocabulary can read it and certainly can get a good idea of the plot. Secondly, the book is highly practical, gives you a clear idea of the concepts, that too with good and concise examples. There is no BS while talking and the teaching and knowledge is up to the mark. I would recommend this book, particularly to the people trying to pursue a career in the domains of Human Resource and Marketing, this may or may not be the guide book! But it surely is a book full of knowledge. To describe it in three words, I would say, Practical – Easy – Worth! Cheers!