Rating: 5/5

Oh. *hand to chest* What a bittersweet story. I've loved the Audrey Hepburn movie for years, and was so pleased to find this out-of-print title at my library. (The copy was acquired in the 1950s.) I was surprised that the movie stayed so close to the book. 

Nuns have always fascinated me. I think that fascination may have stemmed from seeing this film when I was young, and seeing the struggles these women of God go through in their quest for Christ-like perfection. There's no doubt some Catholic heritage in my family, but you'd have to go way way back to find it. Nevertheless, I hold deep respect for these women who give up the world, give up their families and opportunities to have their own families, and devote their lives to service in this way. We follow Gabrielle Van Der Mal as she enters a Belgian convent at a tender age, and progresses through the religious life, hoping to eventually be posted as a missionary in the Congo. A trained and talented nurse, she is professionally capable in all her posts, but the spiritual aspects of her life seem to hold her back. She struggles, and finds many wonderful spiritual leaders around her who admirably try to guide her. When she finally does make it to the Congo, you know she has found her Heaven on earth. And though the 1950s descriptions of colonial Congo are not PC, there is still a tenderness and great reverence for the area portrayed through Sister Luke. But of course, that would not be the end of this story. World wars have a way of messing up the storybook endings. 

I admit, I cried at the end. I cry at the end of the film. But in the film you don't hear all of Sister Luke's internal dialogue, which is heartbreaking. 

I found this book very contemplative, especially when holding up the nun's Rule standards against my own, and comparing how these Catholic sisters interpret scripture against what I think, and my thoughts. It may take a certain kind of person in a certain kind of mood to read The Nun's Story, but oh, I do recommend it.