Rating: 5/5

There are certain books that beg to be read over and over again throughout our lives. To return to a book is a sign of love and dedication. It's a sign that the book was just that good! It is as familiar as greeting an old friend, and sometimes there's a comfort in that reunion. One series that I’ve returned to countless of times is Lloyd Alexander’s “The Chronicles of Prydain”-- and it all started when I stumbled upon “The Book of Three” in my elementary library.
 
The setting of the story is Prydain, a land pulled from Alexander’s love for Wales and Welsh mythology. The story has a host of would-be heroes: from the enchanter, to a retired warrior, to an heir-apparent of the High King of Prydain, to an errant king-who-would-be-bard, to a fiery princess from an ancient magical line. Alexander could have chosen any of these characters to be the hero in his classic children’s fantasy but, instead, he chooses the boy whose job it is to help take care of the pig.
 
That boy is Taran, an Assistant Pig-Keeper living on a small, isolated farm. Taran is bored with his peaceful life under the care of the farmer Coll and the old magician Dallben. He longs for adventure and the chance to perform heroic deeds, and finds them sooner than he expects when the search for the runaway oracular pig, Hen Wen, draws him into a battle between good and evil. In his quest, he meets the brave Prince Gwydion, the fiery Princess Eilonwy, the bard Fflewddur Fflam, the creature Gurgi, and the dwarf Doli. He is both seeking Hen Wen and headed to warn the High King that the Horned King is planning an attack; and on the way, finds himself faced with choices he had never imagined.
 
The plot may seem like your typical Fantasy fare -- it sounds like tween Tolkien. But in truth, it's an exceptional work for young readers, drawing from the same deep well of European myth as Tolkien but delivering its complex story with simple, elegant language that kids can immediately embrace. Prydain grew into something more than a thinly disguised ancient Wales; undeniably, it was similar to that land, but reshaped by the addition of contemporary realism, modern values, and a generous dose of humor, as well as the special depth and insight provided by characters who not only act, but think, feel, and struggle with the same kinds of problems that confuse and trouble people in our time. 

The series, taken as a whole, is Bildungsroman, and “The Book of Three” is only the beginning of Taran’s transformation. He has no great powers, no hidden strengths. He doesn’t discover that he’s the chosen one, or even dig deep into some well of previously untapped strength to rally for a strong finish. He is much like you and me: an ordinary, often weak, self-doubting person, bumbling through a life journey, who gets to the end, looks back, and wonders if he contributed anything of value at all. As such, Taran’s perspective and the changes he goes through can act like a mirror to us: it reminds us that heroes more often lead quiet lives -- that in actuality they are more ordinary than extraordinary. 

This is the start of my first Fantasy series. This is the one that started me on my long trek through hundreds of other great books and dozens of other great series. I still love this series to this very day! The strength of “The Chronicles of Prydain” is the way the books build on each other. “The Book of Three”, when you look at it by itself, may be considered the weakest in the series -- but the whole is greater than its parts and should be consumed as such.
 
My review for the whole series can be found here: 
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

There is a web comic adaptation of “The Book of Three” (ongoing), by the talented artist Dawn Davidson. which can be found here:
http://thebookofthree.thecomicseries....