Rating: 4/5

4.5 Stars

My sister in law bought me this as a Christmas gift when I was pregnant with my daughter. I will admit that at the time I was a bit surprised by the gift as I was very pregnant and SUPER emotional. However, when I did read it I appreciated the fact that she bought it for me.

I found it very interesting and I learned a great deal. 

Some of the main issues:
Safety skills for children outside the home
Warning signs of sexual abuse
How to screen baby-sitters and choose schools
Strategies for keeping teenagers safe from violence

Sounds scary doesn't it? But I found that being educated, prepared and taking precautions is a lot better than spending time worrying myself sick. Although, let's be honest as parents we will ALWAYS worry!! However, by preparing myself and my child (as she got older), I could worry less. 

I'm not saying it's easy to read a book like this. Scary stuff to think about and talk about. But I know some of it has helped over the years. I'm sure some strategies may have changed now (since things like social media have become huge parts of our lives) but the majority is likely the same. Actually at the time it was so helpful and reassuring. It reassured me that I was more prepared for things that could come up. For example, what to ask when interviewing potential babysitters. Although I was lucky and had my mother and didn't have to rely on very much outside help. 

One thing that has stuck with me all these years after reading it is...

FOLLOW YOUR INTUITION and teach your children to follow their intuition as well.

Does that man (or woman) that lives down the hall give you the creeps? Do you feel awkward leaving your children with certain people? Do you feel uncomfortable with a certain daycare worker? I'm not saying to run around accusing everyone of being a predator but we have that inner feeling that most of the time warns us for a reason.

He mentions in the book that we are so often more concerned with people we read about in the newspaper or see on the news, kidnappers, murderers, etc...that live ACROSS the world from us. But then we often ignore that feeling that we get when we come into contact with someone we see often. Not that we shouldn't be cautious in all situations but if a feeling is sticking with us it's good to trust it. I did become worried that I wasn't sure how to trust my "gut" and thought what if it's there all the time and I can't trust anyone? But I did find that I was able to tell the difference if something really stuck with me. 

It gives information and tips on how we can teach our children about touch, the body, personal boundaries, communication, assertiveness and more.
 
When my daughter was around seven she had a certain friend who's father gave me an odd feeling. I met him once or twice and I just couldn't put my finger on what was bothering me about him. At first I thought I was just being paranoid but after my daughter came home from a play-date (they had gone to dinner and a movie) she mentioned that the dad was asking questions that made her feel uncomfortable. She mentioned that he kept joking about the girls having boyfriends and did they want to kiss a boy. She felt really awkward about the kissing talk. Now maybe this was entirely innocent but it bothered me and so after that I would still have the friend over to our house but my daughter didn't go over there. Eventually the friendship ran it's course. Nothing else happened but I didn't allow very much contact or sleepovers etc. I also asked my daughter to tell me if a friend ever shared anything that concerned her. 

When I was young my mom rarely let me sleep ANYWHERE....I was so upset with her. I wanted so badly to sleep at different friends houses over the years and most of the time she would say no. She would only let me sleep over at people's houses where she knew the parents well and had a good feeling about them. At the time I didn't understand. Now as a mother I COMPLETELY get it. I am the same way with my daughter. I know there are some people who think I'm overprotective but I don't let it bother me. MY daughter still has sleepovers with close friends and cousins and doesn't seem to feel left out but I was and still am very cautious when I don't know someone. As she gets older she will start to make her own decisions and I hope I've taught her what she needs to know about keeping herself safe. 

The book talks about so many different issues and what can happen at different ages and how to be prepared for them. When my daughter was young it was hard having those conversations but they were so necessary. I didn't want to terrify her but she did need to be aware of her feelings, her surroundings, and what to do if something did happen. I wanted her to know that no matter what has happened that she can always come to me. 

We try to teach our kids to be polite. We want our children to behave well respect others. However, we also need to make sure that they also know they don't have to obey all adults in all situations. Especially if they feel they are in danger. For example if someone is trying to persuade them to go with them that it's okay to yell "NO" if that doesn't work and someone is forcefully trying to take them then all bets are off, it's okay to yell, scream, kick, and fight etc. 

The books mentions THE TEST OF TWELVE:
1. How to honor their feelings--if someone makes them uncomfortable, that's an important signal
2. You the parents) are strong enough to hear about any experience they've had, no matter how unpleasant
3. It's OK to rebuff and defy adults
4. It's okay to be assertive
5. How to ask for assistance or help
6. How to choose WHO to ask
7. How to describe their peril
8. It's OK to strike, even to injure, someone if they believe they are in danger, and that you'll support any action they take as a result of feeling uncomfortable or afraid
9. It's OK to make noise, to scream, to yell, to run
10. If someone ever tries to force them to go somewhere, what they scream should include, "This is not my dad" (because onlookers assume the adult is a parent)
11. If someone says, "Don't yell", the think to do IS yell, and if someone says "Don't tell" the thing to do IS tell;
12. To fully resist ever going anywhere out of public view with someone they don't know, and particularly to resist going anywhere with someone who tries to persuade them.

Of course all of the things on this list would need to be discussed further with your child. There would also likely be different answers or actions they would take depending on their age. But it's a good start. It opens up a dialogue between you and your child. 

I could really go on but I'm pretty sure this review is already way too long. Some of what is talked about in the book is common sense but there is also a lot of good tips and information. I may not have agreed with everything that was said in the book but, it gave me a lot to think about It helped me realize just how important it is to trust myself and my intuition. 

In my opinion this was an excellent and very important book, that I highly recommend.