Rating: 5/5

The seventh and final of George's so-call "original adventures" (don't worry, he's got dozens more "new adventures," though my understanding is that they tend to be rather repetitive; we'll get to that, though) is Curious George Goes to the Hospital. Again. In fairness, the poacher does acknowledge that George had been there previously.

The story begins with George yet again left unattended at one of the poacher's many homes. He finds a jigsaw puzzle and eats one of the pieces. The poacher later constructs the jigsaw puzzle, sees that a piece is missing, doesn't connect it to the monkey's tummy ache, and goes about his business. 

The puzzle features the now-famous image of George finding the poacher's hat in the jungle. This is 1966, and there's no reference to having the puzzle specially made, so we are left to surmise that George is now so famous that he's featured on jigsaw puzzles. Later events in this story confirm this view.

George wakes up the next day, feeling even worse, so the poacher immediately takes him to the children's hospital. For human children. Not the veterinarian.

I had a lot of trouble getting past that detail. What the fuck is the poacher doing? I initially thought he was trying to avoid the vet, lest they contact animal control and take the wild monkey away. Thus, take him to the hospital and try to pass him off as a human child, albeit a horrifically deformed and mentally challenged one. 

But that makes no sense. George is a famous monkey. Patients in the waiting room acknowledge this. 

So....what, then?

I think this is intended to be a commentary on the sad state of the healthcare system in the United States. If you are rich, you get immediate, first-class care at the nation's finest hospitals, even if you are a monkey, whereas if you are poor, like the little girl in the waiting room, well fuck you! Get in line behind the monkey!

Brilliant satire.

Anyway, pretty standard George fare from here. The doctors get the puzzle piece out (and let him keep it! Gross!), and the monkey then goes around the children's post-op ward, contaminating the many recovering children just out of surgery and likely causing a dozen or more very serious infections. The mayor sees all this but doesn't mind because fuck you, George is a celebrity and can do what he wants. Besides, he made a little girl laugh, so it's toats cool that she'll be dead in a week because of him.

Biting, biting social commentary. Easily one of the best so far!