Rating: 4/5

This is an important book. As much for what is told as for how simple it is to dismiss it before even lifting the front cover from the waiting pages of print. After reading many books difficult for me I reached for something non-fiction, straight forward, happily bereft of metaphorical layers, dense passages, dazzling messages if I could stay with it and read on. I didn't think it possible but I felt, Read-Out or R.O. in medical terms. So, I reached down for Yablonski's, The Story Of Junk. The plan was simple and cunning. Or was it cunning and simple? I hate this getting old and not knowing whether I'm being simple or cunning. Either way I would begin in the middle of this hefty book and skip the part of her perfect upper middle class upbringing and the astonishing, can-you-believe-this-can happen- fall from grace into the hell hole of drug addiction.

Junk began in the middle. The book is written in short sentences. It is written in first person present tense. The camera zooms in as close as possible within each passing moment of Yablonsky and her world. The selection of this style is the perfect representative of the experience, or as close as can be gotten. We as readers experience the altering of time and the cessation of consequence. This is a forthright report on the frailty of us human critters.

Yablonsky like many others-little is mentioned of her past and when it is its sleight of hand mesh and weave leaves it for what it is, a passing notion heard in the background as a whispered song-does not like who she finds inside her mind. As a matter of fact can't stand her, hates her. She cannot be left alone with her and must always be with others, drama and events filling gaps. As important, it is essential to not allow anyone to see who she is. The penalty is never questioned because the task is all consuming. I believe the word is dread. Constant dread. Dread risen from its soiled grave to surround Yablonsky and also feed a current of meaning and a vacuous pledge toward something unnamed.

The descent into Heroin Addiction is not a leap into a fiery pit. It takes a while to become addicted. Overtime and somewhat gradual. She was there before knowing she was. Life continued in-between. Daily life. Living with a soon to be lover, a lesbian rock star addict, she went through a honeymoon period where she became high and happy. Her dread backed off like a puppy cute or not. 

Once the fairly short honeymoon period ended she no longer got high. She became sick. At this point an addict no longer gets high. There is no further kick. They only become violently sick in a way I do not believe the Geneva Convention would allow prisoners of war to be treated. The horrific yowling symptoms persist until the next fix of junk, until the tourniquet tightened and the loaded syringe is knifed into the waiting blue vein. Life now becomes the daily search for the next fix. The dread of not finding it hovers until found. Once found, the ritual, the sooner the better, begins. The bent spoon, small amount of water mixed with the powder of junk. The difficult part of holding a lit flame beneath the spoon dissolving the powder. If held too long the powder dries and is useless. The sickness gets worse. The life of a junkie is not about getting high but about avoiding sickness, living within daily dread and avoiding it till the next… Being a junkie is a way of life.

Yablonski is engaging and makes connections quick. She must begin dealing and as with most dealers can only make enough money to supply her growing habit. Customers like her. She deals clean dope uncut with things that can overdose and or kill. Also, she is discreet. There is not the personal chat of vulnerability. This is business. It is a business that keeps customers desperately ringing her doorbell, invoking their dramas, hanging out in her apartment listening to music. Then she must cop from the dealers who deal to her. They must be there. In reach. She can't just leave these people desperately sick lined up the stairs leading to her apartment. More important, she needs their money-often not their with their pleas for credit. She knows they're always good for their word, right. She must cop the powder for them to get her next fix for herself, to avoid the nightmare.

Constantly surrounded, constantly fearful, caught in the web of a cycle of need, the Heroin is not always there. All too often she must go into the bleakest most dangerous part of the city. The deluge of Heroin in the New York City of the 1990's has a square chunk of burnt out buildings ignored by the police. In front stands a line of sick junkies shaking and vomiting. She lines up with them waiting her turn to step into a dark shadowed building, entire floors amputated. Slipping her money into a cut slit a bag of powder appears after a tense wait. She leaves not knowing what kind, how good, if it is cut with poisonous substances to increase the dealers profits. She must find a place to shoot the junk. She cannot wait. There are dark recesses in dark buildings, in the hollows of alleyways. Will she overdose there? The sickness has to be stopped. Will she make it home cutting through the harrowing streets? Home means another ritual. Straight now from hitting up the junk she cuts up the powder and must bag it to sell to her customers.

What about the police. She trusts no one. Is vulnerable to many though does not think in those terms. No one trusts anyone. A community is formed where that distance is created and trusted. Isolation and aloneness for her while always surrounded by others. She does not see herself and no one cares to see her. Her problem solved and time filled. Surrounded by others stuck in this cycle she leads a life void of the anxieties of meaning, ambition. Morality as a construct falls away gradually in relevance. Within this world all action can be placed within the reference point of the person being a junkie, accepted, expected, and permissible. The addict has entered another world where the relativity of morality has been certified beneath a different code. Within their culture and world the addict's behavior is normal and expected. There is a forgiveness other communities cannot imagine. There is a faith in the present.

Over time it is simple to see and label the physical habit as self destructive. The damage done to once attractive facial and bodily images is palpable. However the addict lives now in a world that is mirror- less. The damage caused them in appearance is not registered or calculated. Their world gives no points for appearance. Appearing more damaged may provide as an asset in asking to be fronted dope or money or not be available to do the same for others requests.

In short the junkie has fallen into a life where, similar to a child, they live in a constant state of need and the searching hope of having that need gratified so as to avoid the horrible mounting feeling of sickness when the need is not met. This fear, insecurity, drives the addict. The sickness of not having the dope the next morning on waking is torturous. So, the addict spends their waking time seeking out a gratifier who will return them to a state of avoiding the horror of being in need and its consequent physical liabilities-copping dope or having enough, works clean or not, a dealer or if not available anyone, even off the streets from an unknown, enough customers to provide not money for a profit but enough money to cop enough dope to keep one's habit afloat.

Fear based, skimming on the uneven voltage of dread, it is a life easily stepped into and once inside, the netting turns out to be the thickness of unyielding iron bars,