Rating: 2/5

The farther I got into this book the further my rating for it dropped. It gets two stars instead of one because I did learn somethings. Beyond that, it felt like this book was written by a tabloid magazine since the focus was on the rumor mills around Howard Hughes' sex life along with his business and political scandals.

My overall impression of Howard Hughes is that he was no great businessman. He inherited an extremely profitable company from his father and knew how to foolishly spend the money he received. He could be effective in negotiations with his unorthodox style. However, many of the actual business projects that he directly got involved with were doomed due to his mismanagement. I have a much better understanding of his overall life, but there is plenty of more down to earth information that I would like to learn about.

Quite a few things that the author brings up were surprising and led me to do some cursory internet research. Some topics, such as the movie The Conqueror being filmed in the fallout area of an atomic bomb site and leading to much of the staff dying of cancer later on, turned out to be documented elsewhere. The authors claim that Howard Hughes had many connections to the CIA. Outside of one of Hughes' companies building a deep-sea drill ship to be used in the CIA's Project Azorian to recover a sunken Soviet sub, I couldn't find other sources supporting other claims of a Hughes-CIA connection. Accodring to the author, the Mary Carter Paint Company was a business front for the CIA. After a little bit more research, it turns out these claims were retracting from a 1977 Rolling Stone article.

Howard Hughes was an extremely controversial figure and very protective of his personal life. Is there a good biography out there of him? I am not sure. This book isn't the one. It scratched my itch to learn more about this man after watching the Aviator with my wife. However, that itch has been scratched and I have enough of understanding of him to enjoy further pop-culture references of him. There are plenty of other men and women throughout history that I am excited to learn about and taking on another Howard Hughes biography would not be a constructive use of my time.

Would I pick up another biography by Charles Higham? This book is a red flag for me and I will avoid his other works in the future.