Rating: 5/5

“Red Giants and White Dwarfs” is book two in my studies of astronomy. Jastrow’s prose is right to the point. His chapters are short and concise. Most are accompanied with photographic illustrations that reemphasize his positions. The book itself is a first edition printed in 1967, during the early phases of the Apollo Moon Shot. It is solid and of high quality paper.

The narrative is comprised of two parts; the first is astronomy and the second is evolution. 
It begins at the sub atomic level; a study of the primary building blocks of mass– the electron, the proton and the neutron. It then progresses to the three fundamental forces; nuclear force, the force of electromagnetism, and the force of gravity. This short course in physics is very helpful in understanding the evolution of a star; from massive clouds of hydrogen gas, to the ultimate collapse of a Red Giant, and then the dying days of a White Dwarf.

In regards to the universe, Jastrow presents both schools of cosmology; the Steady State and the Big Bang theories. He also echoes Hoyle’s thoughts on the formation of Hydrogen in empty space and briefly touches on the discussion of a continually contracting and expanding universe.

Jastrow’s overview of the solar system follows convention; the planets formed from the same cloud of hydrogen that created the sun. As a result, the terrestrial planets are heavy in iron and the outer giants overwhelmingly hydrogen and helium. He also speculates the surface of Mars may experience seasons of “simple hardy plants”, and, that Pluto may be “similar in size and composition to the Earth”.

The final chapters explain the formation of Earth and the beginning of life. Again, Jastrow starts at the smallest elements, this time its amino acids and nucleotides. He then delves into the formation of DNA and the role that viruses play in the further evolution of life. Jastrow also cites Darwin’s “The Origin of Species” when analyzing the progression of single celled organisms to the branches of the animal kingdom.

After reading this book, two things become immediately apparent. Time, and that stars are both the creators and destroyers of life. From the very beginnings of solar formation, to the conceptions of single celled life, and then the rise of hydro-carbon man, it takes billions of years. These processes are repetitive, of which we currently do not have a count to the totality of evolutions. In regards to the Sun, it is the catalyst that spawns life in the solar system. Ultimately, when reaching its final phases of existence, it will end life. With such clarity of existence, shouldn’t we break free from the shackles of Christianity (or any other Abrahamic religion) and observe the Sun as the immediate emissary of the Creator of the Universe?