Rating: 5/5

Brilliant, witty, fiercely observant, Raban meanders across America, commenting provokingly on the mundane social circumstances in vastly differing regions. He is both kind and cutting, always captivating. Ride with him from NYC to Alabama, from Seattle to Key West. His ability to scoop out the flesh of each experience is fabulous. 

One of the most memorable passages is his comparison of the rich and poor in NYC:

"There were the Street People and there were the Air People. Air People levitated like fakirs. Large portions of their day were spent waiting for, and traveling in, the elevators that were as fundamental to the middle-class culture of New York as gondolas had been to Venice in the Renaissance. It was the big distinction--to be able to press a button and take wing to your apartment. It didn't matter that you lived on the sixth, the sixteenth or sixtieth floor; access to the elevator was proof that your life had the buoyancy that was needed to stay afloat in a city where the ground was seen as the realm of failure and menace.
In block like Alice's, where doormen kept up a twenty-four-hour guard against the Street People, the elevator was like the village green. The moment that people were safely inside the cage, they started talking to strangers with cozy expansiveness... Their New York consisted of a series of high-altitude interiors, each one guarded, triple-locked, electronically surveilled. They kept in touch by flying from one interior to the next, like sociable gulls swooping from cliff to cliff. For them, the old New York of streets, squares, neighborhoods, was rapidly turning into a vague and distant memory. It was the place where TV thrillers were filmed. It was where the Street People lived.
Everyone I knew lived like this. Their New York consisted of a series of high-altitude interiors, each one guarded, triple-locked, electronically surveilled. They kept in touch by flying from one interior to the next, like sociable gulls swooping from cliff to cliff. For them, the old New York of streets, squares, neighborhoods, was rapidly turning into a vague and distant memory. It was the place where TV thrillers were filmed. It was where the Street People lived."

"It was interesting to feel oneself being willed into nonexistence by total strangers. I'd never felt the force of such frank contempt---and all because I was sitting on a fire hydrant...every one of these guys wanted me wiped out..after only a minute or 2 of this, I began to warm with reciprocal feeling; had I stayed on my hydrant for an hour, I'd have been aching to get my fist round a tire iron or the butt of a .38 just to let a zombie know that I was human too."