Rating: 3/5

I went looking for this book after readingPower, Sex, Suicide: Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life by Nick Lane in which author Margulis is mentioned several times, mostly with regard to her theory that mitochondria were originally bacteria that entered into a symbiotic relationship with another, larger bacteria, the first step to developing the first eukaryote and the ancestor of all visible organisms.

I was a little put off by the tone in parts of the book where the authors disparage many of their scientific colleagues, particularly the neo-darwinians such as Richard Dawkins. I understand that science involves criticism and challenges to accepted theories, but there is a diplomatic way to do that rather than accusing others of being ostriches who fail to consider new ideas and are oblivious to other disciplines.

Nevertheless, it is always healthy to have competing views, skeptics and an open discussion of all possible answers to an important question. But it seems the authors aren't satisfied to have their theories integrated with others as part of the answer—they want theirs to be the primary if not whole answer. It seemed unbecoming.

I can't remember reading a book whose foreword refutes major aspects of the book itself, saying that some parts are outright wrong, warning the reader to be wary. But perhaps because the foreword was written by famed biologist Ernst Mayr, and given that he does praise many if not most aspects of the book, they felt it was worth the pain. It is worthwhile to read his foreword a second time after you finish the book.

To a lay reader like myself, the book certainly gives one a pause to consider that evolution may not be as fully understood and as tidy as we thought. Speciation by random mutation and differential survival may not be the only rule: genome acquisition and symbiogenesis may play an important role. But just how important, and exactly how, is a subject of ongoing debate as much as natural selection was during Darwin's time. Stay tuned for more information