Rating: 3/5

***
2. The First Warning

When it comes down to it, what do we care
That everything finally turns into dust,
Over how many abysses I sang in despairs,
Or in how many mirrors I lived as I must?
So I'm not a dream, not a comfort, not good,
And least of all am I a blessing,
But you'll recall more often than you should -
I'm not sure, of course, I'm only guessing -
The rumble of lines which are quieting down,
And the eye concealing on its floor
That rusted little thorny crown
In its uneasy silence, and more.

***
Brodsky: "Apart from the general sacred aspects of the said entity, its uniqueness in the case of Akhmatova was further secured by her actual physical beauty. She looked positively stunning. Five feet eleven, dark-haired, fair-skinned, with pale grey-green eyes like those of snow leopards, slim and incredibly lithe, she was for a half a century sketched, painted, cast, carved and photographed by a multitude of artists starting with Amadeo Modigliani. As for the poems dedicated to her, they'd make more volumes than her own collected works". 
A snow leopard, slim and incredibly lithe. Seriously?

***
Broad and yellow is the evening light,
The coolness of April is dear.
You, of course, are several years late,
Even so, I'm happy you're here.

Sit close at hand and look at me,
With those eyes, so cheerful and mild:
This blue notebook is full, you see, 
Full of poems I wrote as a child.

Forgive me, forgive me, for having grieved
For ignoring the sunlight, too.
And especially for having believed
That so many others were you.

***
1.
Not weeks, not months - it took us years 
To part. And now at last we feel,
Having a gray wreath over our ears,
The breeze of freedom, cool and real.

No more being betrayed and betraying,
And you don't have to listen all night
To the evidence I've been busy arraying
Which proves me incomparably right.

2.
In the breaking-up days, as must always happen,
The ghost of the first days knocked on our door,
And the silvery willow rushed right in,
Gray, glorious branches trailing the floor.

Frenzied, proud, bitter, we stood still
While a blissful bird sang to us from above,
We stood looking down as he sang his fill
About the way we defined our love. 

***
Everything here will outlive me --- Everything.
Even those ramshackly birdhouses there 
And all this air, this springtime air,
That has made the oceanic crossing.

And the voice of eternity is calling
Otherworldly, irresistible,
And over the cherry tree, blooming, full,
The moon's brilliant light is falling.

And the road running easy and white,
In emerald thickets is lost to sight,
I don't know where it will end . . . 

It's lighter among the trees,
It's all like the paths one sees
By the Tsarskoselsky pond.

---- (I'm thinking of the Baltic in December)