Rating: 4/5

This book is one of the purest labors of love I've ever read. 

The author's genuine love for the iconic Route 66 - its people, its services, and even its potholes 0 shows in all of his writing and photography. Mr. Wallis brilliantly preserves a slice of Americana that was struggling to survive when this book was published over 20 years ago. It's still hanging on but oh how heartbreaking it must be for the author to see what Route 66 looks like now. 

He starts with the inception of Route 66 and how an automotive club saw a need to link together isolated sections of local roads into a proper highway. I had no idea there was an interstate marathon to celebrate the opening of the highway. Route 66 gave Americans a fun way to explore a section of the country and brought livelihood to remote regions. The road made its way into the cultural identity of the USA and spawned motor courts (aka "whoopie cabins", the most adorable euphemism I've ever heard of), blue plate specials, a TV show, and millions of fridge magnets.

Then some genius decided that it was better to travel across the country without seeing anything and introduced the concept of the interstate highway. Thus, Route 66 was put out to pasture. In some places, the interstate literally runs right next to the poor ole road. Thousands of businesses bellied up and the highway was decommissioned, but it lives on somehow.

The book is a bit dry at times and the author narrates his book through the rosiest of rose-colored glasses. He skips over some of the dangers of the road and many of the ripoffs and unscrupulous businesses that surely plagued travelers, but given his love for Route 66 I can forgive this. 

I remember being a bored and annoying teenager who didn't understand why my parents were so excited to be driving on Route 66 when we drove out to the Grand Canyon in the mid 90s.

But I get it now. I specifically recall driving through Shamrock, TX, in 2008 and having a pleasant stay at the Irish Inn. I drove back through a couple of months later and it was closed. That struck me as very sad. In 2012, on a summer day so hot that even us desert dwellers starting to reconsider our decision to move someplace sunny, I intentionally drove through Oatman, AZ. It was the windiest, most ridiculous road I've ever drive on and I love every minute of it.

And there you have it. The road was decaying before I was born, but somehow it's wiggled itself into my heart. May Route 66 live on. If you have no idea what I'm talking about, then read this book.

P.S. You could make a good drinking game by taking a shot every time he mentions a delicious, reasonably priced home-cooked meal at a Route 66 diner. You'll be drunk before you get to the Texas chapter.