Rating: 4/5

I went to the library to look for books about chess strategy, because, you know, I like chess. They were all out of Susanna Polgar, so I brought home this book instead. It's basically what it says it is; a chess prodigy's father writes about his son and the international chess scene in the 1980s. And here is what I got out of the book: Chess is real bad news! Chess might seem like a classy pastime, or an intellectual pursuit, but it just wants to fuck you up and leave you getting rained-on in the gutter. Stay away from chess, while you still have time! 

If you're an adult, chess might turn you into a schizophrenic Nazi, but it will probably just make you a drunk asleep on a park bench. If you're lucky, you can hustle your skills for drinking money in Washington Square Park. If you're a child, chess is even more insidious. Your parents, who once loved you unconditionally and sought to give you a well-rounded childhood, will start wanting to turn you into a single-speed killing machine. As their love for you rises and falls with the number of other little kids you decapitate at tournaments (whose parents' love is similarly linked to victory, so their tears are not just poor sportsmanship), you realize that to maintain a competitive edge/parental love you need to give up almost all non-chess activities, and play and practice and memorize chess moves for hours every day. 

The best part is that while everyone loves chess prodigies, with their little hands and big heads looking so serious and cute, once you hit puberty, no one cares. They might care a little if you're absolutely the best in the country, or world, or if you're super-hot like Susanna Polgar, but for most of you: it's over kid, find a new pastime. I bet you wish you had some childhood memories to guide you forward. 

So remember, chess is safe to read about, but never, never to play. If you ever see a kid with a chess board, take it away and introduce them to video games and sugar. They will thank you someday.