Rating: 4/5

Awwww. DP frontloads the angst and conflict in the first few chapters so the bulk of the story is about the healing of the H/h - so the HEA feels very believable and very hopeful.

So, the angst. The H/h meet when hero's brother brings her to the ranch. Younger brother, raised separately by their mother, has always been jealous of the hero and wants to show off the New York model heroine. 

Hero is eaten up by jealousy since he fell for her at first sight. And he is unforgivably mean to her anytime they meet. He eventually takes her virginity and then lashes out in guilt about betraying his brother. 

Heroine falls pregnant, tries to tell him, but he sends her away since he believed his brother that she laughed at his clumsy lovemaking. Heroine is in a car accident, loses the baby, and is extensively injured. Six months later, the younger brother is killed in a car accident. Out of spite he leaves his half of the ranch to the heroine. 

Hero reads the letter the heroine sent to his brother and realizes she never had a thing going on with the brother and that she lost his baby. He is devastated and vows to help her heal from the accident.

The story goes on from there as the heroine returns to the ranch with the hero, does her exercises, teaches the hero about female erogenous zones, and agrees to a marriage. They do hurt each other with their words as there are a lot of misunderstandings and a fragile male ego to massage. (This is one of the few times I remember an uninjured hero being self-conscious about his looks.) Their love scenes really show a progression of intimacy and are very well done. (This is high praise from a reader who regularly skims love scenes). 

There is a run-hot/run-cold aspect of the hero's personality that got tiresome, but by the time I was tired of it, the heroine was too and put him on "blast." That was a fun scene. I also enjoyed how vehement the hero was about the heroine wearing white on their wedding day - his possessiveness and regard for the h was loud and clear. 

If you like barely experienced H/h waking up to the wonders of sex along with a big dollop of angst, you'll love this one. 

*puts down the empty bag of Diana Palmer chips. And reads the front:*

Our motto at Diana Palmer Industries "Strangely addictive. Can't stop at just one. " 

I'm just slightly guilty after all that cheesy goodness. Sorry/not sorry