Rating: 4/5

This is one of the best, and certainly one of the most unique, installments in the Nero Wolfe canon. Wolfe actually leaves his sancta sanctorem and travels to a West Virginia resort for a meeting of gourmet chefs. After one of the sumptuous dinners, the gourmets taste nine versions of Sauce Printemps (which, if I recall my high school French, means Spring Sauce?) which contains nine herbs and seasonings; in each version, one seasoning is omitted. The tasters enter the dining room, one at a time, and take a single taste from each dish of sauce, on roasted squab, and write on a card which herb is missing from each dish. When it is Wolfe’s turn, he discovers the body of that evening’s chef, with a knife in his back. The murderer man was hated by several of the chefs present, and several had openly talked about killing him. He was considered a thief, having stolen recipes from them, and from one he had “stolen” the man’s wife.

Wolfe has no intention of getting involved, because he is determined to return to New York City on schedule; however, when the wrong man is arrested, he realizes he must find the real killer.

Wolfe is famous for being a gourmet AND a gourmand, not to mention his other eccentricities of never leaving his home and his passion for growing orchids. In this book, the focus is all on food. We all love food, don’t we? YouTube has hundreds, probably thousands, of food vlogs. (My favorites are the food and travel ones.) So the appeal of this book is obvious, not to mention the mystery is a pretty good one of what’s called the “locked door” variety, meaning that opportunity would appear to be the strongest indicator of the murderer.

I said in the opening that this is one of the best of the Nero Wolfe series, but there is one aspect that really spoils it. The story was published in 1937, and is set in West Virginia; most of the employees at the resort are young black men, and the book is simply littered with racial epithets. The county sheriff is completely reprehensible - I have no doubt he was a member of the KKK. The DA isn’t much better. Rex Stout, in Archie Goodwin’s voice, casually uses racial and stereotypical terms. He could be said to be an equal opportunity offender, however; he describes everyone, whites included, in terms of stereotypes (a Scot has a “face like a sunset preserved in alcohol; someone named Lawrence Coyne is “as white as a snow bank”). Even the venue itself, called the Pocahontas pavilion, he describes as “all Indian as to decorations” (“dark woolen things with colored rugs and stuff”).

The sole bright spot is Nero Wolfe himself. He is convinced that one or more of the waiters (all young black men) must have seen or heard something. He asks them to meet with him and he confronts the issue of prejudice head on.

’You know, gentlemen, I have had very little experience in dealing with black men. That may strike you as a tactless remark, but it really isn’t. It is certainly true that you can’t deal with all men alike. It is popularly supposed that in this part of the country whites adopt a well-defined attitude in dealing with the blacks, and blacks do the same in dealing with the whites. That is no doubt true up to a point, but it is subject to enormous variation, as your own experience will show you...

But even more fundamental than the individual differences are the racial and national and tribal differences. That’s what I mean when I say I’ve had limited experience in dealing with black men. I mean black Americans. Many years ago I handled some affairs with dark-skinned people in Egypt and Arabia and Algiers, but of course that has nothing to do with you. You gentlemen are Americans, much more completely Americans than I am, for I wasn’t born here. This is your native country. It was you and your brothers, black and white, who let me come here to live, and I hope you’ll let me say, without getting maudlin, that I’m grateful to you for it.’

Wolfe addressees each man individually, by name; i.e. Mr. Whipple, Mr. Crabtree, Mr. Brown, etc. Eventually, this approach allows Wolfe to obtain the information he was seeking; Mr. Whipple and Mr. Moulton saw the murderer, although they were unable to identify him because he was in blackface.

I do think it is interesting that the only reasonably enlightened character was Wolfe, who, as he says, is not a native-born American (Wolfe was born in Montenegro). While I believe that our current culture often takes political correctness way too far at times, (and I’m writing this review only a couple of days removed from the kerfuffle over Nike’s Betsy Ross flag shoes) this book has reminded me how am truly grateful I am that we have come a long way from the type of prejudice exhibited by the characters in this book.