Rating: 3/5

This little exchange on page one sums up the romance:

'I've a good mind to put you over my knee and lay into you until you can't sit down again!'

A strange feeling shot through Sherry as she glared at him, her sapphire blue eyes shouting defiance in her small tired face. 

Oh, MP, how you would have reveled in the freedom of Kindle Unlimited. Instead, Sherry has to make do with that "strange feeling," until after the HEA when the H/h can let their freak flags fly. 

There is a happy ending, of course, and the hero does promise more sexual adventures (they spent one night together before the black moment), but the H/h have to wade through a bunch of misunderstandings and jealousy before they can play in the H's dungeon - or whatever the Outback equivalent is. 

The hero's ire is ridiculous. He thinks the heroine's brother is going to elope with his sister. He's lord of all he surveys and the heroine's brother has inherited a broken down station from his hermit grandfather, so he's not good enough for his sister. Heroine and brother grew up in England and went to live with grumpy gramps after their parents died and her father left a financial mess. Heroine's brother hates the Outback, heroine loves it and does all of the work.

The hero is constantly seeking out the heroine's company to "make her pay" for his worry about his sister. It doesn't abate when the H's sister marries someone else entirely and the h's brother moves back to London, dropping the station in his sister's hands. 

I found the hero to be smitten from the onset (he wants to spank her, not take over the mortgage for revenge). He kisses her many times as "punishment" and is angry when she responds because - do I have to explain why? He is a vintage hero. He's fighting his feelings because he's been married before, the heroine is only 19 to his 36 and lets face it, he loves these power games. 

So does the heroine. She hits him. She talks back and says things she doesn't mean. She lies by omission. She misses him when he's gone. She gives him her virginity after he was injured in a wild fire. 

These two. They share the same towel when they have to spend the night in a hotel while looking for their runaway sibling. Hero whips off the towel she has wrapped around her nudity and stalks off to the bathroom, leaving her humiliated and diving under the bed sheets. If that isn't flirting MP style, I don't know what it is. This is MP's version of Lady and the Tramp and the spaghetti scene. 

Ivy and Boogenhagen were having a discussion of who is the most asshat hero of MP's and this H isn't even in the running. He's mean because he's full of sexual tension and is obsessed with the heroine. The hero of The Odds Againststarts out indifferent to the heroine and is mean because he is mean. Big difference. And even he isn't the worst in my book. The Loving Slave has the worst hero that I've read by MP. (I haven't read them all, though)

Outback Checklist:
Drought
Wildfire
Private planes for the large station owners
Rusty utes for the small station owners
Sheep shearing
Cooking for sheep shearers
Sing-alongs after sheep shearing