Rating: 1/5

This review is of “Ecstasy’s Torment”, by Olivia Sinclair.

The book begins in England, 1782. It is here that the heroine of the book, Alexandra Christine Westley, 19, is trying to escape the clutches of her hated stepmother, Corene. (Backstory: Corene married Alex’s father, Edward, after Alex’s mother, Sara, passed. Edward passed soon before the story began; now, Corene is trying to force Alex to marry John Allen, Corene’s lover, a penniless knave who is hoping to refill his coffers with Alex’s money inherited from Edward. Corene, in turn, hopes to get revenge on Alex and Edward, who left most of his estate to Alex), Alex’s trip to London is interrupted when she is waylaid by highwaymen. She is saved by Justin St. Ives, 30, the newly minted Lord Roth and the hero of the book. Justin lives in America, but has returned to England to claim his title and set his family’s affairs to rights.

After being found in a compromising position-by Corene and John-Alex and Justin are forced to marry. The early days of their marriage do not go well, as Alex and Justin are constantly fighting, which is what they do for most of the book.

As they arrive in Williamsburg, Virginia, Alex and Justin receive frequent visits from his friend, Raffe Barton, and Anna Carson, Justin’s ex-paramour who is intensely jealous of Alex’s marriage to Justin. Thinking that getting away from Virginia will help their marriage, Justin takes Alex to Paris, France. There, however, they find more problems, one of which is Andre Dupre’, a count who takes a fancy to Alex. The St. Ives’ leave France after Justin wounds-but does not kill-Andre in a duel over Alex.

After leaving France, Alex and Justin’s ship bound for America is destroyed in a hurricane, leaving Alex and Justin stranded on an island, but apart from each other. They eventually find each other, but Alex has lost her memory. For the first time in a long time, the couple is happy. That happiness, however, is short-lived, as Alex regains her memory and her hatred of Justin as they are rescued by the British Navy and sail back home to Virginia.

More problems await Alex and Justin in Virginia. John Allen has arrived, and he and Anna collaborate to try to destroy the couple. They kidnap Alex, who is with child now, but she is rescued by Justin; during the rescue, however, Alex is shot by Anna, but Alex survives. Alex later delivers a son, she and Justin realize that they do love each other and have their Happily Ever After.

Upside: At the beginning of “Ecstasy’s Torment”, I really liked and felt for Alex. However…

Downside: For the rest of the book, Alex and Justin are very unlikeable characters. Alex is bratty, childish, immature and whiny. She believes that love is chaste kisses and holding hands, nothing more. Justin is arrogant, egotistical, self-centered and obnoxious. He is ruled by his lusts. The majority of the book is Alex and Justin arguing with each other, which becomes extraordinarily tiring after a short while (Right after they are forced to marry!). There is no depth to Ms. Sinclair’s writing; the characters are shallow and undeveloped.

Sex: A few scenes, which are not graphic in the beginning and become less so as the book goes on.
Violence: Alex slaps Justin a couple of times. (I wanted to as well!). There are scenes of assault, battery, attempted rape, sword fighting, and a shooting. None of the violence is graphic, although there is some blood shed. 

Bottom Line: Readers who like overwrought melodramas with obnoxious characters may like “Ecstasy’s Torment”. I don’t fall into that category anymore.