Rating: 5/5

Brilliant. Not a word wasted. I read it in two days. I will keep this as a talisman to ward off sentimentality and gush. To start at the end of it, I will add this book as a resource to keep away from me, “…middle-class men and women, clean and fresh, whom it didn’t seem possible life had touched, discussing in posh, educated voices the hardships that had been handed to them until, on the point of suicide, they had found…” X,Y,Z: whatever self-indulgent claptrap filled in for them the life that was missing. 
	Healy, punchbag for a violent, vicious Catholic father, tempered by a hard environment, further brutalised in the army, and soon for fifteen years a member of that ‘vagrant society’ (his words) that is the city within the city of London. Alcoholics will love you if you have a bottle and kill you if you will not share it. This is a tremendously violent world, bleak beyond respectable imaginings, a world that is kept hidden largely by the routinely violent institutions of court, prison, healthcare. It is not the individuals as such, although there are plenty of psycopaths within and without the arena just as there are some gems (a probation officer, one who helped turn his life around) it is more a structural divide: “It just is”. Very funny at times, very warm too. Human, at the individual level, this Healy is a man worth the time in knowing. Not just for gawkish or voyeuristic reasons, not to admire or detest, but to see ourselves in. There is a good Afterword by Colin McCabe which compares human behaviour in the Grass Arena with that in the (financial) city: both societies struggle for power, the first is more honest and stripped down to basics stripped of their sartorial sheen of respectability. 
	It’s a book about one person too who could be any or many of us, struggling to communicate. Common ground, park, grass arena, community, society. Healy, brought late to sobriety struggling and feeling unreal outside in the healthy happy laughing world of the confident. To get there, “I only had my aggression to relate with. If I couldn’t use that, I couldn’t communicate.” Think about it. “I only had my aggression to relate with.”
	And driving it all, the Tension, the physical almost twin of himself that clawed into his neck and shoulders, the dreadful anxiety and fear. Fear is a main part of the lexicon in other ways: “ … he who can produce the most fear gets the most drink for nothing. Everyone and everything is full of tension. There are no tomorrows; tomorrows can’t be relied on to come in this vagrant society. Nothing can be taken for granted. Each day you have to prove yourself anew in toughness or lack of it, in stealing, fighting, begging and drinking.”
	Healy never quite lost everything. He never went mad completely. That made it worse in some ways. “Trying to hold onto a bit of sanity can make you vulnerable in lots of ways.” That he did hold on leaves us with a rarely powerful testimony.
	The consistency in the unadorned writing, cut to the bone, is parallel with the man who is the body who is the feelings and one of us, but ‘authentic’, so when he does, rarely do a summing up or overview it rings true: “And I’m just drinking and smoking, doing my little bit of nick. It seems such an idle boast. I’m neither proud nor ashamed of it. It just is.” (this against a procession of the much more broken than him). Think about it: “It just is”. 
	There is a lot to be dug over for the nature of addiction, and McCabe does, it is pretty interesting. But Healy just stops, Just like that. No fuss. He found something else, another addiction without harmful side effects and which brought him money and prizes and respect. Find out what it was yourself. But he saw through that, saw it as helpful for a while, then dropped it. He fell in love, it nearly came right, but then he never saw her. Utopia never came. It never does. Life just is.