Rating: 4/5

John Douglas is easily my favorite nonfiction writer. His books are always entertaining and informative, and Obsession, which focuses on sexual offenses spanning from rape to stalking, was no exception. 

Obsession tackles the various psychological elements of sexual predators, from their rough backgrounds to deep-seated insecurity issues. Douglas illustrates the various components of what contributes to the creation of a violent sexual offender, and gives examples of some of these offenders potential styles of behavior, using in-depth, specific, real-life examples. He chronicles the process of criminal devolution with various serial rapists, explaining how and why the offenders were caught, often as a result of their own sloppiness as their cockiness progressed. 

Douglas also dedicated a fascinating chapter on stalking, giving particular attention to the case of Laura Black being stalked by a coworker as an example. He emphasized the subtle, less well known emotions that victims of these crimes go through--he took time to explain why Laura was right to feel harassed when her stalker consistently brought her baked goods, even though at a first glance, those around her and the general public would be tempted to call this type of persistent predator "sweet." 

And that's another thing that makes Douglas so fascinating to read. He presents the reader with tremendously difficult, heavy subject matter and approaches it with incredible sensitivity, compassion, and professionalism. He often dedicates whole chapters towards particularly heart-wrenching cases, with a focus on exactly who these bright young victims were, and how well loved they were and how much potential for good they had in the world. In Obsession, he chronicles 8 year old Destiny Souza and 19 year old Stephanie Schmidt. By introducing the reader to these cases, Douglas is also able to discuss the monumental efforts their families have gone through in creating and advocating for victims rights, a topic he spent considerable time on compared to previous books and was informative and delightful to read about.

Like many Douglas books, he spends a fair amount of time encouraging readers to stay safe, how to help others, and how to get involved in preventing future crime, as well as making practical, informed suggestions on how individuals, communities, and the government at large may enact meaningful change. An eye-opening and fascinating section of this book highlighted just how much is wrong with our justice system that many members of the public, myself included, didn't realize.

Douglas is hard and stern on the people who perpetrate these crimes, and its wonderful to see. He is coming from a place of knowledge and experience, and his stances on things such as criminal rehabilitation and the death penalty are refreshing and informative to read.

Obsession is unique in that it has a chapter dedicated to the three composite characters that inspired Buffalo Bill in Thomas Harris' Silence of the Lambs. John Douglas is often fictionalized, most notably as Jack Crawford in Harris' Hannibal Lecter books, so it was interesting to see his take on the villain his fictional team was up against. Moreover, the profiles he did on Ed Gein, Ted Bundy, and Gary Heidnik were downright chilling.

John Douglas' books are fantastic because they don't read like nonfiction; they pull the reader in. After, the reader is left feeling educated, informed, and entertained. And Douglas always seems to end on a note of hope.