Rating: 5/5

This is a beautiful little story about good triumphing over evil, light triumphing over darkness. Yes, it's a fairytale, and a children's book, but I did not feel like I was reading a children's book. Literature has deteriorated over the years, and I find it very annoying when people say a book hasn't aged well because it doesn't fit today's society. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that the world hasn't aged well. I wish this book had lasted longer. 238 pages seemed to fly by, and I'm left here with no other option but to start it over right away...which I will do. 

Of the characters, I especially loved Maria and Robin, and Marmaduke Scarlet. While Marmaduke Scarlet seems harsh at first, it seems to be merely a façade, and he makes the funniest remarks. Of course, all the dear animals hold a special place, but I find myself particularly fond of Wrolf and Zechariah.

Some favorite quotes:

"...sometimes in her dreams at night she stood beneath the branches of a mysterious wood, and looked down a moonlit glade, her eyes straining after something that she could not see. And when she woke up, there would be tears on her cheeks because her longing had been unsatisfied.
Yet she was not unhappy because of this dream. She knew that one day, when she was a very old woman, she would dream this dream for the last time, and in this last dream of all she would see the little white horse, and he would not go away from her. He would come towards her and she would run towards him, and he would carry her upon his back away and away, she did not quite know where, but to a good place, a place where she wanted to be."

"...though pink was not her favorite colour, it was a colour and, as Sir Benjamin had said, all colour is of the sun, and good. And pink is the colour of dawn and sunset, the link between day and night. Sun and moon alike ought both to love pink, because when one is rising and the other setting they so often greet each other across an expanse of rosy sky."

"I always like to be prepared for more guests than are actually expected," said Marmaduke. "Also I gathered from the tone of your voice that this tea-party was to be a great occasion, and great occasions need to be greatly celebrated. The mere suggestion of meanness, upon a great occasion, is much to be deprecated. The bodily sustenance of the inner man as well as the aesthetic satisfaction of the outward eye should be on a lavish scale."

"Have it your own way," he said. "But if your 'lots to drink' is tea, I don't want it. Of all the wishy-washy, insipid beverages -"

"...when at last the men ride away singing into the sunset, there was not a crumb of food or a drop of anything to drink left upon the table; nor a drop of hatred in any heart nor a crumb of bitterness in any mind. Everything was explained and forgiven, and the future stretched before them with a fair promise...
...A fair promise that was fulfilled, because they all of them lived happy ever after."