Rating: 4/5

This reminds me of those Facebook postings of the top-20 singles from any particular week in the 1970s or 80s. I'll often remember the melody of 18-or-so of those twenty titles.

Likewise this collection of Nebula Award Winners and editor Samuel R. Delany's favourite nominees; I remember most of them from their first publication in 1977. At-the-time I was reading Analog and FSF (Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction) magazines, so I read Harlan Ellison's wonderful paign to past-times Jeffty is Five first published in FSF. Likewise Racoona Sheldon's The Screwfly Solution from Analog and Spider and Jeanne Robinson's Stardance also from Analog (Ben Bova, the then-editor was brilliant at selecting such stories for publication). 

Vonda McIntyre's Aztecs and Ed Bryants Particle Theory were read in later anthologies (perhaps this one on first reading in 1978) and I know I first read Varley's Air Raid in this collection, as I never read Isacc Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine until the 1980s.

Of the six titles here, Jeffty is Five is probably the most famous, having reached a wider audience over the years than the (relatively) small number of readers of FSF. Varley's Air Raid was probably the most lucrative, spawning an expansion into a novel (Millennium) and a somewhat unsuccessful movie adaptation of the same name, starring Cheryl Ladd &amp; Kris Kristofferson. Air Raid is great fun, one of those 'woke up at 2am with a great idea' stories. 

McIntyres Aztecs is a little dated now, and reads a little like a Robert Silverberg short story. It was too easy to see the 'twist' early on. Bryant's Particle Theory didn't really register with me. 

Likewise the Robinson's Stardance is a little dated, though I remember it was well thought-of in 1977, and a worthy winner for 'Best Novella'. 

The standout for me though is Racoona Sheldon's (also known as 'James Tiptree Jnr') The Screwfly Solution winner of 'Best Novelette' and, in the words of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's White Mason can be described as what a snorter! Utterly original, utterly compelling and very scary, The Screwfly Solution hasn't aged one iota. It was filmed as a TV movie, starring Jason Priestley and Elliot Gould, directed by Joe (Gremlins) Dante. The novelettes epistolary-style narrative (conveyed as a series of letters) was a brilliant choice by Alice Sheldon. 

So in summary, a collection that included two classics of short fiction, namely Jeffty is Five and The Screwfly Solution. The other four are pretty good (particularly the nominee Air Raid, but Ellison and Sheldon did rather eclipse them.

Delaney provided a short intro and chose the inclusion of the nominee titles. There's an In memoriam listing for those who passed away in 1977, which included Eric Frank Russell and Tom Reamey, who had won a Nebula just two years before with San Diego Lightfoot Sue.