Rating: 4/5

If you want to visit ancient Greece, Mary Renault is the perfect tour guide. She can take known facts, make logical conclusions based on them, and weave both into a magic carpet that transports you to a living era, not a long lost one. 

In The Praise Singer, we enter the world of Simonides the poet, 83 years old and reflecting about his life. He is a bit cranky at first, complaining that no one can remember songs anymore without writing them down, the way his young (40 years or so) nephew does. Of course in his day and earlier, a poet's memory was his meal ticket, so it was easy to understand his complaint here. Technology makes people nervous no matter the era. 

Simonides was from the island of Ceos (now written as Keos) and he says the island was "stern": there were strict laws about behavior, dress and all sorts of things, but it is a lie that a man must take hemlock at age sixty. That was only in the old seige when the warriors had to be kept alive. Nowadays, it is just considered good manners. He spent his final years in Sicily and although he had other reasons for that choice, I would have to agree with him that Ceos was 'stern'!

We follow Simonides from youngster on the stern island to renowned poet in Athens, and are caught up in a swirl of history, watching intrigues and learning what may well have been the true back stories to many events that since those days have become legendary. I visited wiki a lot while reading this book, because as the story went along I became curious about nearly everything that was mentioned. The people were nearly all historical people, not merely created to fill out the tale (although there were of necessity a few such, they felt as real as the others and who's to say they did not actually exist?). Here is the wiki link for Simonides https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simonid...

Besides the story of one man's life, this is a story of the development of a country. We see ancient Greece on its way to the Classical Greece most of us think about when we hear the name. I like to read about people becoming who they are meant to be, and to see a bit of the same type of development in an entire country was fascinating. This book may not be as well known as others Renault wrote about ancient Greece, but it definitely deserves our attention.