Rating: 3/5

Wait a minute, is this what Joseph Conrad is? I thought maybe I'd read The Secret Agent at the wrong time, because I felt like I should like it but I sortof didn't. I tell people I liked Heart of Darkness, but there's this vague air of uneasiness that I can't quite put my finger on: I've read it three times but I don't really remember it. And here I am at Nostromo, which is about a revolution! And secret treasure! This is exciting! And here's the thing: it fucking isn't. Here's Joseph Conrad's deep, dark truth: he's boring.

It sneaks up on you because he writes about exciting things. A voyage into the heart of darkness to meet the mighty Colonel Kurtz. A secret agent. A man who goes around with explosives strapped to him and a deadman switch at all times. Revolutions. The plot summaries sound exciting. But you get to it and there are no scenes! It's just descriptions. It's a lot of talk. It's boring. 

If it were more exciting, here's what it would be about: This guy Nostromo is a mythically brave Capataz de Cargadores, which is another thing that sounds more exciting than it is, it just means he's in charge of the guys who unload ships. He's entrusted with smuggling some of this rich white guy's treasure - a lighter full of silver - out of town when a revolution hits. It's a dangerous job. Things go awry. 

This is a lighter. It's just a boat.

The treasure is your classic briefcase from Pulp Fiction. It's a test, right? It's temptation. Every man in the book is tested against the treasure. (Conrad's not interested in women.)

Dr. Monagham, who was tortured in his past by a different dictator, redeems himself in his own eyes by protecting it.
Martin Decoud, an intellectual, is totally unable to handle the test and commits suicide.
And Nostromo himself, for whom reputation means everything, and to whom complete trust has been given: He steals it.

Again, this all sounds great. It sounds like a big walloping adventure tale. But in practice it's just a shitload of talking and not very much doing. 

Also there's a bit at the end with a lighthouse that feels like a totally disconnected short story that Conrad just scotch-taped on.

Look, when there are scenes - like the riveting night-time flight of the lighter - they're incredibly good. Dark, too. I mean literally, Conrad might be the greatest writer ever of scenes that take place in darkness. You end up feeling like if Conrad could get his head out of his own ass, he'd be a good writer. But he can't do it. He can't just tell you the story; he has to go explaining it to you. So I'm going to stop denying it: it's not me, it's him. Joseph Conrad is a writer of boring books.