Rating: 2/5

I simply could not connect with this book. It has been critically acclaimed. I can even understand why that is so. From a technical standpoint, it is brilliant. The narrative voice revolves around three main characters: Birger Törbjönnsson, a rural doctor; Annie Raft, an unwed mother; and Johan Brandbert, a sensitive misfit among four half-brothers and a brutal domineering father. The third person viewpoint in each case frees the author to expound unreliable narratives with convincing authority. At times, a character will simply not have connected the relationship between two events. At other times, a relevant memory has simply been forgotten. At other times, a critical fact is being concealed from scrutiny. For example, Birger, the doctor, alludes to marital problems with his wife Barbro. On page 33 we are led to believe Birgen and his friend Åke, the newly appointed district police chief, are merely enjoying a brief fishing trip while Barbro convenes with a group of ecology activists. There is only a hint of disquiet when he casually mentions that Barbro didn't want to celebrate Christmas the year before. By p. 51 he entertains the thought that she won't be returning home. This, of course, arouses our curiosity. In succeeding chapters his recollections begin to document a marriage in dissolution. He deals with Barbro's increasingly passionate denunciation of environmental affronts (in a chapter beginning on p.87) with an odd passivity. The recollections he chooses to relate paint a picture of an overwrought woman magnifying the hostility of neighbors and the long-term damage of clear-cutting the forests. Only later do we learn of a significant event and the connection to Birger's own emotional withdrawal. Time after time, Ekman repeats this pattern, forcing the reader to re-evaluate conclusions that seemed obvious before another revelation. Is there ever an unambiguous truth?

Ekman employs numerous elements to sustain a mood that ranges from somber to creepy. The opening chapters of Annie's story occur at Midsummer. The lingering light intruding on the nighttime sky lends an eerie unnatural vibe. Annie and her six-year-old daughter Mia wander between a river and forested hills searching for the commune they plan to join. Their physical discomfort is portrayed through the cloud of insects that hover and bite them. The land beneath their feet seems alive.  “The tussocks looked like scrubby skulls sticking out of the earth, the birches were twisted and full of knots. On the last stretch down to the river, they cut across some marshland that swayed under their feet. They could hear the water now, a murmur as talkative as the streams, but with several voices.” (p.47)

The people in the story seem to mirror some of this hostile indifference. Annie and Mia linger in a fishing-tackle shop owned by a man named Lil-Ola Lennartsson. Four men (Johan's father and half-brothers) enter and suddenly fall silent. The owner looks at Annie:  “She realized he didn't want them in there any longer and that made her feel ill at ease. She took Mia's hand and went out. The moment she had closed the door she heard the voices raised again.” (p.29)

Sometimes a main character will be struck by inexplicable anxiety. Here is a scene of Annie at the commune:  “The first time she had walked down from the pasture and followed the stream in among the lichen-festooned trees, she had suddenly been frightened right in the middle of a step. Not by any sound, but frightened from within, icily and inexorably warned by an instinct she had never before known existed within her. She immediately turned around and started running back.” (p.178)

In Annie's story the isolation of the commune intensifies our sense of foreboding. The daily mantra of cooperation and openness is undercut by an obvious artificiality which denies natural emotions of like, dislike, unspoken hostility, jealousy and most important, secrecy. The ideals of the commune are constraining rituals, just as the conventions of regular society. 

Oddly enough, the three characters barely interact with each other. Instead, the reader is forced to follow three separate stories occurring in real time simultaneously. The stories are told in short choppy chapters. (Prospective readers are advised to keep a note pad close by and annotate by page number since the chapters are unnumbered. Readers might also simply want to add the name of the main character at the beginning of each new chapter). The connecting event in the story is a gruesome murder of two campers. The identities of the two victims are almost irrelevant. One of them is not even identified (or rather divulged) until 20 years later. Annie stumbles on the corpses while trying to locate the commune. She encounters Johan briefly in the forest and 20 years later seems to recognize him as the man dropping her daughter off late one night. Birgen and Åke arrive at the scene to investigate and interrogate any potential witnesses. 

Much of my problem with this book was due to its initial presentation as a dark crime story. The crime links the characters and precipitates a trauma that alters the course of their lives. However, its solution is almost an afterthought. The crime is more of a catalyst than a focal point. Second, I never really connected with any of the three characters. I can't explain why, but in a novel of over 400 pages, this was an insurmountable problem for me. It was a struggle to even reach the ending. The accelerated pace in the concluding chapters of the book failed to offset the extremely slow pace of the earlier chapters. As one review has pointed out, this book is not for the impatient reader.

NOTES:
An interesting essay about the role of landscape in the author's novels.
https://www.thefreelibrary.com/Landsc...