Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars. Reread for the January group read for the Georgette Heyer Fans group on GR. We are attempting to read all of Ms Heyer's Regencies in the order in which they were written. This is #1 - first published in 1935 - eep! And yes, it is a little dated.

This was never one of my top favourite Heyers, and this reread confirmed that. I first devoured all of her books as an uncritical teen, but these days I read them with a more critical and analytical eye. And now I see that the probable reason I never liked this one as much is because there's actually very little romance in it. Yes the rocky relationship between Worth and Judith runs right through the book, with a bold (but brief) kiss very near the beginning. But basically, it's a mystery story front and centre. Of course, this being a reread, I know whodunnit and how, but the fact remains that I'm not a big mystery fan, and I've never even read Ms Heyer's mystery genre books. 

So. I give 3.5 stars because the quality of the writing is always there. But for me there was too much detailed historical description in this one, and not enough of a focus on the relationship. I can now see this is an early book, and I think Ms Heyer restrained herself a bit in later books in terms of the overly detailed descriptions. I didn't really want to know all of the ins and out of a cock fight. Or a boxing match. Or the trip to London, and how many toll-gates were passed. Etc. I have the greatest admiration for Ms Heyer's historical knowledge and the amount of research she must have done. But in this one it doesn't really translate into a terrifically readable book.

I also didn't really love the MCs that much in this one, either. Worth truly was pretty arrogant, even though he really did fall in love with Judith. But he didn't have much time for people he didn't seem to feel were his intellectual equals, for example, Peregrine, Judith's younger brother. He tolerated Perry, but barely. 

And Judith wasn't really a very warm or likeable h. As readers, we saw very little of her inner life. The writing style did not allow for that - we received subtle hints of her changing feelings towards Worth, but it wasn't till near the end that it was clear she was in love too. There was no emotional hook for the reader. Yes she obviously loved her brother, but for most of the book she seemed to hate and mistrust Worth. And she liked her cousin Bernard too much, when the readers were clearly meant to dislike him. Confusing and not rewarding for readers.

So, overall it still sits as 'not my fav Heyer'. I admire the clever plot and the fluent writing, but Worth and Judith leave me a little cold compared with some of her other MCs.