Rating: 4/5

"in all the questioning about what makes a writer, and especially perhaps the personal essayist, I have seen little reference to this fact; namely, that the brain has become a kind of unseen artists's loft. There are pictures that hang askew, pictures with outlines barely chalked in, pictures the artist has striven unsuccessfully to erase, pictures that only emerge and glow in a certain light. They all have been teleported, stolen, as it were, out of time. They represent no longer the sequential flow of ordinary memory. They can be pulled about on easels, examined within the mind itself. The act is not one of total recall like that of the professional mnemonist . Rather it is the use of things extracted from their context in such a way that they become the unique possession of a single life. The writer sees back to these transports alone, bare, perhaps few in number, but endowed with a symbolic life. He cannot obliterate them. He can only drag them about, magnify or reduce them as his artistic sense dictates, or juxtapose them in order to enhance a pattern. One thing he can not do. He can not destroy what will not be destroyed; he cannot determine in advance what will enter his mind." (156)

This is a perfect description of Eiseley's ars poetica. Not your typical cradle to near grave autobiogaphy but more like a collection of personal essays that reverberate with each other throughout the book. Many of them end with a reflection of such lyrical beauty and emotional wallop that I could not read more than per day. Though he does not refer much to specific examples of his writings, along the way, I found myself gaining a deeper appreciation for the source of his preoccupations, his obsessions, his haunted view of the past, in the essays, and he was quite haunted, particularly by his childhood and family. A tone of heavy melancholia pervades this book, sometimes to point of near emotional fatigue, but the book is not without its light moments, as well. If you've not read Eiseley, I would not recommend starting here; start with the essays, any of the six collections, though I'm rather partial to The Invisible Pyramid. If you're already a fan of Eiseley's work, then I think this book is a must read. If any of the essays inspire you to read more, I recommend the Library of America two volume set of his collected essays.