Rating: 3/5

Buddy-read with my fellow romantic pirate lovers, Karly and Nenia!

This book gets an award for the hottest bodice ripper sex scenes. A bit more graphic and slightly kinkier than your average bodice ripper, these scenes were really, um, fun to read. *clears throat*

In fact, a lot of this book was really fun. The foppish Christobal, the French-talking Kitt, the completely un-frustratingly spirited Jeanette. The Civil War isn't my choice of setting for a romance, or any book, but the characters really made up for any perceived shortcomings. The whole book was just unlike other bodice rippers I've read, free of non-stop rape, a cruel hero, and woman-on-woman hate.

GUYS. THERE WAS NO WOMAN-ON-WOMAN HATE. Oh, there was ample opportunity for it, but instead, Jen examined and handled her conflicting feelings like a god damn PRO. And this was first published in 1983? Psssh. Ahead of its time.

So everything was fine and dandy until. UNTIL.

Shortly after 80%, Christobal (revealed to be Kitt, Jen's secret pirate lover), rapes Jen. For utterly no reason, except maybe that he's drunk and angry. But it's completely out of character, and even Jen didn't think he would do it. I get that, prior to the rape, he was scared and acting out to protect himself, fearing he would lose Jen's love, but how does this translate into the need to rape her? Why wouldn't he just seduce her instead, since they had proven so compatible in bed together?

I was somewhat shocked and put off—not because rape in a romance novel especially disturbs me, but because it was just so out of left field. It's like Bonds suddenly remembered she was writing a bodice ripper and decided to throw some rape in real quick. The next several pages are quite sad, with Jen recuperating at the home of Christobal's former mistress after having miscarried her baby. There are some scenes with her and Christobal, during which she makes it clear how angry she is about the rape and how much she hates him. All of it totally changed the tone of the novel. If not for the rape, if she had miscarried for some other reason, it wouldn't even have been so bad.

And, in light of everything in that spoiler, the last line of the book was a bit distasteful.

I really enjoyed the bulk of the novel, but the last 20% or so wasn't very pleasant because of one single thing.