Rating: 5/5

Jesus was a simple man with a simple philosophy: love one another, don't be a judge, don't be self-righteous parading virtue on your sleeve. Violence solves nothing. Be the first to help others and the last to put yourself forward ahead of them.

I've taken up a daily habit that will keep me busy for some time. I am visiting all the French and English cathedrals online. They are nothing if not symbols of immense power, of a religious empire based on the Roman, the buildings being derivative of the Roman basilica where emperors sat at the front above the people. The structures were meant to inspire awe and submission to supernatural power as represented by clerical power.

What possible connection could there be between the subject of my first paragraph and that of my second? Jesus' wanted people to be humble with respect to each other, not to a hierarchy of clergy dressed in elaborate attire and carrying symbols of power with a supreme leader at the top claiming to be the representative of God on earth and declared infallible regarding doctrine in 1870. There is nothing in Jesus' philosophy that calls for an institution of such wealth and power as the Roman Catholic Church became in his name.

Constantine's Sword is the work of an ordained Catholic following the course of the church through history with the common thread of anti-semitism that has been a feature more or less on display for two millennia culminating in a failure to censure let alone act against Hitler, the polar opposite to Jesus.

James Carroll takes the reader on his youthful travels with his devout mother, showing the naive acceptance of the story of Jesus and the place assigned to the Jews as responsible for his death on the cross. Then we see Carroll become a priest, increasingly questioning the position of the church with regard to the Jews as well as his own responsibility in it. This is a book about the morality of church and of the author as a member of it.

Carroll gives a detailed account of the leading thinkers who set the course of the church and the many popes who could deviate toward acceptance of the Jews but more often toward passivity or even encouragement when laymen became violent against Jews. It almost becomes farce with the setting up of a Jewish ghetto in Rome on the order of and within sight of the pope in the Vatican. The next pope has the ghetto torn down, then the next pope has it restored. 

Peter and Paul, Constantine, Augustine, Ambrose, Abelard, Aquinas, and many popes from Gregory the Great down to John Paul II are all here with their views and actions analyzed, making this a masterpiece of Catholic philosophical investigation and behind it all stands the icon of the church, Christ suffering on the cross. Carroll highlights that the church makes this the center of attention rather than Jesus' message of love and forgiveness.

The cross is the thread that binds the book, starting with a vision of it in the sky before the Roman emperor Constantine marching to take Rome against his rival Maxentius in 312 CE. He saw below the cross the words "with this, conquer", had his troops fashion a cross icon with a vertical spear and a horizontal sword and the following day was victorious. Thus did Christianity win his endorsement.

The cross is at the end of Carroll's historical account with the display of it at Auschwitz, still there in 2020 against the wishes of most Jews. Carroll's extreme discomfort with this placement drives his determination to understand why he feels it and how the cross has established itself as representative of a demeaning, insulting, accusing view of Judaism.

Constantine wished to bring the empire together under the cross and that purpose has never been lost, moving through all the popes into modern times. It is well known that to encourage unity, a common enemy is helpful and a helpless one was readily available throughout Europe.

In contrast to Jesus' call for the love of others, church thinkers starting with Augustine have placed blame on Jews for the death of Jesus. While Augustine did not call for direct oppression of the Jews, he did say that as punishment they were bound to never find peace but must be permitted to exist because their scripture authenticates (in the Christian view) the coming of Christ through prophesies in what the church calls the Old Testament, the first five books of which are the Torah of Judaism.

But permanent guilt in a matter so close to the heart of the vast majority of Europeans could not help but lead to terrible treatment in tough times. A plague? It was the Jews! Political unrest? The Jews at work! Economic decline? The Jews are bleeding us dry! Beatings, riots and dispossession could easily follow and more often than not, the church looked on.

To most in the church, the Jew was a scapegoat always at hand but in such small numbers that oppression was easily practiced and hard to resist, contradicting Jesus' practice of comforting the outcast and befriending the stranger.

It is well known that Jesus told his disciple Peter that before the cock would crow, Peter would deny three separate times that he knew Jesus. Peter vigorously denied it would happen and then went on to fulfill the prophecy, realizing with anguish how easily he had betrayed what he claimed was most important to him as he heard the cock crow. It is with a similar anguish that James Carroll documents the troubling history of his church, ending the book by calling for a Vatican III council to put a determined end to it.

Carroll has the gift of writing, never hesitates to relate the most regrettable episodes, of which there are so many. The reader feels the author's dedication to duty throughout.

Jesus stopped a stoning, saying "let he who is without sin cast the first stone." In other words, look to yourself before you judge others. As a dedicated Catholic, the author has done this with an institution that he feels deeply a part of himself. It is a job well done.