Rating: 4/5

I received a free copy of the Audible audio edition in exchange for an honest review.

Again, wishing for half stars. I'd like to give this one 3.5, but enjoyed it enough to round up. I enjoyed the narrator's performance which I'm convinced made this a 4 star rather than a 3. I will definitely be willing to listen to others by her. She did a great job with making the male lead sound believably masculine, which IMHO is the most important and probably the hardest thing to do for a female narrator. I am not sure if the accents were correct for the area of England the H/h were from, but that didn't bother me. It sounded right and that's enough for me. However as an American and a southerner, I did catch that the accent spoken by the h's servant in Charleston was all wrong. But, it was maybe all of 5 lines in the entire book.

I love Charleston or Charlestown as it was known at the time. I could definitely get a feel for where things were taking place. It's one of my favorite vacation spots and favorite romance settings. So, that's always good and the story itself was very intriguing. I also loved the heroine.

What lost the book the 1 1/2 star was the hero. I LOVE a good vengeful hero story and was very excited to listen to this. However, the hero has to have a good reason to feel vengeful toward the heroine (even if it's all a pack of lies). I'm still not quite sure what Christian's reason was. He had taken the bribe to break the heroine's heart and he had financially ruined her father. Sounds like Jessamine had all the reasons to be vengeful. 

Christian was mad at her because.... Um, I'm not really sure. He thought she may have revealed an embarrassing family secret and she couldn't deny that her brother wanted to marry her off to a man old enough to be her father. He already knew about that! The brother told him he wanted her heart broken so she'd quit being romantic and accept the match he wanted for her. The only explanation for Christian's OTT anger was insecurity, I think. He felt like he wasn't good enough for the h, so when things fell apart, he found it easier to blame her because he fell back into his pity-party 'she thinks she's better than me' attitude. Which was ridiculous, given the heroine's personality. He reminded me of a child who - when faced with an adult who is justifiably angry about his behavior - decides he'll show them and be angry right back, just because.

I also wish Christian had had to do something more to make up for being such a jerk - some groveling or making a sacrifice or something to win back the heroine's trust. The whole being paid to break her heart plotline was kind of glossed over.