Rating: 4/5

W. Somerset Maugham’s 1915 publication has as it’s title a line borrowed from Baruch Spinoza, from his Ethics series, "Of Human Bondage, or the Strength of the Emotions", where he discusses people's inability to control their emotions which, thus, constitute bondage.

This is something of a bildungsroman, in that we follow our protagonist, Philip Carey, from childhood until he is about thirty. As the story begins, Carey’s mother has just died, leaving him orphaned, and he goes to live with his aunt and uncle, an older couple who never had children. The uncle is a country vicar who is domineering and unempathetic. Philip was born with a clubfoot and this disability will haunt him severely in his childhood and will continue to be a difficulty for him, not as a physical deterrent, so much as an emotional one.

Carey embarks on a series of travels, first to Germany, then to Paris to learn to paint, and then to London for studies to become a doctor. Throughout this time, we see patterns of interconnectedness between him and the people who come into his life. I thought of Donne’s line about “no man is an island” but also Sartre’s No Exit, wherein human interactions can be seen as hell. Philip, who is self-conscious about his foot, has a difficult time with socialization, but not an impossible time. Though he gets some unwanted attention, his greatest struggle is with his own acceptance.

The most compelling element of the book is Philip’s relationship with Mildred, a woman he meets in a restaurant, and for whom he falls maddingly, irrationally in love. His pathetic, and unrequited pursuit of her, off and on throughout most of the second half of the story, is at times heartbreaking and bewildering. Maugham’s description of her reminded me of Hemingway’s Lady Brett, from The Sun Also Rises, though whereas Brett was a rich socialite, Mildred, is a conniving working-class schemer. Both women are thoughtlessly oblivious to the harm they cause to men.

Maugham, the author of The Painted Veil and Razor’s Edge, is a master of characterization and dialogue. His ability to convey a social dynamic is unparalleled and that talent is demonstrated in virtuosity in this novel, considered by many to be his masterpiece.