Rating: 5/5

Mr. Richard Dana Jr. or Dana as his shipmates called him, is a man I would like to know. Based on his autobiographical  Two Years Before the Mast, a recounting of his 1834-1836, seagoing-adventures aboard the Pilgrim (outbound) and Alert (return), Mr. Dana was a popular, hard-working, man’s man able to tell a tale. While attending Harvard, he contracted measles weakening his eyesight, choosing to become an ordinary seaman on a two year voyage to California—then the farthest hinterlands—for his ‘recovery’. This wasn’t the only odd (well to me anyway) medicinal prescription used back then either. How does a teaspoon of raw potatoes and onions beaten to pulp, administered every hour and held in one’s mouth as long as possible, strike you as a cure for scurvy, for a patient in the very last stages? When you are desperate, you do what you have to, right? It worked! 

This was one of the most interesting books dear husband and I have listened to in a long time. We both learned so much. Although we’ve neither of us ever had the least desire to ‘go to sea’ – and this book only confirmed that for us – we appreciated what these men endured and Dana is the most meticulous of observer-narrators. He kept a very detailed journal throughout. Do you know what reefing a sail is? I do now! His descriptions of icebergs were praised by Herman Melville. Wherever he went, Dana was friendly and eager to help without regard to social class or race; he was also curious to visit all places of worship, respecting various religious traditions, characteristics setting him above men of his or any age. 

There is also a 24 years later Epilogue where Dana returns to the California and to recount the changes which have occurred in the intervening years. He concludes with a brief update on what happened to some of his mates, those he was able to locate. 

Without being the least bit sentimental, the author is a very empathic man, concerned for all and saddened by many things he sees. It was the main reason he wrote the book—to address the injustices borne by the ordinary sailors. After he was admitted to the bar in 1840, he went on to specialize in maritime law, and defended many common seamen in court.

Excellent book. Admirable author. 5+ stars