Rating: 3/5

This is a collection of 16 short stories by O. Henry, a master of the story with the twist ending. These stories were written in the early 1900's, so you can find them all free online with a little searching. Many of these stories are set in New York City, and it was fun to get a glimpse of New York society a hundred years ago from someone who lived there. O. Henry generally writes light fiction, sometimes sentimental, usually with well-drawn, appealing characters, and typically with a surprise ending.

As a collection, this is a mixed bag. There are several gems in it, but also some mediocre stories, and a few that I thought were complete duds. Given that these stories are all in the public domain, I would recommend picking the best stories and reading them online, or buying a different collection of his stories, rather than this particular set (although it was only 50 cents for the Kindle version).

 
"The Gift of the Magi" - 5 stars. Della and Jim, a young married couple, poor as church mice. All Della wants is to buy her beloved Jim a wonderful Christmas present ... but all she has is $1.87. Is there anyone who doesn't know this story? I don't know how many times I've read or heard it. But I still found myself sniffing and wiping my eyes as I read the classic words:But in a last word to the wise of these days let it be said that of all who give gifts these two were the wisest... Everywhere they are the wisest. They are the magi."The Cop and the Anthem" - 4 stars. Soapy the homeless guy just wants to get arrested so he can spend the cold winter months in a nice warm cell on the Island. Why does Fate seem to be conspiring against him?

"Springtime a la Carte" - 5 stars. This was so cute I can't even. Sarah is alone in New York City, missing her farmer boyfriend who hasn't written, and dripping tears on the menus she's typing up for the restaurant downstairs because the dandelion salad reminds her of Walter putting a dandelion crown on her head...

"The Green Door" - 3 stars. Another story of romance, with fate and an adventurous spirit teaming up. Fine but not really memorable.

"After Twenty Years" - 4 stars. A loitering man tells a passing policeman that he's waiting for his old friend Jimmy, his "best chum." They agreed twenty years ago to meet again at this exact time and place, no matter what. A poignant story of friendship and the changes that can happen over time.

"The Furnished Room" - 1 star. Ugh. Maudlin and infused with bathos.

"The Pimienta Pancakes" - 2.5 stars. Old West tale about a cowboy and a sheep man competing for the same woman ... or are they? Humorous but a little silly.

 
"The Last Leaf" - 4 stars. A very ill young woman takes it into her head that she'll die when the last leaf falls off the vine outside her window. Sentimental but touching.

"The Voice of the City" - 1.5 stars. I kind of got the impression O. Henry was scraping the bottom of the Inspiration Barrel here.

"While the Auto Waits" - 4 stars. Well played, Mr. Henry! Way to fake me out with the double twist. A guy and a girl meet in the park and start chatting, and I was all, yeah, I know where this one is going! Well, I was half right.

"A Retrieved Reformation" - 5 stars. Jimmy Valentine, safecracker extraordinaire, gets a pardon from jail and promptly returns to his safecracking ways, until ... I really liked this one; the ending gave me warm fuzzies. Although I have to wonder what happened immediately after the story ends. Does Jimmy's future FIL quiz him about his unexpected skill set? Does his fiancée, or would she not even care? I like to think he fesses up but they forgive him his past.

"A Municipal Report" - 3.5 stars. After the narrator gets done with some mostly irrelevant drivel at the start about different cities and their personalities, and gets down to the actual plot, it's a pretty good one. A literary magazine sends a man to Nashville to try to sign an exclusive contract with a lady to write articles for them. The situation turns out to be far more complicated than he expected.

"A Newspaper Story" - 2 stars. An exercise in imagining how a newspaper could affect lives in unexpected ways. Not much of a story. 

 
"The Ransom of Red Chief" - 5 stars. The classic humorous tale of a kidnapping for ransom gone bad. The ending totally cracked me up. "You had better come at night, for the neighbors believe he is lost, and I couldn't be responsible for what they would do to anybody they saw bringing him back."

"A Ghost of a Chance" - 2.5 stars. A fluffy story about desirable vs. non-desirable ghosts, and men, and lost opportunities. It's more about social standing and the way people treat each other, and judge each other, than ghosts.

"Makes the Whole World Kin" - 2 stars. Rheumatism makes strange bedfellows. Apparently commiserating over shared ailments that have no reliable medical treatment results in instant friendship.

My ratings average out to 3.2 stars, so a 3 star rating it is. 

O. Henry, whose real name was William Porter, was a prolific author during his short life, writing 400 or more short stories. He spent some time in jail for embezzlement, which may explain the sympathetic view he often takes of convicts and criminals in his stories. He lived in Texas and Honduras (while he was on the lam) as well as in New York City.

Buddy read with the pantaloons-less group!