Rating: 1/5

Some sci-fi, mostly pulp. One of Earth’s colonies was invaded by an alien race called the Alerions. New Europe, it’s called. There is evidence the colony was attacked, but the government is calling it a cultural misunderstanding. There is also evidence of survivors, but rather than avenging their deaths, or mounting a rescue, the government of Earth chooses to let the Alerions have New Europe, no harm done, to thaw relations between their people.

Gunnar Heim won’t have any of it. He’ll go there himself and make things right. His plan is to buy a ship, raid the Alerion supply ships and starve the defense fleet around New Europe. This will weaken the forces occupying the planet and give Earth a chance to retake what was wrongfully stolen from them and rescue the survivors.

First, what a dumb plan. He’s not going to go to New Europe and try to rescue anyone? He’s not going to liberate the planet himself? His plan is to weaken the Alerion forces by raiding supply ships, one by one, and hope that Earth realizes this and grows a backbone and declares war on Alerion? He had no faith in those spineless politicians before, but his plan is to rely on them to do the noble thing? Stupid.

His plan is to become a privateer? Does he really think one ship raiding supply vessels and the like will make a dent in whatever forces are around New Europe?

Second, the story takes forever to get started. I was halfway through the book and not a single thing had happened yet. Heim was preparing for things to happen, buying weapons, recruiting his crew, talking to politicians, etc. Very boring.

Third, the Aleriona are described as foxlike, but the fur ends at the neck, and on their faces is, instead, a beautiful woman’s face. Even the males all look like women from the neck up. Uhh... That’s really dumb.

Pulpy, boring space opera that’s pretty damn illogical.

[December 2021: reviewers on Goodreads pointed out this is basically a commentary on the Vietnam War, complete with allusions to France and her beautiful language. Yeah, I can see that. The US government is cowardly and doesn’t recognize the glorious territory we lost to these aliens, and what about the POWs and Earth citizens we left behind?? So... Become a privateer and somehow a single ship will turn the tide of war... Fuck this book.]