Rating: 4/5

Vietnam is a country that was almost always at war, for the first 75 years of the 20th Century. They fought a French, a Japanese, and then another French occupation. Millions died before the American portion of the war began. As you may imagine, many Vietnamese saw the American prescence as another foreign occupation. America was still traumatized by the Communist takeover in China, and most Americans saw Vietnam as just another Communist domino.
During the American portion of the Vietnam War, 3 million people died. That included 58,000 American soldiers, 224,000 South Vietnamese troops, 1.1 million Communist troops, and civilians made up most of the remainder. In the United States, eight Americans burned themselves to death, to protest the war. Four protestors were shot dead at Kent State. 
Three times as many American bombs were dropped on Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia than during the entire Second World War, and millions of acres of forest were destroyed by chemicals like Agent Orange. American soldiers had a very difficult time differentiating between the enemy and noncombatants. In 1968, American Soldiers killed 500 unarmed Vietnamese woman and children, during the My Lai Massacre. The Free-Fire Zone tactic consisted of Americans telling everyone to leave a given area. After a certain amount of time, anyone remaining was fair game. More than 5 million people were forcibly removed from their homes, due to such a tactic. The Phoenix Program allowed for the assasination of anyone blamed as being a Communist, and the program killed tens of thousands. The North Vietnamese certainly were not saints in the war either. One theme of this book is that dehumanization is a part of war. When dehumanization occurs, then horrible things can and are justified against the opposing side.
For people who did not live during the height of the Cold War, the Vietnam War does not seem to make much sense at all. 
Hundreds of individuals were interviewed in this book. They were from both sides, and they were in quite a variety of different occupations. The one thing that most of them had in common was that they were just doing their job, even though they didn't always agree with it. Similar social, political, and ethical situations remain today.
This book did a great job describing the many faces of the Vietnam War. The only thing that I did not like about it was that there was no censorship of language. Ex-veterans and hippies can use colorful words. Otherwise, I would have given this book a five.