Rating: 4/5

That ending! Give me time to process bcus I want more!!

All She Was Worth was an intriguing, engaging crime mystery written ahead of its time with plenty of twists and clues to be pieced together. The story started fairly simple, of a case of a missing young woman whom simply vanished overnight. We followed Detective Shunsuke Honma, on a long sick leave after injured from a previous case to which left him slightly limp and on sabaticcal leave. With a young son, Makoto and no wife, Honma was a sort of this intelligent man but rough in nature when it comes to his son as he is awkward and unable to care much for him although he truly love his son. A requet came in from his wife's nephew, Jun that needs help to track his fiancee that disappeared suddenly after a discovery of her bankruptcy. This sets off a long journey of discovery on hidden secrets &amp; dark pasts of the young woman named Shoko

An intriguing exploration on consumerism, personal debts, financial commodities, loans in the 90s felt very relevant to the current era. This book seems very prevalent to the times we are in as the focus on loans &amp; pilling of debts with spending by credit cards while struggling to pay off the financial debts with meagre salaries led to personal bankruptcy that ultimately lead these people to be chased by loan sharks. With each clues, witnesses &amp; pasts being unravelled through investigations, we saw the devastating reality of the woman. Although, what fascinates me the most is that we won't able to know the full truth until we get the POV or confessions from the person of interest, a mystery that is left to the reader's interpretation. What pushed someone to the limit, to act the way they need to survive, finding any means of action just to bury the past and to what extent till she stop

Its convoluted, twisted &amp; devious but at the same time,its the desperation to survive. The ending was least to say baffling yet I get it. A thoroughly detailed crime mystery with so many facts &amp; puzzle pieces to be put together, a slow, arduous read yet it gave me one of the most haunting thoughts to ponder about after finishing it