Rating: 4/5

“Love cannot live where there is no trust.”  

This is a tough review, just because this isn’t really a novel. It’s more a collection of stories within the framework of certain mythologies (but for the sake of this review, let’s call it a novel). This is an ambitious work, which Edith Hamilton brings to life Greek and Roman Mythology (mainly and Norse partly), being a keystone of Western Culture. Reading this you get to understand the culture of the Greeks, what they believed in and the values of these stories. The beginning starts with a great essay describing the impact of these mythologies and then talks about major Gods before telling us the stories. Firstly, this is more of a collection of very compact retellings of stories from these myths. Secondly, it begins with a brief commentary talking about the sources, her views, and some interesting observations then the retelling occurs and within retelling, there will be some commentary but mostly that story, which this cycle repeats quite often. This might sound a bit tedious but when you’re reading it, honestly the model just works. The commentary I felt was very insightful to understand the Greek's perspective of these stories and just some interesting observations, overall.

Despite the compact nature, a lot of these stories have room to breathe. As there are numerous stories told, but for the most part, it didn’t feel like a bland summary. As a preface, in the first half of the novel, I knew most of these stories, as I've read a longer account of those stories from Stephen Fry’s Mythology series which begins at the Beginning to Troy (so far). Fry used this novel as a source (and many others) because this is such a cohesive package, sorting out the various sources and semi being chronological. Honestly, I enjoyed Edith’s prose, it read very well and it’s quite modern, so it has that accessibility to it. Most of them (stories) I felt were very engaging compact retellings, but I will say some stories suffer, an example is the creation myth. Zeus defeating Cronos was told super briefly, compared to what experience Fry’s account so much detail is missing. There are Heracles 12 labours which were so super condensed (akin to a summary), portions of the Aeneid I felt it (mainly second half) and aspects of the Iliad section. Besides that, all the stories I felt had enough breathing room and were very engaging. Even the ones I mentioned above I thought were engaging just some events were skimmed over too fast. So overall quite delightful retellings and quite informative.

Norse Section, I love the little bits of Norse Mythology we get here, but unfortunately provided very little, that it feels like an afterthought. I knew that before purchasing it but still somewhat a shame, that there are never revised versions that included much more Norse Mythology.

In Conclusion, do I recommend reading this novel, absolutely. It does everything it intends, being the perfect primer, before delving into the primary text of Greek Mythology. I wouldn’t recommend Stephen’s Fry retelling over this, to me, it doesn’t serve as a replacement but more of a complement. What I did, was read Fry’s retelling first (containing more in-depth retellings of stories in the first half of this novel), this novel and I will eventually read the primary texts. I don’t regret the order I approached it. Concerning how you approach it, is up to you but I will say this will be a valuable novel before heading towards Homer’s work. The last thing I would recommend is don’t binge it. There are a ton of stories here so just pace yourself and don’t overwhelm yourself as there are a lot of names. 

Thank you for reading this review. 

  P.S. This also can serve as a good reference text when approaching Greek Myths, but still by itself it's quite engaging.

 7-7.5/10