Rating: 3/5

Another "nice" post-WWII book by DE Stevenson. And I mean this without sarcasm. Her books are populated largely by nice, decent folks, who try to do the right thing in difficult circumstances. Family, the ancestral home, the faithful retainers, the old friends one has known since the nursery, all of these have a prominent place in the stories. 

In this book, Will Hastie decides to leave the military and return to his - there you have it- ancestral home. He is both looking forward to, and dreading, returning home, because nothing can be the same since his closest childhood friend, Rae, died in WWII 10 years before. And yes, the great estates have been neglected, Rae's mother is developing dementia and his father has lost his zest for life, but Rae's sister, Patty, is still the same. Except that she's gotten engaged to a rather pompous cousin, who is in line to inherit her - there you have it again -entailed ancestral home. Will discovers that Patty has been brooding for the past 10 years over Rae's last letter home from France. Something was up, something he wouldn't commit to paper. But what? Will decides to take a holiday in France, largely to escape the having to see Patty and her fiance, and visits the village from which Rae's last letter was sent. And he finds out that the great news that Rae couldn't write about was that he was getting married to a French girl. Will traces the girl, Julie, down to the South of France, and discovers to his stupefaction that there is a 10-year old boy, the spitting portrait of Rae. Of course Tom must come to England and take his rightful place as the heir of the - you guessed it- ancestral home. This takes some doing, because Julie and her mother are not that keen on taking Tom to England. But they do come to England, bringing new joy to their grandparents. Patty, in the meantime, has broken her engagement and is beginning to realize she really loves Will. But Will seems entranced with pretty Julie. Will they all find love in the end? Rest assured, they will.

Some of the attitudes in the book were outdated. For instance, the idea that Tom must come to England, leaving his mother and grandmother in France behind, seemed to be taken as a given, and very little thought was spent on the feelings of the two women who were asked to give him up. Julie decides to marry a wealthy French neighbor of hers, and this shocks Patty and Will. To marry without love, how appalling. But the idea that she might just be trying to compensate for the loneliness she will feel while Tom is being educated in England, does not seem to cross Will's and Patty's head. So there is a bit of Anglo-chauvinism here, which is entirely consistent with the time it was written (1950s). Apart from that, it is a fun read for a couple of hours of escapism.