Rating: 3/5

Luck McClure and his 8-year-old son Toby live a bachelor life since the death of his wife six years ago. On the anniversary of her death, Luck goes out and gets drunk and runs into Eve Rowland, who intrigues him with how she resembles an adorable little brown mouse. She views this as an insult, while he doesn't intend it as such, but she has some insecurities about how plain she is. They run into each other again, note the attraction and pleasantness between them and slowly get to know each other romantically. But Eve worries about whether she'll ever compete with the memory of Luck's wife given how beautiful she is and Luck struggles with his son pushing him to marry. 

There isn't much going on in this story really. It's primarily about the main characters, Luck, Toby and Eve getting to know one another, becoming something of a family unit and Toby trying to matchmake between Luck and Eve. What little angst there is stems from Luck letting go of his wife's memory and Eve not really knowing what Luck's intentions are. It isn't much. In addition the ending felt extremely abrupt, following a marriage proposal after they've known each other for a few weeks. I found it interesting that the characters felt the inclination to marry right away, rather than to continue dating for a while. It's an interesting story. 

Toby brings most of the entertainment value as an 8-year-old going on 50. He's VERY mature for his age. It also brings about a total difference in values between 1988 and present day. Toby prepares his father's hangover remedy, understands his father's need to go out with women and is allowed to stay on his own for short periods of time, is able to explore out in the woods on his own and has a very open and honest curiosity about sex, particularly when he walks in on Luck and Eve making out. I was 8 when this book was written and I can remember things being similar to this (not necessarily in preparing hangover remedies though...nor the honesty about sex), but definitely in the responsibility and the expectation of respect for adults. But in contrast, this book also presents a very different mindset about gender roles. Toby's primary motivation in wanting a mother is that he's tired of doing all the feminine household chores and is ready to have a mother in the house to do it for him. Especially after Luck tells him that a mother's role involves cooking, cleaning and various other housework, in addition to any job she might work during the day. RME and LOL. If this had been written today, this book would have gone up in flames. I found it entertaining though.