Rating: 3/5

I really wanted to like this book, and I gather from the reviews that almost everyone else has found it deeply satisfying. I am a great fan of "The New Yorker," and have read it all my life. I grew up with people connected with the magazine and several of my elementary school classmates have written for it. And a large number of the people referred to are names with which I am familiar.

Maybe that's the problem. I hoped to know more about this amazing cast of characters, but there are few anecdotes about anyone but Thurber and Ross. As others have mentioned, this is as much a biography of Thurber as it is a study of Ross, and I did indeed enjoy getting to know Thurber better. His humor, like his drawings, is gentle and endearing, though he seemed a lot more serious as a person in the book than I expected him to be.

Until some redeeming anecdotes towards the end of the book, though, I never managed to like Ross, and kept thinking I would have hated working for him. He was incredibly ignorant about literature, art, music and even grammar and spelling, though that did not deter him from correcting the work of a more literary staff. He was immune to poetry. His rudeness is astonishing. As Odgen Nash (whose work I love) is quoted at one point: [Ross was] "almost impossible to work for -- rude, ungracious and perpetually dissatisfied with what he read." he fired people capriciously, had a major problem with the presence of women, even socially,gambled excessively and was in general erratic as a friend and a manager of people.

Thurber makes it clear that people did love Harold Ross, but for the most part, he did not make it clear why this was so.

So...The value for me was in the description of the magazine as an aspect of American culture. The office seems like "Madmen," with constant drinking and smoking, which were so much a part of American culture until the last thirty years or so. And it is interesting to chart the course of such a wonderful magazine, though at the end of the book, I could not figure out how Ross pulled this off, though I am certainly glad he did.