Rating: 4/5

And thus the series continues...
 
Nicole and Anne's lives change drastically. Nicole moves to England to become Viscountness for her uncle Charles, and Anne suffers a dreadful loss in her life. I could understand Nicole's character a lot. She doesn't know what is expected of her life. Even at the end she does not know what holds for her in the future, which brings you to book four!

When I read this series for the first time three years ago, book three was my favorite. I still really enjoyed it, but I didn't like the last third of the story as much. When Judith is introduced-Cyril's mother-you don't get a good insight into her character. By the end I really like her, but at first you want to know more about her life. It also seems a little odd Judith throwing the surprise at the end. It IS a surprise, but just on the side of being slightly eye rolling.

 I LOVE Thomas and Anne's romance. Although I love Cyril's character dearly and cry every time he dies, I will admit that Thomas grows on me every time I read this series. His character is interesting and unsusual from the normal "tall, handsome" characters. And the interest Anne shows toward Thomas isn't because of looks, but instead she loves the passion he shows in his work. Percy and Thomas are some of my favorite characters, and every time it said Percy was perched on the sofa I snickered. 

I also enjoyed seeing the British point of view concerning the American Colonies. I especially like the scene when Uncle Charles is in court fighting for the rights of the Colonies. That would make for a great movie (well, the whole book would)!

One quote that really stood out to me:

"'So long as I base my happiness upon what I have or how life suits me, it will always remain fleeting....I need to find my happiness in God, and in Him alone. By playing my life in His hands and seeking to live as He wants me to, I now have a peace that's greater than whatever struggle I might face. My frustrations and my difficulties, all these will pass. But He remains. And it's in His eternal promises that I must abide.'"