Rating: 5/5

I discovered this book while researching camomile, the herb. It seemed to be completely in my wheelhouse of 'lost innocence Anglophilia' – somewhere between 
  Brideshead Revisited
, 
  Atonement
 and 
  Testament of Youth
 in following a group of young people before and through war and seeing how it affects them, and in contrasting the golden, privileged innocence of the pre-war period with the disillusionment of worldly adulthood.

I loved it! This isn't the first thing I've read to assert that people in wartime or other crisis situations basically go crazy partying and fucking because they could be dead any day, but it's one of the most vivid. The characters leapt off the page with vivid humanity – even ostensibly unsympathetic characters such as beautiful, vain Calypso and selfish Helena. Polly was my favourite character.

There's such drama in the sensuality of contingent scenarios – which YA fiction instinctively gets. Not only is it pleasurable to read about the emotional highs and lows of people in wartime, but these emotions also offer us the opportunity for self-reflection. I had to wonder how I would behave if total war were now declared, and everyone I knew were caught in the upheaval of it all. I'm closer to Helena's age than the other young characters – would I seize hedonism with both hands, as she does? 

However, some characters were more enigmatic than others. For instance, we never get much of a sense of Oliver, who lusts after Calypso in a pretty ugly, entitled way and doesn't really do much to justify the love that Sophy nurtures for him her entire life. And we never really enter the inner world of the Floyer twins – although I suppose it's important for the plot that they basically seem like a unit, rather than two separate people with separate concerns.

One thing I really admired is the sly humour that creeps in, and which is mainly drawn from an observation of human nature at its most base. Wesley is not afraid to make her characters look ridiculous, and she lightly sketches situational irony. Like her characters, she's also quite matter-of-fact regarding sexual behaviour, including promiscuity, paedophilia and polyamory, which could have been treated either pruriently or prudishly. For me, this leavened what could otherwise have been a pompous and overly sentimental story (cf. Atonement). 

I was terribly moved by the segments of the book that focus on the older characters, and see them through the eyes of the younger generation. And I admired the skill with which Wesley interweaves these 1980s segments in with the 1940s segments, doling out just enough reminiscence and reflection at a time to inform each. There is a real sense of narrative momentum leading up to the funeral to which all the characters are travelling.

Every glamorous, beautiful youngster is going to become a dumpy, crotchety elder with health problems – yet of course we always still feel the same inside. In many ways this is an anti-nostalgic book because it makes looking back longingly at the past just seem sad and futile. We lose everything and everyone, in the end.