Rating: 4/5

(I have edited this review to incorporate, after my review, the review that appeared in The New Times on June 18, 1995. I have done this because this novel is all to often listed as YA or even children's. Now I would be happy for any young person to read this book but it is not, particularly by 2024 definitions, a YA novel and I assure you that in 1995 the New York Times did not review YA novels in its literary book pages, though things may different now. - Update added October 2024)

I remember reading this book and liking it immensely and also being struck that the author hadn't written anything since (he still hasn't as of 2024). I can't tell you anything about it now except that it was better than almost all the other reviews on Goodreads and the basis of my positive memories of it I am buying his earlier novel 'Life in the Land of the Living'. What I remember liking about 'Toby's Lie' is the prose but much more its emphasis on honesty, or being true to yourself. I also really loved the William Blake quote the novel opened with:

There is a Smile of Love,
And there is a Smile of Deceit,
And there is a Smile of Smiles
In which these two Smiles meet.

If the novel didn't live up to this quote I would remember because it would be so pretentious. I will reread this after reading his first, and only other, novel.

The New York Times review from 1995 (I haven't provided a link because while not behind a paywall I believe it is only accessible if you have your own free NYT account via Goggle):

"HAPPY lies are all alike, as Tolstoy never quite said, but every unhappy lie is unhappy in its own way. Toby Sligh, the teen-age protagonist of Daniel Vilmure's second novel, is obsessed with lies -- he has to be, if only to keep up with what's going on in his life. His parents are breaking up after 17 years, his best friend, Ian Lamb, is avoiding him, the local drug dealer Juice is offering him rides in his Porsche, and he can't quite tell anyone at Sacred Heart High School that he is gay.

"The main question of "Toby's Lie" is whether Ian will dance with Toby at the senior prom. On the one hand is the humiliation of possible rejection, on the other the anxiety of Toby's declaring his sexuality to the world at large. Yet the course of Toby's life is rife with other complications, from his mother's decamping for a hideaway across town to the drug deals that Juice makes him party to -- not to mention the sacred and profane vision of Father Scarcross in the hospital, wasting away from AIDS, and the mysterious figure of Detective Thomas, investigating everything from Toby's mother's whereabouts to the location of Juice's stash. Put it all together and you've got an unholy mess. And, as with any tissue of lies, deceit leads to more deceit, to the point where the truth begins to look like an impossibly faraway starting point.

"The story is told by Toby himself in a series of short scenes that cast eerie light on one another. Since Toby is a bright student with a mind for literature, lines and even whole stanzas from Shakespeare, Blake, Dickinson and others pop off the pages. They are all relevant.

"Mr. Vilmure, whose first novel, "Life in the Land of the Living," was a model of controlled wildness, is superb with character. He is particularly good at portraying eccentrics: no false sentiment, no special prurience, just a wickedly comic eye for detail. Besides Toby's romantically errant mother, there are the athletic Father Diaz, who likes to picture young Jesus as a boxer, and Toby's intended date for the prom, Angelina Fishback: "She had an extra-large body and an extra-large soul, and her mind was constantly bopping with ideas like Ping-Pong balls in a bingo bin."

"Mr. Vilmure is also adept at evoking locale. Artremease Gray, Juice's aunt-in-law, lives in a shotgun apartment with "impressive-looking bars on all the windows and a coat of pink paint like a Candyland cottage." The door of an abandoned automobile opens to "a spray of cockroaches and muscular black lizards running relays on upholstery." Mr. Vilmure's descriptions are a direct enactment of Freud's uncanny: known quantities, de familiarized.

"The novel's primary theme is the nature of mendacity, the private lies that people can live with and the social ones they cannot -- unless it's the other way around. As Father Scarcross intones, "Lies are God's weeds." Artremease, who lives in a crack neighborhood, warns Toby that the only things more dangerous than drugs are lies. Toby himself is the perfect foil for these ethical concerns. Guileless but always concerned, he is one of the more appealing naifs in recent fiction. He is the blessed fool, or, as Juice puts it, "You're the baby sea tortoise in biology movies, at night, in the moonlight, busting outta its shell -- and the birds a' prey are circling, and the cameras are rolling, and I just wanna help your little bootie along."

"THE danger heightens with the madcap farce. What with missing persons and blackmail and drug deals and many cases of lost love, "Toby's Lie" begins to suffer from plot backup near the end, and the ways that Mr. Vilmure chooses to resolve the mix-ups may be too Gothic for some readers. But for all the threatened brutality, an adolescent sweetness shines through the narrative, and the language remains sprightly. The real accomplishment of the novel is in depicting the emotional life of a teenager in all its colorful confusion. In other words, "Toby's Lie" tells the truth."