Rating: 4/5

If you liked The Pickwick Papers you'll probably enjoy this too , since Charles Dickens first novel and bestseller made his career. The writer was a huge fan of Dr. Tobias Smollett when young and the influence is notable since having read both picaresque novels and enormously fond of each . ( The Expedition of ) Humphry Clinker written in 1771 the author's epistolary masterpiece but sadly the last. For modern bookworms looking at a bunch of letters seems weird, however they give insight to every character's emotion, belief, intention... what they really desire. A superior method I believe than a stream of consciousness where the bathwater and the pearls land entangled. Squire Matthew Bramble gout-ridden, cantankerous skeptic, a wealthy landowner, needs adventure, new experiences, unknown faces to see, as his carriage transverses the recently combined United Kingdom which formed by the Union between Scotland and England. During the six months long trip and many stays, the rivers crossed the carriage sinks, people almost stopped breathing, the water not conducive for it, in the middle of nowhere. Not alone though, the intrepid Mr.Bramble brings spinster sister and (not liking this), Tabitha, nephew Jeremy Melford protective older brother of his lovelorn sister Lydia and loyal Humphry Clinker a new servant found along the road destitute, something mysterious in his background. These five are the main characters, others minor individuals that show up and promptly disappear. Former friends, unimportant servants in the story yet do help the narrative on the paths from Wales, England and Scotland and back. The resort of Bath is fascinating, the unhealthy flock there for the water cure, so do the bored rich who celebrate, and the amusing interaction of the travelers especially Bramble gives the right amount of spice to the preceding, the flavor is delicious. The peak interest is Scotland's exotic Lochs (lakes), remote, unbelievably beautiful, even unsettling. Dr. Smollett a native of the country tries to hide his love for this but the pride shows... The Highwaymen attack, pistols drawn, the well-off feast, suspicions flurry, intimidating strangers frighten the timid...Sadistic pranks abound, coarse jokes frequently said, this isn't the Victorian age...welcome to the 1700s. I confess this era is a good place to visit, when it was written by a man living at the time.