Rating: 5/5

Years ago when I was young, Lawrence Durrell was a god to me; and his Alexandria Quartet was like sacred scripture. Now that I have aged and learned a thing or two, I see that Durrell is something of a phony. His book on Corfu -- Prospero's Cell -- has many of the same characteristics that I loved in the Quartet: the significant encounters with a group of eccentric characters, leading to significant discussions and multiple epiphanies based on their knowledge of the local area. 

Now that I am better read, I am astonished by things that Durrell failed to discuss, such as the role of the island in the Peloponnesian War as described by Thucydides, when different parties supporting Athens or Corinth led to ugly scenes of violence and destruction. It's not even mentioned in the chronology which appears as an appendix. 

At one point, one of Durrell's characters, the sage Count D., makes fun of the British author to his face. When asked what kind of picture his book will present of Corfu, the Count answers:“It is difficult to say.... A portrait inexact of detail, containing bright splinters of landscape, written out roughly, as if to get rid of something which was troubling the optic nerves. You are the kind of person who would go away and be frightened to return in case you were disappointed; but you would send others and question them eagerly about it.”Soon, most of them would in fact leave the island, because it is that twilight period in which all of Europe saw the advancing shadow of World War II, as if it were a dark cloud from Mordor. 

Yet, withal, I do not regret giving the book five stars. So Durrell is a bit of a fake: He seems to not have an interior life of his own. Everything is externalized through a dozen characters who surround him and serve to bring out the details about which he wants to write. I am not even sure that many of the characters are real: They are just too neat, too pat. I am particularly surprised at Durrell's female companion, whom he calls simply N., and with whom he may or may not have had a relationship. 

But it doesn't really matter. The inexact details, the "bright splinters of landscape," are really good in and of themselves. So Durrell isn't a god any more: He's still an interesting writer, and Prospero's Cell is a legitimate travel classic.