Rating: 4/5

This isn't your Lifetime Channel rapist/stalker-on-the-prowl movie of the week where the shaken victim gets in a couple of girl power moments and has the community or court room on her side by the end. Are You in the House Alone takes the rare observation of the internal psychological trauma of stalking and rape and their aftermath, with very little if any room given for survivor sentimentality, forced hope, or shallow resolutions.

 Gail, the victim in question in the book, doesn't even take the popular recourse of a survivor of rape in pop culture media and take the issue to court or file a lawsuit. Faced with stupefied parents, alienating friends, a town that operates on superficiality and old money in a way that already discount her "townie" family, laws that side more with the rapist than the victim, contextual sexism, and false ideas about a young woman's sexuality, it's just easier for her to choose to slip under the radar and carry on as best she can. 

 Gail also doesn't have any tearjerker crying in the shower lulls, powerful speeches or try to actively fight the systematic privilege that protects the monster that puts her through hell the entire book. The damage has been done - a good part of her is dead inside and filled with a cynicism for men, wealthy and influential people, the justice system, and the illusion of safety for a modern woman. The greatest battle she stands up to fight is the one against hiding away at home. Just her re-entering the routine of daily life is seen as courageous by multiple characters in the book, because apparently a woman is better off moving and hiding away herself like damaged goods, and, yeah, it's really fucked up.

It's even more messed up that according to the about the author in the old edition I read, Richard Peck was inspired to write this in the early seventies because rape was on the rise in young adults, but really this issue is still being silenced and the reality of protection for the rape perpetrators, particularly when they are accomplished, well off white boys, is still going strong now. Just see the case of Brock Turner.