Rating: 4/5

This novel, written by a now dead gay porn star about a gay porn star, might initially strike one as being puerile, but I found it to be a rather well-written character sketch with chauvinism as its theme: hedonistic chauvinism on the one hand as portrayed through the protagonist Rick, and religious chauvinism as portrayed by the Hassidic Jewish boys Rick is so enamored by.

Rick is intrigued by the adolescent boys attending a Hassidic-run school across the street from his apartment. His initial interest is purely juvenile and tied to his fantasy of bedding one of the boys. But the story is carried by the conflict portrayed by two opposing world views that are separated by a city street.

One the one side is the world as portrayed by Rick, a gay porn actor whose insatiable appetite for reading is contrasted by his profligate and pecuniary lifestyle. His personal perspective on life is that it is utterly meaningless and devoid of any real sense of right and wrong: everything is relative in Rick's world, nothing is sacred.

Across the street is the world of Hassidic Jews whose world is guided by a belief in a divine order that holds only the Jews can claim divine guidance and protection and that ultimately the course of events will lead to the Jews being rescued by their god.

What ensues is Rick's butting philosophical heads with the school boys with each being just as intransigent in their position as the other: a sort of literary meeting of two immovable forces. Rick tries to show the boys how meaningless their beliefs are, yet the boys refuse to budge. And the boys try to impress upon Rick how his dressing up like them is offensive and his reading of their holy texts belittles their belief, but he is so caught up in proving that he is right and they are wrong that he is bewildered when he experiences retaliation.

There are moments when he and some of the boys genuinely connect, even bond. But the connection is precarious because of the overriding belief of one makes no room for the other's belief.

Did Sandford intentionally create a characterization of how today the Religious Right and Gay community appear incapable of communicating meaningfully because each holds on to its own selfish hegemony? Whether he did is unimportant. But as an allegory of this conflict, Sandford's story is quite good.