Rating: 4/5

Well this book, if it's perspective is correct, sure ruins my previous admiration and interest in psychotherapy.

Masson's main point is that Freud initially proposed the seduction theory in 1896 which said hysteria was a result of suppressed sexual trauma often caused by the father or a family member. Freud was ostracized for this and sub sequentially retracted his view and replaced it with the Oedipus complex and dismissed women's accounts of sexual rape as children as fantasies created by them to mask their attraction to their parent and their discomfort of their own developing sexuality. 

Freud came to the seduction theory most likely by visiting the Paris morgue and hearing lectures their were they were analyzing the dead bodies of children that had been tortured and raped. That and spending a hundred hours with 18 hysterics who each confessed they had been sexually assaulted at a very young age and confessing in such a way and with such emotion that it was not something that was likely to have been faked. In fact the patients did not want to believe it themselves.

When Freud gave his talk on this paper in 1896 he was immediately attacked and isolated and so has everyone else who has tried to broach the subject that certain neuroses might be caused by sexual abuse and incest. These include Freud's good friend Ferenzi, Robert Flies and the author.

These people are creepy even the "good" one's like Ferenzi who started kissing his patients while married it seems. It seems he fell for one of his patients and then married her mother but might have originally had an affair with both. Freud and his first super good friend Flies conducted an absurd surgery on a woman's nose to relieve her of hysteria and to keep her from masturbating by removing parts of her nasal bones. The woman almost died because of it and due to the fact that Flies left several feet of gauze in her nose. Freud instead of admitting his mistake in trusting this hack blamed the woman for being hysterical and almost bleeding to death because she was desperate for sex and wanted to be seduced. How Eckstein stayed friends with Freud after this and even went in for another surgery that had the same affect is beyond me.

The way these people fight is so petty and childish as they turn their practice into a weapon.

It's hard to not come away with the impression that the entire profession is knowingly and intentionally covering for pedophilia. Most likely due to being pedophiles themselves. 

Freud began changing his view on the seduction theory it seems due to the Eckstein case where he realized it was not the real world abuse she experienced that caused her hemorrhaging but was he repressed sexual fantasies. That and another analysis claimed that one of Freud's patients admitted that they had not actually been raped as a child.