Rating: 4/5

** Spoilers below **

Well, that was grim! I'm still trying to unpack to what extent Gervaise's fate is over-determined by Zola's views of hereditary influence versus the socio-economic factors of her urban-poor setting, the two not un-entwined, of course. In some ways, Gervaise is the victim of her own generosity and kindness but her humble ambitions to have a home, a laundry shop, and to bring up her children well are thwarted firstly by the accident that puts her roofer husband out of work and, increasingly, on the road to alcoholism. She's a hard worker (the scene where the women are still working in the laundry at 3.00 am), she has a level of determination, but that fatal family inheritance also makes her congenitally liable to being greedy, lazy and all too prone to slipping into debt. This is, of course, a period when there is no social safety net and when people can and do starve to death. I guess what I'm pondering is whether Gervaise is the victim of biological destiny or whether her fate could have been averted within the parameters of the book.

Zola shares a social crusading mission with Charles Dickens but is notably free from the kind of sentimentality that makes Dickens both beloved and abhorred. Zola's tone is more documentary in this book: he observes and coolly replicates what he has seen from his research. There is cruel irony here, too - Haussmann's plan for the famous Parisian boulevards is coming to fruition just as Gervaise is hitting rock bottom in the working-class slums that both support the enterprise and life-style of the city proper, but which are separated from it by a wall. 

There are some grand set-pieces here: the Coupeau wedding, Gervaise's spectacular dinner, her visit to the forge where two blacksmiths conduct a 'duel' of strength for her attention. But the drip-feed of poverty leading to squalor, disappointment, moral debasement and a generalised depression is everywhere. Domestic abuse is rife, even normalised, and contributes to some of the most sickening scenes - and Gervaise's attempts at kindness for the wretched child Lalie when she herself has close to nothing is striking. 

I can't help noticing, though, that there is no overt politics in this book: workers accept their places in the social hierarchy without agitating (though my understanding is that this theme is displaced to Germinal) which leaves us with an over-riding sense of hopelessness. And their cruel childhood is shown in later books to play out in the lives of Gervaise's children: Claude (The Masterpiece), Etienne (Germinal), and Nana (Nana, which I'll be reading soon). Zola retrospectively added Jacques, the protagonist of La Bête Humaine, to the family.

I read the OUP translation by Margaret Mauldron (1995): this book was notorious at the time for its slang and crude street language but I didn't feel this was translated into contemporary English. Too often the diction feels almost saucy in its old-fashioned register - calling someone a 'soddin' nitwit' really isn't edgy, and neither is describing the adolescent Nana as 'becoming quite a dish'. It would have been nice to have had a greater sense of debased language rather than too many people sounding like chirpy cockney extras from Mary Poppins! 

Nevertheless, this is a book which was also an exposé of the scandalous living conditions in Paris' slums, hidden away from the bourgeois population: Zola's working characters lead bleak, abject lives, yet still exist on the page with energy and dynamism.