Rating: 5/5

Edit: I re-read this again for Peter Monn's book club and enjoyed it as much as before. This time I decided to annotate as I went so it took longer for me to read (about a month!) but I had a great time getting my feelings out as I was reading. I'm going to keep my last review because even though I discover new things or feel new things with each re-read, my general thoughts haven't changed. I can't believe I never made the connection between Kitty and what she feared a hill girl like Heaven would do, though.

5 stars and honestly don't ever see that happening. Can't wait for the movie to come out!

Plot:

This is a re-read for me. I've read this book several times, mostly in high school and college. I was obsessed with V.C. Andrews, her books, and her characters. I decided I missed reading her books and decided I would re-read this series again. A part of me was afraid that I might not love this book anymore because it's been so long and I have changed but if anything, I loved this book even more.

The story is very tragic, but at the same time inspiring. Poor Heaven goes through a lot of abuse, neglect, and overall suffering in this book. People who are easily sensitive or triggered by child abuse, neglect, statutory rape, and graphic descriptions should probably tread carefully. I've always liked Heaven slightly more than Flowers in the Attic. I was surprised to actually find myself in tears at certain parts. 

For a hilarious, spoiler filled recap, I highly recommend going here: http://casteelkidsstolemygroceries.tu...

Setting:

V.C. Andrews does a fantastic job with her settings. This book is set in West Virginia, deep in the mountains full of country folk and poverty. The setting is described so well that sometimes I forgot I was there. There are a few other places besides West Virginia in the book but the majority of the story takes place there. 

Characters:

While VCA is a fantastic storyteller and great with description, it's really the characters that have always touched me. It's exactly why I spent most of my high school and some of my college days participating in writing roleplays that featured her wonderful characters with their deep and complex backstories.

Heaven Leigh Casteel is one of my favorite female characters of all time. I found her easy to relate to despite never having to go through most of what she did. She was likable, inspirational, and kind. There were times in which she was definitely very naive or thought she was better than others, but I think it's great to have flaws. I also like that she grows as a character. She values education, reading, and family more than anything.

Then there's Tom, Heaven's slightly younger brother. He's more optimistic than Heaven about their life and family members, devoted, and funny. In the past I didn't like Fanny at all to be honest but she kind of grew on me this time. Maybe it's because as an adult I have learned that life isn't always black and white and that Fanny's upbringing has definitely made her into what she is. While I did find some of her actions to be very selfish, for the majority of the time I just felt sorry for her. She also brought comic relief to the story, especially when it involved her trying to unsuccessfully woo Heaven's boyfriend.

Granny and Grandpa were endearing but could also be frustrating when they would excuse child abuse and neglect. And while I didn't like Sarah or Luke Casteel, I did feel they were authentic characters. Luke also goes through a lot of character growth and while his remorse later on doesn't make up for what he did in the past, I also ended up feeling sorry for him. Keith and Our Jane were decent characters but could also be slightly annoying. I also liked Miss Deale, though she also felt a little too perfect at times. It was nice to see at least one adult be caring and generous, though. 

Now here's the embarrassing character--Logan Stonewall. Heaven's boyfriend. Back in high school, I really loved his character for whatever reason. Maybe I had the same naivety that Heaven did. He just seemed very sweet and devoted. This time around, I saw him differently. He started out sweet, if not somewhat creepy with the love-at-first-sight thing. Then he became clingy and I didn't care much for his slut shaming in regards to Fanny and in thinking Heaven was just "so pure" and that he hoped she would stay that way. 

It gets worse when they get older and he turns his back on her when she admits that she isn't quite as pure as he thinks she is. And when she tries to explain that her foster father basically seduced her, he won't hear of that either. Just thinking of how I used to idolize his character makes my stomach turn. He's a bastard. Not the worst bastard in this book, but definitely a bastard.

The worst bastard is Cal Dennison. There will be SPOILERS here so skip to the next part if you don't want to be spoiled.

.
.
.
.
.
.

Okay. So Cal seems nice enough in the beginning, but over time he shows himself to be a coward. Even when he tries to help and shower Heaven with gifts and affection, he doesn't stand up to his wife when she abuses the poor girl. He lets Heaven be abused, makes her love him as a father figure, then takes serious advantage of her. He knows her situation as she's told him everything, given him all the ammo he needs. 

While I'm not sure if he purposefully meant to go after Heaven (I don't believe he did in the beginning), there is definitely a point in which you can feel him trapping Heaven. His behavior once they returned to Winnerow was almost worse since he continued to try and control her. I was so glad when he finally let her go!

While Kitty was most definitely a terrible, abusive character, at the same time she was also pretty interesting. I hated her for abusing Heaven though. She seems to become remorseful at the end, which honestly touched me, but at the same time I couldn't help but wonder if it was only because she knew she was dying. Would she have ever been remorseful otherwise? Her death didn't make me sad. She had a tragic past as well but allowed it to shape her into granite for the most part.

Relationships:

The best relationship is the brother-sister one between Heaven and Tom. For once there is no incest or even vibe/suggestion other than Tom jokingly wanting to marry someone like Heaven. Being the oldest and most responsible of their siblings, they had to take on a lot as kids and it just cemented their already close relationship. One of the hardest things was seeing their relationship strain as each were taken away from one another. They don't seem quite as close after that, which is a real shame.

Heaven's relationship with Logan was sweet in the beginning but he was way too clingy and had high standards, especially as they got much older. It's almost ironic considering what happens in the third book. Logan has one hell of a virginity/purity complex. He also seemed to be less considerate toward Heaven as they got older and things got worse for her. I did feel sorry for him when she snapped at him in one scene but I didn't feel sorry any other time.

I found Heaven and Fanny's relationship to be interesting. Heaven clearly cares more about Fanny than Fanny does her but even Fanny has her sweet moments. The rivalry between them was amusing at times, though.

The entire Casteel family aspect was actually interesting. They felt like a real family with complex issues. I would have liked to see Granny stick around longer, though.

Heaven's relationship with Cal and Kitty was also interesting, though at the same time sometimes very hard to get through. I do like that while Heaven initially blames herself for the abuse both of them deal her that she later realizes she did nothing wrong except try to love them. Good girl, Heaven!

Writing/Voice:

While VCA can get really flowery and some of the dialogue seems a bit advanced when some of the Casteels are still kids, I love the writing. Her descriptions are wonderful, the dialect felt authentic, and the dialogue is good. 

Ending:

The ending is so satisfying because Heaven is finally free from Luke, Kitty, Cal, and Logan! Some of her loose ends, such as Grandpa, Fanny, Tom, Our Jane &amp; Keith are also tied up. I did wonder what had ever happened to Sarah and Miss Deale though. There is such promise at the end as Heaven looks forward to meeting her mother's family and attempting to (at least for now) leave her dark past behind her.

Overall, I loved it even more than I first read it. It made me smile, laugh, and cry. It made me feel awful, disgusted, happy, and exhilarated. It's an emotional read that I'm pretty sure I'll always enjoy. I can't wait to re-read the rest, especially Dark Angel, which has always been my favorite out of all of her original books and also of this series, though Heaven is definitely #2!