Rating: 4/5

"Fighter" is a quite credible work of WWII history by a fine novelist, Len Deighton. The book focuses on the Battle of Britain, the 1940 air war between Germany and Britain that was fought over the British homeland in the Summer and Fall of 1940. It was initiated by the Germans as a necessary first step to a possible invasion of England, Operation Sea Lion. The British radar system and the thoughtfully organized information structure devised to keep British pilots advised on the incoming enemy aircraft enabled the Royal Air Force to fight off the invaders. In a close run campaign, and assisted by a German shift to bombing London rather than the fighter bases on the Southeast Coast, the RAF denied the Germans air superiority and the opportunity to attempt landing an invasion force.

Deighton's skill as a novelist provides a very readable narrative voice to this account. His presence as historian, however, is a bit less compelling. While he provides much in the way of information about the equipment, personalities, and events of the campaign, he sometimes does not provide the little bit of extra detail that provides relevant context. For instance, he writes of the opposition of the Canadian Prime Minister to a Commonwealth aviator training program, but doesn't tell why he was opposed or what was the result of this non-cooperation. Deighton does challenge the views of unnamed historians on various details, such as their overemphasis on the role of codebreaking on the campaign, and on the merits of different aircraft variants. 

There were strong personalities in each of the warring camps. Deighton describes how on each side there was intense, long-lasting conflict among parties. Personal advancement, power, and simple vanity set the stage for contests that affected policy determinations on both sides of the English Channel. Herman Goring, Erhard Milch, and Ernst Udet, for instance jockeyed for influence in the German Air Ministry. Within the RAF there was conflict between commanders of different air defense groups. Hugh Dowding, who had charge of the SE Coast air bases, and Trafford Leigh-Mallory who commanded the more interior bases. had bitter differences on strategy and air operations. 

Technology played a key role in the air battles at both the tactical and strategic levels. Deighton's analysis of this complex element of the war is clear. That technology also caused internal conflicts tied to personalities, particularly on the German side. These involved such famous aviation names as Messerschmitt, Dornier, and Junker. 

One added negative on this book is not the author's fault. The small paperback version does not allow proper presentation of the otherwise useful maps and illustrations Deighton provides. Readers would do well to seek a full size, hardcover copy of the book to enjoy the full benefit it contains.