Rating: 5/5

While not as much of a "horse book" as the title might imply -- it's more like a really great girl's adventure book made better by the inclusion of horses -- it IS a fantastic description of a summer vacation in the wilderness. One I would love to go on: 2-4 weeks of guided hiking &amp; camping in the Sierra, hot supper provided, a few pounds on your back but most of your gear carried by a string of pack mules, which in turn are wrangled by riders on horseback, along with a few spare saddle horses in case of sick or injured hikers. It looks very much like such a trip is still possible, actually, but since it also looks wildly expensive even without considering the cost of getting there, reading about it was the next best thing.

From the very beginning I was enchanted by Cress (what a great name!) and sympathetic toward her to feeling of not fitting into the super-academic family mold. I thought her brother was pretty great too, even though he disappeared into the background shortly thereafter for most of the book. That's fine, because I was just as fond of friendly college boy/stock wrangler Jon and his beautiful palomino, Topaz, while also laughing at the ~scandal~ she accidentally creates by staying out and -- gasp -- TALKING to him late at night! Although to be fair, it's mostly one self-appointed Morality Police lady who makes a fuss about it, while everyone else is like 'even for 1950 this seems pretty harmless; just be aware of how it might look.'

But what I loved most of all were the many memorable characters among the other paying guests, specifically the friendly, chatty girls Cress meets and takes up with on the trail, when she isn't enjoying the pleasant solitude of enjoying the beautiful surroundings on her own. The setting is beautifully described, and for days afterward I would find myself flashing back to the imagined scenery every time I went on a walk. Honestly, a more wholesome and invigorating story I could not imagine. I am SO glad I took a chance on buying it when I spotted it for $2 in an antique store, despite the faint brown spotting across the top, just because it looked so irresistibly like a book I would enjoy. Self five!

Final note: the story takes place in Kings Canyon National Park, and at one point a character says, "I hope no kid will ever drive through this place in an automobile and say, 'My grandpappy used to come through here on a horse.'" Imagine the amount of relief I felt when I looked up the area 67 years after this book was published and found out the wilderness is still pretty safe, and both overnight camping and horses are still allowed.