Rating: 2/5

I don’t write reviews. 

This story had a lot of potential, well to be more honest, it had some potential. I don’t know if it’s a problem of having two writers, but that doesn’t seem to be it. The world-building (especially considering it’s a game about role playing games) is pathetically underdone, as is the characterization, which is kind of key to role playing games.

A genuine confusion reigns as to what the driving force of this tale is: a rivalry between two major players in the fantasy gaming world, a murder mystery, a view into a live action role playing game at Dream Park, an escapade in the life of Griffin, Dream Park’s chief of security. One, a few or all of these? Well let me tell you; none of these plot threads were successfully explored to any extent. 

Some complaints:

The main female character has no motivation, except to have sex with other guys, while her boyfriend is there. Then when the boyfriend is hurt, she becomes the victim. 

The constant referral to chubby characters as chubby. “Moved her chubby arm,” “the chunky warrior’s barrel chest,” “noticed the meatier parts of her legs making them not truly slim,” etc. 

The role playing game costs participants thousands of dollars to play. A 17 year-old easily joined. (This same boy also has information no teenager in 2051 would have). Other young couples with no discernible forms of income join, no problem. 

The game relies on knowledge of Papua New Guinean villages and magic, early 20th century cargo cults, The Spruce Goose and Howard Hughes, and more. I just don’t see twenty somethings in 2051 even knowing Hughes let alone his failed aircraft. 

The whole gaming system feels so planned and rigged. It didn’t have the fun dice chance feeling of a real life game. They couldn’t make D&amp;D more boring if they tried. (No, that’s not a challenge please noooo!)

Then the murder. They let the real murderer go free and let the youth, who was trying to steal a formula and tied a man up and did not kill him, believe he was the murderer so as to keep the company’s reputation. 

Also it was no murder mystery. There was no way the reader could solve it. A couple hints led in a few directions, but not compelling.