Rating: 4/5

Really enjoyed this reread- anytime a Cadfael plot gets involved in the civil war between Stephen and Maud I get confused about who is on which side, and where the Welsh fit in! The plot is explained in the summary above - our favorite monk gets involved in brokering a hostage swap because he speaks Welsh. He also tries to help not just one, but two sets of star-crossed lovers. 

The swapped English hostage is delivered badly injured but alive - but found dead shortly after in the abbey’s infirmary. There are a couple likely suspects among the other patients, let alone further afield. Cadfael and Hugh must find the killer, because Hugh has to get back to protecting the shire from raiding parties from Wales. 

We are treated to a return visit from the delightful Avice, now Sister Magdalen (see previous series entry The Leper of St. Giles), a very wise, sensible, pragmatic woman - and apparently very much a twin force at her convent, to Cadfael’s role at Shrewsbury! Both came late to the monastic life, after full lives of varied experience. I would love to have seen Peters build a series around Sister Magdalen! It’s not that she and Cadfael break the rules on purpose, it’s that their long lives outside the cloister have familiarized them with a wide array of people and circumstances. As Cadfael explains about Welsh law, it’s not black and white, like in England - steal bread, punishment is always severe. In Wales, there are shadings to the law - was the person starving, did they have a family to feed? I love that life has taught subtlety and nuance to both Magdalen and Cadfael. 

I love this series, the way Peters writes her characters, the beauty of her natural descriptions, the continuity of life following the liturgical calendar and the natural seasons. I find the books restful and restorative especially among our unsettled times. A good reminder that we humans have endured and weathered much worse over the centuries! We may not learn from it as we should, but Cadfael teaches us to be kind to ourselves, and others, and to hope.