Rating: 4/5

Mansfield Park is a different work from the rest of Jane Austen's novels. I can say that now I've read them all. Jane Austen's books have a sort of set form, characters, and a passionate and exuberant writing style. Even in her mature work such as Persuasion, where the tone is much graver than the rest of her works, these elements are present to a varying degree. But in Mansfield Park , we can see a certain attempt to deviate, to experiment with a new writing style more akin to the Victorian era, and non-conformity to her "accepted" clear-cut form. The story is more complex and deep. It penetrates not only into social problems and human conduct but also deep into the human mind, its thoughts, feelings, and emotions. One can sense a difference even thematically. The story treads on common grounds of social discrimination and class distinction for most of the part, but it also touches on more complex issues such as the proper upbringing of children and instilling good morals in them. All these make Mansfield Park stand apart from the rest of Jane Austen's novel. 

The story has quite a focus on women's education. Jane Austen expounds on the kind of education that needs to be instilled in girls. Yes, they need to be accomplished, smart, and elegant, but all this should come secondary to moral righteousness and a sense of duty. The Bertram sisters, Maria and Julia's thoughtless actions spin from the failure to instill in them the right morals, a sense of duty they owe to their family, and humility. Their indolent mother, over-indulgent aunt, and authoritative father had made the sisters accomplished, but, they have failed to make them wise and moral. Fanny, on the other hand, benefits from both sides and gains a complete education to be the desirable daughter/sister/woman the men desire to have as their own. 

The story also exposes the dependable position of women and the dependability of the poor on their rich friends. The females, who didn't have an independent fortune settled on them and could command it, had to depend on male authority for their comfort and happiness. This was a very trying position for women, for they were no more than "objects" that could be "possessed' and "handled" according to the whim and fancy of the male benefactor - be it father, brother, or husband. Stemming up from personal experience, Jane Austen had no reservations in voicing her opinion on the subject. 

Mansfield Park brings us a set of complex characters, not so clear cut or markedly categorized except for perhaps one or two. Interestingly this is the only time in my history with Jane Austen that I didn't care much about the hero or heroine. Edmund is kind, principled, and good-hearted, but he is weak and dull. He is also a poor judge of character. His love is misplaced. His understanding was affected. To Edmund, the vulgarity of Mary Crawford was just "liveliness of mind"! Altogether, he was a poor hero. Fanny is virtuous, loyal, and steady. Her dependability makes her timid, but when calls for the occasion, she shows unusual strength, courage, and spirit. She is a fair judge of character but a bit too opinionated for my taste. I didn't dislike the character, but I couldn't care for her either. Both the hero and heroine lacked the liveliness and spirit. It is a bit ironic that the supporting characters like the Crawfords and the Bertram sisters were quite full of them!

The story didn't have a marked plot but everything was neatly tied to give a satisfactory ending. I thought I would have enjoyed a Fanny - Henry union which would have been more exciting. But it seems Jane Austen believes that "once a rake, is always a rake" and cannot be reformed by the power of love! :)

With the reading of Mansfield Park, I have read all six Jane Austen novels. I feel happy and accomplished. :) I enjoyed this novel, but if you ask me, it is my least favourite. From an objective point of view, it could be one of her best works since its tone, colour, and style is more advanced than her other novels. But I prefer the lively, exuberant, and satirical Jane Austen to this grave and solemn writer of Mansfield Park.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/