Rating: 4/5

Have I mentioned I love middle grade? Because hey, guess what, I absolutely goddamn love middle grade. (I feel like I shouldn’t say “goddamn” in a review of a children’s book, but also I am still me. I still have my brand to look out for, regardless of target audiences.)

A n y w a y. This book rules.

https://emmareadstoomuch.wordpress.co...

I have a kind of complicated relationship with the movie. It has a reputation for being among the worst book-to-film adaptations, and that is, guess what, totally warranted. They’re two totally different stories, essentially. But uh…(whispers) I guess that’s kind of why/how I like them both?

I GREW UP ON BOTH OF THEM OKAY. THEY’RE BOTH GOOD IF YOU LOOK AT THEM SEPARATELY.

Ahem.

Anyway. I say for the second time.

This book, in case you live under a rock that prevents you from hearing about great middle-grade adventure retellings of fairytales with feisty female protagonists, is a Cinderella retelling wherein Cinderella (just Ella tho) has been cursed with obedience. She has to obey every command given to her.

IT SUCKS.

But it double-sucks because Ella is a lil badass and totally feisty and stubborn and would neverrrrr listen to anyone if she could help it. Unfortunately she cannot. But she gets into some fun hijinks and verbal battles and whatnot because of it.

There is also Prince Char, who is an absolute BAAAAABE. One thing that no one can argue with in the movie is that the movie-Char is fine as hell. Pro tip: picture this for the rest of the review.

The HAIIIIIIIR. Oh my god.

Anyway. (Three times now. Stop counting.)

Char’s full name is Charmont, which is just one letter off from Charmant, which is the French word for charming. And he is EXTREMELY SO. A book boyfriend for the ages and the only man who could ever deserve Queen of Feist Ella.

This should be enough to convince you that this book rocks and it is ten years past time for you to read it. Amazing badass female protagonist + dreamy love interest + great well-developed romance that starts as a friendship (which I didn’t mention until this point but now you know) + adventurey exciting plot + curse + fairies + ogres + giants + fairytale lands + mythical creatures + elvin artists + Cinderella retelling = perfection.

Okay, to be fair, I didn’t include a lot of that information before now. But again: now you know.

Bottom line: This book is like throwing a bunch of ingredients for perfection in a pot and hoping they stick. And guess what? THEY DO.

----------------
reread updates

just as good on the 800th read

----

i will reread this book infinity times.