Rating: 3/5

Two and a half stars, which will be shown as three.

I previously expressed deep concern about Mary Renault's internalised misogyny in my reviews of Renault's Theseus novels.

While finding them brilliantly researched and evocative, I also considered them to be permeated by scorn for women to the point where I was concerned that the author seemed almost to collude in Theseus various acts of brutality towards women (ie, his contemplated rape of 'Persephone' the matriarchal Queen, his his smugness about his destruction of matriarchy, his brutal threats to his aging father's war prize for snuggling up against him, etc).

However, over on the discussion thread my view was changed by a reasoned and perceptive response from the reviewer Caroline Galwey.

I am now willing to concede that I have previously done Mary Renault some injustice in assuming her attitude towards Theseus to be one of authorial approval. Her portrayal is almost certainly fairly ironic, and whilst in life Renault did not sympathise with women in general and saw herself as an honourary man, she probably did her best in these novels to be more objective than I have previously conceded.

Of course, at that time, the view that the overthrow of matriarchy by patriarchy was an undeniably good thing was universally accepted. Theseus' belief that a society characterised by the rape and oppression of women was infinitely preferable to one where one man voluntarily gave himself over as a bloody sacrifice, would be unquestioned. It is to Renault's credit, in fact, that she was able to portray Theseus' as being finally so brutalised by his patriarchal assumptions.

So, following my discussion with that reviewer I will just say that these books are interesting, brilliantly researched, vivid and evocative; but the reader should be aware that Renault, even though writing within the ethos of her time, almost certainly did NOT intend Theseus to be seen as a role model, and he is portrayed fairly ironically, if in my opinion, with a little too much admiration.

I did find the relationship of the Apostate Amazon with Theseus redolent of Stockhom Syndrome. In fact, I found her emotional surrender to a patriarch redolent of the sort of sentimental stuff of the worst examples of porn-for-women (as is for that matter, the briefly sketched in relationship of Theseus to his war prize in 'The King Must Die)' . She did not seem to me at all credible as a woman who had been raised solely among women. Probably, again, this had to do with the lack of understanding of sex roles in Reynault's era, which would assume that a woman who is not like a stereotypical 'female' woman must be like a man...

Also, I found Theseus' murder of Phaedra not only disgustingly cowardly (I assume, he is meant to know this himself) but highly inept for an expert at unarmed combat. As someone who was once a martial arts expert myself I know that he could have used the painless, almost instantaneous strangle - ie, cutting off blood to the brain, rather than that - yuk - seemingly ineffectual choke tht he uses - ie, cutting of the air to the lungs. I wonder the author lapsed so on her research there. 

Overall, though, as critics comment, there is something unfinished and unsatisfactory about the whole story, as if Renault had lost interest in the project.