Rating: 4/5

South of Heaven is one of the lesser known Jim Thompson novels. It has a different feel than many of his other novels. It is not a crazy fever-dream where you can’t figure out if the narrator is pulling a fast one on the reader. Rather, it is a straight-ahead story with the narrator (Tommy Burwell) being a fairly decent guy without even one hint of craziness. So leave the straightjackets at home when you read this one. 

Set amidst the Great Depression in a sparse dry world of Far West Texas, there is a major pipeline to be built an six hundred men “were jungled up while we waited for the pipeline to start.” ”[T]he men had been drifting in here all those weeks – jailbirds, mission stiffs, hoboes – and hardly a man-jack among ’em with more than an empty gut and raggedy-ass clothes he wore.” Tommy’s friend, “Fruit Jar,” “was on canned heat – about half the boes you saw out here were heat-heads. They eventually went blind from drinking it, and while they were getting that way even a very little light drove them crazy.” His other friend is “Four Trey Whitey,” who figures larger in the story than Fruit Jar ever does.

The story is partly drawn from Thompson’s life experiences and all the odd jobs he toiled at. He gives rather full descriptions of the various jobs that men worked on the pipeline and the distinctions between the ordinary working men and the specialists, the engineers. He tells us how badly the men were treated by the companies that were trying to save a buck. 

Four Trey is a bit of a philosopher and tells Tommy that the yellow days are gone and the birds are going to start singing and they are just South of Heaven, so damn close. Tommy is not so confident. He explains that when you are 21 you still believe you’re going to be a famous ballplayer or lawyer and that you’ll marry a beautiful wife and live in a beautiful house, but later on you realize that’s just fantasy. ”I suppose most of us aim a lot higher than the place we actually hit,” he explains.

Tommy’s first job on the pipeline working with Four Trey is working the dyno and he is not so sure he wants to. After all, when he was just a teenager, his grandfather used some dyno to clear a space for a latrine and since you can’t dig in the rock there, you use dynamite and you don’t think much more of a stick of dynamite than you do a stick of candy. He was about a half mile away when he heard the explosion and they didn’t look like people no more.

There’s a romance thrown in with Carol who sets up shop near the pipeline camp and Tommy goes for her in a big way, but can’t help wondering what a good-looking-woman like her was doing following a camp with six hundred men in it, waiting for payday to come around. 

Eventually, the story does work itself around to a caper that Tommy keeps circling around – even when he gets busted for committing a murder- and, unlike most Thompson lead characters, there isn’t any moral ambiguity when it comes to Tommy. This is actually a pretty well-written solid tale, but it is quite a bit different from the usual fare that Thompson dished out for so many years.