Rating: 4/5

Sherlock Holmes is back! This indeed is a happy development. I knew he was immortal. :) 

With his return, Sherlock Holmes brings to us (through Dr. Watson's chronicles of course) thirteen interesting adventures of his where, as always, his brilliant analytical mind, somewhat supernatural faculties, and his power of deduction are demonstrated to his great advantage. This is the third collection of short stories I've read of Sherlock Holmes's adventures and it is the most interesting one to me. Except for a couple, all the others were generously rated between four and five stars.

 The Adventure of the Empty House  - 5 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Norwood Builder  - 5 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Dancing Men  - 5 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Solitary Cyclist  - 5 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Six Napoleons  - 5 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Missing Three-Quarter  - 5 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Abbey Grange  - 5 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Priory School  - 4 stars, 
 The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton  - 4 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Three Students  - 4 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez  - 4 stars, 
 The Adventure of the Second Stain  - 3 stars and
 The Adventure of Black Peter  - 3 stars. 

The eccentricity and arrogance were two marked characteristics of Sherlock Holmes. They were all the more marked in these stories, especially his arrogance. I wasn't pleased when his arrogance was directed towards Dr. Watson, but like the doctor, I also couldn't keep my annoyance for too long. The only complaint I have regarding this collection is Dr. Watson being reduced to a mere chronicler and a secretary. I wish the author had assigned a more useful role to the worthy doctor. 

I'm glad that Conan Doyle bowed down to the popular opinion and decided to continue the series long after his decision to end of the series with  The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes . We readers otherwise would have been deprived of some of the best adventures of Sherlock Holmes.