Rating: 4/5

I think Agatha Christie was in a playful attitude of mind when she wrote this book, as there was quite a bit of humor to enjoy. Additionally, I particularly enjoyed Christie's wry look at the artistic differences between the author Ariadne Oliver and Robin Upwood, the person adapting her book for the stage. It was insightful and interesting to learn about and written very much tongue-in-cheek. 

I loved it, especially the effrontery of Robin Upwood in suggesting that they completely reinvent the lead character, whilst also insisting that "the main thing is for you to feel happy about it!" 

Subsequently, Ariadne Oliver complains to Hercule Poirot: "Collaboration," she said bitterly, "The whole thing's a nightmare! How would you like to see a big black mustache stuck on to Superintendent Battle and be told it was you?"

Poirot commiserates by stating, "I, too, suffer" and then, responds by sharing his profound disgust at the living and dining experiences in his temporary lodgings, which seemed to verge on the edge of chaos and was certainly disorganized. 

Poirot lists in detail all the assaults on sensibilities, "The cooking of Madame Summerhayes is beyond description. It is not cooking at all. And the draughts, the cold winds, the upset stomachs of the cats, the long hairs of the dogs, the broken legs of the chairs, the terrible, terrible bed in which I sleep - he shut his eyes in remembrance of agonies - the tepid water in the bathroom, the holes in the stair carpet and the coffee - words cannot describe to you the fluid which they serve to you as coffee. It is an affront to the stomach!" 

As an onlooker, I have the privilege of being highly amused by these descriptions. I think it was the absolute contrast between Poirot and his host that made it so enjoyable and knowing this is fiction.

This is one of my favorite volumes in the series so far.

Additional notable quote that caught my fancy:

"Sadly, Mrs Oliver ran her hands through her windswept grey hair causing it to look as though not swept by wind but a tornado."