Rating: 1/5

The would-be book is marred by extensively superficial research and exceptionally poor scholarship.

Comparison: Please reference A Nation on Trial: The Goldhagen Thesis and Historical Truth.

The editor of the libearl German newspaper, Die Zeit, Marion Countess Dönhoff wrote a detailed and balanced review of the book: "The decidedly misleading nature of Goldhagen’s book Hitler's Willing Executioners.”

Marion Countess Dönhoff was involved in the nearly successful July 1944 bomb assassination attempt on Hitler's life. Whereby Colonel Klaus Stauffenberg and co-conspirators were all executed thereafter, Countess Dönhoff was one of only three who eluded capture.
The other two surviving conspirators were Philipp v. Boeselager and Ewald v. Kleist Schmenzin
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philipp...
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ewald-H...)

Review of the Goldhagen book Marion Countess Dönhoff – excerpt (translation from German)
https://www.zeit.de/1996/37/goldhage....

I am of the opinion that DIE ZEIT has made far too much fuss about the book. The questionable methods are used to support a theory, which, it seems to me, has not been proven by the author himself.

Goldhagen's questionable method: he starts from the "final solution" i.e. the Holocaust, and rewinds the causal chain, whereby the "final solution” automatically remains present until all prehistoric times. In this way, he proves that "the whole of German society has always shared Hitler's virulent anti-Semitism of extermination."

He claims that the enforcers were representative of the German population in their composition. He does not say whether his statistics include the Austrians, who made up a third of the SS extermination units and commanded four of the main death camps, as Paul Johnson writes in the Washington Post.

(Please reference The Holocaust by Paul Johnson)

If this is the argument, one has to wonder what such a passionately anti-Semitic people would have done if Hitler had fallen on the Western Front in 1917 - where he had been wounded? An authoritarian regime may well have been established in Germany, as in Spain or Italy, but certainly not Hitler's National Socialism.

Goldhagen's questionable thesis: he says that the Holocaust was a "German national project.” The Germans were not only anti-Semitic in the usual sense, they also paid homage to a special anti-Semitism, "extermination anti-Semitism.” This, as he calls it, "eliminatory” anti-Semitism had the goal of eradicating the Jews.

If this kind of racism is in the genes of the Germans, as Goldhagen apparently believes, then one wonders what may have happened to these genes after 1945, because, as he admits, the Germans changed completely.

Of course, the author of the book takes the precaution of defending himself against the accusation that he has postulated a collective guilt of the Germans ("I categorically reject the idea of collective guilt"); but the talk of the "whole people” or "all Germans” refers to nothing other than a collective. Goldhagen also claims: "The entire German elite wholeheartedly embraced the anti-Semitism of extermination.” Another collective! Goldhagen cites two pieces of evidence for the Germans' willingness not only to tolerate the brutal massacres, but also to approve of them with relish.

The first piece of evidence: the people cheered Hitler, even after the "Kristallnacht” in November 1938. This can only surprise someone who views the complete period monocausally in terms of the Holocaust. In fact, people were by no means cheering because of the discrimination against Jews - the "Kristallnacht” in particular was disapproved of by many. Rather, Hitler's great, enduring, and acclaimed myth was based on the rare combination of success and terror.

Success: the elimination of unemployment, the annexation of Austria, the return of the Sudetenland, the victory over France, which believed itself safe behind the Maginot Line. Under these circumstances, the majority of the people regarded the seizure of power as a national uprising worthy of gratitude.

Terror: immediately after the seizure of power, 4,000 communist functionaries were arrested; in the first year alone, the Nazis set up thirty concentration camps for people who did not toe the line: those who listened to the BBC station or expressed skepticism about the regime. Even in the last week of the war, soldiers were executed because they did not believe in the final victory; a Catholic priest was executed because he had not reported to the Gestapo what he had learned during the confession of a resister.

In view of such measures, the second piece of evidence for the allegedly great approval of all Germans for Hitler's Jewish policy is also unconvincing. In a Spiegel interview, Goldhagen answered Augstein's question as to how he knew that the majority of those who saw the synagogues burning thought: "It serves the Jews right.” Goldhagen's answer: "The lack of evidence is itself evidence . . ."

How does Goldhagen imagine life in a dictatorship? Every person who was seriously against it naturally did everything to cover their tracks. The few lists of key positions that were drawn up before the assassination attempt of July 20 (because it was feared that otherwise a vacuum might develop somewhere and the Gauleiter in charge might unleash a civil war) had a disastrous effect. All those whose names were listed on them were executed.

Which in turn proves that Goldhagen's claim that there was no resistance is incorrect. After the assassination attempt, which had been planned for years and then failed, the following were executed: 21 generals, 33 colonels, 2 ambassadors, 7 diplomats, a minister, 3 state secretaries, and the head of the Reich Criminal Police; also several chief presidents, police presidents and district presidents. Since 1940/41, the number of death sentences handed down by military courts has doubled every year. In 1944/45 there were 8,200, while the People's Court handed down 2,140 sentences in the same year.

The fate of the Scholl siblings and countless unknown people should not be forgotten either - even if they did not all risk their lives directly for the sake of the Jews, but had the goal of eliminating the supreme authority - the criminal system - in mind. But for many of them, the barbaric massacres in Poland strengthened their resolve to join the resistance.

Incidentally, many Jews did not consider themselves threatened at all. My closest Jewish friends, Professor Ernst Kantorowicz and Richard Meyer, head of the Eastern Department in the Foreign Office, were not prepared to emigrate early - they remained in Germany until the late 1930s.

Goldhagen's book is nevertheless important because it is able to make the unimaginable atrocities shockingly clear like no other. It is also important because it raises the question of how it was possible that ordinary people, members of the nation of poets and thinkers, were capable of such deeds. Even if Goldhagen does not answer this question, it remains and will continue to torment us.

It is regrettable that he exaggerates and exaggerates his theses to such an extent that they provoke contradiction and the reaction is therefore likely to be negative. Instead of opening people up to new insights, it is to be feared that they will close themselves off with the argument "it wasn't like that” and no longer think about these outrages at all. Unfortunately, the fear that the Goldhagen book could revive … silenced anti-Semitism cannot be entirely dismissed.