Rating: 5/5

The historic battle over old growth forests in the Pacific Northwest

Congress enacted the National Forest Management Act in 1976 (NFMA), detailing a long list of goals for the protection and improvement of natural resources and requiring planning to support sustainable use; biodiversity; and prevention of damage to soil, streams, lakes, and wetlands. The problem was that the USFS had focused too long on treating the forest as though timber production was its primary value. The USFS was slow to transition to the requirements of the NFMA and allowed unsustainable harvesting of trees until they were confronted by environmentalists over logging of old growth forests in the Pacific Northwest. 

This epic struggle between the environmentalists and the timber industry is brought to life by William Dietrich in his book, The Final Forest: Big Trees, Forks, and the Pacific Northwest. It was first published in 1992, the year after Judge William Dwyer banned further sale of logging rights on national forest land in Washington, Oregon, and northern California until federal agencies established a plan to conserve the Northern Spotted Owl. An updated version of the book was published in 2010, adding a preface and an afterward. Dietrich reflects on how his work of journalism has now become history and describes what happened to many of the people whose lives were central to showing the variety of perspectives on this controversy. William Dietrich is a former science writer for the Seattle Times and a Pulitzer Prize winner for his coverage of the Exxon Valdez oil spill. 

Forks, WA once proclaimed itself as “the logging capital of the world,” a title which Dietrich confirms is now obsolete. Instead, the town is now famous as the setting of the Twilight series. Dietrich shares the stories of regular people trying to make an honest living in the timber industry, providing basic resources demanded by Americans and other countries, and how this way of life in the forest has largely disappeared. He also shares the stories of environmentalist activists and the challenging work of biologists to track and learn about the animals in the forest. 

Dietrich shows his talent in journalism by adeptly juxtaposing both sides. In the first chapter he describes the wasteland appearance of a clearcut with the beauty of the loggers’ grace of movement as they precisely cut each tree, carefully sensing the physics and geometry necessary to ensure their safety and preserve the value of the wood. Although a reporter on environmental issues, Dietrich writes that he really liked those he came to know in the logging community. He appreciated the courage and skill of the loggers and others in the timber industry who work hard and at great risk to their safety. In contemplating clearcuts, he raises the point that logging is the result of modern civilization, the desire for wood to make homes, furniture, books, and toilet paper, and to question it seems hypocritical. 

Ecology was an emerging science in the last half of the twentieth century and Dietrich reveals how the USFS and timber industry were slow to understand the importance of preserving complex ecosystems made up of individual species linked into a larger web. While reading through the book, it seems that the government agencies should be blamed for the unsustainable harvesting. Perhaps this is true, but Dietrich gives evidence to condemn and exonerate them. He explains that the US Fish and Wildlife Service lacked the funding to properly carry out the requirements of the Endangered Species Act (1973), and that Congress would dictate timber harvest levels to the USFS, forcing them to allow harvesting at levels that were too high. 

The book makes us consider essential questions, such as how can human society coexist with ecosystems. Dietrich reveals that the story of Pacific Northwest logging is not simply about environmentalists versus timber companies but is far more nuanced and complex. Through the various accounts in the book, Dietrich weaves a narrative that is even-handed to both sides, showing us the challenges of balancing the economic needs and wants of humans with nature’s requirements for habitat and biodiversity. I would recommend this book to anyone interested in forestry, the controversy over old growth, or the history of logging in the Pacific Northwest. 

Today, while the USFS continues to sell trees for harvesting, it appears to have a much clearer understanding of the value of forests, issuing its own studies recognizing the many services provided by forests beyond timber production that include cultural values, water resources, carbon sequestration, air quality, and medicine. In a study on resilience within the USFS, researchers recognized it for being the first federal agency to implement an ecosystem approach to its land management practices. Despite the drain on its funding from fighting massive forest fires in the western United States, the USFS uses a large portion of its resources for restoration, scientific research, and stewardship programs. Its mission is “to sustain the health, diversity, and productivity of the Nation’s forests and grasslands to meet the needs of present and future generations.”

References

Bone, C., Moseley, C., Vinyeta, K., &amp; Bixler, R. P. (2016). Employing resilience in the united states forest service. Land use Policy, 52, 430-438. 10.1016/j.landusepol.2016.01.003

Daniels, J. (2005). The rise and fall of the Pacific Northwest log export market. https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pu...

Duncan, S. L., &amp; Thompson, J. R. (2006). Forest plans and ad hoc scientist groups in the 1990s: Coping with the forest service viability clause. Forest Policy and Economics, 9(1), 32-41.		 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science...

Loomis, E., &amp; Edgington, R. (2012). Lives under the canopy: Spotted owls and loggers in western forests. http://digitalrepository.unm.edu/cgi/...

U.S. Forest Service (2017). Trees at work: economic accounting for forest ecosystem services in the u.s.south. https://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/pubs/55474

U.S. Forest Service (2018). FY 2019 budget justification. https://www.fs.fed.us/sites/default/f...