Rating: 4/5

Guadalcanal. Iwo Jima. New Guinea. Kwajalein. Okinawa. Philippines. Wake. Bougainville. The islands that saw ground combat in the South Pacific during World War II or legendary and their names familiar. But the American offensive campaign in the Pacific began in an area much less familiar on islands remembered only by specialists: Attu and Kiska in the Aleutian Islands. Brian Garfield's The Thousand-Mile War: World War II in Alaska and the Aleutians, is now 50 years old, but remains a timeless and authoritative account of the North Pacific Campaign. In June 1942, seven months after Pearl Harbor, the Japanese again did the unthinkable: Army troops landed on Attu and Kiska Islands in the Aleutian chain. It was the first time that foreign invaders had occupied American soil since the War of 1812. US Army Air Forces planes and US Navy ships bombarded the islands when possible, though extreme weather conditions prevented any systematic bombing efforts and allowed the Japanese to reinforce the islands. Building a ground force capable of retaking the islands required nearly a year, but in May 1943 the US Army 7th Infantry Division did just that. Suffering the privations of extreme cold, brutal terrain and a fanatical enemy, the division with attached 4th Infantry Regiment and Eskimo Scouts, captured I2 after nearly 3 weeks of battle. It took another two months forced the Japanese to evacuate Kiska. The operation exposed US military to the nature of the enemy of faced in the Pacific: the Japanese suffered 98% casualties, including 500 who committed suicide rather than surrender. On the scale of other World War II campaigns, Attu was small, but on the proportion soldiers engaged, it was the second most costly: only Iwo Jima had more US casualties per capita. The brutal weather and harsh terrain provided lessons for the Army for later cold weather operations during the war, but unfortunately many of these lessons were lost after the war. Eight years after that awful summer in the Aleutians, two of the same regiments were destined to face similar terrain, weather conditions, and a fanatical enemy in North Korea around the Chosin Reservoir. Brian Garfield was not a trained historian, but his book is excellent history written well. The Pulitzer Prize committee agreed, because he was a finalist for a Pulitzer Prize in History. It is an operational history that is rich in resources, both Japanese and American, but he also includes personalities. This is a book for the specialist as well as the general reader. It is said that only historians read the footnotes, and in most cases that is okay. In this case, however, all readers should read the end notes. Garfield uses notes sparingly, and does not document sources in the manner of an academic history or monograph. His discursive endnotes are very informative and illuminate aspects of the text that the reader will find interesting. They should be considered part of the text. An excellent book that has stood the test of time. My only negative comment is that the book is that it lacks adequate maps -- they are crucial to understanding the campaign.