Rating: 4/5

i love that this story features an older, more elegant and thoughtful mike hammer, as written by mickey spillane in his older years. i realize most fans dislike the later spillane books and i’m pretty sure i strongly disagree. vehemently even. 

yes, this isn’t young psychotic tour-de-force mike hammer — but that’s okay, because what the later hammer period lacks in pure explosive insanity and narrative propulsion like the early novels, it more than makes up for it with a moodier, reflective and even somewhat sentimental tone of an older mike. which to my mind is a window into the psyche of one of my favorite blue collar writers of all time. reading ‘black alley’ i could infer how mickey felt about life as he aged and reflected on his brasher, younger years. 

to be honest, when people complain about the later spillane / hammer books, i think they forget he wrote this particular novel in his late 70’s (70!!!) and that’s really the lens which to view the character through. it’s an older wiser hammer, reflected even in his dynamic with velda, who is now his fiancé and provides a charming subplot to the story. 

look, as a newer and very passionate fan of spillane, and also as someone who was too young to be aware of him when he was still alive, i love seeing how mickey matured as a writer as he got older and started pursuing more mature themes — without ever being pretentious like some other crime writers — he didn’t just keep revisiting the early glory years of the character, since that wouldn’t have worked anyway due to the fact that mickey wasn’t that mickey anymore; those early books being a product of a young hotshot writer with things to prove, just as the later books reflect his twilight years where he discovered a more relaxed and reflective tone as a writer (also much apparent in “dead street”). 

regardless, we already have the young hammer classics and they’re not going anywhere. which is why i look at these particular books as elaborations on hammer’s later years, which also just happen to be cannon since they were written by mickey himself.