This book “At All Costs” by “John Gilstrap” is a story about a fugitive family using dead people's identities to hide from the government because from a crime they didn’t commit and are the number one on the ten most wanted list. Jake and Carolyn known as the Donovan’s life will change from years of hiding and obey the law but this time they will need to run. Their son Travis will later know the truth about his parents past and he will never see his parents the same ever again. 

Jake Donovan who people know him as Jake Brighton works at a body shop in a small town in Phoenix. One day the FBI and the DEA had busted inside the body shop to do a drug bust because Jake’s paint crew did a sloppy job of transporting them. Jake Brighton was worried when he seen the FBI and the DEA outside the shop because he thought he was going to get robbed and this made him reached for his gun and aimed it at agent Rivers. Jake aimed his gun at agent Rivers for a long time because he was panicking which made him freeze as a statue and when he focused he lowered his gun then was arrested with an assault charge. During that time his wife Carolyn was working at her desperate job where people open packages by not picking up after their mess they caused in the store. When Jake was taken to the courtroom he made a call to Carolyn to go by the plan they had practiced for years for this kind of situation now because he knew when the FBI took fingerprints of his hand everything about their lives are going to change after that. Carolyn was worried because no one had never called her while she was working if it has to deal with something about her child Travis at school, when Jake told her to calm down and to focus on telling her that they're in this together, she instantly runs to the exit of the store not listening to customers or to her boss. Carolyn always has doubt because she doesn’t believe they are ever going to have a good life from hiding but jake always has to put Carolyn into the confidence phase so everything can go as planned

When Jake was released he had a “burst of excitement” and when he exited the courtroom he was being cautious because he knew by the time he was released the FBI would know who he really was. Agent River was furious by the background check of Jake Donovan “Number one on the ten most wanted list”. A few hours had passed when Carolyn had finished getting everything done as planned . As Carolyn was waiting for Jake to arrive at the storage center she was getting worried and was thinking about leaving without him but her mind was always saying “family first” which Jake had implemented into her mind. By the time Jake arrived Carolyn had calmed down and the only thing they needed to do was getting their son Travis. As they were arriving to Travis’s school Jake and Carolyn had an argument because Carolyn has been saying that they should give up running away but Jake told her If the FBI catches them it's over and the only important thing right now is getting their son and finding a way to escape. Everytime when the Donovan’s had escaped from being pulled over by police by using different identities agent River would always get furious. The main goal for agent Rivers is getting the Donovan’s in that cell because if she doesn't she would be lowered in the ranks. When Jake had told Travis about his past “of being accused of massacring 16 people and causing an environmental catastrophe” will change Travis’s life of what he really thought about his family. The only chance the Donavan’s have to escape from running away is Carolyn’s uncle known as Harry whom is a lawyer who helped them before when everything went downhill for them. Harry is a person who doesn't stop if he successfully done his job and that's why he wants to help Carolyn to stop running and believes she and her husband Jake are innocent.

My opinion about this book is that I think the Donovan’s are innocent because whoever was there when the Donovan’s had seen in the darkness causing the murders and causing an environmental catastrophe when they were escaping didn’t want to get their hands dirty so he or she wanted them to be criminals for a reason. I think the target audience for this book is for those who are looking for a suspenseful and entertaining story telling.