Rating: 4/5

This is an intriguing one because although this is intended as a trilogy, I think you could read Spy Hook and Spy Line and leave it at that. The books are written from the first-person perspective of Bernard Samson and Deighton is quite clear that Samson presents things from an unreliable perspective. The story actually finishes at the end of Spy Line; Spy Sinker presents things from multiple third person perspectives of the same events as its predecessors, intended to fill in some of the gaps and give the points-of-view of other characters. Which is an interesting way of doing things.

But before we get to that, we're finishing the story of Spy Line. This and Spy Hook are definitely a pair. Deighton intended them as separate, standalone stories and it sometimes comes across; he'll refer to characters from Spy Hook as thought they've never been heard of before. But it also doesn't really work. I read them as a pair and I think you'd be quite lost if you didn't, and if you hadn't read Game, Set and Match first. Read them in order.

But it's a decent story and it retains a lot of the same elements from the first book. Samson's relentless cynicism comes across and if you're a certain kind of person, you'll sympathise with his frustrated ambitions. He's competent, but reached as high up as he'll go, whilst people better at schmoozing and with no field experience get promoted ahead of him, at least in his telling of it. If you've ever served in the military or suchlike, you'll probably know what he means. His narrative is funny for his gloomy observations about things, such as the motives of his superior Dicky Cruyer and it's an entertaining read.

If you've read the first book, you'll know what to expect here because it's more of the same. The same secrets held amid a slow-moving, paperwork-heavy bureaucracy, a very slow moving plot punctuated with sudden bursts of action and it focuses equally heavily, if not more so, on Samson's personal life as his work life. He is clearly a very conflicted individual. He's struck up a relationship with Gloria, a lady half his age, but who seems to genuinely love him and want to be with him. But he still loves his absent wife, still technically married and it's this that drives his relentless and unwanted burrowing into her actions.

Perhaps something that comes through a bit more here is the department's cynical and poor treatment of some of the people that work for it. Samson is not told anything and chucked into situations and certainly by the end, his personal life is in complete tatters. And he just has to accept it. Thereagain, going back to how we started this review, maybe that's just Samson's telling of things. When I get into Spy Sinker, I might revise my opinions.

I would say that this is a slow burn, and it's intended (I think) that you don't know everything and not all the loose ends are tied up. There is a reference to heroin smuggling that is alluded to, but never really taken anywhere and ultimately used as an excuse for blaming someone for everything that's gone wrong. If you want James Bond action and everything laid out for you like Frederick Forsyth, this is not the book for you. But if you're prepared for many shades of grey about the people, the actions and the plot, then you'll probably enjoy it. I certainly did.