Rating: 4/5

One of the most important books of my youth and therefore my entire reading life. Allow me to explain...

It is a collection of stories that gives a slightly false impression of being for children. The stories are not children's fiction. They are adult stories of weirdness and imagination and every single one is excellent. There isn't a bad story in the volume. They opened my mind to the possibilities of 'weird' fiction.

This was the book that introduced me to the work of Ray Bradbury. The final story in this collection is 'Homecoming' (which also happens to be the first story in his first collection, Dark Carnival) and it's a remarkable piece, a horror-comedy, poetic and strange, uplifting and downbeat at the same time. A story that seems to be a parody but actually isn't. Bradbury subsequently became an extremely important influence on me. In fact I wouldn't be a writer today if I hadn't discovered his work.

But that's the last story in this book. Let's consider the others...

The first story in this collection, 'The Day of the Dragon' by Guy Endore is another extremely strong piece, well-written, ingenious, darkly funny. Endore is sadly underrated these days. It's surely time for his rediscovery. What impressed me about this story was the fact that the basic idea is just so ingenious. The prose itself is also of a very high quality.

'The King of the Cats' by Stephen Vincent Benet is marvellous. It reads like the sort of story Saki might have written but didn't.

'Slime' by Joseph Brennan often seems to be the favourite of many of those who have read this book. It's a very effective story, essentially a tale of pure horror.

'The Man Who Sold Rope to the Gnoles' by Idris Seabright takes characters and situations invented by Lord Dunsany and gives them an even darker twist than they originally had. 

'Gone to the Dogs' by Miriam Allen deFord is a humorous story about transformation.

'The Microscopic Giants' by Paul Ernst is a wonderfully disturbing story about a new form of life found deep underground, where the enormous pressures of the rock mean that any entities that exist must be extremely dense. This was the first oxymoron title I ever encountered and I still think it's marvellous (my favourite oxymoron title of all is probably The Dark Light Years by Brian Aldiss).

'The Young One' by Jerome Bixby is, in some ways, the most conventional tale in this book, but there is a delightful twist at the end which should be obvious but somehow isn't. And again, the quality of the prose is superb.

'Doomsday Deferred' by Will Jenkins. Another masterpiece. This story is about a gestalt entity in the Brazilian jungle.

'The Desrick on Yandro' is perhaps the best story Manly Wade Wellman ever wrote. It is certainly the best and most inventive (and perfectly paced) of his series of 'Silver John' tales.

'The Wheelbarrow Boy' by Richard Parker was my very first introduction to 'Kafkaesque' fiction, that deadpan delivery of the most outrageous and absurdist happenings.

I had just re-read this book after 38 or so years. It was magnificent.