Rating: 5/5

This is the sixteenth outing for Albert Campion, but he figures little in the narrative.

It is a thrilling study of a psychopath, thoroughly rooted in 50’s London and its atmosphere is so redolent of post-war seediness and criminality. It is a tale of human imperfection and self-deception.

The book opens with a country bus containing two elderly passengers being driven into an alley in London’s theatreland. The driver alights, makes a phone call, does a good turn for an elderly lady and goes off to carry out a murder.

Eight months later, Albert Campion visits Superintendent Charles Luke who has evolved a theory about the criminal which links him to several crimes and to a place in London called Garden Green: there is no evidence to support his hunch.

Soon we are introduced to Gerry Chad-Horder whose psychology is explored extensively.He expounds his philosophy to Richard Waterfield who he is trying to involve in one of his elaborate alibis.

"I never let anything tear the skin. I've never been faintly fond of anything or of anybody in my life." He spoke lightly but with satisfaction. "I'm deadly serious about this. I spotted the plain mechanical truth of it as a child. You could almost call it the Chad-Horder discovery. Any kind of affection is a solvent. It melts and adulterates the subject and by indulging it he loses his identity and hence his efficiency. By keeping myself to myself in the face of every conceivable attack I have remained successful, bright and indestructible.”

So early on we are introduced to the criminal and the detectives and the questions are how or if the two will meet. Therein lies the suspense of this book.

We meet Polly Tassie, one of Allingham’s marvellous elderly ladies. It is she who hides her eyes to Gerry’s evil nature and the awful truth about him…..until the end when Gerry tells her:

“Murder is a word, a shibboleth. People get killed every day and sometimes it's called murder and sometimes it isn't. Sometimes it's war and sometimes it's accident, sometimes it's . . . well, it's just the logical conclusion of a sequence of events.”

The final chapter set in a Museum of Oddities is as thrilling as the first. At the end, we do not know all; as the final sentence states: “There was great deal of work to be done”.

Hide My Eyes is a masterpiece.Do read it.

Thank you to the Allingham Estate for my review copy.