Rating: 3/5

I don't think I'm able to be objective in rating of Paul Monette's books. Who am I to judge his works? Besides, I'm a HUGE fan of Paul Monette as a person. He burst into my life with his powerfully written, raw and unforgettable memoirs -Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story and Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story, a magnificent monument to his lover's bravery, their commitment to each other and the plague of hatred and ignorance they had to endure.  I ADMIRE his honesty , his essential and important contribution into changing the way the modern society started to think about AIDS and about being gay or lesbian. 

This book belongs to his early works and is one of his few novels that isn't AIDS-related. But The Long Shot, in the matter of my LIKING, was not a big surprise for me. I knew that this mystery novel wasn't highly praised by critics, to put it diplomatically, and that the bad reviews met Paul Monette very hard. And even if I hate to admit it - I can understand WHY this novel wasn't a big success.
My biggest problem here was not the mystery itself, though I found the solution at the end of the book less satisfying, but the writing style. The Long Shot is written in the oddest, the most bizarre and weird manner. I can explain it only with the fact that Paul Monette at the beginning of his writing career wrote exclusively poetry. He was a natural born, 

I don't think I'm able to be objective in rating of Paul Monette's books. Who am I to judge his works? Besides, I'm a HUGE fan of Paul Monette as a person. He burst into my life with his powerfully written, raw and unforgettable memoirs -Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story and Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story, a magnificent monument to his lover's bravery, their commitment to each other and the plague of hatred and ignorance they had to endure.  I ADMIRE his honesty , his essential and important contribution into changing the way the modern society started to think about AIDS and about being gay or lesbian. 

This book belongs to his early works and is one of his few novels that isn't AIDS-related. But The Long Shot, in the matter of my LIKING, was not a big surprise for me. I knew that this mystery novel wasn't highly praised by critics, to put it diplomatically, and that the bad reviews met Paul Monette very hard. And even if I hate to admit it - I can understand WHY this novel wasn't a big success.

My biggest problem here was not the mystery itself, apart from that I found the solution at the end of the book less satisfying, but the writing style. The Long Shot is written in the oddest and the most bizarre and weird manner. I can explain it only with the fact that Paul Monette at the beginning his writing career wrote exclusively poetry. He was a natural born aesthetically inclined poet, and his high affinity for beautiful sentences, words, phrase is pretty much obvious here. But the language that could sound amazing and takes your breath away in a short poem, appears very artificial and pretentious in a mystery story that demands a clear story-line and not an agglomeration of blurred thoughts, very complicated sentences, distracting detailed descriptions the only purpose of wich was just to strike a reader with their beauty without making sense.

BUT

I don't think that there are a lot of writers on this planet that can write almost 300 pages in such poetical and fascinating way, the question is: was it worth all the efforts? I honestly have no idea.

Still a MUST read for all Paul Monette fans. 

P.S. A big hug to Ije, my PM buddy, I won't do it up to the end without her moral support! *smooch*