Rating: 3/5

This is the second of Rex Stout’s Nero Wolfe novels that I have read, and the more of them I read, the more fascinated I am by his character’s domestic circumstances. In the series, the great detective lives in a Manhattan brownstone, along with three other men to tend to his needs and interests. Today this sort of arrangement would raise more than a few eyebrows, and no doubt plenty of people have written articles and posts exploring this, which I look forward to reading at some point. What interests me more as I read the books, though, are the economics of running such a household. In the novels, Wolfe not only has three men permanently on his payroll, but he has as well the expenses of maintaining the brownstone as well as a few cars, at least one of which is maintained by a service, and an expensive hobby cultivating orchids.

Why do I find this so interesting? Because Stout makes it clear in his first novel, Fer-de-Lance, that Wolfe is not rich, but depends upon his income as a detective to support his lavish lifestyle. At the end of that novel, he is paid a fee of $50,000, the equivalent of over $1 million today. As it was my first Wolfe novel, I thought that amount might have been Stout’s way of freeing his character from financial needs, yet it is clear at the start of this one that income remains a concern, and to explain properly the consequences of this I have to employ spoilers.

The premise of the novel is that Andrew Hibbard, a psychology instructor at Columbia, has gone missing. Earlier he had approached Wolfe seeking protection from Paul Chapin, a Harvard classmate who was crippled in a stunt that Chapin was forced to perform by his classmates. Now two of those classmates have died, and Hibbard fears that he is the next. At the start of the novel Hibbard has disappeared, and is presumed to have been murdered by Chapin, with Hibbard’s niece seeking to employ Wolfe to find the body

The twist of the story is twofold: that both of those deaths are entirely unrelated to the incident with Chapin – with one dying in an accident and the other by suicide – and that Hibbard is not dead, but in hiding. Though Chapin is innocent, he is using their deaths to torture the other people who pressured him into the stunt. Hibbard’s fears are driven entirely by his guilt over his role in the matter, and he has gone underground in order to avoid Chapin’s wrath. Wolfe either knows or suspects this when he calls together the other classmates in order to convince them to hire him to find the person responsible for Hibbard’s disappearance and to address the threat posed by Chapin to themselves.

What makes this so fascinating is that what Wolfe is offering them amounts to a swindle, as he knows that Chapin poses no threat, and that Hibbard will eventually turn up alive. The offer is more about exploiting the fears of the nearly two-dozen men to extort over $56,000 from them for largely unnecessary or superfluous services. All Wolfe really is setting out to do in return for this substantial sum is to find Hibbard – a task already being undertaken by both the police and a private detective agency – and to then dispel their fears of their aggrieved classmate. It really is a breathtaking degree of deceit on Wolfe’s part, and one which makes him indirectly responsible for a murder that later takes place. Because when one of the members of the “League of Atonement” murders another for an unrelated matter, he frames Chapin for it knowing that the authorities’ suspicions of Chapin have already done most of the work for him. It proves a trivial matter for Wolfe to expose the man’s guilt, but left unaddressed is that the murderer might never have been inspired to commit his crime had he not had a patsy already available.

The moral ambiguity of Wolfe’s actions is truly fascinating, and sets this book apart from others of its type. Whether Stout deliberately intends to implicate his central character in this manner, or if it was more a reflection of a different moral outlook, is really up to the reader to decide in the end. But that it sets the book apart from so many novels of its ilk is undeniable, and it certainly has me interested in reading more of Stout’s novels to see if this is a feature of his famous character or merely an aberration. Because I suspect the one thing that doesn’t change in them is Wolfe’s constant need for money. After all, as many a criminal can attest, living the high life is never cheap.