Rating: 5/5

Powerful, thought provoking, and often difficult to read. Giardina does an excellent job of portraying Bonhoeffer as a human being, warts and all. Conversations explain his thoughts and philosophy, and Giardina carefully sets the background 1930s German culture. I liked learning how Bonhoeffer’s experiences in the United States (civil rights, West Virginia’s Hawk’s Nest tunnel disaster, Jazz, dancing) informs and influences his theology. It’s hard to read without thinking of Trump (though written in 1987). Comparisons with the Nazi regime are chilling.

1933, after the Reichstag burns: “This won’t be the first unjust government in the world,” Dietrich said, “or the last. God knows I won’t be happy living under it, but it will come to an end.” 132

“A government which suppresses the freedom of its citizens can only be called illegitimate, however legal its institution.” 139

“Perhaps I shall not be so polite as to raise my hand,” Dietrich said. “Not that I’m used to making a scene. But I find now that I am angry, always angry. It’s not just the bullying and the threats. It’s the way all knowledge and logic and reason are twisted into their exact opposites. So that it is no longer possible to converse with these people. Only to scream at them...” 169

“If it was so wrong, why did God let it happen?”

“How was God supposed to stop it? You’re a free man, Alois. There are no invisible strings connecting you to God, directing your every move.”

“But if God is all-powerful, God could intervene. God could find a way.”

“And because God didn’t intervene, it was all right.”

“Yes.”

“Too bad you don’t believe in God, then. You’ve lost your excuse.”

Bauer blinked. He looked away. “Perhaps I do believe in God,” he said. 

“Oh, yes,” Dietrich said. “God makes a convenient scapegoat. Or people always think God is absent when things are going bad for them. Things go better and God is back. Well, I want to live in the world as if there were no God. That is the only way God can truly be with any of us. You, on the other hand, want a God you can blame for everything you’ve done. Oh yes, you will believe anything you must to exonerate yourself.” 455

“I do not know which of us God loves best. But it hope it is you. However, I warn you, the love of God burns like fire. You will not be able to stand in the face of it.” 456