Rating: 5/5

Kudo's to Sara Paretsky for making V.I. Warshawski such an unforgettable, sustainable and lovable character. She gets my highest rating for having done so. I found this collection of stories(nine chapters all united by the Introduction titled: A Walk on the Wild Side: Touring Chicago with V.I. Warshawski) educational, entertaining, and intriguing. How else would I come to learn of the Japanese board game, Joseki highlighted in The Takamoku Joseki chapter? it was cleverly introduced as the medium through which essential company secrets were relayed. Likewise, I learned of the existence of the Maltese Cat thanks to the chapter with its name and of its rarity, in part, due to its difficulty in breeding. Due to V.I.'s superb snooping skills, we learn the cat in question, Lady Iva of Cairo, was said to have only had the "opportunity to mate" three times in her fourteen- year lifespan the present time being one of those "seasons" which ups the ante. The question thus becomes was V.I. really hired to locate the missing cat rather than the runaway sister of Brigitte LeBanc, Corinne? Fearless V.I. takes us to and through the deplorable, deserted and dilapidated building Jade Pierce ( ex-husband of Brigitte) calls home in search of the missing teen where she uncovers more than she could have imagined. As is typical in the series, V.I. encounters a physical assault ( when her defenses are down) yet manages to subdue her attacker turning him into the victim and a provider of needed information. V.I.'s heart and soul are revealed in her creative resolution to the sibling conflict that permeates which earns her credits as Mediator of the Year in my book. 

I must confess to those who are to read this review that I am a long time fan of V.I. even though or because of her resemblance of Sue Grafton's Kinsey Milhoune. Both have lost mothers early in life and grew up with a father in the police force still known to many detectives in the Chicago and Santa Barbara (?) police departments with whom they each routinely interact in the course of their respective investigations. I do not know which came first but their independent spirit and resourcefulness is equally remarkable and lovable. I invite all to read Sara Paretskyl, she will not disappoint.