Rating: 5/5

I read this as part of my Lenten observance. I found Chittister's commentary on the Rule helpful and challenging, making clear the focus and practice of Benedictine spirituality. Reading and discussing this book with a small group would be a valuable experience. I plan to read it again to be reminded of important aspects of the life of prayer and Christian community. As I read, I noted many comments I wanted to preserve--they are listed here:

“Obedience, Benedict says – the willingness to listen for the voice of God in life – is what will wrench us out of the limitations of our own landscape” (20). 

”The person who prays for the presence of God is, ironically, already in the presence of God. The person who seeks God has already found God to some extent” (21). 

”Benedict obviously believes that life lived fully his life lived on two planes: attention to God and attention to the good of the other” (24). Further, “an obligation to human community and a dependence on God, then, become the cornerstones of Benedictine life” (26). 

”Clearly, for Benedict, God is not something to be achieved; God is a presence to be responded to but to home without the presents we cannot respond.… God is the breath we breathe. It is thanks to God that we have any idea of God at all… God is the reason that we can reach God” (27). 

”The rule of Benedict reminds us that whatever authority we hold, we hold it for the good of the entire group, not for our own sense of self” (49).

”The end of Benedictine spirituality is to develop a transparent personality… Holiness… Has something to do with being who we say we are, claiming our truths, opening our hearts, giving ourselves to the other pure and unglossed… Benedict is intent on developing people who are what they seem to be” (51). [I noted in the margin that this statement reminds me of the Trevecca motto I have long appreciated: “To Be Rather Than To Seem.”] 

”These tools of the spiritual life – justice, peacemaking, respect for all creation, trust in God – are the work of a lifetime” (56). In the section where Benedict talks about the ladder of humility, this comment by Chittister: “The fifth rung of the latter of humility is an unadorned and disarming one: Self– revelation… is necessary to growth.… The struggles we hide, psychologists tell us, are the struggles that consume us” (69).

"Even the desire to pray is the grace to pray. The movement to pray is the movement of God in our souls. Our ability to pray depends on the power in place of God in our life. We pray because God attracts us and we pray only because God is attracting us" (77).

”Every Sunday morning, just as the day breaks, Benedict asks us to say five specific songs: Psalm 67 ask for God’s continued blessings, Psalm 51 gives voice to our contrition, Psalm 118 recounts God’s goodness in times past, Psalm 62 pours out a longing for God, and psalms 148-150 bring the soul to a burst of praise. The structure itself, in other words, models the disposition of the soul before it’s gone” (80). 
”Compline, the night prayer of the community, was built around three psalms (4, 91, and 134) designed to do what we all need to do at night: recognize that what we did that day was not perfect, hope that the next day will be better, praise the God who is love and grace brought us through another day, and go to bed trusting that the God who sees our every action is more concerned with our motives then with our failures” (88). 

“Benedict says that the spiritual life is not simply what we think about; it is what we do because of what we think. It is possible, in fact, to spend our whole lives thinking about the spiritual life and never develop one" (110).

“Until we are able to have at least a little silence every day, both outside and in, both inside and out, we have no hope of coming to know either God or ourselves very well” (125).

“Monastic spirituality revolves around becoming a contributing part of a people of faith, living with them, learning with them, bearing their burdens, sharing their lives” (127). 

“It is the single minded search for God that defines Benedictine spirituality” (134). 

"The function of the artist in the monastery – and in the life of us all – is to make the transcended visible; to touch the soul in ways that match the soul; to enshrine beauty so that we may learn to see it; and to make where we live places of wonder” (150). 

”Benedictine spirituality does not fear poverty; it fears the kind of self-sufficiency that frees people from the smelting effects of a communal spirituality” (156). 

”The things we ruminate on, the things we insist on carrying in our minds and hearts, the things we refused to put down, the rule warns us, are really the things that poison us and erode our souls” (173). 

”Benedictine spirituality is about caring for the people you live with and loving the people you don't and loving God more than yourself. Benedictine spirituality depends on listening for the voice of God everywhere in life, especially in one another and here.” (178) 

”It is not what we read, he implies; it is what we become that counts. Every major religious tradition, in fact has called for a change of heart, a change of life rather than for simply an analysis of its literature” (179).

The closing paragraph of the book is a good summary: "Even at the end of his rule, Benedict does not promise that we will be perfect for having lived it. What Benedict does promise is that we will be disposed to the wheel of God, attuned to the presence of God, committed to the search for God, and just beginning to understand the power of God in our lives. Why? Because Benedictine simplicity gentles us into the arms of God. Benedictine community supports us on the way to God. Benedictine balance makes a wholesome journey possible. Monastic prayer, rooted in Scripture, lights the way. It is a way of life, the spirituality that makes the humdrum holy and the daily the stuff of high happiness. It is a way of that leads us to pursue life to its fullest. As this final chapter promises, the meaning of the human enterprise is for are taking if we will only follow the simple but profoundly life-altering way” (180).