Rating: 4/5

David Ignatius has been known to me for decades. He is an intellectual, a journalist, an editor and columnist and a novelist. His father was a secretary of the navy, and is of Armenian descent. His mother is a descendant of Cotton Mather, Puritan preacher. Son David has reported on national and global politics, business news, international affairs, and he has covered two wars, in Iraq and Lebanon. Critics say he is too much a fan of the CIA, even when they torture for information. Ignatius was a supporter of W. Bush's Iraq War, but has since changed his mind. Siro, BTW, is a meaningless codeword for the CIA. 

This particular story begins in 1979. The Shah has abdicated and the Ayatollah has returned. The hostages have not yet been taken.. A shadowy ex-OSS officer hiding in the bureaucracy in Washington, DC, seeks agents, new or experienced, for an off-the-books deception operation aimed at the USSR. His plan is to create the impression that the Central Asian Republics (Uzbekistan, Armenia, Turkistan, Chechnya. etc)- essentially the ancient Silk Road Muslim territories, are ripe for revolt. He finds his agents, one male in Turkey and one female new recruit, and puts his plan in motion. There is a discussion between the woman's family friend/mentor in the CIA and the new agent, Anna, about the special difficulties of being a female agent, but Anna still jumps right into bed with her "partner" in this caper, Taylor.

The CIA details seem authentic. Discussions are had about the role of the agency and the ethical problems associated with the things it must do to accomplish its goals, mostly set by the current president and his national security staff. There is almost never a total victory, and there are casualties in the agency and among its foreign recruits. Burnout is expected. Nobody can be trusted completely. The plot seems plausible, the characters only slightly less so. All thrillers seem to need lots of casual sex.. I suppose that can be a strong motive for the type of risk takers who become CIA operators, but for EVERYONE? All the time? Not in my world, anyway. Otherwise, I am convinced the author is telling me something true about the CIA, and I was fascinated. 

My other quibble is that the ending needs cleaning up. It goes on too long (625 pp), but most of the extra stuff is at the end of the action and concerns the aftermath. If you like thrillers, I think you will enjoy Siro as I did.