Rating: 4/5

This is one of Marion Chesney's funniest novels with captivating characters and a storyline that always kept my interest. Marion Chesney's biggest talent, in my opinion, is her ability to craft a wonderful and diverse ensemble cast of characters. In this story, the heroine Henrietta Bascombe is an impoverished 19 yr old member of the gentry who has just inherited 5000 pounds from the local squire. Henrietta's an orphan who lives in her late parents' cottage with only her former governess turned companion, Miss Hissop. These 2 women are celebrating Henrietta's good fortune at the start of the story:

Miss Hissop is a 40 something yr old spinster who is quite an amusing and eccentric character ! She thinks Henrietta ought to use the money as a dowry in order to get herself a husband but Henrietta has more revolutionary plans. The heroine thinks that a gold digging husband might just end up marrying her and then gambling away her money or spending it on loose women. Henrietta's big plan is to do the unthinkable ( for a gentle woman of the gentry ) and go into trade ! Miss Hissop is appalled because this will make Henrietta ineligible for a husband from the aristocratic class but the heroine has plans to open a confectionery shop to rival Gunther's in London. Henrietta gets 2 other impoverished village gentry women to go with her and Miss Hissop to London. The other young ladies, Charlotte and Josephine, aren't exactly fond of going into trade but it's better than suffering all alone in the village. These 2 are a bit different from Henrietta because they still have romantic dreams of finding the perfect husband. The kooky Miss Hissop, however, is only obsessed with one thing: planning her perfect funeral ! 

  Only Henrietta knew that behind this formidable exterior lurked the soul of a rabbit. All Miss Hissop wanted out of life was to pay for her own funeral and not to be buried in a pauper’s grave. In the way that young girls had a “bottom drawer” or wedding chest for their trousseau, Miss Hissop had a funeral closet in which she kept the little money she had saved in a tin box, a hand-embroidered shroud, black armbands for the mourners, and a long list of instructions as to the funeral arrangements.

The funniest thing about Miss Hissop is that her funeral plans would become grander and more ostentatious each time she managed to acquire more money. That made me laugh a lot because normal folks would tend to want to spend any extra funds on making their present life better. Henrietta was a smart and unconventional heroine. She had a keen mind for business and after an initial difficult start, her confectionery shop Bascombe's started to make a lot of money. The 4 women used inventive marketing methods to attract customers and soon, 2 eligible noblemen started coming everyday because they were interested in Charlotte and Josephine. These men were Guy Clifford and Lord Charles Worsley. Charles was the younger brother of the snobbish hero. The H is Rupert, the Earl of Carrisdowne. When Rupert hears about the other 2 men's interest in the ladies at Bascombe's, he's amused initially because he thinks that shopgirls are only suitable as mistresses. Then, when he discovers that Guy and Charles are thinking in terms of marriage, he is scandalized, especially after they inform him that the women are members of the gentry:

  “Are you trying to tell me that these tonnish ladies have taken to trade?” demanded the earl. 

“Well, I suppose that’s it,” said Mr. Clifford awkwardly. “Ain’t that just what I’ve been saying?” 

The earl cast a cold blue eye on his friend. 

“I thought you were looking for a wife, not a mistress,” he remarked. 

Mr. Clifford flushed. “Surely running a respectable establishment like a confectioner’s don’t put a female beyond the pale?” 

“Yes, it does, my friend,” said the earl gently. “And well you know it.”

Rupert was such a stuffy and entitled type of H. When he realized that he couldn't prevent Guy and Charles from courting Charlotte and Josephine, he decided to spread bad rumours to make people stop visiting Bascombe's. When that failed, because Henrietta had such mad marketing skills, he decided to get to know the women personally. That's where the romantic storyline started to develop and the H's plan backfired because he soon found himself falling in love with Henrietta. Their sweet little romance was proceeding smoothly until a jealous wannabe other woman called Lara Clara intervened. Clara wanted the H to propose to her and she thought he'd liked her until Henrietta came into the picture. The jealous OW schemed with her drunken brother, Alisdair, and they paid a couple of men to set fire to Bascombe's:

 
  “Only a sovereign to get rid of that Bascombe?” Lady Clara smiled, a slow, catlike smile. 

“The only bargain to be found, little brother, in these expensive days. Very well. Burn her out! Carrisdowne hasn’t yet proposed, evidently, or we’d have heard of it, and without a place to stay she will need to return, even if temporarily, to where she came from. That will leave the field open for me.”

The H arrives in time to stop the fire from spreading but the 4 women are traumatized by it since they could've died if he had not arrived and seen the 2 men running away after setting the blaze. The most entertaining result of this near tragedy was Miss Hissop's response:

  “So terrifying,” gasped Miss Hissop. “We might have all been burned to a crisp, and then what would have happened to my funeral? Oh, to think all my dear funeral instructions might have been burned with me! Henrietta, my funeral instructions must from now on be lodged at the bank.”

The MC's seemed well set for their happy ending after the fire, because Rupert decided to propose marriage to Henrietta. But the adolescent shopboy, Esau, whom Henrietta had saved from the workhouse was afraid that if Henrietta married the H, then Bascombe's will be closed and he will be forced to return to the workhouse. I felt sorry for Esau since he'd suffered so much in the workhouse, but I wanted to punch him when he pulled a nasty stunt and split up the MC's. Esau lied and told the H that Henrietta provided sexual services to a certain elderly duke and a couple other titled men. The jealous and enraged H didn't stop to investigate these accusations properly. He was heartbroken because he thought he'd been about to marry a slutty woman so he said a lot of nasty things to Henrietta. The MC's are separated for a few months and the depressed Henrietta closed down the London shop and moved to Bath to open her new store there. As time passed, however, Rupert continued to pine over Henrietta and concluded that he'd been too hasty and unfair to her:

  As the longing to see Henrietta became stronger and stronger, as he became more convinced he had damned her without a hearing, he became determined to find her. But inquiries at livery stables and coaching inns drew a blank. It was as if there had never been a Bascombe’s, as if Henrietta, Josephine, Charlotte, and Miss Hissop had never existed.

The wily Lady Clara also got her first comeuppance because the H flat out told her to get lost !

  Lord Alisdair Sinclair returned home one evening to find his sister, Lady Clara, in tears. 

“Haven’t seen you cry this age,” he said. “What’s to do?” 

“It is Carrisdowne,” said Lady Clara. “He told me if he found me waiting outside his door again, he would need to order his servants to tell me to go away. He said… he said he was tired of being annoyed by me.”

That didn't stop Clara, though. She started stalking the H and followed him down to Bath when he went to reconcile with Henrietta. Her big revenge plan entailed poisoning a huge cake that Henrietta had catered for the H's dinner party. The evil OW thought that the H would end up dying and her nemesis Henrietta would be jailed for murder. It's the smart Miss Hissop who saved the day by jumping on top of the cake to prevent the diners from eating it ! Clara was discovered wandering alone in a rural pathway and was placed in an asylum. Her conspirator brother Alisdair managed to escape; he probably had to leave the country because the authorities were looking to arrest him. The servant boy Esau was contrite after the MC's confronted him about his lies but he wasn't punished because they understood that he was just a scared child who didn't want to be sent back to the workhouse. This was a marvellous story ! At the end of it all, Henrietta decided to keep Bascombe's but she compromised with the H and decided to hire supervisors and other employees to see to it on a daily basis. Josephine and Charlotte also got their happy ending with Guy and Charles while the awesome Miss Hissop became a rich lady whose funeral plans started to rival that of royalty ! 

This is the heroine, Henrietta:

This is the hero, Rupert: