Rating: 2/5

Is ‘mystic’ a polite way of saying ‘unintelligible’? 

I first encountered Simone Weil while reading The Long Loneliness, the autobiography of Dorothy Day; Weil came recommended to me as another Catholic woman writer and social activist. Like Day, she is intellectually rigorous and contemplative about the nature of faith and its relationship with the world militant. However, there similarities drop off – Day is grounded in the mechanics of the physical world, the demands and oversights of its players, and remains driven and active against the prevailing injustices; Weil shutters herself away, playing ascetic and writing an awful lot about it. That Weil, de Beauvoir (Weil’s contemporary at the Sorbonne), and Day are lumped into the same category speaks to a fundamental misunderstanding of the three women’s contributions and outlooks and an intellectually lazy glossing-over of what each represents: they are grandly divergent individuals, only their sex and religious affiliation are common. 

Waiting for God left me underwhelmed: it fell squarely into the category of literature that, for the life of me, I can’t figure out how or why it’s earned the attention and accolades of so many. It is unevenly written: a collection of letters to a Priest (and confident) and essays on faith that – while dense – are occasionally so circuitous as to be unintelligible. I don’t subscribe to the common notion that to be difficult to understand is equivalent to brilliance, nor am I especially inclined to believe I’m incapable of understanding Weil’s work. It’s an emotionally and intellectually immature work, thrumming with ambition, but failing to find focus.

Her naiveté is exasperating, which sporadically crept into delusion, about the nature of faith and her slavish devotion to the Church. She is dramatic, overwrought and even maudlin, lamenting her status and constantly delving into exhaustive, verbose bouts of spiritual introspection. Even if private, to make such a show of her faith and the ‘ecstasy’ contained therein is contrived: the lady, as it were, doth protest too much – I don’t doubt her faith or its sincerity, nor do I understand the compulsion to write at such great lengths about it. 
It seemed contradictory to chronically harping on Christ and divinity while writing excessively about oneself. For an individual so obsessively passionate about the suffering of others, perhaps I have little patience for her choice to – rather than contribute actively in charity or outreach – self-inflict similar suffering in solidarity with the oppressed. 

Certainly, theology – especially personal theology – lends itself to doublespeak and ambiguity, because the nature of the spirit (and of sanctity itself) often eludes the confines of language. There are throngs of worthwhile 20th century apologists, individuals who thoughtfully and incisively delve into spiritual matters without becoming weighted down with solipsistic dirges about their internalized beliefs.

Waiting for God creates the distinct impression that Weil was psychologically unwell, if not experiencing bouts of psychosis or mania. I'm also likely not the 'right' reader for this book - it's steeped so heavily in excessive self-involvement and examination that I found it oftentimes difficult to find where, in fact, God comes into play - other than as a vessel for her to delve deeper into her own psyche and proclamations of enduring faith.