Rating: 3/5

Minor grammatical amendments 25 October 2024

This is a classic story of a man out of his depth who at first doesn’t believe any of the sharks might attack him, if indeed there are sharks, then realizes there are a lot of them circling around and what’s worse he’s not sure which ones are the really dangerous sharks. Moreover he has no shark fighting skills.

Howard Graham is an English armaments engineer in Turkey, in the early days of World War Two, before either Turkey or Italy make up their minds which side they would like to be on: Graham has been advising the Turkish navy on their war preparations but he is already out of his comfort zone. 

Then someone takes a pot shot at him. In his hotel room. This is a little close for comfort. Shaken but not badly wounded it dawns on Graham that he’s in actual danger and what is worse he doesn’t know from who (whom).

Not in any reassuring way, Colonel Haki, the head of the Turkish Secret Police, explains to Graham that the vital information in his head means it would be an advantage to the Germans not to have him alive. Even though Colonel Haki seems to be a man who knows more than he is telling he does fill Graham in about the murderous spies intent on killing him. Accordingly, rather than let him catch a train, Haki has organised safe passage to Genoa aboard a small Italian freighter.

And who is on board the vessel? All the people who will make him nervous, many of whom, if not all, are not who they seem: Josette, the alluring Hungarian dancer with whom he had flirted rather guiltily at a nightclub the night he got shot, as he momentarily forgot about his nice wife back in England; Josette’s manager / husband Jose (an odd relationship there); the decrepit German archaeologist Haller, who goes on endlessly about ruins, travelling with his wife, and the tobacco dealer Kuvetli among others. Just who are the bad people? Who can Graham trust?

Then in Athens the man who shot him comes on board ship, a man he recognises from a photo Colonel Haki happened to have handy at the time. Then Graham loses his borrowed gun. Bloody hell.

Soon enough he finds out who the really bad people are as is unceremoniously bundled into a car for what may well be his last ride.  To save himself Graham needs to find courage and fortitude he may not ever had known he possess. Does he save himself? What do you think?