Rating: 4/5

These stories are solid and competent with some glittering moments, but sometimes their points seemed obscure. They include some great, memorable characters, but some others with few distinguishing features, and many who are very similar to one another.

Stylistically, the last story is the most interesting (The Image Trade), which unfortunately pointed out the shared, conventional style of the others. It is the shortest, but it was certainly good to see the form stretched and fully inhabited in some of the longer stories, too.

The prose is faultless. Each sentence sits solidly in its own merit. The settings come alive. They are all set when they were written, the 1980s, and I felt a nostalgia for some details and assumptions. I have a feeling that there are some class indicators included which I failed to pick up on. I certainly felt there were elements I wasn’t getting in Things.

I liked parts of Cocky Olly, but I’m not sure that it came together as a whole, so I’m surprised that’s the most famous of these stories. The characters and moments were great. I wonder whether it might work better as a linked series of shorter stories? At least for readers now.

A Trip to the Seaside is very satisfying. Pritchett constantly undermines the protagonist so that the revelation at the end is not so much a twist as a vindication of how we already feel about him. The central relationship in A Careless Widow is very interesting, not one I’ve read before, and all the characters are well-formed, well-presented. The same is true of A Change of Policy (though again I think I was missing indicators), but I thought it would have benefitted from being shorter and therefore tighter.

Pritchett writes women well and with a lot of sympathy, also the queer-coded protagonist of A Careless Widow. He has some sympathetic straight men, but even the best are a bit pompous, and the worst are selfishly presumptuous. The attitudes and assumptions of the mid twentieth century are shown to be crumbling. It’s all a bit monocultural and middle-class and heteronormative for current tastes, but these stories are still well worth reading.