Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars This is a sweeping story of Abbie Deal’s eighty-year long life, especially her pioneer days in Nebraska in the 1870s and 80s when the labor was back breaking and so many pioneer families were struggling for a basic livelihood. This novel is a unique combination between a bird’s eye view of Abbie’s life and the details that make her life so rich. I think Aldrich accomplishes that by making Abbie the strong focal point of the story. Abbie often reflects on how swiftly time moves and the narrative supports that. I couldn’t believe her young children were already grown and married and that their children had children. 

Aldrich captures the “civilizing” of the west so well, too, and how that created a culture clash between Abbie’s generation and her children and grandchildren’s generations. Abbie’s elderly years are poignant because her relatives want to care for her but they are often unintentionally callous. It’s only her daughter Margaret and her two granddaughters Katherine and Laura, who, in their very different ways, seem to value Abbie and in some cases to rely on her. I love the shared love of beauty between Abbie and Margaret and the shared love of story between Abbie and Laura. I tried to be a Laura for my own grandparents and this book makes me conscious of how I treat my parents as they age. 

I often cringed when Grace was on the scene. She couldn’t seem to shake the idea that Abbie’s life had been limited. I cheered when Abbie stood up for herself and described the depth and breadth of her life, from her parents’ unique relationship, to her early marriage, to her wagon train ride to Nebraska, to her years of hard work, to bearing and raising children, etc. What is it that makes a person limited? A lack of education? A lack of travel? Not necessarily. I often thought of Hannah Coulter as I read this. The themes and subject matter are similar. 

Though some of Aldrich’s prose was lovely, she can’t hold a candle to the way Willa Cather evokes the beauty of the Nebraskan prairie. I missed that in this novel. I’ve also gotten used to novels that cover so many years of a person’s life that are more contemplative, such as Gilead by Marilynne Robinson, Wendell Berry’s novels, Crossing to Safety by Wallace Stegner, and My Antonia by Willa Cather. I missed the spiritual depth of those novels. There is much that is worthy of contemplation in Abbie Deal’s story but I don’t think it will glow in my imagination like other novels have. 

I loved that character of Laura. I’m glad to see there is a sequel about her. I will be looking that up and will certainly read more by Aldrich.