Rating: 5/5

One of the great classics of world literature. Worth reading for the parts that still apply. Confucius describes himself as a transmitter, not an originator. The book may not contain any original sayings. Its main philosophical idea is to avoid extremes. That's also an ancient Greek idea. One can do no better than to follow that precept. 

In some places, the orifices of a corpse were plugged up to prevent the soul escaping and doing harm to the community. In China, mortuary jades were used in the same way. 

The currently accepted dates of the life of Confucius are 551 to 479 BCE. 

Book I
1. ... To learn and at due times to repeat what one has learnt, is that not after all a pleasure?...

3. ... Clever talk and a pretentious manner are seldom found in the Good....

Book II 
2. ... Let there be no evil in your thoughts.... 

15. ... He who learns but does not think is lost.... 

17. ... Yu, shall I teach you what knowledge is? When you know a thing, to recognize that you know it, and when you do not know a thing, to recognize that you do not know it. That is knowledge. 

18. ... Hear much, but maintain silence as regards doubtful points and be cautious in speaking of the rest; then you will seldom get into trouble. ...

Book VI 
2. ... He had a great love of learning. ... 

Book VII (My personal favorite.) 
2. ... I have listened in silence and noted what was said, I have never grown tired of learning nor wearied of teaching others what I have learnt. These at least are merits which I can confidently claim. ... 

4. In his leisure hours the Master's manner was very free-and-easy, and his expression alert and cheerful. 

5. ... How utterly things have gone to the Bad with me! It is long now indeed since I dreamed that I saw the Duke of Chou. 

6. ... lean upon Goodness, seek distraction in the arts. 

7. ... none has ever come to me without receiving instruction. 

8. ... Only one who bursts with eagerness do I instruct; only one who bubbles with excitement, do I enlighten. If I hold up one corner and a man cannot come back to me with the other three, I do not continue the lesson. 

10. ... The man who was ready to 'beard a tiger or rush a river' without caring whether he lived or died--that sort of man I should not take. I should certainly take someone who approached difficulties with due caution and who preferred to succeed by strategy. 

15. ... Any thought of accepting wealth and rank by means that I know to be wrong is as remote from me as the clouds that float above. 

16. ... Give me a few more years, so that I may have spent a whole life in study, and I believe that after all I should be fairly free from error. 

18. The Duke of She asked Tzu-lu about Master K'ung. Tzu-lu did not reply. The Master said, Why did you not say, 'This is the character of the man: so intent upon enlightening the eager that he forgets his hunger, and so happy in doing so, that he forgets the bitterness of his lot and does not realize that old age is at hand. That is what he is.' 

19. ... I for my part am not one of those who have innate knowledge. I am simply one who loves the past and who is diligent in investigating it. 

20. The Master never talked of prodigies, feats of strength, disorders, or spirits. 

21. ... Even when walking in a party of no more than three I can always be certain of learning from those I am with. There will be good qualities that I can select for imitation and bad ones that will teach me what requires correction in myself. 

23. ... My friends, I know you think that there is something I am keeping from you. I take no steps about which I do not consult you, my friends. Were it otherwise, I should not be Ch'iu (the familiar name for Confucius). 

24. The Master took four subjects for his teaching: culture, conduct of affairs, loyalty to superiors, and the keeping of promises. 

26. The Master fished with a line but not with a net; when fowling he did not aim at a roosting bird. 

27. ... There may well be those who can do well without knowledge; but I for my part am certainly not one of them. To hear much, pick out what is good and follow it, to see much and take due note of it, is the lower of the two kinds of knowledge. 

31. When in the Master's presence anyone sang a song that he liked, he did not join at once, but asked for it to be repeated and then joined in. 

33. The Master said, As to being a Divine Sage or even a Good Man, far be it from me to make any such claim. As for unwearying effort to learn and unflagging patience in teaching others, those are merits that I do not hesitate to claim. Kung-hsi Hua said, The trouble is that we disciples cannot learn. 

Book VIII 
17. ... Learn as if you were following someone whom you could not catch up, as though it were someone you were frightened of losing. 

18. ... Sublime were Shun and Yu! All that is under Heaven was theirs, yet they remained aloof from it. 

Book IX 
7. The Master said, Do I regard myself as a professor of wisdom? Far from it. But if even a simple peasant comes in all sincerity and asks me a question, I am ready to thrash the matter out, with all its pros and cons, to the very end. 

24. ... if you have made a mistake, do not be afraid of admitting the fact and mending your ways. 

Book XII 
2. ... Do not do unto others what you would not like yourself. ... 

Book XIII 
24. ... Best of all would be that the good people in his village loved him and the bad hated him. 

Book XV 
11. ... He who will not worry about what is far off will soon find something worse than worry close at hand. (Hear that climate change deniers?) 

20. ... The demands that a gentleman makes are upon himself; those that a small man makes are upon others. 

23. Tzu-kung asked saying, Is there any single saying that one can act upon all day and every day? The Master said, Perhaps the saying about consideration: Never do to others what you would not like them to do to you. 

30. ... I once spent a whole day without food and a whole night without sleep, in order to meditate. It was no use. It is better to learn. 

Book XVII 
3. ... It is only the very wisest and the very stupidest who cannot change. (I hope I'm on the very wisest side.)