Rating: 3/5

While I admired Booker T. Washington’s ability to see the world so optimistically in his autobiography “Up from Slavery”, it would be a lie to say that I was so greatly impressed by Washington’s story that I would recommend its placement on school reading lists. Considering the plethora of fascinating slave narratives out there, being reprinted and regaining popularity thanks to award-winning films like “Django Unchained” and “12 Years a Slave”, Washington’s memoir about his financial and political struggles during the foundation of his famous Tuskegee Institute seems almost tepid in comparison.

My technical criticism with the book is that it is rather dry and slow-paced and lacking in in-depth introspection. Washington spends only the first few chapters talking about his childhood spent as a slave in Virginia, his adolescence during and after the Civil War, and the Reconstruction years in which he attended Hampton University, which was then called the Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute. I found these chapters to be enlightening and up-lifting, although I would have liked to have seen more.

The remainder of the book, unfortunately, reads more like a business manual than an autobiography, with Washington writing about the finer points of fund-raising and political deal-making. He is also a chronic name-dropper, quick to point out and praise the many (white) donors and patrons who helped to fund his Tuskegee Institute. Certain parts of the book seem devoted solely to listing names of donors. Other parts of the book are, inexplicably, devoted to self-aggrandizing excerpts from various newspaper and magazine articles. It strikes me as being strangely narcissistic, a strong disconnect from Washington’s public persona of a soft-spoken, humble man.

He also seems to have more interest and pleasure in talking about money and the minutiae of starting a college than he does in anything personal. Indeed, his entire marriage to his first wife, Fannie Smith, is given only two paragraphs in the book. Granted, it was a short marriage---they were wedded in 1882, and she passed away in 1884---and their union produced a daughter, Portia. This is literally the extent of the information he relates about his first marriage. After having read “Up From Slavery”, I still don’t have a strong impression of the man’s emotional and spiritual side. His narrative has an acute dearth of personality. 

Don’t get me wrong: Washington’s story is an inspirational one. It is hard not to be inspired by the story of a young black man born a slave in 1856 and becoming the most vocal and prominent member of the black community until his death in 1915.

And yet, controversy regarding some aspects of his philosophy on racial relations in the U.S. had a divisive effect within the black community, one that is still felt today.

There is no question that Washington was one of the most influential and important black men of his time. “Up From Slavery” was a nationwide bestseller, in both the North and the South. Blacks and whites alike found inspiration and hope for more positive race relations in the future in his words. It’s easy to see why.

Washington seems to subscribe to the philosophy of letting bygones be bygones, especially in regards to the treatment of black people by whites under slavery. He believed in a philosophy of appeasement when it came to whites, a philosophy not shared by a contingent of the black community.

In his most famous speech---and, arguably, one of the most important speeches in American history, according to some historians---during the Atlanta Exposition of 1895, Washington set the stage for the Atlanta Compromise, an agreement later negotiated between black and white community leaders in the South that would give blacks basic education and due process rights under the law as long as blacks agreed to work quietly, accept segregation, and not push for social equality.

Washington, in the speech, said, “The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremest folly, and the progress in the enjoyment of all the privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing. No race that has anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree ostracized. It is important and right that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we be prepared for the exercises of these privileges. The opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera-house. (p.223)”

While many black people at the time couldn’t fault the logic of Washington’s words, many critics felt that his speech was a win-win for white supremacists and led to the cruelty of Jim Crow laws.

In essence, critics argued, Washington was telling black people to work hard, start at the bottom, don’t get too uppity, and one day white people may treat you with some semblance of respect. This meritocratic mindset---work hard and you will achieve success---wasn’t realistic for black people, critics argued, especially when the system was rigged: White people had the advantages, and they weren’t going to give them up willingly.

Clearly, Washington’s views were antithetical to the subsequent militant views propounded by Marcus Garvey and Malcolm X. Washington probably would not have even agreed with affirmative action, as it went against his view that black people must help themselves and not rely on any special accommodations from white people.

Yet, I can’t help but think that Washington was wiser than many critics allow. Certainly, some of his views may have been flawed and/or did not factor in the possibility that many powerful whites wanted to see black people fail for no reason other than the fact that they were racist white supremacists. Regardless, Washington’s approach may have been the best approach for the time. 

Tensions ran high so soon after the Civil War. Blacks and whites alike were confused and frightened. Washington’s focus on education and self-help for the black community was definitely a useful approach. Washington knew, too (possibly from personal experience), that taking an antagonistic approach to the white-dominated society at the time was akin to David facing a Goliath while blind-folded and possessing no weapons. Better to ingratiate one’s self with Goliath while secretly building up an arsenal.

Despite its flaws, “Up From Slavery” is still an important book. I still wouldn’t campaign for its placement on school reading lists, especially next to more lively and entertaining reads such as Frederick Douglas’s autobiography, but its definitely worthy supplementary reading for students of black history and literature.