Rating: 4/5

I'm glad I chose this translation (by Robin Waterfield), and this publisher (Oxford World's Classic) - the introduction is of great help, and the text flows easily and is very understandable, and doesn't feel stiff and such.

This book's subject is a series of speeches praising Love (both of sexual and of mind-kind; the former producing sometimes children, the latter creative works and learning - the latter is more immortal and superior in author's opinion). The book ends with useful notes and a name index that shines light on the party guests and names popping up in conversations. Plato wrote the book between 385-378 BC (most likely around 380 BC).

Plato sets this imagined high-society dinner-part in Athens, 416 BC, which is told about to others just after the death of one of the guests, Alcibades, in 404 BC. Other guests include the comic poet Aristophanes (who of course gets the funny hiccups that is cured with sneezing), and Plato's teacher, Socrates, who gets to be the giver of Plato's opinion on the subject (Socrates himself gets it from not-certain-if-existed person that is Diotima, a wise woman).

I liked this quote: "On the other hand, ignorant people don't love knowledge or desire wisdom either, because the trouble with ignorance is precisely that if a person lacks virtue and knowledge, he's perfectly satisfied with the way he is. If a person isn't aware of a lack, he can't desire the thing which he isn't aware of lacking."

Seven speeches are heard: Socrates' turn comes at the end, but when Alcibades bursts into the part, he gives one more speech, praising Socrates, and clearly showing that to him, the mind-part of Love is more of a stranger; he doesn't really get why Socrates rejects his advances. (Alcibades comes to a bad end in exile, murdered by the Persians; Socrates, as we know from history, gets a death sentence, having to drink poison). 

But all ends well in this story: people leave the party, some sleep to the next morning, and Socrates goes back to the Lyceum (gymnasium and public baths) in the morning as usual (he has a good alcohol tolerance). We get a great dinner-party conversation about love, that hold surprisingly noble, interesting thoughts to carry with us to life.