Rating: 2/5

So I wrote the review below in 2007 or something, after reading the book in 1999 and again in, I don't know, 2003 or something. Then I picked up a used copy for a dollar last week (2010) and read it again. I don't like it 
  nearly
 as much as I used to. The story and the writing style are both deeply problematic. Several plot points are just completely implausible--for instance, crowds of people in a hospital waiting room viciously attack our hero for no particular reason; also, all the faculty of all levels of the public school fear and loathe him as if he's a horror movie villain, just because he's an unkempt misfit, basically. Also, the language (of the omniscient narrator, not dialogue--there isn't any direct dialogue) is almost constantly overwrought. This manifests itself in a few different ways, and I'm surprised it didn't bother me more in the first place.

--------------------------------------------------------

A confounding book---I love and dislike it all at once. 

The story is tremendous fun, but I have some real issues with the way it's written.

The writing style is weird and troubling. The dialog is all indirect quotes, not direct. It seems throughout most of the story as though it's a kind of third-person omniscient narrator, or rather someone from the town but unidentified and with an omniscient view and literary voice. It ultimately becomes apparent, though, that it's being recounted from the perspective of someone from within a specific character set.

It seems impossible to account for such a narrator within that group of characters. He plainly places himself among them and yet accounts for all of them in such a way that the group can't actually include him. I suspect it's an oversight by the author, though I can't be sure. It pisses me off.

The language often used, in the narration and the dialog, is completely implausible coming from either this narrator or from the hero. Implausibility hurts the cause.

On the other hand, as irritating as that implausibility is, the language itself is frequently mighty fun to read. Also, I love the story. Love it. In some ways, it rings of truth, and in other ways, it's totally ridiculous, but it's consistently full of unconventional and interesting adventures of a peculiar protagonist, who suffers, endures, excels, and stirs some shit up.