Rating: 3/5

I read a lot of mystery authors and each of their popular character driven series… Robert B. Parker, John Sanford, Michael Connelly, C.J. Box, William Kent Kreuger, and Craig Johnson to name a few. And now, with the passing of the literary legend, John Le Carre’ in December 2020, I have decided it’s time to start reading his works and exploring his post-World War II influence on the literary world of spies and mysteries. I have always wanted to read him and that time is now. I have his books on my Kindle, but I have chosen to also buy his books on Audible and listen to them while I take my daily walks. For me, it’s been worth it.

After finishing off his first four books featuring his iconic spy, George Smiley, I have now turned to his fifth novel - “A Small Town in Germany” – a cold wat spy novel originally published in 1968. Being over 55 years ago means this novel is old enough to be considered a historical novel rather than the cutting-edge political thriller that it was considered when it first came out.

“A Small Town in Germany” is John le Carre’s fifth published novel and the first to not include George Smiley in some role or his government agency referred to as “The Circus”. The novel takes place in Bonn, the postwar capital of West Germany during the post-World War II Cold War paranoia of the late 1950’s and 1960’s, ongoing student protests, and rising fears that former Nazi party members were returning to positions of power. 

In “A Small Town in Germany” the UK is working hard to gain support from the West German government and the officers and diplomats working in the British Embassy are knee deep in the political games taking place. When a minor officer, Leo Harting disappears, along with a number of secret files nobody seems to be concerned. However, Alan Turner, is sent from London’s British Foreign Office to investigate the occurrence and assess the damage done.

When Harting arrives, the head of Chancery, Rawley Bradfield, and many of his fellow embassy members are hostile to investigator’s arrival and investigation. In every interview with the various employees Harting faces a lack of support or belief that Harting has taken off. They believe that either Harting will return or is on personal leave. From Harting’s perspective, he suspects that Harting could be a spy working for a Communist government like Russia. Could that really be the truth.

As Harting works through his interviews and investigation, he faces obstruction from multiple forces, including a new nationalist political movement which favors a Communist ideology that is anti-British and anti-Western European, Embassy members hiding secrets that endanger the very mission they are in Germany to serve, and a dangerous past that may have led Harting to commit an unbelievable crime…

This was an interesting read filled with political intrigue and strong satire on humans can overthink, over-analyze, and blind themselves to the truth of what is really happening. It was very clear to me early in my reading that Le Carre’ dark and cynical view that was in sharp display in his previous two books - “The Spy Who Came in From the Cold” and “The Looking Glass War” – is amplified ten-fold in this spy caper. He doesn’t hold anything back in using this story to examine the pressures of diplomatic life and political complexity of the democratic and communistic ideologies being played out in daily life. 

Le Carre’ focuses on themes like duty, responsibility, loyalty, diplomacy, social expectations, alienation, and the conflict between political ideals and trade-offs. Throughout the novel, several characters deal with telling the truth from their perspective, while being either blind or in denial as to what that truth really means. For most of them, they have become so hard coded into their current government roles and required behaviors that they cannot see what is really going on in front of them. Others have a good idea of what is really happening but choose to be in a state of denial or feigned unawareness for selfish reasons, leading to becoming disillusioned. 

The ironic thing is that I believe Alan Turner is meant to be the voice of reason but ends serving on the opposite end of the spectrum, driving towards an end that is just as tunnel-visioned focused and bias in his own ways as that of the embassy characters. Everything he sees and hears leads him to the only acceptable conclusion available, and that is Harting must be an enemy spy. Turner is just as prejudiced and stuck in his own world as the rest of them are. 

To be honest, this felt like a mighty big treatise on how political views and bureaucratic activities lead some to detach themselves from real-life events or use them in a twisted manner to defend their beliefs. Le Carre’ has created one heck of an extremely dark satire on the state of politics and the lives of those who live it. Characters in this male dominated world are blinded, beat down, and in denial of how the world around them is changing while they refuse to accept it and adapt. It’s pretty dang amazing how Le Carre’ uses the intrigue of the spy world and politics as a canvas to demonstrate how weak and silly we humans can act, especially when put under pressure. He questions how hard might we really stick to our values and morales in time of crises. It’s interesting to me that Turner sticks to his mission at all costs, but mostly due to his blind desire to prove he’s right rather than to discover what the truth really is. Blind ambition can be a very strong motivator that can carry you far. Usually too far it seems.

I’ve mentioned in my prior reviews that Le Carre’s great use of language is one of his greatest strengths as a writer. He uses it as a powerful tool, as well as a weapon, in this one. As I listened to Turner’s interviews from a verbal perspective while listening on Audible, it was obvious how Le Carre is a master of interrogation and use of language to deliver an experience that connects directly with your senses. There were moments in this one where he delivered excellent back and forth exchangers and debates between Turner and the other characters that were great to listen to.

On the other hand, this was the first Le Carre’ book that I had some struggles with. Not that it wasn’t good, but it had some weaknesses too. It started out slow and took a while to get going. It was also mostly told through conversations, interviews, and discussion between the characters. Everything was talking and telling. There was not much showing. No real action or physical scenes to mix things up and keep us on our toes. Not much at all. 

All of his previous novels focused a lot more on showing, not telling, but this one was all about telling, which made it harder to stay engaged as a reader. There was a lot of focus on the details in every scene that tended to distract from the primary storylines. I found myself drifting off at times when each chapter was an interview that Turner had with one character, and it went on for 45 – 60 minutes straight. For me, some of those interviews felt over-extended and somewhat heavy on the delivery of clues. I understand this was part of Le Carre’s delivery of satire, but truth be told, it wore on me a bit. I kept wanted to say, “Let’s move on please” and for the first time felt a lack of excitement and interest.

Because of these issues, I did some research on Le Carre and this novel. It appears that he was initially unhappy with this book and it went through several rewrites prior to being published. He intended it to be a clack comedy about political manners of the British, but struggled with capturing that result. He also noted that the character of Alan Turner was modeled was based on himself while he was going through a personal breakdown as his first marriage was falling apart. Looking back now that makes a lot of sense to me when reflecting on how reactionary, blind, and driven the character was to get through his assignment.

Overall, this book was quite a dark satire on the political and espionage world that Le Carre lived in during a time of international cold war and political ideological conflict taking place between a split Germany and Britain’s role in the greater European political and economic community. That background and ongoing conflict played an influential and meaningful part of the novel, offset by the heavy-handed conversational focus that tended to distract at times due to length. I enjoyed most of this one due to the layered complexity of the missing officer and secret files mystery, as well as another emotionally charged ending. However, I also struggled to maintain my attention during the slower parts and political manifestos that ran overly long.

Although I am giving it three out of five stars, it has been my least favorite of the first five books that John Le Carre’ has written. That is not meant as a criticism, because this one has a lot to say about the period of political unrest during the height of the cold war era. It’s just that the previous four novels were better reading experiences in my opinion.