Rating: 5/5

A Streetcar Named Desire is a play set in New Orleans, from a period of social realism that could be described as a modern tragedy. The play follows two main protagonists, Blanche, and Stanley, husband of Blanche's sister Stella in a complex domestic conflict. The play is set in a period post-Great depression, describing the clash of social classes in new American society where previous segregation in wiped out by the Great depression and divided are forced to merge and live side by side. Stanley is a Polish self-made man, part of the working-class, while Blanche is a descendant of landowners in the Old South, so the tension between them is magnified by their social incompatibilities. 
The psychological dichotomy between Blanche and Stella further intensifies the tension that culminates in the tragic act (of rape by Stanely) that causes Blanche's demise.

Looking through the lens of Jungian psychology Blanche is a typical representation of archetypal immature, wounded feminine. She is unable to cope with reality and truth, therefore, uses illusion, lies, and manipulation of seduction to get to her goal, which is marriage. In the idealized view of marriage, she wants a man to shield and save her from the reality of the loss and death of her husband, which she is incapable to handle by herself. Emotionally dependent, her regulation of feelings is so immature it is almost unexisting, obvious in her hysteric overreactions. Blanch is also unable to process her grief and address properly the mourning over her dead husband. Her sexuality is completely unconscious and ambivalent, acted out in two extremes, one of chastity and sexual repression and one of promiscuity in drunken sex with younger men, reflecting the fixation in the tragedy of her husband's death. She uses sexuality as another form of escapism from unpleasant, but in the process loses her family fortune, destroys her reputation and chance to live a respectful life she longs for.

"After the death of Allan- intimacies with strangers was all I seemed able to fill my heart with..."

Her inability to see the truth, adjust to reality and accept personal and social changes is the fatal flaw of the character that leads her to a tragic end.

Stanley, on the other hand, is a representation of archetypal immature masculine. He could be perceived as confident but is in fact arrogant and dependent on his tyranny. Stanley unconsciously sees Blanche as a threat to his power structure. He is judgemental, projective, and shames and belittles Blache with “truth“. In his “quest for absolute truth“, he is equally deceitful as Blanche, as he uses the truth as another arsenal of weaponry of intimidation to assert control. He also does not shy away from using physical force on women as he has no capacity to regulate emotions and not act it out in a neurotic and violent way. He has something animalistic about him and his sexuality, once described by Blanch as ”brutal desire“. He uses not only phallic power as a weapon to dominate and suppress the feminine, both in his wife Stella and even more so in Blanche. His sexuality is maybe not as unconscious as Blanche's, but equally destructive, as he does not use sexuality to escape reality as Blanch, but to bend reality to his will. Stanley's quest, in which he, in the end, succeeds (through rape) is to destroy Blanche and cause her demise, and his motivation is unconscious hatred towards the feminine and everything else Blanche is symbolically representing.

Stanley and Blanche are equally driven by the desire that leads to destruction. Trapped in a cycle of violence and lust, both corrupted, immature, toxic, wounded and embedded in internal chaos and madness. The real inequality becomes evident in the difference with which society and their environment treat Blanche and Stanely. Blanche's flaws and madness make her unmarriable, and she is stripped of her worth and dignity, her reputation and sanity are destroyed. She ends up isolated and abandoned by all, even by her sister. In the culmination of her pain after rape, she is put away in the mental institution and stigmatized once and for all as unstable and mentally ill. 

Stanley's pathology, on the other hand, is not noticed at all by society. He remains well integrated, respected and loved man in the community, even though he beats and rapes women. He is not stripped of his reputation or dignity and continues his life as a married man with a child, even though his acts of destruction are far more insane and morally corrupted than Blanche's. The rights of being someone's partner in marriage and procreate are not taken away from him as they are from Blanche. He is not put in a mental institution and no one perceives him as mad or mentally unstable. This reinforces Foucault's very obvious suggestion that mental illness and “madness“ are socially constructed.

The lack of sexual repression and free expression of desire which is in Stanley perceived as expectable and acceptable are in Blanche punished most extremely. That shows societal hypocrisy and gender discrepancy, distorted and unjust views on male and female sexuality, tailored to control women and suppress them in the free expression of their sexuality on the collective scale. Men oftentimes get to be unapologetically sexual while women rarely have that luxury without being stripped of their value and dignity. 
Blanche and Stanley could be both easily diagnosed with personality disorder, and they both act out deep psychological pathology but one of them will be stigmatized by society, and one of them will even be accepted as normal, and even be praised by some for his strong masculinity. This is how gender inequality works, a lot of times it is not easily detected or perceived, hidden in the shadows of reaction patterns we are sometimes not even aware of.