Rating: 4/5

Notes on a Scandal is an extremely sordid story, narrated by a totally unlikeable (and unreliable?) narrator – dealing with an illicit sexual affair between a frustrated middle-aged schoolteacher and a disadvantaged teenage student with learning difficulties. Almost all of the dramatis personae are despicable and there is not a single ray of hope in the whole sorry episode. That it makes a gripping read speaks volumes for Zoe Heller’s mastery of the written medium.

Barbara Covett is a middle-aged spinster, a history teacher at St. George’s School in Archway, North London. The school is a sort of catchment area for disadvantaged students who cannot afford more posh schools – and as such, it is not the ideal temple of learning. Into this school comes the new pottery teacher, the naive and sexy Bathsheba (or Sheba) Hart. Barbara is initially attracted to her, but she keeps herself aloof until one day she helps her control a pack of unruly students, something which Sheba has no flair for. Their friendship grows, when Sheba confides in Barbara about her affair with Steven Connolly. Barbara is aghast and advises her against it – but Sheba cannot stop, and the affair moves to its logical conclusion: the teacher in the dock for molesting an underage student.

The narrative starts from this point: Sheba has already been arrested and is out on bail. Thrown out of her house by Richard, her self-righteous prick of a husband, she and Barbara are staying for the time being in the house of Eddie, Sheba’s brother. Barbara is writing down an account of the affair, which we, the readers, are perusing.

Barbara outs herself immediately as a stuck-up and frustrated prig, with possible homosexual impulses which have not been acknowledged: Ms. Heller has done wonders with her voice. She has low opinions of almost all her co-workers, as well as an extremely low one of the headmaster Pabblem: however, even when her prejudices are there for all to see, we sense a certain perceptive honesty in her – a person having no illusions of herself or the world, she can go past the beautiful mask and see the ugly visage underneath. Looking through her grey-tinted glasses, we see people at their worst. Sheba, naive but having no sense of propriety beyond immediate sensual gratification; Richard, ostensibly the intellectual but actually an ineffective gas-bag; Polly, Sheba’s daughter, the rebellious teenager who is a manipulative child-devil – I could go on and on. The only character sympathetically treated is Ben, Sheba’s son with Down’s Syndrome.

The memoir is a strange mix. Barbara talks about her own activities in the first person – however, there are parts where she narrates Sheba’s adventures from the third person point of view. The question immediately arises how she could have known what transpired exactly – the answer is that she doesn’t. She is writing from her imagination. And since from the beginning of the memoir, we are aware of Barbara’s feelings for Sheba (for example: her illogical jealousy about her friendship with Sue, the music teacher), it is a foregone conclusion that the affair would be described only in the most lurid terms. The author, here, practically asks us to distrust her mouthpiece. 

But then, we are shown the stark honesty of Barbara about her personal feelings – and her strange vulnerability behind the facade of the iron lady. At some point of time in the story, we find ourselves identifying, at least partially, with this tragic product of the hypocritical British middle class. And then, everything becomes shades of grey rather than black and white – as human life is.

In this tale of sex and sleaze within the walls of a London school, Zoe Heller has managed to create a drama which makes us question the very basis of our moral standards.