Rating: 4/5

I would give it 3.5 stars if I could. The first part of the book was a turn-off. Apparently, David thinks that the missing element from eating is our relationship with God and our recognition of ourselves as manifestations of the divine.

Yeah. So helpful. Thanks.

Anyway, he does have some helpful information in this book. Some of what I found helpful: 

"By telling you to avoid meat, for example, some vegetarian proponents are not only asking you to eliminate it because it is harmful to health, they are telling you to 'eat my system, eat my way of seeing the world, eat my belief that killing animals is unhealthy...' Likewise, when meat eaters tell you to eat meat, they are not just promoting its health-giving effects, they are saying, 'eat my system, eat my belief that it is acceptable to kill animals, that eating meat does not make you morally corrupt." (p.31)

Full disclosure, I am a vegetarian. But I appreciate David's exposure of what every diet is - a philosophy, a way of life, a system. When "diet experts" say you should eat a certain way, they are asking you to believe in more than the food they promote. Think about it.

Of course than he points out that the "anything goes" diet is still a system, even without rules and regulations. He suggests that people with this diet secretly fear responsibility. I don't know that that is true, so I'm taking it with a grain of salt.

"We...literally have less ability to digest food when our mind is improperly digesting life's experiences." (p. 45)

This sentence pops up among the discussion of stress or anxiety and digestion. When our sympathetic nervous system (the fight-or-flee response) is alerted, digestion is put on the back burner, even if there's food going down the pipes. Sure, digestion still happens, but not nearly to the extent it would if we're relaxed. So enjoy what you've eaten or are about to eat, and relax!

Probably the best line was:

"When we say to someone, 'Don't eat that food, it is bad for you,' what they often hear is, 'You're a bad person for eating that food.'" 

This leads to a discussion on "good" and "bad" food, self-worth, and identification. I suppose after years of hearing, "You are what you eat," it is not so large a leap as to connect "bad" foods to a "bad" self. 

Essentially, the remainder of the book talks about our approach to food, to family, to life, and to nourishing ourselves. It is about intuitive eating, listening to our bodies and recognizing that the body's needs do change over seasons and years. There is a chapter on craving, and dealing with cravings without trying to muscle them into submission.

Overall, I'd say the book has its good qualities. I'd say it was helpful in building my food philosophy, and probably would be helpful in anyone's.