Rating: 3/5

King Charles II is often synonymous with the image of a paramour. Charles was very much loved by the ladies if his mistresses are any indication; and he had more than enough affection to return, all around. What most people tend to dismiss is that Charles had a wife at his side, Queen Catherine of Braganza (Portugal). Avoiding scandal and politics; Catherine was a devout Catholic, a charming woman and a sensitive soul backed with occasional fiery streaks. This rather calm disposition means Catherine didn’t leave tales of great drama for prosperity (although she popularized tea-drinking in England, so there’s that!). One of the queens of English historical fiction (no pun intended), Margaret Campbell Barnes, attempts to showcase Catherine and her marriage to Charles II in, “With All My Heart”. 

In usual Barnes style, “With All My Heart” immediately dives into a narrative eschewing an ‘introduction’ or buildup. Although this could be problematic in other texts; Barnes is a literary master and it works in her favor of creating a nuanced story that is subtle and organic but layered. Barnes’s writing is floral, illustrative and vivid creating strong images in the reader’s eye without being cheesy or overly romanticized. “With All My Heart” focuses on the social and personal lives of Catherine and Charles instead of being politically-charged but don’t worry: this is not a bodice-ripper. Barnes maintains a historic appeal. 

Expanding on this, even though not as much is known about Catherine as history-lovers would hope; Barnes doesn’t take overly contrived historical liberties and “With All My Heart” is quite believable based on what we do know and feels very ‘real’. This creates a compelling, rich and entertaining narrative. 

On a negative note, the characterizations of both Catherine and Charles feel slightly one-dimensional and under-developed. They aren’t poor representations; but Barnes could have offered more growth which would have made the plot of “With All My Heart” even better as a character-study piece. 

As “With All My Heart” progresses, there is more of a focus on Charles’s reign, politics, the Great Fire of London and the war with the Dutch. Although not overly detailed; Barnes weaves these beautifully into the tapestry of Catherine and the possible reactions she may have/could have expressed.

Barnes finally ignites Catherine’s spark into a fire in the concluding chapters when highlighting the Titus Oates accusation against her and the rebellion of James of Monmouth (Charles’s first-born illegitimate son). “With All My Heart” gains both momentum and color while filling out the portrayal of Catherine with ‘pizzazz’.

Even with this boost, the ending of “With All My Heart” feels rushed, overly-circulated and informal in comparison to the rest of the novel but still strong on the historical accuracy and acumen. The finality does, however, envelope Catherine well and allude to her importance and legacy making for a memorable closing. 

Like most early-published historical fiction novels (“With All My Heart” was published in 1951); Barnes unfortunately doesn’t offer a prologue or note explaining and liberties she did take with the narrative. 

“With All My Heart” is a solid and delightful window into the marriage of Catherine of Braganza and Charles II. Although the text isn’t as strong as the other output from Barnes; it successfully avoids fluff and is historically raw while being beautifully written. “With All My Heart” is suggested for all readers interested in King Charles II and Stuart England” and is a rather quick but delightful story.