Rating: 1/5

DNF at 176 of 496 (35%)

I want to curse whoever put this in a little free library for me to find.

  Content warning:
 death of a parent (off-page), suicide (off-page), sexual assault &amp; racism

  Dislikes:

ᝰ.ᐟ Jennifer (the fmc) is a racist.

  Jennifer was stunned, to the point of being wordless. Captain Klein’s Lil was a Negro. Jennifer hadn’t ever known of any white man actually consorting with . . . a . . .

This is set in the 1800s, so yes, racism was unfortunately rampant, but you can acknowledge the reality of racism in a historical context without making your main character actively racist and still expecting us to be on her side. It’s as if we’re expected to gloss over her racism because it’s the 1800s, so we should just accept it. Nope. Sorry. If you want me to root for a character, don’t make them a racist, especially one who’s so openly appalled by interracial relationships. Jennifer’s reaction to Lil was sickening and I don’t care if it’s historically accurate—it’s a terrible look for a protagonist. She practically had an aneurysm after meeting Lil because she couldn’t imagine why a white man would get with a black girl.

  ”I cannot understand how a white man . . . can . . . you know . . . with a girl like her.”
“Her being black? Is that what you mean?”
Jennifer swung around and faced Nicholas with a set jaw. “Yes. She’s a different color and upbringing. Why, you’d never, would you, Nicholas?”

I just know she supports slavery. I wonder what she would’ve said and done if Nicholas had been with a black woman before her.

It’s crazy because she whines about being treated differently for things outside of her control, like being a minister’s daughter, but turns around and judges black people for something equally out of their control. Make it make sense.

If you’re going to make your protagonist a racist, there better be some major character development and accountability later on. Otherwise, it just feels like we’re supposed to hand-wave her prejudice because ‘that’s how things were back then.’ Sorry, but that’s not enough for me. I didn’t read the whole book, meaning I never found out if the author decided to address this in any meaningful way later on. She might’ve 🤷‍♀️ if she did decide to give Jennifer character character growth to unlearn her racism, then great, but the initial portrayal still left a bad taste in my mouth. Also, I nearly read 200 pages and there was no sign of any growth from her, so the odds are not good.

ᝰ.ᐟ Insta-lust/love. They had two brief conversations and decided they were deeply in love. Be so fr. You’re in lust, you stupid idiots. This is what the hero has to say about the heroine after — I repeat — two very short conversations:

  The urge to paint a particular subject hadn’t ever been so strong before. But he hasn’t met anyone like her before. She was the first woman he deeply desired to possess . . . not only on canvas . . . but wholly. He so longed to pull her into his arms and taste the sweetness of her lips.

. . . you literally just met her. The FMC wasn’t any better. She decided she loved him after he told her he was an artist and delivered a few suggestive lines. That’s it. Where’s the substance? The actual conversations that build the foundation of a relationship? Knowing he’s good with a paintbrush is not enough to consider him your soulmate, babe. They don’t know about each other’s values or morals or anything significant. They don’t even know basic facts about each other, like their favorite foods or colors, but they’re “in love.” Right. This kind of insta-love takes me straight out of the story because it’s so unrealistic. Nobody is thinking all this after a meaningless minute-long conversation.

ᝰ.ᐟ He kissed her boob while she was asleep without consent. He made a move on her a few minutes before she fell asleep and she shut him down, so clearly, her boundaries were set. Instead of taking no for an answer, he waits until she’s unconscious and unable to stop him to start kissing her chest because “he couldn’t help himself.” It reinforces the narrative that boundaries don’t matter if the guy is just so overcome by his feelings. The fact that the heroine is written to enjoy it only further solidifies that message. She’s HAPPY about a man assaulting her in her sleep because it means he can’t resist her. HIM NOT BEING ABOUT TO CONTROL HIS DESIRES AROUND YOU AND TAKE NO FOR AN ANSWER IS NOT A GOOD THING. I can usually overlook dub-con in books, but I don’t like when authors try to frame it as romantic or like the hero didn’t do anything wrong.

ᝰ.ᐟ Uncle Thad 🤢 this man made me SO UNCOMFORTABLE. yucky yucky yucky. He is a creepy, lecherous mess 
  lusting after his niece.
 And why did the author have to give us his perspective? It added nothing to the story besides ickiness. I could’ve lived a long, happy life without having to read about an old man’s disgusting, lustful thoughts about his young niece. Also,, did uncles and nieces kiss on the lips on the regular in the 1800s or is this solely a Jennifer and Thad thing? Genuine question.

  Likes:

ᝰ.ᐟ The girl’s hair on the cover is so luscious and pretty. She really is that girl. And her dress?? Gorg. The guy’s hair is also so fluffy. I’m jealous. I want to run my fingers through their hair indefinitely.