Rating: 4/5

Written in 1966, The Effective Executive alternates between dated and timeless. Dated, in that the language often rings tinny on the modern ear. Dated, in that there are six pages on Decision-making and these new-fangled Computers. Dated, in that Drucker urges tolerance of personal behavior that will bring on a flurry of lawsuits in today’s environment as long as the individual serves up exceptional results.

Timeless, because here we find the origins of personal and business management for the next 55 years. This is the first use of the phrase ‘knowledge worker’. Chapter by chapter, we find David Allen’s Getting Things Done in Chapter 2, Know Thy Time; we find the works of Marcus Buckingham and Tom Rath’s Strengths Finder 2.0 in Chapter 4, Making Strengths Productive. The title of Chapter 5 is, literally, one of Stephen Covey’s 7 Habits – First Things First. The directive to test your hypotheses in the chapters of decision-making could be lifted straight out any modern book on strategy today.

Synopsis

‘Effectiveness’ is getting the right things done. Effectiveness can, and must be, learned. Every knowledge worker is an executive.

The executive faces constraints: Their time belongs to everyone else in the organization. They have to keep doing their operation work even as they take on executive roles. They are effective only if others use their contributions. They are isolated from the outside, but to be effective, their contribution to results must be felt outside their organization.

The book presents the five key practices that lead to effectiveness.

KNOW YOUR TIME

Record your time in a time log to know where it is being spent. Likely, it is not where you think.

The key to managing time is to delete activities, delegate activities, and consolidate the remaining time into the largest chunks possible. An overlooked source of time for the organization is to not waste the time of others.

The major timewasters are too many meetings (obvious), lack of systems – re-solving the same problem again and again (see the chapter on decision-making), and over-staffing – too many personalities with too much time invites friction between people.

FOCUS ON RESULTS, NOT EFFORT

The primary area of focus should be contribution to the organization, not hours worked, not reports generated, not slide decks built. The three main areas are direct results (revenue, profits, accomplishments), building values, and people development – yourself and others.

The development results are two of the basic requirements of effective human relations, the others being teamwork and communication.

FOCUS ON STRENGTHS, NOT WEAKNESSES

Build on strengths of the team to make weaknesses irrelevant. The key question an executive should ask about another is, “What can this person DO?”

When staffing, the main task is to fill the job, not structure jobs around people. That leads to favoritism and conformity. To avoid structuring jobs around the person, guard against building the ‘impossible’ job, but make each job big and demanding. Appraise people before testing them against the job.

To appraise people:
•	Do not focus on weaknesses, look for strengths
•	Realize weaknesses come with strengths. You hire the whole person.
•	Ask yourself:
	What have they done well in the past?
	What are they likely to do well in the future?
	What must they learn?

Focusing on strengths and not weaknesses applies to bosses and yourself as well as subordinates

FIRST THINGS FIRST

Do one thing at a time.

In setting priorities:
•	Favor the future over the past. Avoid the ‘sunk cost’ fallacy – that is, letting the time and money already spent on an activity drive decisions about the future. Set ‘sunset’ dates on activities to stop doing them unless consciously renewed.
•	Favor opportunities over problems. Focus on the important, not the urgent. In addition to a to-do list, have a stop-doing list. Kill old tasks to make room for new ones. Realize projects postponed become projects abandoned and remove them to not waste mental energy on them.
•	Favor making a difference over playing safe.

MAKE EFFECTIVE DECISIONS

Only executives make decisions, and they concentrate their time and efforts on important ones. They favor impact over technique and sound over clever reasoning.

The first question to consider is: is this decision necessary? Do the benefits of a decision greatly outweigh the risks of not deciding? If proceeding with a decision, follow this process:

Ask “is this situation generic or an exception?” Assume (in order):

1.	The problem is generic, a symptom of a larger problem. This includes generic problems that may be unique to you (e.g., a merger).
2.	Though the only instance (so far), the problem is emergent of a new (generic) class.
3.	Truly one-off.

Develop a clear specification of what the decision must accomplish.

Start with what is right, not what is acceptable (compromises will come easy enough).

The decision must have its own ‘conversion to action’. That is, it must specify what action is to be taken, who takes it, who needs to know about the decision, and what roadblocks to the action need to be removed.

Decisions begin with a hypothesis – a point of view about how things work – which begins with an opinion, not facts. Consequently, the effective manager does not argue a decision, they test, test, test it. In testing it, start with the assumption that the traditional measurement is not the right measurement.

Finally, when a decision is made, execute it. Don’t study it to death or procrastinate waiting for more data.

These five practices, though simple in concept are not necessarily easy in practice. They require constant exercise because they are essential to getting the right things done.