This book contains the first three of the Lemony Snicket series: The Bad Beginning, the Reptile Room, and the Wide Window.

The Bad Beginning: a pretty short book, just 168 pages. A quick read. I don't think it took me longer than an hour. I read it in one sitting. Reasonably interesting, but at this point not as interesting as Harry Potter or Percy Jackson. The author has a quirk of using long words and then defining them. At the end of the book he uses several of the words - like the exercise where you learn the definitions of words and then use them in a story. 
The plot: Three Baudelaire children ages 14, 12, and 2, are at the beach when their parent's house burns down. They end up staying with a distant relative, Uncle Olaf. He wants to get their money and devises a plan to have Violet take part in a play where a marriage is performed, but where it will turn out to be a real marriage and that will give him control of their money. Some holes in the plot: she gets out of it by saying that the law says she must sign something with her "own" hand which means her right hand and actually she uses her left. Not clear why it can't mean her left hand. Also, I want to tell the author to take this chance to discuss the evils of child marriage and the fact that someone cannot be forced to get married against their will and that fraud invalidates a marriage. I feel the author missed a great chance. Another hole: even if he did get control of Violet's part of the fortune, only one-third of it would go to her, the other two children's fortune would be unaffected.
Nevertheless, it's not too bad for a beginning. I'll see what the other books bring.

-Book 2 the Reptile Room - I actually liked this one better because it's a little more cheerful. In this one, most of the things they recount are enjoyable, because the relative to whom they are taken is a "cool" guy. The sad part comes when he is murdered by the mysterious Count Olaf in disguise. As usual, Mr. Poe, their guardian, is clueless, but he finds out by the end of the book, so they will be moving on to another relative soon.
Book 3 - The Wide Window. Not quite as good as Book 2.
The Plot: Mr. Poe has now decided to have the children stay with Aunt Josephine, an aunt-by-marriage. She lives in a house overlooking Lake Lachrymose. Once more Count Olaf appears in disguise and attempts to take control of the children. The children escape, involving an adventure on the lake. The book ends with the demise of Aunt Josephine and excape of Count Olaf, so they are to be handed off to a new relative.