Rating: 2/5

My main beef is that this book pitches itself as a western. I mean, it's called Owl Woman Saloon and if you flip through there's all this kind of westerny stuff between the chapters about saloons and pioneer women. But that's it. The story about a lumberjack is kind of western-esque, at best. Maybe Gallagher was trying to tie in that good ol' American spirit characterization, but I didn't see it. So that felt like false advertising at the end of every story and on every level, and I'm super salty about it.

Honestly, every story in this collection was worse than the last. I couldn't care about a single character and the plots were just straight up unpleasant. The writing just wasn't good enough to carry the tales like: a woman puts down her cats; a pretentious poetry professor skeevs upon a student and obsesses about Napoleon; or a lumberjack knows another lumberjack whose wife is a gold-digger. They just weren't good stories and they weren't even well-told. That feels super harsh to write, but it also feels super accurate.

I would start every story thinking, "Maybe I will actually like this one," and a couple of pages into a few of them I thought, "Wow, this is actually a pretty good set up," and by the end of each story I was just hoping it would be over soon. Just, like, not good. Not even super bad, just totally unremarkable in that ennui=deep kind of way that writers seem to use when they want to write about **emotions** but they don't really have anything to... like... say. Just no meaning at all. Just crappy things happening to kind of crappy people and what feels like an implied hope that you'll divine this deep message from their suffering. "Oh, so real," someone might say. "How bold to depict this image of humanity," they might say. But I'm just not into that shit.

The only exception is the last story, "The Woman Who Prayed", which was actually very good. Quite unexpected after reading the previous fifteen pieces. Title really says it all, but the descriptions of how she changes are really rich and moving. The story was non-bogus. This story alone was good enough to bring the rating up to two stars, because it made me feel like this author could totally speak to me if they had the right story to tell me.