Rating: 5/5

Mickelsson's Ghosts was John Gardner's final novel. He died tragically at 49 in a motorcycle accident not far from his home in 1982, shortly after the book was published. I discovered Gardner's fiction in the late '70s with October Light, and then Mickelsson's Ghosts in '82. His work has always remained with me, and it had been my intention for decades to return to him one of these days. This reading of Mickelsson's Ghosts is my second, and the start of my plan to continue with October Light, The Sunlight Dialogues, and Nickel Mountain.

The novel tells the sad, pathetic tale of Peter Mickelsson, a once promising philosopher, now reduced to teaching courses at Binghamton University, divorced and nearly broke, hounded by the I.R.S., a drunk and a lecher, paranoid, and quite possibly going mad. Nothing is going well for Peter.

As the novel opens, Peter is seeking some refuge from the "stifling, clammy heat of the apartment his finances had forced him to take, on the third floor of an ugly old house on Binghamton's West Side - the nice part of town, everybody said" by purchasing a gloomy old house in the mountains outside Susquehanna, Pennsylvania, 35 miles from his job at the university. Sure, he can't afford it, what with his ex-wife and the I.R.S. breathing down his neck, but that doesn't stop Peter Mickelsson.

With that move, Peter Mickelsson, the rationalist, the philosopher and academic, finds himself in alien territory, amidst water diviners, rumored hauntings, and the occasional religious cult. He soon learns that the house he is now living in is rumored to be haunted.

Peter Mickelsson, proud ethical philosopher, starts an affair with a young prostitute, then a colleague from the university. He contemplates robbing a man of his money. He begins seeing the purported ghosts.

His life is crumbling around him. And seemingly his philosophy cannot save him.

Gardner weaves a wonderfully rich and complex tale of this tortured soul.

John Gardner was an incredible writer, crafting some of the most psychologically full characters in fiction. His deep moral sense is evident in all his work. It is all the more sad and unforgiveable that much of his work should so soon be out of print, and that he should be so little known to modern readers. John Gardner deserves a place among the great writers of last century