Rating: 5/5

My dad loved Chuck Colson's books, but I have never read one before. Although I was alive during the Watergate scandal, I don't remember it and the intrigue didn't interest me. (Chuck Colson was sent to prison over the Watergate scandal in Nixon's administration. His books tend to focus more on the hope that he found in prison - Jesus.)

But, I picked up this book, not about Watergate, but thinking of my dad. I gave myself the summer to read it, but found I have finished it before my kids are even out of school for the summer! I never realized before what a dramatic, engaging writer Chuck Colson was, and it made me wonder what I was missing with his other books.

This book is not about Watergate, but more about everyday people who have lived extreme lives for Jesus. Each chapter had its own story and real people as characters. Some of the book reminded me of the type of stories that the Voice of the Martyrs publishes, but better written. (Some of the stories of the Voice of the Martyrs were rough translations or written by people who were not used to writing, but their stories were compelling because of their truth and the horrific situations faced.) Church Colson's stories were compelling and well-written. Most of them happened in ordinary, but hard circumstances. Some were horrific circumstances. Most were modern stories.

I thought that the chapter "Watergate and the Resurrection" held Colson's interesting perspective. He said that he discovered that the Watergate conspirators could not hold their conspiracy together under scrutiny and threat of financial and legal troubles; he could not imagine the apostles holding a conspiracy of a false resurrection together, even when tortured and killed for their faith.

I liked the story of Myrtie Howell in the "Life and Death" chapter best, and her encouraging, loving letter-writing ministry to prison inmates from a nursing home, when in her nineties. "Lord, You know what You want me to say. Now say it through me. ... So, now, Mr. Colson, you just keep remembering the Lord don't need no quitters." 

I have known and been blessed by such a person, a man who kept his joy in a nursing home, who considered it his ministry, and I saw the joy and delight he took in those who treated him there. And I thought, "What man, when moved to a nursing home, would pray for those who came to visit and encourage him?" So, maybe this chapter was special to me because I remember him. It is a sweet, gentle reminder not to grumble over my lighter troubles, but to be sweet until the end.

"Knowing how susceptible we are to success' siren call, God does not allow us to see, and therefore glory in, what is done through us. The very nature of the obedience He demands is that it be given without regard to circumstances or results." This made me think of the teens I worked with at a former church. Sometimes I wonder what became of them - and pray. I may not know this side of heaven, what good, if any, was done there.

This book, "Loving God," also reminded me of Kay Arthur's Bible study, "Loving God and Others." Except what she told in a verse-by-verse format, Chuck Colson showed with real-life, human examples.

More Favorite Quotes:

"Even in the ugliest of times and in the ugliest of circumstances, it is possible to love God and other people."

"Self-fulfillment fads led to self-absorption and isolation, rather than the fuller, liberated lives they predicted."

"But we will only be weak and stumbling believers and a crippled church unless and until we truly apply God's Word - that is, until we truly love Him and act on that love."

"He chose the one experience in which I could not glory for His glory."

"It is not what we do that matters, but what a sovereign God chooses to do through us. God doesn't want our success; He wants us. He doesn't demand our achievements; He demands our obedience."

"Ye he [Boris Kornfeld] could not help praying them. Having seen his own evil heart, he had to pray for cleansing. And he had to pray to a God who had suffered, as he had: Jesus."

"Having accepted the possibility of death, Boris Kornfeld was now free to live."

"What God wants from His people is obedience, no matter what the circumstances, no matter how unknown the outcome."

"For maturing faith - faith which deepens and grows as we live our Christian life - is not just knowledge, but knowledge acted upon."

"The mind alone is no match for the seduction of evil pleasure" - Colson, paraphrasing Augustine

"But in the garden he [Augustine] saw that the Scriptures were not just words to be interpreted; they were words that interpreted their reader."

"For we should read God's Word not for what we can get out of it, not for what it will do for us, but for what it will teach us to do for our God."

"Adding to scripture is as dangerous as taking away from it - and this perhaps was part of Eve's undoing."

"For deep inside we know that obedience to the Scriptures without concern for consequences is penetrating and painful. It requires us to die to self and follow Christ. It demands that we recognize the sin in our lives and that we acknowledge and repent of that sin."

"Without a continuing repentant attitude - a persistent desire to turn away from our own nature and seek God's nature - Christian growth is impossible."

"One Christian leader, asked why he never mentioned repentance, smiled and replied, 'Get 'em first, let them see what Christianity is, and then they'll see their need to repent.' Tragically, this attitude pervades the church not only because we're afraid the truth will scare newcomers, but because it might also drive a number of the nodding regulars right out of their comfortable pews."

"All our knowledge has not ushered in a brave new world. It has simply increased our ability to perpetrate evil."

"If there is anything worse than our sin, it is our infinite capacity to rationalize it away. The Bible tells us this is a fearsome thing."

"Psychiatry, properly administered, can turn a schizophrenic bank robber into a mentally healthy bank robber; a good teacher can turn an illiterate criminal into an educated criminal. But they are still bank robbers and criminals!" - an unnamed prison psychologist

"We often end up obeying the rules rather than obeying God."

"Our pious efforts can become ego-gratifying ... Such self-centered spirituality in turn leads to self-righteousness."

"Sin is not simply the wrong we do our neighbor when we cheat him or the wrong we do ourselves when we abuse our bodies. Sin, all sin, is a root rebellion and offense against God, what R. C. Sproul calls 'cosmic treason.'"

"We must understand that our goal as believers is to seek what we can do to please God, not what He can do for us. Personal victories may come but they are a result, not the object. True Christian maturity - holiness sanctification - is God-centered."

"I put my faith in the God of the Bible, not the God I had made up in my head."

"The picture of Me that you make in your own mind so that you feel complacent and secure is idolatry." - Bill Bontrager, paraphrasing Amos.

"Obedience to God does not always mean a happy ending. But why should we think it would?"

"History has shown that when society embraces religion, religion usually hugs back. Accommodation is often followed by assimilation and amalgamation." 

If Christianity were false, "do you think I would prefer you not to try and tell me?"

"I hate this business where Christians always feel obliged to be encouraging."

Dictionary:
"metanoia" - repent, from meta (change) and noia (mind.)

"Cheap grace," - Christianity without cost, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, German martyr

"political illusion" - the misguided belief that all problems can be solved by structures, namely institutions, Jacques Ellul, French historian

"instant pudding religion" - where someone turns to Jesus and their lives suddenly get better rather than continue to have struggles as most of us do, David Chapman, business man.