Rating: 4/5

This book gives a good overview of FDR’s life in both a narrative and pictorial perspective. The author, Joseph Alsop was a cousin of the president and had access to him. I liked that he gave personal accounts and perceptions especially concerning FDR’s wartime leadership. One thing I have found in reading about great presidents and for that matter any successful leaders is that they always surrounded themselves with competent and trustworthy advisors. That was the case with Franklin Roosevelt as I have found in Lincoln after reading, “Team of Rivals”. Here is a quote found in the concluding pages of the book:

"For an entire generation after the war ended, President Roosevelt’s successors in the White House regularly turned to the Roosevelt veterans for wise counsel when the going got rough. With one of them, Robert A. Lovett, President Kennedy even went so far as to offer a choice of the Secretary-ships of State, Defense, and the Treasury. The great officials whom Roosevelt had recruited in the war emergency further made much of the glory of the not inglorious administration of President Truman, and today I wonder sadly whether we shall ever see their like again. Sadly, I wonder too whether we shall ever see another leader of the U.S. Army with the all-around greatness of George C. Marshall, or an Air Force leader with the tough, concentrated intelligence and crafty courage of H.H. Arnold, or a Chief of Naval Operations to compare in fighting spirit and general astuteness with grim, relentless Ernest King."

After reading “FDR” I being admittedly a conservative Republican gained enormous respect for the 32nd president, especially in his execution of duty as Commander and Chief during the Second World War. Here is another quote that I believe gives the reader a sense of FDR’s statesmanship and uniting leadership from the viewpoint of the author’s personal relationship with him:

"His most remarkable contribution as a war leader was the way his boldness and his craft, his never-failing sense of political realities and his far-sighted statesmanship finally brought the great majority of Americans to acknowledge the need for the United States to play a new and larger role in the world. A great President, in my opinion, is above all a great teacher of his people; and all of us still repeat, albeit unknowingly, the lessons we have learned from each of our great Presidents from George Washington onwards. In the crisis of the Second World War, Roosevelt’s teaching was made easier by the enemies of the United States. But only consider what the outcome might have been with a run-of-the-mill President—average timorous, average maladroit, average self-interested, average unimaginative—in the place that Roosevelt filled so well! It is a thought to make one’s blood run cold, and to fill one with gratitude to Providence for giving the country Franklin Roosevelt when the need was so great and so urgent."

Today the thought of the lack of such leadership in troubled times “makes one’s blood run cold…” I pray to Providence that we do not experience a similar and perhaps worse conflict in this present age