Rating: 2/5

This might be my least favorite one of all. There were still good bits, i read several sections out loud to my wife they sounded so good. But overall this story is just OK for me. 

I've always known that Stout played fast and loose with the details of his creation. He would change the street address, or make up a weapon that doesn't exist, like the Marley .38 Archie carries. But this time these details were jarring to me. Most of the time that doesn't bother me but there were two in this book that stand out as really bothersome. 

The first one is one deals with the operatives that Nero often hires to assist Archie in collecting clues for him. For books and books there have been three of them. Saul, Orrie, and Fred. Orrie is often described as wanting Archie's job and in thinking that he's better than he really is. This time those three are hired along with another operative Jonny Keems. Jonny is described the way Orrie usually is. Jonny ends up  being a red shirt to provide motivation for Nero in solving the mystery. This feels a little cheap instead of the usual elegant crafting.

The second one is petty. One of the characters is invited to stay several days at Nero's residence. This is not uncommon for visitors to stay in what they call the South Room, on the third floor across the hall from Archie's room. There is a room called the North room on the second floor across from Nero's that is rarely used. Archie brings the guest in, goes up one floor to the South Room. Ugh! See petty but it's bugging me because I've spent so much energy putting together my vision of what Nero and Archies world looks like and this change serves no real purpose for the story. 

My final complaint is that this mystery was solved by hiding information from the reader. Nero recovers documents that expose the real plot between the murderer and the victim, but at no point is any hint of that relationship established and all is revealed in the final confrontation in Nero's office. That also felt cheap to me. 

Overall, this is not my favorite but the strength of the writing of the characters keeps it from being a total disaster. This gets two stars, making it "OK".