Rating: 2/5

This book was a suggestion from a list of "Best Biographies" guest-written for "The Womens Room," a blog about all kinds of things written by two women in London. They're funny and literate, and I thought a show biz bio might be just the thing for the weekend of our family reunion. AND our library happened to have this one on the shelf. 

Well. First off, Clara Bow had a devastatingly sad life. Poverty, abuse, scorn, loss, death, bad luck. . . first her mom and then she had it all. There's some line about "plucking defeat out of the jaws of victory"--that could be the subtitle for this book. Not too much fun to read about, especially as I kept waiting for that big break, but each big break was just a precursor to another chapter of naive young woman, looking for love and support; studio bosses taking advantage; bad decisions, terrible movies, stress, etc. 

Secondly, the book is written oddly. Here's an example: "I'd try to pay, but Clara wouldn't let me," says Jacobson. "She'd say, 'Maxine, you pay for it. Artie don't got that kinda money.'" Since Alton's cash, like her car, came from Clara anyway, she made no objection." (38) A patient reader can figure out which "she" refers to which woman after a minute, but a good editor could have cleared that sentence up ahead of time. A more damning example concerns Gary Cooper: "Since few of his silent films survive and those that do are rarely shown, modern audiences are unfamiliar with a time when, before his face was punctuated by the middle-aged crags that made it a cinematic Mount Rushmore, Gary Cooper was a man for whom the word "handsome" seemed an outrageous understatement." (90) Whew. That sentence (and others like it) cries out for an editor! A final line I questioned claimed that of Amelia Earhart, Gertrude Ederle, Miriam Ferguson, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Isadora Duncan, Margaret Mead, Aimee Semple McPherson and Margaret Sanger, "none made as indelible an imprint as Clara." (87). Hyperbole, anyone? 

So. I'd give it a C-/D+. Clara Bow was certainly a significant figure, but I certainly hope there are better-written biographies of her out there!