Rating: 4/5

This is one of Trevor’s earliest novels – his third (1965). It’s almost as if Trevor was still finding his stride. I’ll call it a black comedy.

Eight people live in a run-down London rooming house. They have been hand-picked by the owner because of their loneliness. The founder of the boarding house seems genuinely sympathetic to lonely people (he has no family himself) and he keeps a notebook on them from which we learn about their backgrounds. For example, one entry reads: “I weep when I think of Joseph Scribbin’s life, and the emptiness thereof.” 

Despite his attempts to provide these folks with the companionship of each other, they are still lonely because in different ways they are seriously damaged people in a psychological sense. Every night they sit in the lounge and their conversation never moves beyond talk of the communal meal or what’s on the TV. They never pry into each other’s business; they never visit each other’s’ rooms; they avoid personal questions and, after 10 or 15 years of acquaintance, still address each other by some title – Nurse, Major, Mr, Miss.
 
The black comedy comes in through who these folks are. One man who interrupts the TV viewing with his violent coughing fits is “…dying on his feet because he feared the thought of hospitals.” A middle-aged Nigerian immigrant has been in love with a woman for years simply because she was kind to him at the immigration office. He brings her flowers weekly and leaves them at her door while her roommates make excuses about where she is. There’s a man whose only pastime is listening to recordings of train engines – annoying all the other tenants with the noise. A woman clerk approaching middle age has never even had a man make a pass at her. A small-time con artist flimflams clerks and waitresses to get extra change back but he’s also a black-mailer and a stalker. There’s a nurse who seems to delight in giving old people shots and a former military officer who attends live porn shows. 

In the first chapter, the founder of what he calls his “institution” dies. In his will leaves the boarding house jointly to two of the most unlikely characters. Was this a cruel joke on his part or did he have something else in mind? 

Trevor gives us good writing: 

 “The drizzle freshened the short grass of the graveyard and toned down the lime of new headstones.”

“…the clergyman blinked, finding it difficult to respond with words.”

“…there was a seediness about his clothes and about his face; he had not led a dissolute life, one would have guessed, but somewhere in his life something had gone wrong.”

“Her face had lines, not many, but clearly the precursors of many.”

Not a great Trevor but it kept my interest and I thought it was a good read. William Trevor is one of my favorite authors and I have read about 15 of his novels and collections of short stories. Below are links to reviews of some others of my favorite novels of his: 

 Mrs Eckdorf in O'Neill's Hotel

 After Rain

 The Hill Bachelors

 Fools of Fortune

 Nights at the Alexandra 

 The Children of Dynmouth

Top photo from lostwomynsspace.com
Bottom photo from whatpub.com