Rating: 4/5

There was a time in my life when I thought my Christian faith required me to prove that other religions were wrong. I remember being given handouts that listed a series of theological topics - creation, sin, salvation, etc. - and compared what different religions said about each one. The goal was to show that Christianity was true and everyone else was false. 

At the same time, I always found religions fascinating. I majored in religion in college. Early on in my studies I came to realize that such simplistic charts were not really helpful at all. I learned from CS Lewis, and then others, that Christians could find commonalities with other religions. All truth was God’s truth and we ought not be surprised in finding truth outside our particular religion. Over time I studied early church history and learned that the early Christians such as Justin Martyr, Clement of Alexandria and others frequently argued that the Greek philosophers were given philosophical truth in much the same way the Hebrews were given scripture. 

I spent over fifteen years working in campus ministry on a secular university campus. Ostensibly I was doing evangelistic work. Part of my work was to help Christians grow in their faith, the other part was to convert nonChristians. But I was always a pretty crappy evangelist. I was more interested in learning what others thought about things rather than trying to change their thoughts. Thankfully the organization I worked with did not judge success based on the number of converts. The secret was, I rarely had any interest in converting people. I felt kind of guilty about this. I mean, didn’t my Christian faith require trying to convert others?

It has taken many years, but I can comfortably say that the idea of religion as some sort of zero-sum game is not the only way to view religion. I have a lot more I could say about this, but I do need to comment on the book. Coming to believe in universal salvation played a key part in my changing views on religion. I am still a Christian, but I believe God loves all people. I am not sure on the details of how my Christian faith relates to other religions, but I do know it is more fruitful to converse than attempt to convert. I also believe God’s love for all does not include all people coming to see things my way, nor does it include all people becoming “Christian”, as if the afterlife is merely some sort of place for mass conversion. Rather, all of us humans are invited to move deeper into God’s love, a love which defies our understanding and language. 

Anyway, in all my years of ministry, I never met a Taoist. 

That’s the transition to the review. I hope you liked it.

But I have read The Tao-Te Ching and a few others books. This book is thick and detailed as the author examines the teachings of Lao Tzu, who lived 500 years before Jesus, and argues that Lao Tzu, like ancient Greek philosophers, had an understanding of truth that integrates well with the life and teaching of Jesus. This sort of reflection fits better in the Eastern Christian church than the West, though it has made inroads in the West as well.

 For us Westerners to truly enter into the ancient Christian transmission and catch the essence of Christ's teaching, it is necessary for us to crucify our rationalizing minds and rise above the level of thought and emotion. For a society founded on Descartes' proposition "I think, therefore I am," this of course means a kind of suicide; and it is to precisely such an ego-death that Christ calls us. Contemporary Western Christianity trains us how to think and what to think; whereas Christ Himself, as did Lao Tzu before Him, taught us how not to need to think. The only way to get past a merely external apprehension of religious words and concepts is to seek, without compromise and self-pity, the Reality behind them. If our rapidly diminishing Western Christendom has become too jaded by intellectualized or emotionalized religion to see the essence of Christianity, then we must, as it were, start over. In this book we will look at Christ and his message as would Lao Tzu, who, although he lived five hundred years before Christ, intuitively sensed the presence of Christ in creation”  (24).

Overall, this is a thick book. It includes an adaptation of the Tao Te Ching:

 “The poems that follow are not a translation of the Tao Teh Ching, but rather comprise an entirely new work which is based on and quotes from the Tao Teh Ching. In these poems we will look at Christ through the innocent eyes and intuitive vision of Lao Tzu, and at the same time present Lao Tzu's teaching in the light of a new revelation. Therefore, what follows might be considered a "New Testament of the Tao Teh Ching." In keeping with the aim of this work, we have at tempted to follow the form and style of the Tao Teh Ching, including the latter's division into eighty-one chapters, based on multiples of three”  (51).

That is the highlight of the book. Much of the rest is extended instruction on spiritual practice. I read a few pages each morning and found a lot to think about. That said, I was getting bored at the end. Though that is probably more me than the book - I do not work in ministry anymore and actually have to clock-in at a job which has certainly changed my reading habits a bit. But this is a fantastic work for any looking to consider how Christianity relates to other religions, specifically Taoism. Some of what is learned here could be applied to other religions as well. 

Finally, here are a few quotes that stuck out at me:

 “There exists a Being undifferentiated and complete,
Born before heaven and earth.
Tranquil, boundless,
Abiding alone and changing not,
Encircling everything without exhaustion.
Fathomless, it seems to be the Source of all things.
I do not know its name,
But characterize it as the Tao.
Arbitrarily forcing a name upon it, I call it Great…” 
TAO TEH CHING, CHAPTERS 25 AND 4

 “In the beginning was the Tao, And the Tao was with God, And the Tao was God.
The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by Him;
And without Him was not anything made that was made.
In Him was life, and the life was the light of men.
And the light shines in darkness,
And the darkness comprehended it not....
He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, And the world knew Him not....
And the Tao became flesh, And dwelt among us,
And we beheld His glory …” 
THE GOSPEL OF JOHN, CHAPTER I

 “THOUGH NOT with the same power as in the people of God [the Hebrews], nevertheless the presence of the Spirit of God also acted in the pagans who did not know the true God, because even among them God found for Himself chosen people. Such, for instance, were the virgin prophetesses called Sibyls who vowed virginity to an unknown God, but still to God the Creator of the universe, the all-powerful ruler of the world, as He was conceived by the pagans. Though the pagan philosophers also wandered in the darkness of ignorance of God, yet they sought the Truth which is beloved by God; and on account of this God-pleasing seeking, they could partake of the Spirit of God, for it is said that the nations who do not know God practice by nature the demands of the law and do what is pleasing to God [cf. Romans 2:14]....
So you see, both in the holy Hebrew people, a people beloved by God, and in the pagans who did not know God, there was preserved a knowledge of God--that is, a clear and rational comprehension of how our Lord God the Holy Spirit acts in man, and by means of what inner and outer feelings one can be sure that this is really the action of our Lord God the Holy Spirit and not a delusion of the enemy. That is how it was from Adam's fall until the coming in the flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ into the world.” 
St. Seraphim of Sarov

St. Seraphim: ”If we concede that the pre-Christian philosophers did seek the truth, and that they did catch glimpses of it, it only stands to reason that their teachings should bear some similarities, like a broken reflection of the moon
in water, to the fullness of Truth in Jesus Christ. Therefore, these similarities need not appear as a threat to Christianity; instead, they offer one more proof of Christ as universal Truth” ( (41).

 “Only God is self-existent. When man began to fall under the illusion of being a self-existent individual, he was essentially making himself into a little god. This was the meaning of the primordial trap into which he fell: "Knowing good and evil, you will be as gods. Man had been created to rise, in his simple and uncompounded nature, in noetic contemplation of the simple and uncompounded God. To rise in love, and to unite all of creation with himself in love, raising it also to the Creator. Instead of regarding the Way, however, he chose to regard what was easier and closer at hand: his own visible self. Instead of rising with God, he fell in love with himself”  (220).

 “The illumination that Christ offers us does not end with this life, nor is it static in the life to come. It is only the beginning of a progress that will never end. "Indeed," says St. Symeon, "over the ages the progress will be endless, for a cessation of this growing toward the end without ending would be nothing but a grasping at the ungraspable. The One on Whom no one can be sated would then become an object of satiety. By contrast, to be filled with Him and to be glorified in His Light will cause unfathomable progress, an undefined beginning. Just as those, possessing Christ Who took form in them, stand near the One Who shines in the inaccessible Light, so does the end become a principle of glory in them or--to explain my thought more clearly in the end they will have the be-ginning, and in the beginning the end"  (