Rating: 4/5

Fatherless America is one of the most important books I have read in years. Although it was written and published over twenty years ago, its commentary and warnings feel not only prescient but present and painful. In the world of social science, twenty years is a long, long time; however, I'm not convinced any of the deficiencies in our society detailed by David Blankenhorn have been addressed; in fact, many of them have probably gotten much, much worse. Fatherless America is not only a review of the past, it is a prophecy of our future if we don't respond to the most troubling and disastrous demographic trend of the last several generations: fatherlessness.

Admittedly, I have a unique interest in topics related to masculinity, manhood, fatherhood, and the dynamics of the family. Previous books I have read have touched on these topics, such as: Manliness and Manning Up. In fact, even works of fiction have provided insight into this personal interest—books like Gates of Fire and The Illiad. Our society is inundated with the ideas of gender neutrality. In fact, masculinity in particular has been singled out as something to avoid, to correct, and to expunge. (One of the great ironies of feminism is that as women have achieved greater autonomy in their quest against masculinity and patriarchy, they have adopted more and more masculine behaviors and attitudes). In our efforts to find greater equality among the sexes, have we ignored a huge amount of unintended consequences? Fatherless America is really a book about ideas. Although it's packed with social research, data, and statistics, the most compelling argument it makes is one of ideas. The idea of fatherhood has been transmogrified, argues Blankenhorn. Society has, incrementally and often imperceptibly, changed the idea of fatherhood, and in so doing has changed the very dynamic of our culture and society. And it hasn't been for the better, especially when it comes to the well-being of children. They are, without a doubt, the biggest losers in our quest to change traditional mores and expectations related to marriage and fatherhood.

In many ways Fatherless America is a response and rejoinder against the mounting collection of social research which either diminishes the role of fathers or ignores them altogether. In my own reading I have consistently been surprised by the myopia of academics and writers when writing about the family; or, rather, the ignoring of family. It is not uncommon at all for a writer—whether it's about emotional intelligence or personal success—to give a perfunctory mention of parental importance and then quickly move to apparently more interesting or what they believe to be more effectual interventions, such as: public education, social programs, government interventions, etc. Blankenhorn expertly calls out this bias in the research. This blind spot in social and academic research, I believe, causes so many well-intentioned and extremely intelligent people to miss the mark when it comes to child well-being and human thriving. The traditional family cannot be completely untethered from gender roles, which is anathema to many scholars. Gender neutrality as a principle appears to override all of other principles and considerations, and society is left holding a really nasty bag of consequences.

Fatherless America is a contrarian book. (Another great example of a contrarian book is Life at the Bottom; I highly recommend it). It clashes harshly with a gender-neutral society. It heralds the attributes of masculinity rather than decry them, and asserts that fatherhood is the most powerful construct to harness the natural impulses of men. I think most Americans would agree the flight of fathers from their children is a bad thing. I don't think most Americans understand the impact of that flight. Blankenhorn makes an extremely compelling case that some of our most vexing, dreadful, and recalcitrant societal problems could be solved by a restoration of the idea of fatherhood and the return of fathers. Ideas, asserts the author, made them and helped them leave, ideas can bring them back. I agree.

http://thethousanderclub.blogspot.com/