Rating: 4/5

This book about transactional analysis is one of the best selling self-help books of all time, so I thought it was interesting just to learn about this popular theory of psychology from a generation ago.

Although this was presented as a novel theory of human behavior when it was written, it seems to be very much based on Freud's ideas about psychology. The basic idea is that as very young children, we all develop feelings of "not OK" from having bad behavior corrected by our parents, and we all learn how to mimic our parents' behavior. We carry the "not OK" feelings with us through life as our "Child," and our inclination to mimic our parents as our "Parent."

We spend most of the time throughout our lives on autopilot. Some of the time we are just daydreaming and not really connecting with others at all ("withdrawal"). When we are interacting with others, sometimes it's just a kind of mechanical, pre-programmed polite interaction ("ritual") or fairly meaningless small talk ("pastimes"). Much of our time is filled up by work and other practical chores that need to be accomplished to maintain our chosen lifestyle ("activities").

The time that we think is devoted to interacting with others is really mostly devoted to playing "games," and I think this is the most interesting aspect of transactional analysis. Another book, Games People Play, focuses on the games that are part of everyday life.

When we are playing "games," we are really mindlessly acting out our "Child" and "Parent" selves. The purpose of transactional analysis is to get people to stop playing "games," and instead act as "Adults." The "Adult" self is not just acting upon the "not OK" feelings from childhood or copying the way you perceived your parents to be acting when you were a small child. Rather, the adult self is like a "computer" that takes in new data from the real world and makes independant decisions about how to be. By acting this way, a person can spend more time with other people engaged in "intimacy" rather than just playing "games."

Here are two examples of "games." One is "Why don't you/Yes, but" in which one person A talks about why person A is unhappy because of some problem that is making person A unhappy. Person B offers solutions to the problem (Why don't you . . ."), but no matter how many solutions person B offers, person A always just comes up with some excuse why that solution won't possibly work ("Yes, but . . ."). I thought this was interesting because I think it's almost become a cliche that men don't understand that when a woman is describing some problem that is making her unhappy, men show a lack of empathy by trying to solve the problem, instead of just being "supportive." I can just imagine the author of this book telling his female patients to stop acting like a "child," and to start acting like an "adult" by acting in a way that would actually solve the problem.

Married couples also play "games," such as "Now I've got you, you son of a bitch." If the husband or wife is acting like a "Child" (needy/insecure) or a "Parent" (insisting what "should" be done without real justification), bickering often escalates into drawn out arguments that get nowhere. If both partners could cast aside the baggage from their own childhoods, they could achieve "intimacy" as two adults in a committed relationship. I think think there is some truth to this theory.

I think one big problem with trying to apply transactional analysis is that in many cases it's not at all obvious what the "Adult" way of acting is. You try to do the right thing, but how exactly would you know that you're acting out your "Parent," rather than being an "Adult." In some cases it may be obvious that you're just perpetuating some prejudice that you picked up as a child from your own parents, but in other cases it's not. Also, according to this book "a relationship in which the Adult in both persons is in charge . . . allows for the emergence of the Natural Child." I kind of get what the author is saying: Once you achieve intimacy, you can relax with another person and allow your natural, fun, creative self to emerge. But in every day life, how would you know if you were being an Adult and allowing your Natural Child to emerge, or if you were just acting as the "Adaptive Child" and playing "games"?

Anyway, I thought it was interesting to read what white, middle class Americans thought was the answer to their angst in the late 1960s/early 1970s. These days, therapists have to "treat" people for a "mental disorder" on a list of diagnoses in order to get reimbursed by an insurance company. It is interesting to me that when this book was written, the author was just trying to create a theory of human psychology in general and felt no need to identify any particular diagnosis.

My guess is that this book was popular because it was both politically liberal while at the same time strongly advocating that people should have traditional moral values. I imagine that it appealed to people who supported civil rights and opposed the Vietnam War but also opposed rioting and thought the hippies should settle down and get a job and get married. I think the "peace sign" on the front cover is definitely a sign of the times. I notice that it was eliminated in more recent editions.