Rating: 3/5

This book resembled a cosy fireside chat with John Irving on the conversion of novels into screenplays. Although The Cider House Rules is the main subject under consideration, there are detours into his other novels that ended up as films, notably The World According to Garp and The Hotel New Hampshire, and the one that, try as he might, never made it to the cinema, his first novel, Setting Free the Bears.

I wondered why the eminent novelist had considered writing this memoir of his dabbling in the movie business. When I realized that this book was written on the eve of the release of the film version of The Cider House Rules, I wondered whether the author was trying to absolve himself of any responsibility for the finished product. Why? Because movies do not reflect their book versions. They are slices of the novel, where scenes and characters come and go or are replaced depending on the director, the studio and audience tastes. The Cider House Rules had four directors during its journey to being filmed, and the screenplay, written by Irving, changed radically with each one. This is to be expected, for when compressing a story, some characters and scenes will be compromised or eliminated, and others created anew to compensate for the gaps in the story. Voice-over (narration in the novel) is a frowned upon device in the movies and is used sparingly.

And yet it must have been a labour of angst for Irving to whom this book is close. He comes from a privileged medical family, and the book’s central character, Dr. Larch (played by Michael Caine in the movie), is modelled on the author’s grandfather. 

One thing that became clear to me when reading this “how to make a screenplay” book, was how contrived movie scripts are. Effect, marketability, timing, and resolved endings are more important than moral and political issues that the author makes central themes in his novel version. So while Irving the author would like to make abortion and it’s representative, Dr. Larch, the focus, the movie deems a romance between the orphan, Homer Wells, and the temptress, Candy, more important.

A good read if one is interested in screenplays, and also for novelists who do not ever want their novels converted into movies.