Rating: 5/5

Amazing and Beautiful Graphic Reference

I purchased this book from Amazon over 20 years ago and it's surprising how useful a tool it has been to visualize historical sequences and to correlate events occurring at the same point in time in different cultures. My most recent recourse was to shore up some references to developments in France while reading a book on medieval and renaissance Germany. The book is 17 1/2 inches tall so it won't fit most bookshelves and when fully extended reaches about 14 feet in length (excluding the cover), though one usually only needs to look at 2-4 pages at a time. The first four pages are devoted to biblical events, which would raise objections to it by some but as a non-literalist who considers the Bible as one of the great texts of western civilization I appreciate having this around though I would have felt equally comfortable if it had charted the natural history of the 4 1/2 billion years preceding human history.

In additional to the biblical track the remaining 10 pages show the progression of human history as branching parallel streams, the width of each growing and shrinking to reflect geopolitical power and influence. The initial streams are Phoenicia, Egypt, Greece, Chaldea (Babylon) and China, with the year clearly at the bottom. Thought the focus is largely Western, by the time the charts end in the mid 20th century, though some lines peter out, there are some 50 separate streams. The labeling is clear to read, and the use of colour and pictographs are extremely effective in drawing and recovering focus on a specific region. The final page has a sidebar of 20th century events.

IMV stylistically this is a masterpiece of pragmatic visual presentation. See also Edward R. Tufte,Envisioning Information. One also notes that copyright has expired so that not only is it inexpensive there are multiple reproductions each no doubt with their own variations. Great as a personal reference and an excellent choice of gift for a preteen or older child interested in history as long as there is no objection to the inclusion of biblical chronology.