Rating: 4/5

A collection of 21 of Asimov's science fiction short stories, with links to detailed reviews where available.

Introduction - 2⭐ 
In this 3 point self-deprecating introduction, Asimov defends himself saying he does STILL write science fiction! The collection is in alphabetical order with short introductions to each story.
There, that's it! Who says I'm long winded?

🕳️✴💀 About Nothing - 3½⭐ 
Shortest story in this collection and a feghoot (one that ends with a pun). Professor Jerome Heironymous discovers a black hole that will end humanity, then comes up with such a witty pun that consequences have to follow.

👨‍⚖️💻🚫 A Perfect Fit - 3⭐ 
A man is unable to use computers because of a crime he previously committed, so in a world where everything depends on the usage of computers, he's basically a cripple. The reason for why he is thus afflicted is revealed at the end of the story. 

☁️🤥🔬 Belief - 3⭐
Physics Professor Roger wakes up to find himself levitating! He wants to be studied but cannot persuade his wife or other skeptical scientists, that he is telling the truth, until a friend gives him a very good piece of advice.

I AM GROOT🌲💔💀 Death of a Foy - 3⭐ 
The Foys are tree-like creature with 5 hearts who are virtually immortal until they "give up" as this one is about to do, on Earth, due to an ill-starred love affair. This Feghoot story that builds up to a pun for its punchline requires specialized knowledge to understand, click on the link to my in depth review that explains it.

👩🏼‍🎤🎼🧑‍🎤 Fair Exchange? - 3½⭐ 
Asimov is a great fan and member of the Gilbert and Sullivan Society of New York, so he wrote this story referencing Thespis, the first of the G&amp;S collaborations where almost all of the music is lost. Herb volunteers for experiments on Temporal Transference, where his mind can inhabit another's across time if both are in resonance. He ends up switching minds with Stockbroker Jeremy Bentford in 1971 London, attending Gilbert and Sullivan's Thespis so he could get the music and sing it to his equally enthusiastic wife! Unfortunately research experiments sometimes have unforeseen consequences.
 
🐦🧚🏻🐬 For the Birds - 3⭐ 
Asimov wrote this science fiction story featuring a clothing designer for a French fashion magazine in 1978, but they changed their mind so it was instead published in Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine, May 1980 and reprinted here. Designer Charles Modine is invited to a space station on a commission to design wings! The purpose is to enable the settles to lower the station's rotation and get rid of the Coriolis effect so more people will want to settle. By seeing things as an artistic whole, he succeeds where technicians failed. Note: I wonder if the magazine story inspired the 
  rare 1979 Thierry Mugler Galactic Siren Sequin Catsuit with Winged Fins?

🚬🛰️👽 Found! - 4⭐ 
First published in OMNI Magazine October 1978, Computer Two (of 4) is losing internal pressure so the protagonist and Joe have to head up to troubleshoot, something that has never happened as the computers are supposed to self diagnose and repair. While there, Computer Three starts losing pressure, if all 4 are disabled space flight grinds to a halt! Then the 2 technicians discover a tube that has bored a hole into Computer Two ... and more tubes inside ...

🍝🧄🤤 Good Taste - 4½⭐ 
Chawker Minor has returned home to his planet of Gourmets after the equivalent of a "gap year" traveling. He enters their planet, Gammer's Annual Finals a food competition where he wins with the most novel ingredient, but alas, local prejudice comes to the forefront when he reveals what the ingredient is. 

📝✂📜 How It Happened - 4⭐
In ancient Egyptian times, a scribe persuades his brother to summarize his historical novel, told from the start, as they have limited funds and papyrus. The ending was fairly clever!

🚀🎬🌕 Ideas Die Hard - 3½⭐ 
Davis and Oldbury volunteer to be the first 2 men on a mission to the moon that requires manual intervention as the previous 3 unmanned craft have not returned. Unknown to them their conversations are being transmitted to Earth so mission control can study the effects of prolonged exposure to space on humans. Asimov admits this story has not "aged well" since mankind did get to the moon, but still, this story does reference that famous conspiracy theory!

  

  
  

  

🗣🔥🙌 Ignition Point! - 3⭐ 
Behind the scenes power hires a speech writer to help his political candidate reach the masses but gets more than he bargained for.

👨‍👨‍👦‍👦🖥️🛸 It Is Coming - 3⭐ 
An extra-solar object is on the way to Earth! As politicians are gridlocked, the woman in charge of Multivac has to take action, unilaterally, to modify Multivac and try establish some kind of protocol for first contact. Her husband aids her, and when the meeting does occur, only Multivac is able to make sure things don't go horrifically wrong. This is in essence, the smart thing to do, and reminiscent of what happened in the Godzilla movie clip here.

🤔🧏🏻😈 The Last Answer - 4⭐ 
After Atheist physicist Murray Templeton dies he is told by an all powerful being his job is to "think" for all eternity to amuse the being. Thus begins a battle of wits. This was pretty short, witty and clever, but not as good as The Last Question, for what else could an eternally existing being want?

🌍🚀🛰️ The Last Shuttle - 4⭐ 
A pilot is saddened to have to be the one that "pilots" the last shuttle away from a particular destination.

💊🧠🤷🏻 Lest We Remember - 4⭐ 
John Heath, an average man working for Quantum Pharmaceuticals volunteers to be a test subject for a drug that enables total memory recall. It works, he changes, consequences follow.

🏹🔁🖼️ Nothing for Nothing - 5⭐ 
Asimove wrote this after Alexander Marshak, Paleolithic archaeologist, suggested he do a story on Ice Age Art. An alien ship's Explorer thinks there's something on Earth, as it has managed to get the ship three consequtive Awards for Excellence (and its rewards) the Captain has to allow the Explorer the latitude to investigate. A trader is sent, discovers primitive earth folks do have something of value and ends up trading them something in return, WITHIN their rules, which will have long term repercussions. All I could think was this would never happen in Star Trek!

 
😈👩🏻🎶 One Night of Song - 3⭐ 
Collected in Azazel. George uses his 2 inch demon Azazel to help a friend get revenge on a mistress who cruelly dumped him - by giving her one night performing with a perfect voice. As with all deals with demons, this one has unforeseen after effects.

😈📸🤵 The Smile That Loses - 4⭐ 
Collected in Azazel. George, in an effort to get physical affections from Rosie O'Donnell, uses his 2 inch demon Azazel to capture her husband's radiantly happy smile in a photograph, after which, the husband turns into a complete grump ... Good story. Rosie is right, almost every spouse probably wishes they had that kind of picture of their significant other.

🪨🐍🏁💯 Sure Thing - 5⭐
Asimov says this 4th vignette is one of his favorite short shorts, and if we aren't groaning, snorting or making unfavorable noises when we've finished, he will be vastly disappointed. This Feghoot delivers and then some.

🌎👀⭕ To Tell at a Glance - 4⭐
Gamma's authorities have requested tour guide Elaine Metro's assistance to uncover a spy among the 5 tourists en route to their world. The spy is bent on sabotaging the station so the 13 outer world's bid for independence set to coincide with the American Tricentennial independence celebration will not pass. Decent mystery.
 
💨⏲✝️ The Winds of Change - 3⭐
Professor Dinsmore gives a very long explanation to 2 colleagues about how he's used the nature of physics that one of the two developed in order to gain an advantage through time travel. The ending is kinda ham-fisted, but it's always been true in any age. Nobody is safe from the Moral Majority.