Rating: 4/5

"I...was most impressed by the Betty and Barney Hill case when it was first introduced in the 1960's (The Interrupted Journey).This was the first so-called "abduction" case. There were many things in that report that convinced me that the Hills had a true experience. For example the apparent telepathic communication and the non-hostile intent of the aliens, seemed to me perfectly plausible".

Dolores Cannon in "The Custodians"

Barney under hypnosis: "He's a Nazi...his eyes are slanted...those eyes...I feel like a rabbit...it's the cat in Alice in Wonderland..."

 Nuclear Physicist Stanton Friedman :"They [aliens] don't understand how Barney's teeth come out and hers don't" Hahah
 (Barney had dentures)

Paul Devereux "...driving hours upon hours...they go into trance...miraculously floating into a spaceship ...out of the body experience...lucid dreaming experience...,sleep disorders that fit in absolute detail" (the abductee description) 

 "Tectonic Strain Theory
(Michael) Persinger [a cognitive neuroscience researcher] has also come to public attention due to his 1975 Tectonic Strain Theory (TST) of how geophysical variables may correlate with sightings of unidentified flying objects (UFOs) or Marian apparitions. Persinger argued that strain within the Earth's crust near seismic faults produces intense electromagnetic (EM) fields, creating bodies of light that some interpret as glowing UFOs or The Virgin Mary. Alternatively, he argued that the EM fields generate hallucinations in the temporal lobe, based on images from popular culture, of alien craft, beings, communications, or creatures".
From Wiki 

  

This is one of earliest* reported cases of abduction. I would highlight two, at least, important features, common to many other abduction cases. They’re the “missing time”** and the “intensity of the emotions” associated with the encounter; the latter obtained via hypnotic regression. In fact, the title of the book is the Interrupted Journey: two lost hours aboard a flying saucer. 

Basically, the story told in the book involves a couple: a white woman and a black man who, back in September 19th, 1961, are travelling from Canada (border) to their home in Portsmouth, USA.

  
 

He’s a bright civil-rights activist and post officer, called Barney. She’s a social worker, by the name of Betty; her true name being Eunice.

They had had the warning of an upcoming hurricane while heading south. After the restaurant break for a meal, they left the place at around 10:05 p. m. . While on the way home she was the first one to spot “another star” (above a known planet). 

Soon they both concluded that the star was moving: “the object would disappear behind the trees”. They will report: “strange sounds” ….and “missing time”...at 11 p.m. when passing by the “Cannon mountain”. The "star" had entered a “crazy course”. 
:::
Upon arriving they get to this conclusion: the trip took 2 hours longer than expected. Past few days, Betty started having nightmares of the couple being taken onboard a spacecraft and "medically examined".

  

In December of 1963 they sought help from Doctor Benjamin Simon, because Betty had developed health problems (ulcers, namely). 

The book gives detailed accounts of the sessions the couple went through. Of special (somewhat terrifying) interest are the examinations they were subjected to, by aliens. Some of these examinations left physical marks in the body of Barney.

Betty had access to maps that led to the identification of the place in the galaxy where from these aliens came. 

  

  

The couple was separated while in the hypnotic sessions. Thereafter “amnesia” was induced.

  

Someone commented that the emotional [fear and terror] intensity reported was "greater" than any of the war traumas reported by military people. 

The movie based in the book, The UFO Incident by Richard A. Colla (1975), is fairly good, regarding the story.

  

  

---
*Maybe the earliest is the case of Antonio Villas Boas in Brazil, 1957.

**Missing Time, by Budd Hopkins 

  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3g93Y...
The Lost Betty Hill Interview,October 2009. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dzUWf...
(Betty and Barney Hill case with regressive hypnosis)