Rating: 4/5

Female deities: honey, I'm pregnant

Their husbands: 

  

EDIT: Warning for those who are not familiar with Greek mythology: Spoiler alert!

Cronus, king of the Titans, ate his children Hades, Poseidon, Hera, Demeter, and Hestia. Don't worry, they survived. He tried to eat Zeus but failed. Cronus also castrated his father, Uranus, and threw his severed genitals into the ocean. Now that's some good true crime content. 

King of the Gods Zeus ate his first wife, Metis, while she was pregnant with Athena. Don't worry, Athena survived. Metis, not so much. RIP sweet Oceanid. In the words of the great Alan Rickman, 'by Grabthar's hammer, by the Sons of Warvan, you shall be avenged.'

Tantalus killed his son Pelops and tried to serve him as a Swedish buffet-style meal to the gods. (I'm paraphrasing, but this is basically what happened). 

Welcome to Greek mythology, where cannibalism, filicide, parricide, uxoricide, adultery, and incest are not only expected but encouraged. 

I fully immersed myself in the world of gods and monsters. I'd forgotten how much I loved Greek mythology. Edith Hamilton did her thing. Allow me to explain the unhinged world of gods and goddesses in my modern, unhinged way. 

99% of the men from Greek mythology belong to the streets. If they're not cheating, then they're committing literal sex crimes. Zeus bangs anything that walks. Naiad Daphne's father, a river god, transformed her into a laurel tree as she fled from Apollo to avoid his advances. Living life as a plant is more desirable than being Harvey Weinsteined by a Greek god. Ares is psychotic. Poseidon has a short temper but also loves dolphins, so I guess he's not all that bad.

Zeus 24/7 :

  

Why is Theseus considered a hero? He used Ariadne to help him defeat the Minotaur, then ditched her on a deserted island (thankfully, she was rescued by Dionysus). He also abducted Helen. I feel like this topic is not discussed enough. Theseus was trash. 

Dionysus, whom I affectionately refer to as the Jim Morrison of Greek mythology, is probably my favorite. He enjoys indulging in wholesome activities such as orgies, riding his leopard-drawn chariot, and drinking wine. I don't see any problem with that. Live your best life, king. Dionysus had female followers known as Maenads (or Bacchae) who enjoyed revelry, drinking alcohol, and occasionally wreaking havoc on cities (and men). Although Dionysus had a reputation as a manwhore, he still managed to find true love. One of my favorite love stories in Greek mythology is that of Dionysus and his wife, Ariadne, a mortal princess from Crete. But that's a story for another review. 

The majority of the gods and goddesses: scheming, plotting, fighting

Dionysus: traveling, drinking, having orgies, living his best life. 

  

Athena, Artemis, Persephone, Psyche, and Nyx are absolute queens. Let's talk about Nyx, the primordial goddess of night. Did you know Nyx is so fierce that even Zeus, the king of the gods, fears her? Nyx is the daughter of Chaos and the mother of Hemera (the personification of day), Aether (the personification of sky), Hypnos (god of sleep), Thanatos (god of death), Eris (goddess of strife and discord), Nemesis (goddess of retribution), and The Moirai (the Fates), among others. 

Do we even need to talk about Athena? To paraphrase Wendy Williams, she's an icon, she's a legend, and she is the moment. In the competition for the patronage of Athens, Athena emerged victorious over Poseidon. She provided guidance and watched over numerous heroes, including Odysseus, Perseus, Jason, and Heracles. Athena was not a saint; however, she had her bitchy moments. When Arachne claimed to be a better weaver than Athena, the goddess turned her into a spider. Harsh but also iconic. 

Athena: I am a feminist.

Also Athena, every time a woman annoys her: 

  

My favorite couples in Greek mythology:

1. Hades (god of the dead and king of the Underworld) and Persephone (goddess of Spring, later became queen of the Underworld) 

2. Cupid/Eros (son of Aphrodite, god of desire and erotic love) and Psyche (mortal princess, later became goddess of soul)

3. Dionysus (god of wine, festivity, fertility, and theatre) and Ariadne (mortal princess of Crete)

4. Orpheus (the greatest musician who ever lived) and Eurydice (the tragic wife of Orpheus )

5. Selene (goddess of the Moon) and Endymion (mortal shepherd and hunter)

6. Hero (a virgin priestess of Aphrodite) and Leander (the young man who fell in love with her)

7. Echo (a nymph/oread) and Narcissus (a hunter who fell in love with his own reflection). Not really a love story, but I had to include them. ♫ You're so vain, you probably think this  song  review is about you ♫

I still haven't grown out of my Hades/Persephone phase. Persephone, a sheltered daughter of a controlling mother, was abducted/eloped with Hades, the King of the Underworld. If I had to choose between gardening and ruling the Underworld with the hot king of the dead, I would have been like, 'F the flowers.' Daniella Michalleni's poem   I hope you’ve heard of horns, but that isn’t half of it. Out of an entire kingdom he kneels only to me, calls me Queen, calls me Mercy. Mama, Mama, I hope you get this. Know the bed is warm and our hearts are cold, know never have I been better than when I am here. Do not send flowers, we’ll throw them in the river. ‘Flowers are for the dead’, ‘least that’s what the mortals say. I’ll come back when he bores me, but Mama, not today   lives in my head rent-free. 

Hades and Persephone:

  

There are multiple versions of the Hades/Persephone myth, but my preferred canon depicts Persephone falling in love with Hades, embracing her dark side, and living happily with him in the Underworld.  Is kidnapping really that big of a sin? Let's cut Hades some slack.  
I would love to discuss the other couples, but this review is already too long. The story of Psyche, her sisters, Aphrodite, and Cupid is a chaotic drama that deserves its own review.

Cupid: Mother, I've fallen in love with Psyche. 

Aphrodite: 

  

 Greek mythology gods and humans as Lana Del Rey lyrics  

Gaia (the personification of the Earth) -  I got my red dress on tonight, dancin' in the dark, in the pale moonlight  

Nyx (the powerful primordial goddess of the night) -  He said to be cool but, I'm already coolest, I said to get real, "Don't you know who you're dealing with?"  

Zeus (king of the gods, sender of thunder) -  Love you more than those bitches before  

Hera (queen of the gods, goddess of marriage and childbirth) -  My old man is a bad man, but I can't deny the way he holds my hand  

Demeter (goddess of the harvest and agriculture) -  They mistook my kindness for weakness, I fucked up, I know that, but, Jesus, can't a girl just do the best she can?  

Poseidon (god of the sea and earthquakes) -  Did you know that there's a tunnel under Ocean Boulevard?  

Hestia ( the virgin goddess of the hearth) -  She said, "Most men don't want a woman with a legacy, it's of age." She said, "You can't be a muse and be happy, too  

Hades (god of the dead and wealth, and king of the Underworld) -  Oh, my heart it breaks every step that I take, but I'm hoping that the gates, they'll tell me that you're mine. Choose your last words, this is the last time, 'cause you and I, we were born to die  

Persephone (daughter of Demeter, goddess of spring, queen of the Underworld) -  In the land of Gods and Monsters, I was an angel living in the garden of evil  

Athena (virgin goddess of wisdom, warfare, and handicraft) -  I wasn't crazy, I was divine 
 
Artemis (Apollo's twin sister, virgin goddess of the hunt and wild animals) -  If you want some basic bitch, go to the Beverly Center and find her  

Apollo (Artemis' twin brother, god of the sun, light, archery, prophecy, truth, healing, diseases, music, poetry) -  You were like tall, tan driving 'round the city, flirting with the girls like, "You're so pretty"  

Aphrodite (goddess of love and beauty) -  I fucked my way up to the top, this is my show  

Ares (god of war) -  Been tryin' hard not to get into trouble, but I've got a war in my mind 
 
Dionysus (god of wine, theatre, festivity, fertility) -  Please don't try to find me through my dealer, he won't pick up his phone  

Ariadne (princess of Crete, sister of Minotaur, wife of Dionysus) -  If he's a serial killer, then what's the worst that could happen to a girl who's already hurt? I'm already hurt 
 
Hermes (messenger of the gods, protector of travelers, merchants, couriers, and thieves) -  I'm smoking while I'm runnin' on my treadmill, but I'm cutting up roses, could it be that I fell for another loser  

Hephaestus (god of fire, metalworking, craftsmen, and volcanoes) -  Open me up, tell me you like it, fuck me to death, love me until I love myself  

Cupid (god of desire and erotic love) -  It's a love story for the new age, for the sixth page, we're on a quick, sick rampage  

Psyche (a mortal princess who became the goddess of the soul after marrying Cupid) -  Oh, be my once in a lifetime, lyin' on your chest in my party dress I'm a fuckin' mess, but I oh, thanks for the high life, baby, it's the best, passed the test, and yes, now I’m here with you  

Daphne (a naiad, daughter of the river god Peneus) -  There's things I wanna say to you, but I'll just let you live, like if you hold me without hurting me, you'll be the first who ever did  

Hecate (goddess of magic, witchcraft, necromancy, and ghosts) -  I want money, power and glory, I want money and all your power, all your glory, Hallelujah, I wanna take you for all that you got 
 
Nemesis (goddess of retribution and punisher of evil deeds) -  No holds barred, I was sent to destroy  

Eris (the goddess of discord) -  I heard that you like the bad girls, honey, is that true?  

Orpheus (the greatest musician who ever lived) -  And there's no remedy for memory, your face is like a melody, it won't leave my head. Your soul is haunting me and telling me that everything is fine, but I wish I was dead (dead, like you)  

Eurydice (Orpheus' wife) -  You're in the wind, I'm in the water, nobody's son, nobody's daughter  

Hera, whenever Zeus knocks up one of his mistresses: 

  

I would like to conclude this review by informing (or reminding) everyone that Aphrodite had an affair with Ares while being married to Hephaestus.