Rating: 5/5

Having dealt with the retrograde condition of interracial relations in the debut novel of this series, author Barbara Neely turns her gimlet eye to the state of relations with the African-American community in Blanche and the Talented Tenth.

The title refers to W.E.B. Dubois’ prediction that one-tenth of the Negro race would rise, through education and good character, to be the leaders who would buoy up the rest of the race. The term became conflated with light-skinned blacks, those with straight hair and skin no darker than a paper bag, as if intelligence, industry, or leadership were something based on having traces of Caucasian blood! 

At the heart of Blanche and the Talented Tenth are the light-skinned, well-bred, and well-connected African Americans who regularly summer at Amber Cove, Maine, a stand-in for wealthy African-American resort villages like Oak Bluff on Martha’s Vineyard or the Azurest section of Sag Harbor, N.Y. Doctors, lawyers, authors, well-known professors — the crème of the African-American crème — litter the landscape at Amber Cove in Maine. And when Blanche White — a maid who wants to appear more at ease with her dark skin, natural hair, and job position than perhaps she really feels — comes to Amber Cove, she finds the old prejudice of so-called “high yellow” blacks against their darker brothers and sisters alive and well, a prejudice as strong as that of any racist white. 

Blanche will be spending a few days at Amber Cove with her sister’s children as the guest of two well-heeled African-American doctors, Drs. David and Christine Crowley. (Blanche’s niece and nephew, Taifa and Malik, attend school with the Crowley children.) Just before her arrival, a particularly unpleasant regular died under very suspicious circumstances. And Blanche intuitively realizes that lots of unsavory goings-on amongst the Talented Tenth of Amber Cove, despite their money, Ivy League educations, and privilege.

Neely weaves a most intriguing mystery. But what really made this book special was the penetrating look it took at the black ruling class and at the self-deceptions that help the privileged of any race able to keep looking at themselves in the mirror.