Rating: 4/5

To me the uniqueness of The Doors’ music lies even more in Ray Manzarek’s wild and crazy keyboards than in Jim Morrison’s vocals. I mean, what is the song Light My Fire without Manzarek’s intro/outro “hook”—at a time organ solos were unheard of in Rock music. I also like how in later years Manzarek agreed to play on Weird Al Yankovic’s Craig’s List, a parody of/paean to The Doors music. Gotta love the guy. Luckily, Manzarek’s book about Jim Morrison is just as much about his own life, and the friendship they shared.

Musicians and fans will enjoy the detail with which Ray describes particular songs and how they came together. He’s rather a poet and word painter himself, weaving in arcane symbols and quotes from various songs when they relate to the plot. Ray comes off as an intellectual stoner, serious and gifted musician, and genuine nice guy. Except when he gets off on a rant. 

After ranting a bit, he generally begs pardon. However, he lets it be known that he hates not only Oliver Stone’s movie The Doors, but also Oliver Stone. And he’s not keen on bandmate John Densmore’s personal style either. In fact, I now want to read Densmore’s biography of Morrison, 
  Riders on the Storm
 to get the story from Densmore’s point of view. Update 11/25: I also rated Densmore's book 4 stars. I recommend reading both.

Light My Fire is very nostalgic, and not just for its content. Manzarek’s writing style and manner of speaking are a blast from the 1960s and 1970s. His beliefs echo values of that time: love of peace and freedom paired with hatred of authority figures. Political correctness was unheard of, and people spoke their beliefs without sugar-coating. Ray's plan for working Morrison up from the ranks of poet to presidency is delightfully naïve, as much of the younger generation was in those days. 

If you want to learn more about Jim Morrison and The Doors, this book is an excellent place to start. Bonuses: an authentic feeling of 1960s-70s popular culture, and the story of a strong friendship between two men with very different personalities who shared values and experiences in the arenas of art, music, performance, and politics.