Rating: 4/5

Not for the faint of heart, but worthwhile. 

Grant describes every battle in the Civil War that he was either involved in, or oversaw as Lieutenant General in charge of the U.S. Army. Readers who don't appreciate battle strategy the details of battles will find these long descriptions hard going. It helps to keep a cheat sheet of generals, as Grant does not always distinguish between National and Confederate leaders. The reader can lose track of which side's movements he is describing. Also, I found the maps included in this edition too small to be useful. It was hard to picture the topography or where the battles were fought unless I had been to the actual places. 

With all that, what comes through is a humble leader driven by a set of guiding principles on the evil of slavery and the value of liberating black people from the tyranny of slavery. In one description of a southern general's view of black soldiers, Grant cannot bring himself to describe the racist view of the southerner, instead letting the man's words as quoted speak for him, with Grant's commentary letting us know his deep disagreement with the view. 

Grant's compassion also shines through even in the midst of bloody battles. He makes sure his troops do not loot and pillage southern lands. He makes sure his army compensates farmers for the supplies they take. He disputes the view that Northern soldiers set fire to southern towns, giving evidence several times of Confederate soldiers burning cities before they departed, leaving National soldiers to put out the fires. 

I also appreciated reading the timeline of Grant's life in the afterword. The memoirs only cover his time as a soldier and not as president. After his presidency, he invested his entire fortune, $100,000 (about $3 million in 2024 dollars), in an investment bank led by his son. After a bank crisis he was left penniless. Congress voted to give him a lifelong pension (ex-Presidents at the time had no such provisions). He wrote his memoirs in the last year of his life, and his wife received approximately $400,000 in 1882 dollars from the book sales. The Library of America edition includes many letters from Grant to his wife, and his life-long love for her is evident. The letters round out the picture of a man whose heroism saved the Union and destroyed the institution of slavery.