Rating: 3/5

There have been many Waugh's in English literature.

I had previously read novels by Alexander Waugh's grandfather Evelyn, all of which were excellent, albeit somewhat lacking in the milk of human kindness. I had read a novel by his mother, Teresa Waugh, which was terrible. I have a collection of novels by his father, Auberon, which my sister bought me as an Xmas present a few years ago but I have not got around to reading yet. 

Now this, a book by Waugh the younger; not a novel, but an investigation into the history and character of God himself no less, in His own words so to speak.As I expected given his ancestry, Waugh's intentions are mostly satirical. It's a pithy and irreverent look at the origins and evolution of the two pre-eminent monotheistic Gods, as per the Bible, the Koran, apocrypha etc. 

In truth, it's difficult to resist the temptation to extract the St. Michael out of God when you focus almost exclusively on the nonsense of the Old Testament, which Waugh does. I mean, have you read that absurd gibberish lately?

Here is a typical example of Waugh's tone throughout: "Picking up a small cluster of dust, he sculpted it into an image that resembled his own, and breathing into his nostrils, Hey Presto! God created Man." 

It's not all flippancy though. In the first chapter, 'Mewling and Puking, Waugh informs of how Yahweh was originally merely a son of El, who gained his ascendency over El and his brothers and sisters (the Elohim) with the victory of the Israelites over the Canaanites, and how the inconsistencies of this position are still inherent in the early books of the Bible.

However, Waugh either doesn't seem to know much about Islam, and certainly isn't so keen to mock Allah, perhaps not fancying the same fate as Salman Rushdie. He decides instead to inform rather than ridicule, telling us of the Islamic God's exhausting number of names, and how the 100th name of Allah remains unknown because Mohammed whispered it to a camel as thanks for shading him from the sun.

Probably a wise choice. Some gods can take a joke, some can't.