Rating: 3/5

I should have read this before I started reading the more modern Superman Origin stories...this is the daddy of those. John Byrne redid Superman for the 80s, a few years before I started getting into comics. The look of Superman and Clark Kent here is pure what I grew up with. There's some good stuff, and some other stuff that makes it apparent this book is 27 years old.
This Superman has some seriously sanctimonious moments where he tries to put Batman in jail, then figures out Batman's Gotham is no Metropolis.
Also, this Lex Luthor is the ridiculous Redheaded Tubby one that is kind of hard to take seriously, even though he's the bad guy.
Lois here is 80s woman at it's best, tough, high-fashion, yuppie to the max (also seriously hot, which is strange to say...)
I didn't care for the last issue (#6) where it seemed like Byrne ran out of time from DC and had to cram a whole lot into the final issue of the miniseries.
I also didn't love the whole Rah-Rah American parts, but then again...Late Cold War Era...Reagan was still president when this came out!
The art is solid Byrne, which I remember from the Superman I read as a kid in the late 80s. There's also much less sci-fi stuff, and some of the parts don't ring true, like Clark's prowess on the football field in High School...but then again, this was all true and authentic Superman when I was a little kid, so perhaps there've been way too many reboots since that I think of Byrne's as outdated, but then again, 1986 was a long time ago. Imagine how 1959 Superman would have looked in 1986 (the same 27yrs later) so I suppose in that regard it's held up fairly well.

Enjoyable, but perhaps don't read any modern Superman too soon before you read this. I enjoyed feeling like a kid again reading this, before Doomsday and Superman's death, rebirth, and all the crazy shit that's happened since. What's here the most is the potential for where this Superman could go, and Byrne deserves a lot of credit for all that he did for Superman and updating him for a new generation.

Worth a read, even beyond the nostalgia factor I got.