Rating: 3/5

The Birds' Christmas Carol is a novel by Kate Douglas Wiggin printed privately in 1886 and published in 1888, I'm not entirely sure what that means, but that's what it says. It had illustrations originally, but my copy didn't which makes me mad. A little. This is one of those puzzling things I've learned about the author:

Kate Douglas Wiggin was an American educator and author of children's stories, most notably the classic children's novel Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm. She started the first free kindergarten in San Francisco in 1878 (the Silver Street Free Kindergarten). With her sister during the 1880s, she also established a training school for kindergarten teachers. Kate Wiggin devoted her adult life to the welfare of children in an era when children were commonly thought of as cheap labor.

Wiggin went to California to study kindergarten methods.

Now, how did she go to California to study kindergarten methods if she started the first kindergarten in San Francisco? Maybe it was the first free kindergarten she started and the rest cost something,or maybe California has them, but San Francisco itself doesn't, I don't know. At any rate she seemed to love kindergartens because her and her sister were instrumental in the establishment of over 60 kindergartens for the poor in San Francisco and Oakland. There must have been an awful lot of children in San Francisco and Oakland. In between all the kindergarten work she wrote books, some of them children's books, some of them for adults. The one I just read is The Birds' Christmas Carol, whether it's a child's book or an adult's book I have no idea, it seems a little depressing for kids. The book isn't about birds, you know the kind that have feathers and fly around, it's about a family with the last name of Bird. Mostly it's a book about one girl, Carol Bird. The book begins on Christmas day:

"It was very early Christmas morning, and in the stillness of the dawn, with the soft snow falling on the house-tops, a little child was born in the Bird household.

They had intended to name the baby Lucy, if it were a girl; but they had not expected her on Christmas morning, and a real Christmas baby was not to be lightly named—the whole family agreed in that."

No, it had to be a special name for a special day. It had to be settled early in the day because Mrs. Bird never allowed her babies to go over night unnamed. We're told she would have blushed at such a thing, and that to let blessed babies go about without names for months was enough to ruin them for life. I don't know why anyone wouldn't name their baby for months, but I also don't know why this would ruin their life either. So the entire family was trying to think of the perfect name for the new baby, the first girl. And then this happens:

Meanwhile dear Mrs. Bird lay in her room, weak, but safe and happy, with her sweet girl baby by her side and the heaven of motherhood opening again before her. Nurse was making gruel in the kitchen, and the room was dim and quiet. There was a cheerful open fire in the grate, but though the shutters were closed, the side windows that looked out on the Church of Our Saviour, next door, were a little open.

Suddenly a sound of music poured out into the bright air and drifted into the chamber. It was the boy choir singing Christmas anthems. Higher and higher rose the clear, fresh voices, full of hope and cheer, as children's voices always are. Fuller and fuller grew the burst of melody as one glad strain fell upon another in joyful harmony:—

"Carol, brothers, carol,
Carol joyfully,
Carol the good tidings,
Carol merrily!
And pray a gladsome Christmas
For all your fellow-men:
Carol, brothers, carol,
Christmas Day again."

One verse followed another, always with the same sweet refrain:—

"And pray a gladsome Christmas
For all your fellow-men:
Carol, brothers, carol,
Christmas Day again."

Mrs. Bird thought, as the music floated in upon her gentle sleep, that she had slipped into heaven with her new baby, and that the angels were bidding them welcome. But the tiny bundle by her side stirred a little, and though it was scarcely more than the ruffling of a feather, she awoke; for the mother-ear is so close to the heart that it can hear the faintest whisper of a child.

She opened her eyes and drew the baby closer. It looked like a rose dipped in milk, she thought, this pink and white blossom of girlhood, or like a pink cherub, with its halo of pale yellow hair, finer than floss silk.

"Carol, brothers, carol,
Carol joyfully,
Carol the good tidings,
Carol merrily!"
The voices were brimming over with joy.

"Why, my baby," whispered Mrs. Bird in soft surprise, "I had forgotten what day it was. You are a little Christmas child, and we will name you 'Carol'—mother's Christmas Carol!"

"What!" said Mr. Bird, coming in softly and closing the door behind him.

"Why, Donald, don't you think 'Carol' is a sweet name for a Christmas baby? It came to me just a moment ago in the singing, as I was lying here half asleep and half awake."

"I think it is a charming name, dear heart, and sounds just like you, and I hope that, being a girl, this baby has some chance of being as lovely as her mother;"—at which speech from the baby's papa Mrs. Bird, though she was as weak and tired as she could be, blushed with happiness.

And so Carol came by her name.

Now after this, every single minute we spend with Carol reminds me of a character from a Dickens novel, Little Nell. Little Nell was perfect and so is Carol:

Perhaps because she was born in holiday time, Carol was a very happy baby. Of course, she was too tiny to understand the joy of Christmas-tide, but people say there is everything in a good beginning, and she may have breathed in unconsciously the fragrance of evergreens and holiday dinners; while the peals of sleigh-bells and the laughter of happy children may have fallen upon her baby ears and wakened in them a glad surprise at the merry world she had come to live in.

Her cheeks and lips were as red as holly-berries; her hair was for all the world the color of a Christmas candle-flame; her eyes were bright as stars; her laugh like a chime of Christmas-bells, and her tiny hands forever outstretched in giving.

Such a generous little creature you never saw! A spoonful of bread and milk had always to be taken by Mamma or nurse before Carol could enjoy her supper; whatever bit of cake or sweetmeat found its way into her pretty fingers was straightway broken in half to be shared with Donald, Paul, or Hugh; and when they made believe nibble the morsel with affected enjoyment, she would clap her hands and crow with delight.

"Why does she do it?" asked Donald thoughtfully. "None of us boys ever did."

"I hardly know," said Mamma, catching her darling to her heart, "except that she is a little Christmas child, and so she has a tiny share of the blessedest birthday the world ever knew!"

But in our next chapter we are ten years from the events in the first chapter, and though Carol is still that perfect child, always giving her gifts to the neighbor children even before it was time to eat their Christmas dinner kind of thing, she is not quite the merry child she used to be:

But Christmas in the Birds' Nest was scarcely as merry now as it used to be in the bygone years, for the little child, that once brought such an added blessing to the day, lay month after month a patient, helpless invalid, in the room where she was born. She had never been very strong in body, and it was with a pang of terror her mother and father noticed, soon after she was five years old, that she began to limp, ever so slightly; to complain too often of weariness, and to nestle close to her mother, saying she "would rather not go out to play, please."

Most of the book from here is about Carol wanting to give a Christmas party for the Ruggles children, nine children from a poor working class family living next to the Birds that Carol can watch from her window every day. As for the rest, well you can probably figure that out without even reading the book, but go ahead and read it anyway. Especially if you are a fan of Little Nell. Happy reading.