Rating: 3/5

Caveat: Have just read the 1992 edition and learned (after the event) Helen Fisher has updated this extensively in light of new evidence

As a school sixth-former I was lucky enough to attend a series of extra-curricular classes on comparative religion and alternative approaches to ethics. Whilst I was enthralled to learn for the fist time the tenets of the world’s major religions - plus what the Stoics, Epicureans and Hedonists had to say; there was a problem. The classes were taught by a dye-in-the-wool Christian. As a result, whatever ideas we examined, the conclusion was always that they were inferior to Christianity. ‘Christianity is the answer now what’s the question?’ At certain points in Helen Fisher’s book I felt the same way. Her haste in concluding that monogamy is the ‘most natural’ way for our species to live let down what was an otherwise interesting and informative book.

The monogamy hard sell starts with Fisher speculating that our australopithecine ancestors (probably, not definitely) would have been better off in exclusive sexual relationships because their bipedalism meant that the females’ hands would have been devoted almost entirely to the need to carry or hold infants. Dependence on a single male partner for the period of the offspring’s infancy was ‘obviously’ the way these creatures solved this problem. The australopithecines existed, incidentally, around four million years ago, so no soft tissue (and very few fossils) survive to provide clues re their reproductive anatomy, nor would the comparisons Fisher makes between modern chimpanzee lifestyles and those of the australopithecines bear much scrutiny – the evolutionary timescales of the two species being separated by millions of years.

It must be admitted that the book was written in 1992. Ideas in this area have moved along a great deal since. Yet, Fisher does know about and briefly refer to sperm competition – cited today as a pointer to promiscuity. However, she makes nothing of it, not factoring it into her arguments either for or against her case for monogamy being natural. 

I did enjoy the author’s ethological perspective, particularly her comparisons of what other creatures get up to in order to cheat on their primary partner. Disappointingly she didn’t look at the biological strategies of creatures like dolphins who don’t fit her monogamous model. Like humans, dolphin infants take years to grow up, presumably because of their large brain sizes. Mothers are supported by the other females in the pod as well as a subset of the males who protect the female group - often from other unattached males. Dolphins demonstrate a successful social approach to rearing dependents without resorting to exclusive pairing. She also cites Chimpanzee behaviour far more than that of the far more promiscuous and matriarchal bonobos. Dutch primatologist, Frans de Waal, is worth quoting here: ‘Just imagine if we had never heard of chimpanzees and had known bonobos first. We would at present most likely believe that early hominids lived in female-centred societies, in which sex served important social functions and in which warfare was rare of absent.’

In the penultimate chapter of Anatomy of Love, Fisher looks at the pairing habits of !Kung tribespeople in the Kalahari and the Mehinaku in the Amazon basin. Although she fails to discuss tribes like the Canela or the Mosui - who operate perfectly viable, and entirely non-monogamous, sexual cultures - I enjoyed this part of the book most. Amongst both peoples, whilst there are one-to-one marriages, multiple extra-marital affairs are common, if not ubiquitous. Discovery of an affair can result in a major ruckus – even divorce - yet at some level all members of these tribes must know their partner is ‘getting up to something somewhere with someone’. Fisher combines these observations with others about the frequency of divorce, particularly amongst people of reproductive age with less than two offspring – what she cites, based on statistical analysis, as an evolutionary ‘four year itch’. What she gives us is a different version of ‘monogamy’, one based on not-very-exclusive pair-bonding. One that its participants are half aware of, but prefer not to confront. This is a model of monogamy I had not particularly considered before, and I am grateful to Helen Fisher for introducing me to it in Anatomy of Love.