Rating: 2/5

The book is interesting because it gives you a different point of view than what you were used to, at least for those of us who have read biographies of Hitler by authors who have a fantastic ability to ignore homoeroticism.

However, the greatest sin committed by Lothar Machtan is to CLAIM that Hitler was homosexual. I know I'm asking a lot for a book published in the early 2000s by a man who was born in the 50s, but it seems that both he and the scholars who refuse to speculate about the sexuality of historical figures forget that sexuality can be a spectrum and that not everything boils down to gay and straight.

In the first place is Angelica Raubal. During a part of the book I wondered how the author would adress the issue of the niece, because however you interpret it, it's quite obvious that Adolf Hitler had quite strong feelings towards his niece, as disgusting as it may sound. How far this relationship "deepened" will always be a mystery to historians and non-historians alike. And if Hitler over-dramatized his mourning for Angela as another excuse not to commit to a serious relationship (as Lothar Machtan theorizes) it's something I'm willing to accept because the Austrian politician has a track record as a two-faced actor. However, the author disappointed me a lot when he simply said that this was not the dramatic story of a couple, but of a love triangle! between Emil Maurice, Angela Raubal and Hitler. Again, I am willing to accept that he may have been attracted to his driver (I'm open minded what can I say), but, leaving aside the fact that it all sounds like a stupid soap opera, it's lazy to simply boil down the whole Angela Raubal affair to that, when almost all Hitler biographers have agreed that it was a complex issue. Lothar Machtan should have treated the dictator's attraction to Angela and his chauffeur as separate issues. But he didn't do that because it didn't fit with his sensationalist theory.

Another mistake is assuming information...or believing that we readers are fools. For example, Röhm, Hafenstaengl and Kurt Ludecke tried to blackmail Hitler with information that could endanger the leadership of the Third Reich. And what was that information? We don't know, we will never know, but Machtan says it was about the dictator's sexuality. It could be anything, for example more details about his relationship with Angela. After all, Otto Strasser didn't blackmail, but spread rumors about Hitler fetishes and sexual anomalies, especially towards his niece.

It’s a pity that the book has been written in this way, because many things can be said about the sexuality of this particular dictator and his relationships with some men (Rudolf Hess, Albert Speer, Kubizek…). In general his relationships with men needed to be studied more closely. But instead Machtan gave us a book like this, written to get as much attention as possible. Something he got because if I'm not mistaken it was a hit in Germany (back in the early 2000's)