Rating: 5/5

This wonderful hybrid book by an Argentine intellectual begins with a look at the neoliberal order, neither condemning it nor praising it. 

At first it sounds like Sarlo is criticizing those willing to participate in a system where a limited amount of alternatives are endlessly repeated - in City, shopping malls, youth culture, video games - but she's not. (After all, what is a video game other than an attempt to try and beat a machine at its own game?) The boys in seedy video arcades are actually trying to gain victories over their placement within the machine. There may be no girls around, but they have a chance at understanding the political order at a much deeper level than a doctor or a lawyer or a professor. How is that even possible? Mainly for having no clear objective. (Wasn't that the main theme of Good Will Hunting, a punk janitor and townie who was actually more mathematically sophisticated than those situated within the system?) Same goes for young girls shopping global brands at the mall. There are few boys around, for good reason. They are seeking to participate in a world created by powerful institutions they are prohibited from entering. 

The best part of the book is where Sarlo explicates the place of art in this world. Whenever you hear a person say what art is, what it ought to be and what it is good for (everyone from Eliot to Franzen), you are merely hearing a person trying to place himself within it. The "sacred place" of art of the past was practiced for centuries by "a handful of men and a few exceptional women" who argued for it only so that it could be possible (as a substitute for religion, as elevated craftsmanship). Mass education arrived in the late 19th century. Art, history, and language education followed. Exemplars were named like religious figures. And out of the mass of humanity in a game where only a bare fraction ever really participated. 

But then true plurality as promised by 19th century democratic revolutions finally arrived post-1960s. Anyone can now participate in the art game. Alas, as a result, it is no longer sacred but a profane space of conflict where people take up positions in order to place their work. It seems like the market would make this process an equitable one (for it being a level playing field according to the laws of competition). But many refuse to recognize the cultural patrimony that exists which favors one kind of "artist" over another, while claiming, among other political motives, "the representation of those who have no voice, the defense of tradition or the discovering of the new, the construction of nationhood, or the search for beauty or justice." From the sociological view, these conceits are clearly fictional, hiding the true motives of those who want a share in power based on artistic creativity. 

Much has happened since this book was published in 1994. You can easily translate, however, discussions of "zapping" with your television clicker into "clicking and linking" through your computer. In other words, much of this book still applies. 
______________

This was a great find. I'd especially recommend it to anyone with an interest in Latin American politics and literature, or anyone who loves theory when written with clarity. Those who love Borges, she has also written very well about him too, with the same kind of themes addressed above. It looks like Sarlo is still active, making speeches at places like Berkeley on "post-pop political populism" as recently as November.