Rating: 3/5

I had heard of John Varley’s Titan through word of mouth online in some book discussions and book tube type channels and platforms promoting interesting science fiction novels that were set in the year 2025. So, what better year than this year to try to read this one ?

While there are some thought-provoking concepts explored via some strong world building at points in Titan, there are also some glaring issues I had with this novel that rendered this novel only a three-star experience. 

Cirocco (Rocky) Jones is the captain of Ringmaster, a spaceship that is traversing through space and approaching Saturn. Ultimately, the ship is captured by an unknown entity, and rendered unconscious. After regaining consciousness, she and the other members of the crew, who are split up, must figure out and explore this unknown place to understand what it is and how to get back. One of the problems initially are the odd manifestations and thoughts experienced by Cirocco and others. 

Even though the books are very different, certain aspects early on reminded me a little of VanderMeer’s Annihilation. The crew not only is disoriented, but experience strange thoughts, as this entity can seemingly tap into their conscience. It is difficult for the crew to try to wrap their brains around what is taking place, so they set off to explore and discover. We mostly follow Cirocco during this exploration of the area. 

I felt like the world building and the exploration of the region, and just the science part of the novel, was very fascinating. They come to find that there are several creatures that inhibit the area. One of the more unique parts of the novel is when they encounter a centaur-like alien known as Titanides and realize they can communicate with them via singing. There are also “angels” , human-like creatures who often battle with the Titanides. So, the science aspects of the novel were interesting. 

All this said, I had some issues with elements of the book. The characters are serviceable, but mostly generic and bland, and interchangeable. Some parts of the dialogue and exchanges were lackluster and cringe too. There was also an overemphasis and a fixation with giving us a behind-the-scenes look at the physical relationships between characters and all the drama about it, and this just seemed so out of place and unnecessary. I found it quite jarring that only a few pages in and having that the focus of the novel. It was a big distraction, and gave the novel a cheesy feel to it.
 
And the ending really fell flat too. All this intrigue for the big reveal only to have it end that way. Suffice to say, the ending certainly was a letdown. 

So, if you can get past the cringe and ridiculous and unnecessary parts of the book, what is left is a pretty interesting world-building experience. There are two more books in Gaea series, but I’m not that anxious to continue on.