Rating: 3/5

”As my plane took off one fall morning from Hanoi. I looked out of my window and felt a sense of peace and closure. …I had seen Vietnam, the land of two million war dead, become once again the land of the living. And I was taking back with me not the deafening explosions of weapons, but the gentle sound of the monsoon rain.”
It has been six years since I went to Vietnam to build a house with Habitat for Humanity. Vietnam is not a country that I had planned to visit, but the opportunity presented itself and so I went. I am glad I did. I learned a lot including that there are places hotter than Virginia in August. I also met some wonderful people and ate some incredible food.

Since that trip I have continued to read and learn about the country, the people and the war that caused such disruption in Vietnam and the United States.

This book was a good addition to my reading list. Elliott tells the story of her family in the context of the French occupation, the split into two countries, the involvement with the United States and then the end of the war between North and South. She had a lot to cover which explains why her memoir is almost 500 pages. I now have a much better understanding of how the Vietnamese came to be warring against themselves. I will need to watch the Ken Burns documentary on Vietnam to help me understand how the US got so involved.

This was a very scholarly work about a family who took government service seriously. I wonder how this story would be told by someone whose family was middle or working class. I think Elliott has many advantages because of her family’s service to the state. However, I realize that once Communism won the war, her family suffered because they weren’t part of the proletariat.

The whole time I was reading this book a particular song kept repeating in my head. It is part of the reason that my quotation above is from the last paragraph of the book. Scott Ainsley is a wonderful singer and this is his composition. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BT9Ps... I am glad there is peace again in Vietnam.