Rating: 2/5

What's a juvenile horror series without at least one book set at a summer camp? Scream Around the Campfire is that book for the Shadow Zone series, a story that's more coming-of-age than traditional horror. Eleven-year-old twins Gina and Frank Giardelli are sent to Camp Slumbering Pines in Washington's Cascade Mountains after their mother takes a trip to visit her sister. Frank likes the idea of hanging out with other kids at camp, but Gina wants no part of roughing it in the outdoors. Her bunkmates—Stacey, Linda, and Rebecca—have attended this camp for years, so Gina is the odd one out in their social circle. She wishes she could go home, but she's stuck here at least until her mother returns. It seems unlikely that Gina's experience at camp is going to improve.

 Socially isolated from her peers, Gina can't shake the feeling of being watched in the dark heart of the woods. Henry Creeley, the new owner of Camp Slumbering Pines, asks one of the counselors to tell all the campers the local legend of Big Foot, a species of huge, hairy humanoid said to have attacked a company of loggers many decades ago. The legend does nothing to ease Gina's mind, and her fears prove justified when a seven-foot-tall apeman grabs Gina and carries her away to a phosphorescent cave with a story painted on its walls, the story of the loggers and the Big Foot as seen from the perspective of the creatures. The Big Foot who abducted Gina, a youngster named Oak, speaks to her in English, but what he says is almost beyond belief.

 It's public knowledge that Mr. Creeley is planning a major expansion for Camp Slumbering Pines. Construction has begun on posh new buildings meant to attract wealthy campers, but massive machines digging up the forest are negatively impacting the Big Foot species, disrupting the line between reality and the Shadow Zone. Oak just wants to be left alone, but older Big Foot are ready to act violently to keep Mr. Creeley off their land. The only chance for peaceful mediation is Gina, but she has no clue how to dissuade Mr. Creeley from his expansion project. He's not going to believe her about the Big Foot, who meticulously stay out of public view, so why would he stop construction? Gina needs to convince a few other campers to believe her crazy story and help her bridge the communication gap between humans and the Big Foot, or this summer at Camp Slumbering Pines is going to end in tragedy.

 Like the other best Shadow Zone books, Scream Around the Campfire combines mildly scary elements with a story about growing up and learning who you are. Sleepaway camp is outside Gina's comfort zone; at first she puts in no effort to make friends, but in the heat of battle with supernatural creatures, she'll take allies wherever she can get them, even if they wouldn't be her first choice as friends. As Gina learns to enjoy camp, she also is figuring out how to feel comfortable in her own skin regardless of circumstances; she goes on to solve a dispute between humans and another species, and not just anyone is that resourceful. Scream Around the Campfire isn't as unpredictable or exciting as most of R.L. Stine's Goosebumps books, but it's above average for this series, and part of me wants to give it two and a half stars. This is the kind of story Shadow Zone excels at.