Rating: 5/5

A Book of Two Stories: One Very Classic Salinger and One Very Not

Raise High The Roof Beam, Carpenters is a short story by JD Salinger in very classic Salinger style—it has all of the alliteration, the vibes, lush backstory, abundant dialogue, and use of enclosed spaces.

Raise High centers on The Glass Family. During World War II, Buddy, at the behest of his sister Boo Boo, attends his brother Seymour’s wedding. Only there is a catch. Seymour is a no show to his own wedding! As the guests depart, Buddy hops into a nearly full cab. As the other wedding guests don’t recognize him, they begin to bad mouth Seymour.

Throughout Salinger’s published works on The Glass Family, there is constant mention of “It’s a Wise Child”, a radio program which propelled all of The Glass Children into fame.

“I said that from the time Seymour was ten years old, every summa-cum-laude Thinker and intellectual men’s-room attendant in the country has been having a go at him. I said it might be different if Seymour had just been some nasty little high-I.Q. showoff. I said he hadn’t ever been an exhibitionist. He went down to the broadcast every Wednesday night as though he were going to his own funeral.”

In many ways, The Glass Children are treated as though they are zoo creatures. The masses, with their faces mashed against the glass, catch glimpses of them, and are convinced that they “know” them. Is this autobiography for Salinger, with the masses trying to test his wits and attempt to outshine or outsmart him while he just wants to be a poet?

 Seymour: An Introduction

What an ironic title! Because this is Seymour’s eulogy or rather his ending.

This story isn’t typical of Salinger. It is told in a stream of consciousness style with obnoxiously long paragraphs and doesn’t ring with that beautiful dialogue which is quintessential Salinger.

If you have ever seen an interview with Donna Tartt, that’s what this book was like—the ramblings of an intellectual.

However, this was Salinger’s last sanctioned published work, and it is essentially a send-off letter, explaining his writing philosophy. “When was writing ever your profession? It’s never been anything but your religion.” “Were most of your stars out? Were you busy writing your heart out?”

Of course, Salinger gets his nods into his great influences: F. Scott Fitzgerald and Henry David Thoreau. “I have a good idea though, that I haven’t been presenting a living portrait of the Sheik of Arabee.” On page 94 of The Great Gatsby includes some of the lyrics of the song, The Sheik of Arabee. “It was the height of the spring thaw, a beautiful sunny day, and I was feeling frankly, just a trifle Thoreauish (a real treat for me, because after thirteen years of country living I’m still a man who gauges bucolic distances by New York City blocks).” And I would like to think of Salinger writing away somewhere in his little cabin alongside Walden Pond where “a place has been prepared for each of us in his own mind.”“

The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent):
Hardcover Text – $35 on Thriftbooks

Connect With Me!
Blog Threads BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango