Rating: 4/5

For some reason, I found this book slower going than The Believing Heart, which is the first book in the set. It seemed more cerebral and had fewer illustrative stories to tug at my heart. And yet, as I thumbed through it after reading it, I noted the many insights that were new to me and quotes that I very much loved. For instance, I had never realized that "if we decline the Savior's invitation to let him carry our sins, and then satisfy justice by ourselves, we will not yet have experienced the complete rehabilitation that can occur thorough a combination of divine assistance and genuine repentance." Paying for sins is not the same as repenting, which moves us to become something better. Justification is not the same as sanctification. 

I loved the comparison between the animal sacrifice of the Old Testament and the sacrifice of a broken heart of the New Testament. In the first we offer a possession; in the second we offer our own heart. Also, "one who offers an unblemished animal, the firstling of a flock, acts in similitude of the Father's sacrifice of his unblemished, firstborn Son. By contrast, one who offers his own broken heart acts in similitude of the Son's terribly personal sacrifice of himself." 

The book explores beautifully the reasons for trials and tribulations and heartbreak in life as necessary elements in our growth. As Neal Maxwell is quoted in the book, "the soul is like a violin string--it makes music only when it is being stretched." Besides detailing the "mortal bitterness" in life, Elder Hafen explains how the "Atonement somehow releases the forces of grace, through which the Savior empowers and endows us with strength, capacity, hope, and other spiritual gifts we may need." One of my favorite chapters was about hope and how we reconcile the gap between "what is real and the ideal, between what is and what ought to be." Hope is a very real gift to help us deal with our own sense of personal inadequacy--neither erasing the gap by lowering standards and throwing out guilt, nor dishonestly ignoring the gap and pretending to be better than we are, but rather balancing with peace and patience the disparity as we slowly work toward narrowing what is with what can be in a process of time.