Rating: 3/5

Legendary for his YA novels—including the Unwind dystology, the Skinjacker and Arc of a Scythe trilogies, Challenger Deep, and Bruiser—Neal Shusterman was an author for years before rising to international prominence. What Daddy Did (later retitled Chasing Forgiveness) is one of his early offerings, and it's unlike almost anything else he ever wrote. The book takes a nearly documentary approach to a family destroyed by a crime most people could not imagine occurring in their own family. The story is somewhat fictionalized, but the major events happened to the real Preston Scott. 

 Life hasn't been easy lately at Preston's house. His parents, who fell in love in their mid-teens, have ferocious arguments that scare Preston and his little brother, Tyler. Will they divorce like Preston's friend Russ Talbert's parents plan to? The situation deteriorates from 1982 to 1984, at which point the married couple is about ready to call it quits. They put their house on the market and start discussing where the boys will live. Preston doesn't want to see it end like this, and secretly, neither does his father: Danny Scott has a few tricks to persuade his wife that their union can be saved. If only he can convince her to listen.

 When Danny's wife stands firm that she wants a divorce, his demeanor changes. Preston senses the desperation around his father, the crazy impulsiveness. His wife's hints that she's in a relationship with another man infuriate Danny. Is she sneaking behind his back with Weavin' Warren Sharp, professional football wide receiver? How could she trash their marriage before giving it one last try? Danny grows more erratic in the weeks leading up to March of '84, and Preston is afraid of him. But he doesn't fathom the depths of his father's psychosis until the police show up one evening at Preston's maternal grandparents' house, where the boys often stay, with news that shatters any semblance of a normal life: Preston's mother is dead. His father shot her.

 The shock of the first few days is a fevered nightmare. Preston is barely aware what's happening around him. His mother antagonized his father for years, goading him to terminate the marriage, but she didn't deserve to die, and Preston and Tyler don't deserve to lose their mother. Preston's grandparents absorb the blow better than anyone; they've known Danny most of his life, and natural as it would be to loathe him for killing their daughter, they don't turn on him. No one knows if his legal defense is true, that he lost his mind and has no recollection of shooting his wife, yet the victim's parents extend him the benefit of the doubt, testifying on his behalf at trial. Preston's mind is a quagmire of emotion impossible to navigate right now, but he, too, offers to speak under oath in support of his father. Months of legal proceedings result in a plea deal for Danny to spend five years in prison. Preston is tormented, unsure if he did the right thing standing up for the accused or if he betrayed his own mother, but at least he can decompress for a bit now. He and Tyler have their grandparents, and as stable a life as possible without a mother or father.

 "People who spread rumors...like lies better than they like the truth. Don't trust anyone who spreads rumors."

 —Jason, What Daddy Did, P. 124

 We exhale along with Preston as the pressure ebbs. He, Tyler, and their grandparents move to a new neighborhood and school where they won't be known as the family struck by bloody tragedy. Preston makes friends and becomes interested in girls as he reaches his teen years. People find out his sordid family history, but it never derails him too badly. Danny's prison sentence, already short for a crime that had been tried as first- and second-degree murder, is commuted to two years, and a convicted killer is about to rejoin the family. Preston and Tyler visited frequently when Danny was in jail awaiting trial, and went to see him as often as possible in prison, but this will be the first time in years they've spent time around him with no strings attached. When Danny drives up to the house to find his sons outside waiting for him, there are tears and lots of volatile emotion that everyone tries to temper in the interest of making it through the moment. The consequences for Danny's crime are in the past as long as he doesn't violate parole, and he'll soon have a new job to support himself and his estranged kids, but feeling like a family again is more complicated. Preston was never able to fully ascertain what Tyler feels about the murder, but Preston is conflicted inside, even as he tries to mask it for fear of upsetting his father. Which person affected by the shooting truly has the longest road to recovery?

 "Life would be so much easier without people telling us what we're supposed to feel—what we're supposed to do. Life would be so much easier if everyone left us alone."

 —What Daddy Did, P. 179

 There are intense moments over the next few years, but they're minor compared to most novels of this sort. Neal Shusterman respects the quiet nature of Preston's coming to terms with his father's crime. He'll never know how culpable Danny actually was, but Preston has to live with helping dramatically reduce his sentence. If not for Preston and his grandparents, Danny could have gone to prison for life or faced execution. That burden of doubt will never completely ease for Preston. The pathway back to normality is relatively unspectacular, but Preston still isn't sure he's forgiven his father for that terrible Thursday in March of '84. Can he ever be certain he forgives Danny? In a winsome, painfully honest final chapter, Preston and his father confront their lingering doubts and come to terms with a trauma they'll never put behind them entirely. That's life, and partial resolution of our problems is the only reasonable goal. But it still can be a miracle.

 Preston hopes his parents won't divorce early on in What Daddy Did, but staying together ends up costing them more than he could have known. Dissolution of a marriage is sad, but necessary if continued proximity endangers a life. Preston at age eleven or twelve shouldn't be blamed for not wanting his mom and dad to split up; every child wants a stable home, and divorce undermines that. Preston's view on divorce at that time is thoughtful: "It's like going to the store and buying clothes, wearing them for years and years, then returning them and asking for your money back...A store won't buy back a pair of used jeans, so how come people can trade each other in, like it was nothing? If your only pair of jeans is torn, you get a needle and some thread, and you sew them up, right? Parents should be the same way." Divorce shouldn't be regarded lightly. If we put in the effort to mend torn garments, shouldn't we do that much more to fix broken relationships? Reconciling with a loved one is immeasurably more rewarding than casting them away and starting anew. But in the case of Preston's family, not divorcing ends up being so much worse. His mother dead, his father a shell of himself after doing time in prison, Preston has to decide if he's willing to accept Danny as his father, not just a man who moves in with his offspring until they grow up and leave home. What should forgiveness look like in Preston's situation? There's no schematic for doing it right, but Preston must figure out his feelings before he's too old for it to matter. You only get one childhood with your father.

 What Daddy Did is a subtle work, and it took time to grow on me. Neal Shusterman is usually the king of twists, but this book more resembles the gradual, wistful arc of an early Susan Beth Pfeffer novel than the wild thrills of Unwind. Preston's emotional reaction to his mother's death is not absent, but it isn't as raw as in Julius Lester's When Dad Killed Mom. I shed tears reading that novel, but wasn't so moved by What Daddy Did. What pushes me to round my two-and-a-half-star rating to three, and strongly consider the full three, is the poignancy that cloaks the story. Preston and Tyler's loss is profound, but all that's left to them is to move on. The years and decades will pass without their mother, and there won't ever be another day they don't have to cope with that. It's a burden the kids and Danny carry equally, but forgiveness can make it bearable. What Daddy Did is not a typical Neal Shusterman novel, but there's a lot to love about it, and I suspect I'll love it more over time. Stories that require years to fully settle into one's heart are often the best of all.