Rating: 4/5

Freud was liked a dogged detective on the track of a great crime, communicating his hunches and approximations and at last his final discovery to his best friend who may well have been in fact the criminal.”
His thesis is that all severe neurotics have been sexually seduced or otherwise traumatized in early childhood by a psychotic (but often perfectly socially adjusted) parent and in the process are violated, humiliated, and damaged”.
Freud shifted the interest of psychoanalysis tone pathogenic effects of fantasies, putting less emphasis on the pathogenic effects of real memories in repression. The ideal analytic patient has come to be a person without serious trauma in his childhood.”
A real memory demands some form of validation from the outside world — denial of those memories by others can lead to a break with reality, and a psychosis.”
To tell someone who has suffered the effects of a childhood filled with sexual violence that it does not matter whether his memories are anchored in reality or not is to do further violence to that person and is bound to have a pernicious effect.”
If Freud had not given up the seduction theory, he would never have created the Oedipus Complex leading to the creation of psychoanalysis as a science and a therapy.
One only succeeds in awakening the psychical trace of a precocious sexual event under the most energetic pressure of the analytic procedure, and against an enormous resistance. The memory must be extracted from them piece by piece and while it is being awakened they become prey to an emotion which is hard to counterfeit.”
Freud is here depicting a scene where a young girl accuses her father of having raped her, upon which the man begins to sob, acknowledging his guilt.”
Freud is was enraptured with Fliess during the most important years of his scientific development. The precise influence that Fliess exercised on Freud is impossible to construct.
The nose is regularly influenced by abnormal sexual satisfaction.
Granite does not ask whether her disturbances could have resulted from the reality of her accusations; instead he automatically assumes that her accusations are the result of her disturbances.”
Physical abuse often accompanies sexual abuse of a child. It is now common knowledge that sexual violence often ends in physical violence.”
If the mothers ignorance is one of the elements of the slander, the other is the extreme suggestibility of the child.”
He says of convicted rapists that they are often excellent family men.
The people accused of sexual assaults are usually what they call lucid lunatics, whose appetites and instincts dominate their will and punish them to the irresistible satisfaction of their morbid needs.
Sexual acts committed against children are very frequent, especially in highly populated areas and industrial centers. Those charged with this crime are often men of mature age or elderly men, and the age of the aggressor is almost always in inverse proportion to that of the victim. Education does not seem to be an inhibiting factor in the commission of this criminal act.”
Children living at home constitute a stimulus to evil acts. In our observations we have been struck by the large number of cases of incest that figure in them ….individuals with higher education has increased…
Children are vulnerable to these sexual attacks as early as age four. When they occur, parents would rather remain silent.”
He stresses the fact which the courts ignored, that sexual assaults, even when repeated over a long period of time, and frequently engaged in, are capable of leaving absolutely no trace.
The pain suffered by this unfortunate child surpasses the most atrocious punishment the mind is capable of imagining.
The denial was not total— somewhere these children kept their knowledge of the horrible crimes that had been committed on their bodies sealed off from the world.”
Freud was exposed to a literature attesting to the reality and frequency of sexual abuse in childhood (often occurring within the family); he witnesses autopsies at the Paris morgue performed on young victims of abuse.”
In 1905 Freud publicly retracted the seduction theory. Giving up his “erroneous” view allowed Freud to participate again in a medical society that had earlier ostracized him.”
The early traumas his patients had had the courage to face and report to him he was to later dismiss as the fantasies of hysterical women who invented stories and told lies.