Rating: 2/5

not great
with a few pecular biases and viewpoints

think of it as a crappy Thomas Kuhn, a dozen months or so before Thomas Kuhn

basically scientific discovery is more like zombies sleepwalking
and it's a bit like music, the artist doesn't know where his creativity flows from. and they aren't aware of the implications of their work.

Which seems more like a three page magazine article

---

The odd thing is Koestler was completely wrong about how widely read Copernicus' work was, which is pretty much the neatest thing about this book.

---

wiki

By then Copernicus's work was nearing its definitive form, and rumors about his theory had reached educated people all over Europe.

Despite urgings from many quarters, Copernicus delayed publication of his book, perhaps from fear of criticism—a fear delicately expressed in the subsequent dedication of his masterpiece to Pope Paul III. Scholars disagree on whether Copernicus's concern was limited to possible astronomical and philosophical objections, or whether he was also concerned about religious objections.

Successors

Despite the near universal acceptance later of the heliocentric idea (though not the epicycles or the circular orbits), Copernicus's theory was originally slow to catch on.

Scholars hold that sixty years after the publication of The Revolutions there were only around 15 astronomers espousing Copernicanism in all of Europe:

"Thomas Digges and Thomas Harriot in England; Giordano Bruno and Galileo Galilei in Italy; Diego Zuniga in Spain; Simon Stevin in the Low Countries; and in Germany, the largest group—Georg Joachim Rheticus, Michael Maestlin, Christoph Rothmann (who may have later recanted), and Johannes Kepler."

Additional possibilities are Englishman William Gilbert, along with Achilles Gasser, Georg Vogelin, Valentin Otto, and Tiedemann Giese.

.......

Arthur Koestler, in his popular book The Sleepwalkers, asserted that Copernicus's book had not been widely read on its first publication.

This claim was trenchantly criticised by Edward Rosen,[s] and has been decisively disproved by Owen Gingerich, who examined nearly every surviving copy of the first two editions and found copious marginal notes by their owners throughout many of them. Gingerich published his conclusions in 2004 in The Book Nobody Read.