Rating: 5/5

This is a book very close to my heart, and in my top ten of my all-time favourite classic children's books. I first read this when I was 8 or 9, and have re-read it many times since. In fact my copy is looking decidedly battered and worse for wear (you always know you're on to a good book when the cover threatens to fall off). In many ways this is an underrated novel of E. Nesbit, and I will readily admit it is not one of her best. Nonetheless, I still love it more than 'The Railway Children', 'The Treasure Seekers', etc, with perhaps the exception of 'The Story of the Amulet' (the sequel to 'Five Children and It'), which comes a very close second.

The story concerns three children, two brothers (Gerald and Jimmy), and their sister, Cathy. They are on holiday, away from their parents (don't all the best adventures happen on these types of occasions?), and staying in Cathy's boarding school under the supervision of the French schoolmistress, who sits around looking wistful. To break the monotony of the boarding house, they decide to explore the local countryside, and get hopelessly lost. They come across a hole in a hedge which leads to an underground passage, which itself leads them into a beautiful garden with an ornate castle at its centre. The garden is seemingly deserted, and the feeling of magic grows as they come to the entrance of a maze. Following a scarlet thread, which brings them to the maze's epicentre, they discover a sleeping princess, who Jimmy wakens with a smacker on her cheek (Gerald ought to have done this as he was the eldest, but he chickened out). After providing a feast for them in the castle (bread and cheese) the princess turns out not to be a princess after all, but a girl named Mabel. Nonetheless she does possess a magic ring...

'The Enchanted Castle' is a very episodic, with the children having different adventures in each chapter. What joins the chapters together to a unified whole is the enchanted ring. Through its powers they can become invisible and make wishes. They help the local policeman catch a burglar, make the statues in the garden come alive, and help the French schoolteacher find her long lost love. The wishes they make also quite naturally get them into all sorts of scrapes, including getting the ring stuck on their finger, growing too tall in 'Alice in Wonderland' style, and making inanimate objects come alive into 'Uglie-Wuglies', more terrifying than it sounds. Throughout all this, Nesbit writes in her typically relaxed, natural style, and her characters, while not well-rounded, talk and act like real children (albeit from 1907). It is this inherent realism that makes the magical elements seem so real. Special mention should also go to H. R. Millar, who illustrated the original book with evocative line drawings, effectively capturing the main elements of the story. In short, I can't praise this book highly enough. As the tattered state of my personal copy can testify, I love it to bits.