Rating: 4/5

New York, the early 1970's. The elite Special Investigative Unit (SIU), charged with fighting drug crimes, fresh off their public relations success of "The French Connection", is starting to have a few problems. It seems the detectives are using illegal wiretaps to find dope dealers and, when they cannot make a righteous bust, have a nasty habit of taking the money and splitting it amongst the various partners and upper brass.

The Knapp Commission on police corruption, formed after patrolman Frank Serpico made public the run-of-the-mill graft in the lower ranks of the New York Police Department, is still holding hearing. There is unease in the department.

That is when SIU detective Bob Leuci begins having second thoughts, and agrees to wear a wire to meetings with corrupt lawyers and Mafia types in hopes of arresting them.

But all the members of the SIU are all compromised, and so the unit begins to fall like a house built of cards.

Price of the City is a non-fiction book which details the angst of a cop turned informant. He feels guilty about turning on his partners. But everybody has done something crooked, including this cop.

There is a lot of angst in this book. Partner versus partner. Departmental brass versus lesser members of the force. An officer's will to do what's morally right versus his loyalty to his former partners. There is mucho, beaucop angst.

The book is a bit of a slog. The transitions between narrative and flashback scenes are not always smooth, and those flashback scenes sometime grow into other flashback scenes or more explanatory exposition.

But there are numerous amusing anecdotes, such as the narcotics stakeout devolved into the narcotics officers watching as stolen goods of a hijacked truck were hidden inside the location of interest, only for the hijackers to be caught by patrolmen who then proceed to let the rest of the department know there are 450 stolen TVs there for the taking. The narcotics boys are not amused as their bust is compromised by a line of police officer-owned station wagons removing over 100 TVs from the scene.

The book is OK. It's more interesting if read in conjunction with Serpico by Peter Maas