Rating: 5/5

Deirdre and Desire, the third book in The Six Sisters series, is better than the first, and far better than the second. Deirdre is a red head (her older sisters, Minerva was dark haired, and Annabelle was a blond. One wonders about the physical features of the Amitage parents. They are described as a hunt happy reverend and a hypochondriac mother, but physically they are "middle-aged." In any case having married off his two older daughters to handsome, wealthy men, the Reverend Charles Armitage decides to do the same for his third beautiful daughter. He decides on wealthy Lord Harry Desire, and sends his third daughter back to Lady Godolphin for her "season" in London. Minerva after all found Lord Sylvestor Comfrey there, and Annabelle married a friend of his Peter, Lord Brabbington, at no expense to her family. 
Deidre however does not want to be treated like chattel and vows to marry only for love. Unfortunately pickings are slim, and she decides to go for Guy Wentworth, a sleazy character who first counted her oldest sister Minerva until she found out the source of his money, "black ivory" was the slave trade. She outright rejects him, and he also tries to lure Annabelle, after her marriage with Lord Brabbington appears to be in name only, but her father "hunts" him out of the area. Back once again (he seems determined to be the villain in all the novels) to visit his mother who has a mansion in the same village, he is out to get revenge on the Armitage clan for the indignity and pain he suffered from the father. However, he is leery of going with her too openly, so the two meet in secret. Lord Harry, who is madly in love with Deidre has people watching what is going on and is able to foil most of Wentworth's scheming. Wentworth gets together with an equally disreputable friend, Silas Dubois (one of the nasty men who planned to ruin Minerva because she didn't approve of the loose morals of the ton), who wishes to keep Harry from inheriting Mr. Blewett, his uncle's fortune because he is second in line for it. The plot becomes very exciting with attempted murder, real murder, robbery and the appearance of Lord Harry Desire seducing the gullible Deidre by biting her. However since Deirdre was compromised, she is forced to marry the handsome, rich, adoring Harry, who she herself is madly in love with. 
An original and highly entertaining plot to fit in the series. Let's hope the trend continues.