Rating: 3/5

Re No Gentle Persuasion - Well as Ms. Pargeter couldn't resist an abusive H, it seems Kay Thorpe can't resist a man who cheats. I have mixed feelings about most of her books. KT is a good writer and her stories usually have a decent amount of tension but her dilemma's never focus on if the H is faithful or the OW is for real- he isn't and she is. 

 Most of her plots have undercurrents that are a treatise on the h being able to accept a marriage where is she very materially well off, and the H is probably fond of her, and definitely in lust with her body and skillz, but he will never be a one woman man. In short, most KT subplots are the h coming to an acceptance that the man she is with will be unfaithful, and most times the h decides that as long as she doesn't see it, she won't have anything to worry about. 

On one hand I am amazed that she is able to write very convincingly of the h's acceptance of marital infidelity, but on the other it always makes me very leery of KT book's. 

After all I am gadding about HPlandia for a pink fuzzy HEA glow and a few adult beverages with maybe a cookie, not looking for a dissection of the marriages of the rich and famous and the tradeoffs that have to be made by the ladies who enter into them. 

NGP is the perfect example of KT's views on faithfulness between partners. Yet in this one it isn't the H that I really don't like - he is just doing what an HP H does. It the h who pretty much drives me to the bottle (although if you are doing the drinking game on this one, one drink for every time the H rips the h's clothes off will have you loaded by chapter 5) cause she is just SO COLOSSALLY TSTL. 

 I have never wanted to reach into the pages of a book and use my skillet more - this girl needed help fast. I had to admire the H tho, he played her like a Stradivarius and the man had a truly AMAZING amount of stamina - which I guess was no problem for him since his drive was based upon a woman's looks and with all the lovely ladies around him, he pretty much found an inexhaustible resource (sorta sad his libido could't be bottled, the world's energy demands would be solved for the next several millennia.) 

The story starts with the h meeting the H as he is coming out her dad's office. Apparently dear old dad has been "borrowing" company funds to make some off the book investments and he got caught. The H plans to have him arrested after the weekend. The h decides to sacrifice herself on the altar of filial devotion and tracks the H down to offer her body if he won't arrest the dad and will give him 3 weeks to realize his investment and return the money.

The H knows a hot babe when he sees one and wants a sample on tap so he grabs her and rushes her off to bed, only to be thwarted by an expected phone call. The h is finally realizing what a bad idear this was and was leaving when he offers to meet her terms if she will go to Rome with him. Turns out that call was from a friend informing the H that his mistress of two years has been cheating on him and married another man cause he would't marry her. He still expects bedroom service but she has to go with him to fulfill it. She wavers but he threatens prison again and she caves.

When the H picks her up to leave, he decides he doesn't like her drab dress and rips it off of her. She changes and they have an almost scene before the H leaves for his meeting. He returns and has her dress in a dress that would make a burlesque dancer blush. He then parades her at a party in front of his old GF and the h finally catches on to what he is doing. They return to the hotel and then he rapes her. 

Okay, technically she consented when she went on the trip with him, but she really did not want to do it and the H knew it so coercion is the least of it. Naturally she has been chaste and so it is not the greatest moment ever. The h is attracted but has a pretty impressive will and refuses to give the H any response, this makes him more violent - and then the penny drops. 

The next morning the H is really apologetic and nice and the h BELIEVES him. (I was banging my OWN head at this point). He tells her he is madly in lurve, she was a pure and virtuous girl who sacrificed herself for her father and he feels bad, cause he was going to let daddy dearest off with a warning and a repayment but thought to teach the h a lesson. Now however, he has besmirched her innocence and he wants to make her next experience better, also he wants marry her. 

They go back to bed and in a post coital haze the h agrees to marry him. He whisks her off for the ceremony and then off to Venice we go with only one or two ripped garments left in the wake. They get to Venice and the h discovers the H needed to marry her to foil an arranged marriage instigated by his grandfather.

The H's mum ran off and married the H's father, his grandfather disowned the mum but held out the promise of reinstatement if the mum would return to Italy and the family and bring the H with her. His mum left his dad, took him and went back to the family fold - as a reward for her obedience the H's grandfather never spoke to her again altho they lived in the same palazzo. 

However the H's dad fought for custody and won, as the H is an English citizen and not an Italian one. Because he is a direct grandson and not a cousin, the grandfather wants to leave him his estates (KT always manages to get the feudal in there somewhere - I don't think she can justify her chauvinistic H's without it) but felt his English father diluted his blood and so he wants the H to marry an Italian. The H wants revenge for the misery of his mum and so brings the very English h home as his wife. 

He has no care or concern that the h will have to learn what is essentially a full time job running the entire family's households over multiple houses and estates - she is 23 years old, doesn't speak Italian and has to manage multiple staffs in a family that is culturally very opposite and different from her own. The H's GF insists on a full church wedding and the h is having some serious doubts but the H just keeps ripping her clothes off and fool that she is, she just keeps caving. 

Finally the mistress shows up at a family party and the h sees the H getting his groove on in the garden with aforesaid mistress. She makes the decision to just accept and keep quiet but gets into another fight with the H and thus there ANOTHER clothes ripping off incident. The H refrains from rape this time and they manage to patch things up, but the h really doesn't want to live in Venice, his cousin is better suited for the role and the H (who deliberately omitted all of this when he asked her to marry him) is pretty much only focused on his revenge.

Then the GF wants the h to leave the country, he tells the h that the H was with the mistress the day before, and the h finally figures out why the H's behavior the night before puzzled her. Since she had told the H that she did not want him to be coming from the mistress and going to her, she immediately packs her bags and goes back to England.

The dad tries to get her to understand that men just cheat because the have too, but the h is having none of it - until the H shows up of course and we cue the Stradivarius and hunt around for the rag bag to deposit the remains of yet more torn off clothes. The H swears he loves her, he is only going to look and be tempted by other hot women but he wants to stay with her. The h is in a lust fog again and happily agrees that she will learn to curb her jealousy and HEA.

All of the above was done in a very tasteful and elegant manner, but it was still tacit complicity for the H to run amok when the h is having a bad hair day or just because he is a bit tempted. When I was in my twenties and drank the kool-aid I actually believed the H when he said he loved her at the end. Now I am a cynical old bat and I laugh myself into tears when I think of how gullible the poor girl actually was. I can only guess that she was dropped multiple times as a baby or all the clothes tearing off removed some attached brain cells as well. 

Either way this one is definitely a book of interest - how much you believe, and how well you like the book are probably going to be entirely dependent on if you were drinking every time the h's clothing was ripped off.