Rating: 5/5

Plot: 10 (engrossing at all points and compelling in overall thrust)
Characters: 10 (complex and memorable)
Accuracy: 10 (thorough and detailed even with obscure details)

A genuinely great novel set in the later Roman Empire. It's a complicated setting to place a novel in since the open autocracy and religious fanaticism of the period doesn't endear it to the average reader. This book however, doesn't really focus on all that (though it certainly shows up) but instead tries to portray everyday life as it would have been experienced by those at the time. There are a lot of these slice-of-life stories set in the early empire and Republic. Very few attempt this for the later empire. It's great to see somebody try to delve into it.

The basic plot is the story of a young woman who disguises herself as a eunuch to escape an unwanted marriage and study medicine in Alexandria. So already we're given four unique elements: an underexplored era/setting (Ephesus, Alexandria, and Thrace in the 370s), a female perspective, an essentially eunuch perspective (since she's treated as such for most of the book), and a depiction of ancient medical techniques and theories. All of these elements are handled well and there is much development of the themes that arise naturally from them. I actually found the eunuch's perspective to be so compelling I almost wish they'd just gone with that. We hardly even get a woman's perspective after all, since she spends most of the book in disguise, and eunuchs are often her most compelling characters.

The book is structured in clearly demarcated sections. In fact, a lot of the time it feels like three loosely connected novels sharing the same lead. The book is divided by location: her time in Ephesus as a noble's daughter, her time studying medicine in Alexandria, and her time as an army doctor on the Danubian frontier. Each region features a completely different cast of characters, although there is a bit of overlap.

I was quite impressed that the book tends to avoid the cliched plot points that might be expected to appear. One confrontation I was particularly dreading as it would derail whatever direction the plot was taking, but it never appeared even though it seemed so obvious a final showdown would happen. I like being surprised in this way. At least when my surprise is due to dispensing with unnecessary plot formulae and not to incompetence and failure to properly signpost necessary plot details. About the only failing here is the insertion of a completely unnecessary romantic subplot that both feels forced and as cliched as any of the mistakes it avoids. Having read a number of Bradshaw's books at this point I feel this is a common failing in her novels. She has to hook everyone up with a happy romantic match, no matter the appropriateness of it to the plot. Charis' closest real comparison is Hypatia, who taught philosophy in Alexandria about twenty years after this novel, and in order to maintain the respect of the men who studied under her she had to remain ostentatiously celibate since any romantic attachments would have prevented her from having any position beyond that of housewife, mother, and obedient servant to her husband. Bradshaw's quite open about the immense misogyny of Roman society elsewhere in the book, but she conveniently ignores it when it comes time to wrap up the novel and settle her down happily ever after. It's not great.

But any problems about individual plotpoints pale in view of the immensity of the work. It tells a coherent story about a woman's journey through the late Roman empire and it does so with class and style. It feels like a lived life rather than just a collection of stray facts and an adventure narrative. We get to see an entire area of Roman life that we're otherwise unfamiliar with. That alone makes the book worth reading. Even better are the collection of entertaining characters and peripheral glances at major events of the time. By the end you feel almost as if you've spent some time living in this foreign but sometimes familiar world. It's masterfully done. Highly recommended.