Rating: 3/5

We're all going on a (pause) summer holiday. No more working for a week or two....

Or permanently because we make poor choices about accepting cordial invites from complete strangers. What is it about a glass of two of Prosecco on a warm summers afternoon that makes people so trusting of random strangers when they're on holiday? Perhaps we find some of our holiday locations so idealistic and romantic that it's like a fairy tale and so we'll merrily gad about, without a care in the world, believing that no harm can befall us. Yeah right pay attention people. 

Murder on the orient express? Amity Island in Jaws? Cabin Fever? The Beach? Any of these things ringing a bell? Whether you're enjoying some quiet time by the ocean, on a cruise or simply enjoying the back woods in butt-fuck nowhere with your drunken jock friends, beware YOU ARE NEVER FAR FROM A PSYCHO!

Ian McEwan likes to play on these kinds of fears and lets face it, with psychos aplenty roaming the highways and byways of our fair planet he is planting these little worry seeds in pretty fertile ground. The Comfort of Strangers is a warning to all overtly trusting day-trippers, euro-hounds and lovers of the city break.

At first I didn't have much interest in the two primary characters but by Chapter 4 I was, despite myself, really enjoying this book. Initially Mary and Colin seem smug and dull. They come across as vain and their relationship appeared to be based on neediness rather than love, like two whiny puppies pawing at each other for affection and attention. However the way they interface with their holiday environment (in a nameless place but descriptions suggest Venice) is how many people have experienced a foreign city. McEwan does an excellent job of capturing the tiredness, even despair you can sometimes feel when lost in a foreign place. That exact moment when a holiday ceases to be fun and becomes more like an endurance test. Enter the new friends; welcoming and there to lend a guiding hand. Or are they? As usual McEwan provides a twist in the tale. It's his literary raison d'etre after all. Better than On Chesil Beach but not as good as the Cement Garden.