Rating: 3/5

Monstrous, murky mixture maddens minds

Prolific author Larry Niven, famous for the Ringworld series and a lot more, has lived long enough to see pieces of his fictional worlds turn into reality. For me, his novels are “far out” and full of fantasy mixed with pieces of reality. “DREAM PARK” is no different. It is a mad collage of so many different things that it’s impossible to write a coherent review of it in the normal Goodreads review style. You’ve got to grok it in its fullness or don’t mess with it. How about a view of 2050 where for fun people enter into elaborate games created with actors, holograms, and computerized effects? Such games would last several days and participants could be “killed out”. Like modern videogame characters, they could come back another time. How days-long trips could be crammed into a building is not explained.

In 1980-81, the authors here anticipated cell phones, many-player video games with incredible graphics, and the Metaverse. Niven is still alive and I’ve got to hand it to him. Who else could have lumped cargo cults, zombies, sword fighting, a murder mystery, a bit of a love story, monsters, an atomic bomb, the wooden Spruce Goose (Howard Hughes’ giant airplane) together with spunky but now totally-outdated American dialogue and wisecracking style from old Hollywood movies? Whoa, dude! Who ever heard of people swearing with “drowned” and “drowning” instead of the more standard words beginning with ‘f’? There’s no predicting Larry Niven. 
 
 As an anthropologist I was amazed to find reasonable explanations of the phenomenon of cargo cults in Melanesia and even one of the famous leaders—Yali—of such belief systems, alongside totally inappropriate colonial generic words like “bwana” or “kimosabee”! The main point about the book is “Don’t take anything seriously!” It’s just entertainment and a kind of sci-fi roller coaster. It’s quite hard to get into because you don’t cotton onto what is going on right away, but if you get past the first 35 pages or so, you’ll be hooked.