Rating: 4/5

For my money, the first and lasts stories are best, the second and third only for Chandler purists. This is early Chandler, and rough in many places, but you can see him polishing parts of the stories and developing his unique style. 

1. Trouble is My Business - 3.5 Stars

The first story starts off a bit roughly and overwritten, but even in this early effort we can see the Chandler-to-be. Marvellous. 

 The tall one was grinning. He had his hat low on his forehead and he had a wedge-shaped face that ended in a point, like the bottom half of the ace of diamonds. He had dark moist eyes and a nose so bloodless that it might have been made of white wax. His gun was a Colt Woodsman with a long barrel and the front sight filed off. That meant he thought he was good. 

Colt Woodsman again. This appears quite often in this collection. 

Full size image here

Chandler's prose gets a bit tighter and smoother in Chapter 4, but the complex plot and characters are not yet "trademark" Chandler. 

By chapter 7 we see most of the plot, but it still takes an info-dump by Marlowe to tie it all together. 

All-in-all a delicious portent of better work to come. 

2. Finger Man - 3 Stars

This scene in the casino and some of the parking lot reminds me almost exactly of the film version of The Big Sleep with John Ridley (Eddie Mars) and Lauren Bacall. 

Note: ALSO - Much of the initial cottage-photography nude-girl session in Killer in the Rain seems have been lifted from there directly into the superb The Big Sleep film version of 1946, screenplay by William Faulkner and Leigh Brackett

 Two croupiers stood near me with their heads together and their eyes looking side-wise. One moved a rake slowly back and forth beside the idle wheel. They were staring at the red-haired girl. 

She wore a high-cut black evening gown. She had fine white shoulders, was something less than beautiful and more than pretty. She was leaning on the edge of the table, in front of the wheel. Her long eyelashes were twitching. There was a big pile of money and chips in front of her.

The croupier leaned across the table and very carefully stacked her money and chips. He placed her bet for her on the red diamond. He placed his hand along the curve of the wheel. 

“If no one objects,” Canales said, without looking at anyone, “this is just the two of us.”  

Marlowe's gun, a long .38 with a six-inch barrel.

Full size image here 

Unfortunately, the story bogs down in too many twists and false explanations. 

3. Goldfish - 3.5 Stars
Better than the second, but barely. Uneven pacing, a confused plot, repetitive dialogue that doesn’t always ring true, but a neat ending.

4. Red Wind - 4.5 Stars
Once this story gets going, you know it's the real thing. Early Chandler, but pure and clean. Great complex plot, good pacing, and the prose mostly smooth and effortless. Wonderful. 

Two beautiful quotes, indisputably Chandler:

 The old Levantine had a shop on Melrose, a junk shop with everything in the window from a folding baby carriage to a French horn, from a mother-of-pearl lorgnette in a faded plush case to one of those .44 Special Single Action six-shooters they still make for Western peace officers whose grandfathers were tough.  

and

 I went out of the bar without looking back at her, got into my car and drove west on Sunset and down all the way to the Coast Highway. Everywhere along the way gardens were full of withered and blackened leaves and flowers which the hot wind had burned. 

But the ocean looked cool and languid and just the same as ever. I drove on almost to Malibu and then parked and went and sat on a big rock that was inside somebody’s wire fence. It was about half-tide and coming in. The air smelled of kelp.  

.