Rating: 5/5

When disaster strikes, it is always good to be prepared for any type of emergency. Even if houses have an “Emergency Kit”, the question is whether the family knows how to use the materials properly. The SAS Survival Handbook is great for learning how to learn with equipment, or nothing but hands. SAS Survival Handbook, written by an ex-SAS, John ‘Lofty’ Wiseman, was written so that anyone can learn how to survive with nothing in any situation or climate. 

	Survival dates back to when the first man walked on earth searching for food. Survival brings common people back to their basic thoughts and instincts. In the book, Wiseman brings some focus about listening to instincts and letting the “inner caveman out”. Being in a survival situation is not ideal but being prepared can never hurt. Wiseman makes learning easy by separating sections that relate to each other so there is not confusion. With the author’s chapter-by-chapter topics, learning new material is easy.
	
	Topics that are focused on in the book are wide in variety. Reasons such as this make the book seem well organized. Wiseman focuses on topics such as setting up essentials, being mentally prepared, finding food, navigation, staying healthy, natural disasters, climates, and survival at sea. The author’s style helps comprehend the variety of topics. Wiseman uses a layering technique where he builds off of previous chapters. This is great for reading straight through because it reviews older material so it is not forgot. Just because chapters build does not mean information cannot be quick. For example, if I need to learn quickly how to reduce blood loss, I can look up the Health section where it goes deeper to what I am looking for. The information is simple and easy to understand. There are also many pictures that help. With these techniques, anyone can learn how to survive the worst situations.

If the reader does not believe that they would not benefit from this book because they would not read it, having a copy around cannot hurt since it covers topics varying widely. I would recommend this book to everyone. The reader does not need to be alone on an island for this information to be relevant. Blood loss is possible around the house where it needs to be dealt with immediately. I would also recommend this to everyone because I enjoyed reading it. Although some parts were gruesome, it is all part of life and survival. I found the information to be the perfect amount where it keeps attention and get the information through. Reading about how humans had to survive attracts me to human behavior and the will to live. If I were in a survival situation, I would just need Wiseman’s SAS Survival Handbook to live a long and healthy life.