Rating: 3/5

A ragbag collection of essays on design, most of which have not aged as gracefully as his classic and still highly recommended The Design of Everyday Things, first published in 1988 and revised and expanded in 2013.

Rereading this collection in 2023, the essay that stood out for me was Coffee Cups in the Cockpit about the design of passenger plane cockpits. There are observations in it which are still quite relevant to the design of Human-AI teams -as are a raft of writings on automatic pilot and flight team design and aviation accident analysis. Norman writes well, argues forcefully and convincingly about what makes a design good or bad from a human point of view, includes compelling and brief case studies or examples, and has an excellent sense of humor.

Most of the first essays in this book (Design follies, The Home Magazine Kitchen, Refrigerator doors and message centers, and High technology gadgets, while enjoyable, read like addenda to The Design of Everyday Things, as he picks up on flaws in designing doors, vending machines, kitchen appliances and layout, virtual reality systems, and exercise machines, and points out what exactly makes them examples of poor design.

Sometimes his reflections on design lead him to muse on key problem in the design of artifacts which had not been invented in 1992 and which engage deeper issues in human-machine interaction. His first essay, Go to a sixth grade play deals with the distancing effect that some technology has. The essay deals with how focusing on the act of photographing or filming a trip or a school play often makes the photographer or filmer miss the immediate and usually far more important human experience in exchange for the possibility of recording impressions for later perusal. As he points out, his memories are usually not as rich and may be emotionally impoverished. I feel that many of his points in this essay are particularly pertinent to our age of selfies. Teddy is another prescient essay which reflects, in a style which at times sounds black-mirroresque, on the possible consequences, both positive and negative, of developing and relying on absorbing but socially distracting memory-enhancing devices. I recommend the reader intrigued by these ideas to read some of Sherry Turkle’s more detailed, relatively more recent, and psychologically deeper analysis, such as Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each Other (2011).

Several essays read like short columns on ideas that struck Norman’s fancy or curiosity, but are rather whimsical, shallow, debunk or set right a proverbial/popular saying. Such essays include How long is noon?, Real Time, Nature’s packaging, Evolution versus design, Hofstadter’s Law, One Chance in a million and Brain Power.

In short, most of the essays make for light reading, and are amusing if read in the proper spirit and if you can appreciate grappling with surprisingly contemporary issues from the vantage point of a time in which intelligent phones and social media were, at most, a gleam in a few eyes.