Rating: 3/5

3.5 *

I was mesmerized by Ishiguro’s prose in Never Let me Go and The Remains of the Day so I knew I will read more of Ishiguro. However, it took me years to get to this one even though I had it at home. This is why I put it in my Speed Dating with a book yearly challenge. I try 10% of a book and if it does not attract me, I cross it out of my TBR and don’t look back. 

When We were Orphans is one of the author’s earlier novels and you can feel that. His themes, which are perfected in the novels I mentioned above, here feel like a sketch, an experiment. The novel is good but it feels like his talent is not fully developed. 

The novel is about Christopher Banks, an English man who was born in Shanghai in the early 20th century. His parents disappear when he is 9 and he is then forced to return to England. He becomes a famous detective. After many years , he decides to return to Shanghai during the Sino-Japanese war to investigate the disappearance of his parents.

I cannot stress enough that this is not a crime novel. We are not told much about his investigations skills, we only know that he is good from the voice of the narrator, which is very unreliable. The novel is firstly about the fragility of memory, just like all his other works. Christopher is an unreliable narrator due to his flawed memory. The narrator repeatedly mentions memory and writes “as I remember” several times, which suggests that the past might be different than what he relates. His self-opinion seems also to be different than what other thinks of him. There were moments when I wondered if he really is a famous detective or people just indulge his illusions. 

The tone of the novel changes when the narrator moves back to Shanghai to find his parents. The plot became unbelievable, surreal. There were a few meetings that made no sense, such as with the man who owned the family old house or with the soldier in the war zone. Everything that happened in Shanghai made me thing that the narrator went crazy while in China or he never went abroad and everything was in his head. If none of the two are true, than the writing is subpar. However, I think the change was intentional. 

Again, as usual with Ishiguro, there are two novels in one. The first one is what is written on paper and the other is all that is not said, what the reader guesses or deduces between the lines. That, is the most important novel and the one we need to write for ourselves.
 
Maybe it was not his best work but it definitely shows what the author can do with words and we can glimpse the genius he will become in just 5 years.