Rating: 3/5

Poetry. I doubt that any of you are deliberating over whether or not to buy this poetry collection from 1966, but in case you are, or, like me, you found it on your bookshelf and decided to read it, here's what's what.

First off, this is the first volume of Lawrence's poetry I've read. Prior to this, I only knew him from "Figs," which is not in this collection, and I was prepared not to like him. Because you hear things about D.H. Lawrence, like he hates women, or he's preoccupied with sex, that sort of thing. And it's true that occasionally those things intersect with dickbag-like accuracy: 

I Wish I Knew A Woman

I wish I knew a woman
who was like a red fire on the hearth
glowing after the day's restless draughts.

So that one could draw near her
in the red stillness of the dusk
and really take delight in her
without having to make the polite effort of loving her
or the mental effort of making her acquaintance.
Without having to take a chill, talking to her.
Well said, David Herbert! Because isn't that what we all want? A woman to warm us without having to deal with her feelings, or listen to her talk? Just a hot, silent, willing female body, open as a fire grate.

But, surprisingly, Lawrence also wrote quote a few poems from the perspective of women. And when he's not suggesting women shut up and open their legs, he writes some pretty sexy stuff. So I found a lot to like in this volume, like "Wedding Morn," "After the Opera," "Snake," "Humming-Bird," and "The Elephant is Slow to Mate." Because, oh yes, Lawrence's preoccupation with sex does not stop at the human, no. He's also interested in tortoise sex, and elephant sex, and whale sex. As one is. 

I have now written myself into a corner because when I say I liked his poems about nature, you will immediately wonder if that includes the one with the whale phallus. Yes, I'm afraid so. His nature poems have a peaceful rhythm to them, and I like the keen way he looks at animals, or trees, or the huntsman coming home to his wife:

With his hand he turns my face to him
And caresses me with his fingers that still smell grim
Of rabbit's fur! God, I am caught in a snare!
I know not what fine wire is round my throat;
I only know I let him finger there
My pulse of life, and let him nose like a stoat
Who sniffs with joy before he drinks the blood.
That's one of his poems from the female perspective. The same hunting imagery that isn't that remarkable in the beginning of the poem (when it's about actual hunting) becomes hot and powerful when applied to sex.

So I think I could find quite a lot to like about Lawrence, as long as I ignore his dickbag tendencies. I want to say his earlier work appeals more to me, but I can't really tell because this collection is organized so poorly.

And so we reach my review of the collection. Edited by Kenneth Rexroth, with an introduction by Kenneth Rexroth. Rexroth, Rexroth, Rexroth. His fawning introduction is all but useless for the common reader. There's a lot of speculation about what Lawrence did or did not know, read, study, feel. It didn't make me at all enthused about reading Lawrence's poetry despite the fact that Rexroth clearly believed Lawrence to be the best poet of his generation (Rexroth: "Only Yeats stands up against Lawrence."). All I got out of it was the sense that Rexroth really wanted to make out with D.H. 

The collection itself is not great to look at. The poems are arranged one after the other, no white space at the end of a poem, sometimes two or three to a page. No dates. No index. There is a timeline of D.H. Lawrence's life, but that would have been more meaningful if I knew when each poem was written.

Three stars for the poetry. Two stars for the collection.