Rating: 4/5

Another good one from Ms. Rule.

If you've ever read an 'Ann Rule book,' you sort of know what you're getting: a factual account of a story you might have heard about/read about/seen on television, etc. of someone who's done something VERY VERY BAD. Murdered their parents, their children, their spouse. Drowned them, shot them, poisoned them and all for very simple reasons. Boyfriend won't 'accept' children. Husband in love with another woman. Sister/mother/daughter is abusive, when actually YOU are the one who's got the problem. I've read a few and the themes run the same. What differentiates one story from the next is all in the details and details are what Ann Rule does best.

In this one there's a woman who comes across as attractive, intelligent, even friendly. First impressions are great! High IQ. Over-achiever. Doctor, specialist - in you name it: ER medicine, cardiology, and maybe psychology? Well, why not? But many a charming person doth tend to be a pretty snake in the grass - and this one's lethal, a serpent. In the course of these pages you learn about Debora Green - her backstory, her parents, her past. Then the story moves forward - time period the 1990's - and you witness how this woman transmogrifies into a harridan, a harpy, a beast of a woman who you'd best just nod to in the halls and move quickly on. What Debora does when her husband finally plans to get up and leave her is horrible and you need to read it to find out...

No spoilers here.

The conclusions many reach about this woman tend toward an assortment of 'personality disorders,' but I read control in every awful thing she does. Absolute control. Agree with her, please and praise her and she's fine - your best friend! (Maybe.) Disagree, dispute or find fault? Then you're in hot water indeed. I've known a few people like this in my long life and I've learned to keep them at arm's length. And no, none of them have ever done what this woman did - I hope! - but best to nod, say good morning and just keep moving. It's all about control and if they can't get it, they'll go to great lengths to do so. 

Sometimes, for the most extreme among them, those great lengths include murder.

Four stars.