Rating: 4/5

I enjoyed this book very much. Podkayne is a brave, clever, and compassionate heroine whose compassion is ultimately her downfall and possibly her brother's salvation. I don't want to talk too much about the plot because it would give it away. But this gives me an opportunity to address something that, as a classic sci-fi fan, I find difficult, and that is that I think Heinlein is often deeply misunderstood by modern readers.

The most recent film adaptation of Starship Troopers interpreted Heinlein's classic critique of democracy as a pro-fascism novel. And Heinlein is often interpreted as a rampant sexist. This novel is one of the novels so interpreted.

A review by Ungelic_is_us addresses some of these criticisms in regards to specific events in the novel that are often interpreted that way. Later on in the comments section, in which Heinlein fans lambaste the criticism, this reviewer seems truly mystified as to why it's received such attention and such negativity, pointing out that some people like the book, some don't, and what's the big deal? I think Ungelic would be truly astounded to know that the answer is that it's because Ungelic's review is not a critique of a book; it is an assault on the author's character. That is why the reaction is so negative. Let me break down these statements one by one, because they make good talking points:

"Here's what I learned from Podkayne of Mars, courtesy of Professor Heinlein (blech):"

Already the reviewer communicated a judgment of the author's character. I think this would be a good time to point out that the views expressed by characters in a novel do not necessarily reflect the views of the author. Actually, authors often write about characters who *don't* share their views in order to challenge the readership and make a point. Podkayne of Mars is such a book.

"A woman should always hide how smart she is, so she doesn't scare off the men."

Let's start by explaining that this book was published in 1963 - by a man born in 1907! The most popular TV shows in 1963 were Gunsmoke, the Lucy Show, Alfred Hitchcock Presents (now there's a real misogynist!), the Jetsons, and the new kid on the block, the Beverley Hillbillies. Bra-burning was still a decade away, and if you've seen the Jetsons and the Beverley Hillbillies, you know what teenage girls were supposed to be like; dumb as rocks, but pretty and nice and motivated by shopping. Women's liberation was still a long way away.

I suspect this reviewer is somewhere in her early twenties. I suspect this because I remember how, in the 1970s, it was important that even the most kickass women heroes on TV - Wonder Woman, the Bionic Woman, and Charlie's Angels - had to be sexy, feminine, and not as tough as the male characters in the series (except Wonder Woman - mostly). And even that's now considered a sexist trope.

Podkayne, in the time of Lucy, the Beverley Hillbillies and the Jetsons, wants to be a spaceship captain when she grows up. Her mother is a respected engineer. Do you have any idea how hard it is now for women to get jobs as engineers? (Maybe New Horizons has changed that, but we'll see in the next decade or so).

Besides - take it from a smart, middle aged woman - she's not wrong! And that, I think, says more about Heinlein's attitude towards men than his attitude towards women.

"If a woman wants to get a man's attention and get the information she needs to further her career, she should just act like a moron coquette."

Um - it works. And it worked even better in 1963. See above comment.

"It doesn't matter if a girl is a complete innocent from a Puritan society: she'll naturally know how to be a cocktease."

Ah, now this comment indicates that the reviewer a) missed the sarcasm that was the tone of that passage, and b) did not clue in that Heinlein was using the technique of the Unreliable Narrator. It's when a character's biases and ideas colour the narrative, particularly when it's a first person narrative. The character's perceptions are somewhat askew from what the truth actually is, and such a technique actually shows more about the character than the world.

Mars is not a Puritanical society. That was a teenage girl comparing the society of Mars to the society of Venus, which is kind of like comparing Washington to Amsterdam; Naboo to Mos Eisley; or the Earth of the Vorkosiverse to Jackson's Whole.

Heinlein respected women who were comfortable with their sexuality, but of course Podkayne is a teenaged girl just discovering her sexuality, and this was 1963. Meaning his protagonist couldn't actually have sex with anyone or she would not be considered moral. So she flirts but it goes no farther.

"Introduce an infant into a situation, even if it is of a different species, and a woman--no matter how intelligent, savvy or career-oriented--will always disregard logic and personal safety to care for and protect it."

Well, okay. I have to admit that as a feminist who sees no reason why women and men should not share any childrearing past the age of nursing equally, that tone in the book rankled me a little. But Heinlein was writing a dissertation on the maternal instinct and how he admired it. I can read it with a grain of salt as a result. And history, despite our vain assertions to the contrary, is not a march towards progress. It's a drunken dance. Sometimes you gain ground and sometimes you lose it. It's a much less progressive world than it was before 9/11, except in the area of gay rights. The history of Afghanistan can show you just how fragile women's rights can be.

But . . . I would hope that most people in the world would disregard logic and personal safety to care for and protect innocents. I would call that courage, not stupidity.

Also . . . I never had any plans to be a mother. But when I found myself a stepmom at the age of twenty, I found that yes, there was a desire in me somewhere to protect a child and care for it, whether it was "mine" or not. I don't expect everyone to have that desire, and I see no reason that men can't have it too . . . but Podkayne, being a naturally compassionate and empathic person, obviously does. I don't see this as a bad thing. Quite to the contrary, it's one of her best qualities.

"No matter how smart a woman thinks she is, she'll always be dumber that a 12-year-old boy."

No, no, no. Podkayne just finds her brother difficult to outwit because he's a 12-year-old psychopath who is willing to do crazy and possibly evil things she would never consider. He's Dexter (Dexter's Laboratory or maybe even the Showtime series - and no, Podkayne is not Didi.)

"Don't expect a woman to be able to solve a problem under pressure, unless it involves babies."

Actually, that's not true. I blame the males in the story for this one. The only problem under pressure they were willing to listen to her solution for was in dealing with babies. And as an older sister to small triplets, that's a problem she had training in, when other situations she did not, and so the adults were not likely to trust her. They didn't trust her brother either. And her brother doesn't trust her because he puts too much stock in their IQ tests and, as a psychopath (or rather, a child that has never been given a clear moral compass) has a natural sense of his own superiority. If any of the adult men had the brains to listen to Podkayne, or if Clark had the brains to trust her, or himself, the ending may have been very different.

"Look for the psychopathic but hyper-intelligent boy in the story; he's the real main character, no matter what the narrator thinks (especially if she's female.)"

He was the moral foil to Podkayne; an example of everything bad about the Ayn Rand "selfishness is the highest law" scumbags. He was clearly provided to contrast Podkayne's nobility and compassion.

"All Heinlein novels will contain a patriarchal, patronizing older male figure and a smug, patronizing younger male figure whose function is to tell the other characters how stupid they are and how they don't understand the way the real world works."

ALL Heinlein novels? You never read Glory Road, did you? Or The Number of the Beast?

"Women should be grateful that men try to get them drunk so they can rape them, instead of clubbing them over the head to rape them (usually)."

Okay; this was sarcasm. And a cautionary note from an older, cynical, worldly young woman to Podkayne not to trust the young man that was responding to her flirtations.

"Even in a future where humans have colonized Mars and Venus, and interplanetary travel is the equivalent of a cruise to Alaska, women will still be unable to get jobs in traditional male occupations and expected (even if they have managed to break through the glass ceiling) to give up their aspirations in favor of making babies, or taking care of babies."

Even in this day and age in which women are world leaders and executives-- bah, never mind. You'll find out when you get out of University.

"RAGE. Of all the ridiculous sexist tripe! I nearly threw this book against the wall so many times, it's a wonder I actually got through it."

Well, it wasn't a long book! Seriously though. If you think that Heinlein was sexist, please read Glory Road and tell me that Star was a wilting wallflower.

Some say that Podkayne demonstrates a marvelous understanding of the teenage mindset. I agree. Heinlein nicely captured the total self-absorption of the teenage mindset while still building a lovely, just plain nice heroine that I loved and wanted to protect and mother. Even if all of this other reviewer's views were spot on, Podkayne is still twice the heroine, and twice the role-model, of Bella of Twilight! And she was considered to be a good teenage girl character. That's something that makes me rage.

Heinlein was critiquing a generation that had become selfishly focused on their own careers as opposed to the future of their children. He had a point, and still does. The child traipsing off to go on adventures has become a literary trope, but in the real world, that would be the sign of either hard luck or bad parenting.

I don't think it's fair to judge a man's character by the course of events in a story he wrote in 1963 when comparing it to modern sensibilities. Heinlein wrote charater-driven science fiction about men and women, boys and girls with their own unique flaws and merits. And I think that with the understanding that Heinlein was exploring the maternal instinct, and the understanding that the Unreliable Narrator technique certainly applies to the heroine as well as most of the other characters, Podkayne is a memorable novel that, even though it was written more than fifty years ago, and even though it was intended as teen fiction, stands the test of time.