Rating: 3/5

I actually liked this one more than I thought I would. I started reading it coming off the back of having read Mary Renault’s excellent Alexander trilogy not long before, which, for me, is the definitive Alexander fiction, and I went into this book feeling dubious as to whether it could compare. It couldn’t, but it wasn’t all that bad. I certainly enjoyed it more than I did Steven Pressfield’s Last of the Amazons, which was confusing, anachronistic, and had huge plotholes. 

The voice of Alexander is the crucial factor in any novel tackling this historic person, presenting the author with the challenge of trying to capture his quixotic charisma, unusual intelligence, and powerful emotions. To my surprise, Pressfield actually does a reasonable job here… sort of. Let me explain. Other reviewers have praised the strength of descriptions of war in this book, and they’re dead on. The entire book reads like a series of anecdotes about battle, war, and the lessons Alexander has learned about being a commander. And it’s written well. The battle scenes are clearly described, if, at times, occasionally heavy on technical detail, and the anecdotes and snippets of wisdom are easily readable and page-turning. Alexander’s words of wisdom feel true to the historical figure’s intelligence and battle experience – so his “voice” did feel plausible here.

However, that’s all we get. The novel is very narrowly focused on just this one aspect, on the sequence of just one particular sort of event. I felt like Alexander the general was here… but Alexander the ruler, the dreamer, the man, was oddly absent. His charisma, personal dynamism, and human challenges felt like they were missing. I went through it at a good pace, enjoying the story, thinking it was quite well-written – but also missing those aspects that had been omitted. For me, the book didn’t capture the essence of Alexander, it just captured one strand in the essence of Alexander. Good, but it’s not going to supplant Mary Renault’s trilogy any time soon.

6 out of 10