Rating: 5/5

I picked up City of Beads when one of my many daily “oh hey, free eBooks!” emails rolled in letting me know this was a free mystery selection. And then it sat on my eReader for a few years until I got around to actually reading it. I wanted a mystery, and was tired of the stuff I’d put on my To Be Read list, so I went poking around the archives for a good mystery and stumbled on this one.

I suppose from its name alone, I should have known that this was going to be about New Orelans, but what I didn’t realize was that Tubby Dubonnet is a lawyer. He doesn’t do a lot of lawyering. He does a lot more fishing and open container driving. Except for those two aspects, he reminds me of my father - a man who happens to also be a lawyer, lover of good food, and someone who loves his daughter.

I don’t know how well he is introduced in the first book, as I jumped right in to book two of the series (this one), but I related to him almost as alterna-dad.

First, I feel it would be remiss if we didn’t spend a moment to provide a moment of admiration for the fact that the author wrote a whole book with someone whose last name was “Aucoin”. The chemist in me kept correcting the elemental symbol in her head.

It also rang so very true that Tubby’s daughter would be asking him to do pro-bono work for her college pursuits. Yep, guilty as charged. And like alterna-dad, actual-dad did it to the best of his ability. (and still does)

What surprised me the most is that this mystery seemed to happen to and around Tubby without him being an active participant. Others did all of the work and he just sort of sat there dumbfounded as the work, once done, was dropped in his lap. This was the first time I’ve encountered such a style, and I have to say that I’m going to keep this series as a To Read because I found that I quite liked it. The protagonist isn’t keeping secrets from the reader because the protagonist learns as the reader does.

And, what surprised me most of all? Being a free Kindle selection, this book had clearly been edited. Wow! Every single one of five stars for that one!