Rating: 4/5

"He drew Diana's attention from the first moment that he entered the Pump Room—a black moth amongst the gaily-hued butterflies."

edited 4/23/18 to add info about swearing
edited 4/24/18 to change my TBR plan

The Black Moth (1921, Heinmann) by  Georgette Heyer, is a standalone adventure with a bit of romance set around 1751, during the Georgian period. I originally started reading Heyer when I ran out of  Jane Austen books, and was trying to find a suitable replacement. 

Rating: 4 stars (Is that sacreligious?)
Narration: 4 1/2 stars (by Julian Rhind-Tutt)

The plot: This is a very entertaining story, but I think the prologue could have been less confusing. I want to explain one thing right now to prevent confusion to the reader! I hope that it isn't a spoiler, but really, the beginning bugged me until I figured out that tidbit. I would have actually appreciated knowing the following spoiler-tagged information ahead of time.

"Hugh Tracy Clare Belmanoir, Duke of Andover" is the villain of the story. The prologue consists of a letter from the duke to his friend, who doesn't show up until much later in the story in a minor role. Belmanoir is the titular black moth.

The heroine: Diana Beauleigh, "not more than nineteen or twenty," is a kind young lady that the reader doesn't see much of.

The hero: Sir Anthony Ferndale, who is really John Carstares, 30, is now the Earl of Wyncham. Carstares left home years ago after angering his father, and has been living a solitary life - with only a valet - as a gambler in Europe, and now as a highwayman in England! Don't worry, though. He is a likable hero. 

Christian elements:I wasn't thrilled with the following quotes:

"What! Is she then religieuse?"

"I cannot but think that Hester has altered sadly since last I saw her. She is always talking of sermons and good works!"

Is it clean/chaste? Yes! All of Heyer's books are. 

There is some swearing. The D word and God's name is used in a variety of ways, including OMG. Some instances of God's name, such as "Thank God!" don't seem to be swears, but there are definitely some that are. 

What I liked: 

*I feel smart every time I read one of Heyer's books and become acclimated to the language. :-D

*Heyer takes what seems to be an impossible dilemma and finds a solution at the end of the story.

*I loved the adventure portion of the story. I didn't even mind the lack of romance - and that it took a backseat.

What I didn’t like: 

*Instalove, as far as I could see. If there was anything else to explain the fondness the hero and heroine develop for each other, it occurs off-screen.

*The confusing prologue. 

*Both the villain and the hero have pseudonyms, various ways of addressing them, as well as nicknames! It will be clear, but pay close attention! I think Heyer could have toned down the variations on the .

*At least one person wore patches on the face, after the Georgian fashion. Even though it's historically authentic, this always kicks me out of Heyer's Georgian books. However, when I looked up face patches, I found that my own visualization of them was grossly exaggerated. They're quite small, often made of black silk, and often look like a beauty mark - sometimes stars, etc. All the pictures I could find showed only one Marilyn Monroe-esque patch. Not at all the stamp-sized square things I was picturing. Also of note: men did this also, though I didn't find any images of men wearing patches. 

I also found the use of whitening makeup and the practice of sniffing snuff distracting. Thankfully, these were not very prevalent in the book, but they were present.

Link to a short article with an explanation of the purposes of beauty patches - and a couple of pictures

Audiobook: The audiobook was quite good. However, I did not like the voice of Lavinia. I suppose perhaps the reader/listener is not supposed to. (See the quote below.) 

"Her voice was rather high-pitched and childish, and she had a curious way of ending each sentence with an upward lilt and a long drawn-out accent, very fascinating to listen to."

***********

The bottom line: This is an adventuresome Georgian romance. I recommend this book to fans of Jane Austen looking to branch out, as well as to fans of historical fiction. I look forward to reading more by Georgette Heyer. Since I started with her first book, I think I'll continue with her second,  Powder and Patch, originally titled The Transformation of Philip Jettan.