Rating: 5/5

*May contain spoilers*

I listened to the audio version of this book (#1) during a few quiet hours in my garden, it was the perfect setting.

After suffering a horrendous injury to her face whilst intervening in an argument between her parents, young Marina has stopped talking. She has found herself unable to speak at all, and no amount of encouragement from doctors, hospital staff or family can coax words from her.
Her injuries, although extensive, don't appear to be the cause of her inability to talk. It seems that her trauma has been so great as to literally render her speechless, and in a desperate attempt to encourage her rehabilitation, it is decided she be sent to a boarding school.
In Marina's mind, her mother just wants to be rid of her, and her father is now in gaol.
Life in the boarding school is difficult, not only because of her physical appearance, which ironically doesn't seem to bother her too much, but her muteness is cause for a lot of speculation on the part of her fellow classmates.

Marina is reserved and doesn't wish to participate in anything, nor does she want to be befriended by anyone, well meaning or otherwise.
One morning one of the teachers handed out diaries to the class and required that every pupil write something in it everyday, it didn't matter what they wrote or how they wrote it as long as they wrote something.
Without reading their details of their work he would check every week to make sure that they complied by asking them to hold it up for him to see.
At first Marina just scratched a few meaningless things in the diary, but then one day she found herself writing more, mostly about the girls in her class and dorm, and progressively more about herself.
She still wasn't speaking but she found this exercise liberating and somewhat cathartic. 

The book has us tuning in to Marina's daily entries into her diary, slowly we see her story unfolding, and as we discover her story, so does she.
The writing sharpens her mind and makes her more observant, as she writes, she begins to see and understand people differently and soon discovers that everyone has baggage. She starts to find forgiveness in the most unlikely of places.

This is a very moving and inspiring story who's strength lies in its most unusual circumstances, the qualities of which are threaded throughout the unravelling of Marina's story page by page, to command the attention of the reader.
I look forward to reading the second book.

Highly recommended 5★s