Rating: 2/5

I have just re-read this book, originally read many years ago. I saw that first time round I gave it 4 stars, but I think that was done retrospectively, and based on the fact that Dervla Murphy is one of my favourite writers. Regrettably reading it a second time brought up quite a lot of issues for me, and this time round I have only given the book 2 stars.

I love the way the books starts. Here is the first sentence.

"On my tenth birthday a bicycle and an atlas coincided as presents and a few days later I decided to cycle to India.  

Amazingly, in 1963, that is exactly what she did. She covered approximately 3000 miles - from Ireland to France, then moving on into Italy, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Turkey, Persia, Afghanistan and Pakistan.....and finally into India. She arrived at Delhi six months after leaving Ireland.

A lone woman making this journey on a bicycle is almost inconceivable to most of us. She took a gun, but only used it twice. Once to shoot a couple of wolves that were threatening her, and once to see off a man whose intentions were obviously hostile. Interestingly he was the only person who threatened her on the whole of her journey.

"This is perhaps the moment to contradict the popular fallacy that a solitary woman who undertakes this sort of journey must be ‘very courageous’. Epictetus put it in a nutshell when he said, ‘For it is not death or hardship that is a fearful thing, but the fear of death and hardship.’ And because in general the possibility of physical danger does not frighten me, courage is not required; when a man tries to rob or assault me or when I find myself, as darkness is falling, utterly exhausted and waist-deep in snow halfway up a mountain pass, then I am afraid – but in such circumstances it is the instinct of self-preservation, rather than courage, that takes over."

She's a truly unique human being. At the beginning of the journey she faced the coldest weather in Europe for eighty years - on this leg of her journey, she often had to hitch a ride with a bus or lorry, due to high banks of snow and black ice, but wherever she could cycle she would do so. 

Things got better as she moved further south. Sometimes she would cycle over 100 miles a day. The country to completely bowl her over was Afghanistan...

"We left Kabul at 7 a.m. in perfect cycling weather with a brilliant, warm sun, a cool breeze behind us and the air crisp and clear. Beyond a doubt today’s run up the Ghorband valley was the most wonderful cycle-ride of my life. Surely this must have been the Garden of Eden – it’s so beautiful that I was too excited to eat the lunch my hostess had packed for me and spent the day in a sort of enchanted trance. High hills look down on paddy-fields and vivid patches of young wheat and neat vineyards; on orchards of apricot, peach, almond, apple and cherry trees smothered in blossom, and on woods of willows, ash, birch and sinjit, their new leaves shivering and glistening in wind and sun. Lean, alert youths, their clothes all rags and their bearing all pride, guard herds of cattle and nervous, handsome horses and donkeys with woolly, delicately tripping foals, and fat-tailed sheep with hundreds of bounding lambs, and long-haired goats whose kids are among the most delightful of young animals. At intervals there are breaks in the walls of sheer rock on either side and then one sees the more distant peaks of the Hindu Kush rising to 18,000 feet, their snows so brilliant that they are like Light itself, miraculously solidified and immobilised. The little mud villages remain invisible until you reach them, so perfectly do they blend with their background, and the occasional huge, square, mud fortresses, straddling hilltops, recall the cruel valour of this region’s past and have the same rigid, proud beauty as the men who built them. The ‘road’ – narrow and rough – alternately runs level with the flashing river and leaps up mountainsides to give unimpeded views for miles and miles along the valley. This is the part of Afghanistan I was most eager to see, but in my wildest imaginings I never thought any landscape could be so magnificent. If I am murdered en route it will have been well worth while! "

Whilst initially being quite critical of Pakistan, she soon met up with different people - often the families of senior army officers and diplomats - and she made some good friends. Her views upon arriving into India were also pretty critical, mainly I think because of the poverty she encountered. For instance she saw hundreds of starving cattle in the Punjab, and felt that the Hindu beliefs about the holiness of cows was largely behind their bad state of health. Overall I found her quite critical and dismissive of people and cultures - which is something I would never have said about her other books. I think this was perhaps because it was her first book, and it was largely written in instalments, as she travelled. She would fill out diaries, often after a hard day on the road, and then send them back to Ireland. She said these initial writings were virtually unchanged. In many ways the book's descriptions of people and situations is very much that of first impressions, and a lot of those impressions were quite harsh.

She also comes across as someone who is massively dismissive of modern western life. For instance she greatly admires the wild herdsmen of Afghanistan - who treat her as an honorary man, and with great generosity and kindness. Whilst being an extraordinarily independent woman herself, time and time again she suggests that the women she meets are happy to lead restricted lives, often living in women's quarters, with a severe lack of education. But she sees all of this as positive compared to the shallowness of life in the west.

The one aspect of the book that cannot be criticised is the amount of adrenalin you will experience whilst reading it. She has the most amazing and terrifying adventures, that will startle even the most laid back reader. In terms of stoicism and tenacity she is super-human.

So, in some ways a good read, but in others a bit below her usual standard.