Rating: 3/5

While some of the language, nutritional advice and the photos are hopelessly (and hilariously) dated, this is a great little introduction to hatha or physical yoga. Structured as a 28-day training program, this book was created to help people gradually develop strength and flexibility through a series of asanas, and discusses the benefits of the practice on health, weight management, arthritis relief, etc.

My father, who has been a yoga teacher for over thirty years, still recommends this book over newer, more fashionable yoga guidebooks out there. It's a prefect resource for anyone interested in learning basic hatha yoga at home: the instructions are clear and detailed, and the progression of the exercises makes the training both effective and less intimidating. The book is broken down into 4-day learning blocks: new exercises for the 3 first days, then the 4th is spent reviewing the previous material. This sets a nice pace, and keeps the exercises from getting too boring or repetitive.

I have been doing yoga on and off for years, but to be honest, I hate most yoga classes (and gyms, and basically any place people gather for fitness activities - don't ask), so I'd rather practice at home. My father gave me a copy of this book ages ago, and I pulled it off the shelf last month, figuring going through the 28-day regimen would shake off my yoga cobwebs gently. Not only did it do that, but it also helped me put a daily yoga practice back into my routine, which is great! The pacing is perfect, somehow both challenging and gentle for beginners or intermediate-and-rusty practitioners. I can definitely see why my dad still recommends it!

A couple of the asanas are actually a bit too tough for beginners (or rusty old crones), and should have been broken down in more gradual steps (head stand, cow face and full lotus, for example), but generally, the difficulty level is reasonable. You still might want to complement this with another (more recently published) book of illustrated asanas (the Grounded Panda's is pretty great: https://shop.groundedpanda.com/) that also show you how to use props like blocks and straps - which are really helpful, especially when you are learning new poses.

If you don't mind the fact that this was written for 1970s housewives who didn't dare associate with the hippies but wanted to try their hands at that yoga-stuff, this is a good building block on which to beginning practicing yoga at home, or as a primer for classes and more advanced practices.