Rating: 4/5

In May 1943 American and Canadian forces invaded Attu Island, the farthest point of land in the Aleutian Chain. It was the largest Pacific invasion since Guadelcanel and in terms of casualties as a percentage of troops committed it ranked only behind Iwo Jima. In one of the most costly battles of the Pacific, the Allies began reversing the progress the Japanese had made in 1942 when they established bases on Attu and Kiska -- bases that could have put all of the Pacific nothwest within bombing range.

Brian Garfield, primarily a novelist, develops this little known story with a masterful touch. Personal dimensions are integral as Army-Navy conflicts were almost as important as the enemy. Written in 1969, and updated 25 years later with new archival material, Garfield pursues the narrative of this theater in part because it was lightly covered in its day, and virtually ignored afterward. Garfield makes a persuasive case that while nobody should have realy wanted to possess the Aleutians, once the battle was defined, it was critical for both sides to succeed. This book is deservedly a favorite of Alaskans. 

The events of the initial Japanese incursion, their vastly superior planes, ships and submarines, are all powerful reminders of how ill prepared the United States was for war. But the Japanese underestimated both the ability and the will of the United States to respond. Much of the newest radar and weaponry got tested in Alaska, and many techniques of engagement later deployed in the Pacific and Europe were developed there. Students of this conflict will find much that is new and important to the development of the next three years.

The conflict between enemies is central, but the reality of Alaska aches over all. Cold, fog, penetrating rain and snow, williwigs, and hurricane force surface winds were the realities. More pilots and equipment were lost to the elements than the enemy. Commanders in Tokyo and Washington had no ability to grasp the reality and soldiers trained in California had neither the equipment nor schooling for what they were to experience.

In May 1943 another event was happening. My father was getting ready to graduate from Bluffton high school and join the navy. His basic training would span the remainder of the Aleutian conflict. By the time he was posted on Attu Island it was many months after 1700 Americans were killed or wounded, with 2000 more casualties from cold and disease. The Japanese had lost over 5000 troops, hundreds of them suicides of both able bodies and woundeds as American troops surrounded their shrinking foothold. Only 28 Japanese prisoners were taken. Reading The Thousand Mile War taught me much about a little known part of WW II history and made me grateful my father wasn't a few months younger.