Rating: 5/5

The Kennedy assassination was first rumored during afternoon recess from Lincoln Junior High School. It being Park Ridge, Illinois, a number of seventh graders took it as good news. No one doubted the rumor. I was asked by another kid who'd become president now and had to think for a moment before coming up with Lyndon B. Johnson.

After recess we were taken from class to the downstairs auditorium where we were addressed, solemnly, by Clifford Sweat, our principal. The teachers all appeared serious, very serious--probably worried about our sensitivities, about how this important news ought be conveyed to a bunch of thirteen and fourteen year olds. The snide remarks of the children of conservatives ceased. We were sent home.

The next several days my family, like many others, was glued to the television, hearing rumors coalesce into "facts"; watching Johnson sworn in on Airforce One with the bloodied widow beside him; seeing the putative assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, himself assassinated by a former Chicago hood, Jack Ruby, while in Dallas police custody; witnessing the world-historical funeral procession in Washington, the burial in Arlington. The weeks that followed saw the print media cover the same material with detailed chronologies in Time, glossy color photographs in Life. The months that followed saw the hurried publication of the Warren Commission Report and the first of the books to question it, Mark Lane's Rush to Judgment.

It was probably a year or two later that I actually heard Lane himself interviewed on the radio and began my occasional forays into studying the assassination, studies which have included the reading of scores of books, of which Mailer's is the latest.

I do not subscribe to Mailer's conclusion that Oswald likely was the sole gunman, but then determining the facts of the assassination itself is not his primary concern. He and his colleagues appear to be intellectually honest and note many of the contradictions and loose threads which were left by the official accounts of the FBI and the Commission. They also attack, more than once, Posner's recent apologetic for the government's story. No, their concern is more for the character of Oswald and on this account they make a valuable contribution, primarily by going to the effort to interview many of his associates (and the KGB operatives who kept tabs on him) from his two-plus years in the Soviet Union, many of whom have never been interviewed before. What emerges is a believable, often sympathetic, portrait of a person both ordinary in the lower middle class trajectory of his life and extraordinary in terms of the means by which he tried, sometimes successfully, to transcend his background and conditioning.

I've read a bunch of Mailer over the years, liking his non-fiction more than his fiction. The most recent books of his read have been Ancient Evenings, an ambitious failure, and his The Gospel According to the Son, another, rather poor, rather uninspired, attempt to represent the person of Jesus. This biography is worth reading both for the value of its reportage and the high quality of its prose.