Rating: 5/5

Reread January 24, 2026: Truly one of my favorite books of all time.

January 27, 2022: This is one of those books you put down and think, "HOW do I get everyone I know to read this?" Now, I should point out that I think this book will mostly appeal to women, to women who are mothers, or who have a strong bond with their mothers, and to women who revere their elders. If that is you - read this book. 

Years ago, my grandmother let me read her diary from the years she was rearing her young children and helping my grandfather with his work as well. Her written words changed my life. They normalized the busyness I felt; they made me see humor in situations I'd otherwise have looked upon with displeasure. Having a friendship with my grandma has taught me to have a different perspective than I would have had as a mother and I'm forever grateful. 

This book reminds me of that friendship. This gives you a glimpse into the life of pioneering; the sacrifices made; the battles fought and won. At times, it all seemed absolutely hopeless. I don't know how they did it! Truly. But the wins were made all the sweeter because of the hardship. This is a book about being a woman, being a great wife, and especially about being a phenomenal mother. I cannot praise it highly enough. I have quote after quote saved. This is one to learn from in youth, to revisit and remember in adulthood, to lead you into later life with grace and grit. At any stage, this is a book for the ages for women who desire to go out in the end having held their lantern high, having given this life and their family every. single. last. bit. of what they had to offer. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐+❤ 

I think that love is more like a light that you carry. At first childish happiness keeps it lighted and after that romance. Then motherhood lights it and then duty . . . and maybe after that sorrow. You wouldn't think that sorrow could be a light, would you, dearie? But it can. And then after that, service lights it. Yes. . . . I think that is what love is to a woman . . . a lantern in her hand. 

You know, Grace, it's queer but I don't feel narrow. I feel broad. How can I explain it to you, so you would understand? I've seen everything...and I've hardly been away from this yard....
I've been part of the beginning and part of the growth. I've married...and borne children and looked into the face of death. Is childbirth narrow, Grace? Or marriage? Or death? When you've experienced all those things, Grace, the spirit has traveled although the body has been confined. I think travel is a rare privilege and I'm glad you can have it. But not every one who stays at home is narrow and not every one who travels is broad. I think if you can understand humanity...can sympathize with every creature...can put yourself into the personality of every one...you're not narrow...you're broad. 

The greatest antidote in the world for grief is work, and the necessity of work. 

If the faith of all the mothers could blossom to its full fruition, there would be no unsuccessful men in the land. 

There are many memories. but I'll tell you the one I like to think of best of all. It's just a homely everyday thing, but to me it is the happiest of them all. It is evening time here in the old house and the supper is cooking and the table is set for the whole family. It hurts a mother, Laura, when the plates begin to be taken away one by one. First there are seven and then six and then five...and on down to a single plate. So I like to think of the table set for the whole family at supper time. The robins are singing in the cottonwoods and the late afternoon sun is shining across the floor... The children are playing out in the yard. I can hear their voices and happy laughter. There isn't much to that memory is there? Out of a lifetime of experiences you would hardly expect that to be the one I would choose as the happiest, would you? But it is. 

Love is the light that you see by.