Rating: 4/5

Reading business after humanities is a real values warp. It’s strange to read an author really saying, Cover up your weaknesses. Do nice stuff for executives’ kids so that the executives like you. Flatter legitimately. Basically, gamesmanship, or as I would have called it, scheming manipulation, is the way to the top. 

When it came to the sales section, I slowed my pace, because I’m trying to sell a [very high-quality] poetry book right now [you can buy it at https://thecurator.org/product/owlets/], and trying to advertise [ahem], and feeling very out of my element. I feel like I’m intruding, which Mr. McCormack says is a good feeling to have: 

“The best salesman all seem to have a sixth sense about this they can tell by the tone in someone’s voice or the atmosphere in the room when the mood or timing is wrong. And either because they don’t want to impose, or because they know that it is not in their own best interests to do so, they will not antagonize their customer by attempting to make a sale. The old foot-in-the-door school of high-pressure, super-assertive techniques has gone the way of the dinosaur. These were never very effective techniques to begin with… an awareness of when you are imposing can be the most important personal asset a salesman can have. It also helps to believe in your product. When I feel that what I am selling is really right for someone, that it simply makes sense for this particular customer, I never feel I am imposing. I feel that I am doing him a favor.”

So there you go, guys. Here’s the link in case you missed it: https://thecurator.org/product/owlets/. I’m doing you a favor.

At the beginning of the chapter, Mr. McCormack writes: 

“Most people, I believe, are born salesmen. At school, we sell our peers on accepting us and our teachers on giving us good grades. We try to sell our parents on letting us stay out at night or use the car or buy a new stereo.” 

Well, speak for yourself, sir. I don’t think I ever succeeded in convincing anyone of those things, or tried very hard. That’s not to say I never got them, but I think it would be a pretty corrupt teacher that would let a student persuade her to give him good grades. I didn’t connect with the start of that chapter.

Something Mr. McCormack said that really resonated with me was at the end of chapter 4:

“Psychologists would probably tell me I am a prime candidate for burnout: I work too hard and too long [80-90 hr/wk.] under extremely stressful conditions. Yet I have never experienced anything close to what must be a terrible psychological state… I think a far more pervasive problem than job burnout is job boredom... Boredom occurs when the learning curve flattens out. … If you’re bored it’s your fault. You just aren’t working hard enough at making your job interesting.”

Challenging and probably true for me. “For me” since we’re postmodern now and all that. In general, what he had to say about lifestyle resonated with me.