Rating: 4/5

Although one can deem the whole war unnecessary, Gallipoli was definitely one of the most unnecessary of its campaigns. It didn't accomplish much, if anything. Alan Moorehead writes that both sides suffered around 250 000 casualties and in retrospect many viewed the campaign as a mistake. Nevertheless, it is an interesting and important story of lives lost too early, of a battle on historic ground. 

Alan Moorehead was an Australian journalist and writer and wrote this book in 1956. It is an excellent book on the Gallipoli campaign. Much like The Price of Glory: Verdun 1916 by Alistair Horne it is written and paced with the skill of a great writer and on many instances it will keep you turning the pages, eager to know more. While Moorehead clearly has a fascination with the Anzac forces, which is understandable as he was Australian, he gives an objective and quite multi-faceted account on this battle. There are definitely many interesting moments from this battle such as the nine hour armistice that was imposed, under which the Anzac forces and the Turks grew a mutual fondness and respect for one another; or the evacuation that ended the campaign that had to be conducted in utmost secrecy.

Something that I very much enjoyed is that Moorehead's writing on several instances captures the romanticism and myth around Gallipoli that was created by many of the soldiers, even before arrival. The hopefulness of the young Allied soldiers was showed through their poetry and diary entries and many regarded this as a moment that would forever change history. Rupert Brooke (who would die before arriving at Gallipoli) wrote: 

If I should die, think only this of me:
That there's some corner of a foreign field
That is for ever England.

Moorehead portrays the unique culture that the soldiers developed after being stationed at a front so far away from home, cut off from the rest of the world. In addition to this, he makes it clear that this was very much a battle that displayed the weaknesses of the British army and its leadership, their inability to organize the campaign correctly was probably what jeopardized it and finally, caused it to collapse. Although it didn't succeed, the Gallipoli campaign and its combination of naval and military operations as well as use of airplanes, would be an indication of the development of modern warfare tactics. By studying what went wrong here and avoiding to make the same mistakes, the Allies were able to succeed in Normandie in 1944.