Rating: 4/5

To me, John Donne is pre-eminently a poet of wit. Two meanings of wit are meant here: his pen was driven marvellously on the conditions of words themselves, and he was also a man of deep learning. He would spin wonderful paradoxes (through logic, through words, through sciences, through religious dogma) and resolve them with full finesse. Whenever one began a new Donne, one knew it would be a force to be reckoned with—no hand-waved schmaltz or airy hyperbole in here!

(Hyperbole here is—just read his anniversaries to the death of a girl he had never met. But it is not airy. It feels well-developed and apposite.)

Donne makes the reader linger on every word, not only because he is a sparkling wit, but because he also forges quite labyrinthine phrases. One of his trademarks is to add at least three commas per line, and to change the word order at will. This can be at times rather frustrating, but at the same time it also shows his splendid sense of poetic rhythm that seems to be really his own. Based on this collection, he was not very daring with rhyme or with form, but his sometimes staccato, sometimes legato rhythm is something that stands out quite patently.

When I say Donne is primarily a poet of wit, I also mean that his poems shine in other ways than their core ideas. Often it seems that his ideas are rather basic, and it would hardly do justice to sum any of his pieces up. They are about simple themes that are developed with cunning. They convince the reader through craftsmanship, not through philosophical prowess. His diction was also not astoundingly noteworthy, though he was far from incompetent in that regard: what I mean here is that, unlike with Shakespeare or Shelley, Donne's words tend not to halt the reader that often with profound beauty. 

No, his effect is more subtle. So subtle in fact, that one might have called him Donne Scotus, had he been born a wee more north. I am particularly fond of the clever peeps in the literary canon, and I am thrilled to have stumbled upon a poet whose words I cannot simply skip at a glance.