Rating: 4/5

Some fifty or so years ago, I discovered the novels of Irving Wallace. At the time, I read six or seven of his works and thought he was the greatest novelist who ever wrote. Recently, I decided to re-read one of his novels. I chose The Word, a sprawling tale of the discovery of a supposed new testament, written by James the Just, detailing his brother Jesus’s life after crucifixion. Yes, in this testament, Jesus has survived the cross and lived another twenty or so years. The protagonist Steve Randall is hired to publicize this new Bible being published. Randall, however, seems to believe the thing is a fraud, and he sets out to expose the deception—in almost 600 pages of sometimes nail-biting intensity and other times endless description. I give kudos to Wallace for his research. He appears to know everything about the Bible, Biblical times, and ancient languages, not to mention Italian laws about unearthed antiquities and, briefly, French law procedures. This novelist is one who cared about his authenticity to the extreme. I, however, who must have had more reading energy in my youth, got extremely tired this time around wading through the seemingly endless background stories told and, at times, re-told. For example, the character LeBrun’s back story is related to Randall in a lengthy telling, and then Randall meets LeBrun, and LeBrun tells his backstory again from his personal viewpoint, this time in twice as much detail. I was surprised, at least, that when Randall relates the backstory yet again, he did abbreviate it. As for the tale well-told (and, as I said, sometimes over-told) it is magnificent. These days I like my books to top off at about 300 pages or less, but I eagerly awaited the next fifty page installment of this book—I read in bed, and fifty pages is about all I can manage before drifting off—until the book came to an end. I’m not sure I liked the ending, but I do know it fit beautifully with the Randall character as described at the beginning of the novel. Randall begins as a conflicted soul, goes on his long journey to enlightenment, and does, indeed, come out enlightened. Besides Randall, the characters are well-developed, and, as previously stated, there is more than enough backstory on each to get to know them before we join them on Randall’s journey. One character, though, I did not like, did not trust, and, even later in the novel, when she was supposedly redeemed in Randall’s eyes, I still did not like nor trust her. Wallace wants us to believe she is good, and in fact, he lets Randall believe in her. But I didn’t buy it for a minute. But, then again, it’s not for me to re-write another author’s work. If Wallace liked her, then so be it. As for The Word, it is timely some forty years after its being written. We are all, I think, searching for something to believe in, and that’s the crux of this book.