Rating: 3/5

This isn't my usual fare, but one of the pastors at church recommended it, so I wanted to check it out. I think it is very much worth reading. Sometimes the emotional and spiritual power of a story rises above imperfect storytelling, and this is a good example. 

Stronger in the conception than the execution, it reminded me stylistically of the Left Behind books (and, indeed, features a blurb from Tim LaHaye)--which I think borrowed their format and narrative voice from pop thrillers a la Grisham and Patterson (but I've never read Grisham or Patterson, so).

Anytime there is exposition via a long-winded back-and-forth over the phone, it loses me a little. It can be preachy and on-the-nose. But the author isn't going for subtlety at all, so I can't really hold it against him. He's trying to educate his readers about the effects of persecution and martyrdom and about the plight of Chinese Christians. And beyond education, he's trying to engage the readers' emotions. I was very concerned going into the book that it would be emotionally manipulative, but Mr. Alcorn succeeded in letting Li Quan's story speak for itself.

I do wish the B-roll "Meanwhile, around the throne of God" bits were handled in some other way. Trying to describe heavenly things based on a very literal reading of the book of Revelation felt speculative and cheesy, not to mention theologically dicey. John of Patmos received a divine revelation that he translated into human terms by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit; I'm not sure it's wise for a non-Inspired writer to put this kind of gloss on scripture (I also feel this way about The Robe, The Red Tent, The Book of God, The Message, Ben-Hur... it's a long tradition). It's difficult to convey in fiction that this is just one man's interpretation of Revelation. It feels true because it provides emotional resonance to the fictional story of Li Quan, but since Li Quan is fiction, so is this portrayal of God. I'm sure Randy Alcorn would be the first to say his story is only his imaginative interpretation, only a very finite shadow of a glory that we are told no tongue can describe.

But humans are bad at separating the symbol meant to point us to the reality from the real thing--see Moses' bronze serpent, for example, or even the Ark of the Covenant--so I think it can be dangerous and misleading to add to scripture in this way.

All that to say, I think it could have been powerful to make Li Quan's wrestling with his heritage and family part of the human story and, rather than publishing a fictional version of the heavenly places, to interpolate only sections of scripture to describe the martyrs crying out for justice and Christ's final victory over death.