Rating: 5/5

Y'all I know this book's premise seems so goddamn incredulous. It's form is tedious and kinda sloppy, and Sarno occasionally jumps to certain conclusions that are somewhat dubious... but this book saved my hand, and possibly my life.
In my junior year of college (2018, around the same time that I had begun transitioning) my hand's health was progressively getting worse. I was diagnosed with tendonitis, carpal tunnel, RSI, golfer's elbow, you name it. My shoulder was also always uncomfortably stiff, the pain radiating from my left index finger all the way up into my neck.
I am a jazz musician (keys and bone) and an avid smash bros player so these symptoms made "logical sense" to me, and I 100% believed that the combination of the aforementioned (plus coding, eugh) was slowly and permanently damaging the structure of my hand. So many days I could not even pick up a pencil/plastic fork, let alone play my beloved instruments. Oftentimes, I could not even sleep at night as the pain made it so it was almost impossible to sleep comfortably. I found myself entering a deep depression, the future so uncertain as I spent sleepless nights wondering if I'd ever be able to function again, let alone pursue my dream.
Let it be known that I am generally quite the skeptic and believe in a scientific evidence-based process. I had tried exercises, stretches, nerve glides, extended rest, ibuprofen, cold/hot compresses, massaging, literally everything that the doctors and physical therapists recommended. Yet it just kept on getting worse and worse. I was at the end of my rope and had officially (with a heavy heart) made a fb post telling everyone that I was never to pick up a controller again, forced into an early retirement as I desperately tried to mitigate symptoms so I could still make music.
Someone in the comments recommended this book, citing gaming legends Silentwolf (melee) and Simply (mario 64) that had used this method to heal their tendonitis and continue their craft. If I was not so desperate, I would have dismissed it. But after watching their videos on their healing process, I was intrigued, and copped the book.
I read the book within 3 days during summer of 2020. Pretty much all the book really says is that subconscious rage (but imo also unresolved trauma, and a broader spectrum of negative emotion) manifests itself in your body (by depriving certain areas of blood flow) as a physical distraction from the psychological turmoil you are experiencing. It does so connivingly, typically affecting places that would make the most sense (knees for athletes, lower back for office workers, hands for musicians etc). And somehow it works. When the chronic pain gets you, it controls your thoughts and your life and doesn't let go. Sarno's recommendation to counter this is a prescription of belief, as well as self-reflection in the forms of investigative journaling as well as meditation.
As I mulled over this information, the conclusion that I eventually came to (noticing when my hand was acting up the most helped with diagnosing this) was that I had an incredible anger inside of me - I felt shunned and discarded by society (and my father) after coming out as trans. I also felt like I had been forced to live for my father and had wasted so many years that I could never get back. I desperately wanted to prove the entire world wrong and envied/criticized those that I deemed more attractive/successful than I. And when I came short (as I often do), I was ruthlessly critical. There is a lot more here that I could get into, but the point is that at a certain subconscious level I was fucking angry as hell and wanted to exact my vengeance (still true, but I'm more aware of it lol).
That being said, I would caution those to avoid going down the rabbit hole of trying to turn over every little rock of the past. After enough contemplation, accepting that the pain is psychosomatically caused is usually enough for it to recede.
On the day I finished the book, I found that a good portion of my subconscious rage had surfaced, and for the first time since middle school I actually wanted to fight someone, lmao. That boiling anger lasted for a few days before receding. Not even a week later, the pain had basically vanished. A few weeks later I went to a neurologist who told me my nerves were incredibly healthy and that what I had been experiencing was a software issue, not a hardware one.
Since then, the pain has dramatically reduced, at times nonexistent (I can play keys for days and smash for hours). It only really comes back every now and then when I'm feeling incredibly stressed for a sustained amount of time. And when it does, I give it a slap and tell it that the pain is being psychologically induced. And it's been working, I shit you not.
Having my hand back in this capacity is not something that I ever considered possible. As I navigate through life, knowing that I was able to overcome this has been one of my greatest sources of strength. I wish I could say that I'd never take my hand for granted after this, but I kinda already do again, haha. On the bright side, I'm definitely more ambidextrous because of it. I wish y'all the best, you got this!
Also, check out "The Body Keeps the Score" for a more comprehensive deep-dive into how trauma affects the body.