Rating: 4/5

I read the book Danger on Panther Peak by Bill Wallace. This is a realistic fiction book because there are made up settings, people, and places. But these things could be real. When there is something between you and your livestock, what do you do? 

This question was answered by an eleven year old boy whose name is Tom. Tom is bored out of his mind at his grandfather's farm. When he hikes up to Skeeter Ridge, he finds a friend. His friend’s name is Justin. Justin has been living on a farm his whole life. Because of this, Justin shows Tom everything he knows about the land and what to do. When Justin shows Tom a swimming hole, Tom sees what he thinks is a panther. The panther eats lots of livestock of many farmers. The panther comes to Tom's house and eats their cow and its calf. After this, many farmers try to hunt it down, but they become unsuccessful. Tom’s grandfather gets injured, and Tom needs to ride to safety. Will he make it in time?

 An external conflict that I had was character vs character. I say this because When Tom climbs up Skeeter Ridge to explore he finds a boy named Justin. They are very rude to each other, they start to disagree. After they do that for 15 minutes, they start fighting. Although they were fighting for no reason, they are creating conflict which is character vs character. I also had internal conflict in my book, character vs self. Such as when Tom's cow and its calf is attacked. Tom believes that it is his fault, so he gets stressed out. 

Once he gets home from the site, he thinks about it, and he realizes that if he would have kept the door shut, they would have never gotten out. This was a good book. I say this because it was filled with detail and summary so that you don't get lost. The reason that I gave it four stars instead of five is because it doesn't say how they get to the farm. 

I believe that this book would be more beneficial to readers in 5th through 7th grade. I say this because this book is for a person who wants a quick straightforward read.