Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars. As the novel opens, Marjorie Wetherill is knocking around her huge family home in Chicago all by herself. It's a week before Christmas and her mother has just died, leaving her an orphan. She is an adult (having graduated college, so likely ~22 years old), but no matter what your age, losing your parents hurts. Marjorie is dealing with another bombshell on top of this loss. She's always known that she was adopted, but never knew anything about her birth family - until now. Her adoptive mother left her one last letter, detailing all she knows about the family, including their last known address. She more or less implores Marjorie to look them up, because they have always regretted their decision to give her up for adoption and long to see her, even now - especially now, because the Wetherwills have always refused to let them see her.

Marjorie is at a loss about what to do. She's always yearned for her birth family, but she fears all the same. They didn't want her as a baby, so why would they want her now? Would they resent her for growing up in the lap of luxury, now an heiress worth millions, when their lifestyle was much more modest? She knows that her mother is still alive, and that she has a twin sister, but basically knows nothing else.

Her childhood friend and neighbor, Evan Brower, actively discourages her from reuniting with her birth family. He's convinced that they would take advantage of her wealth and basically mooch off her, because what else could they be but lazy and spoiled? He's decided that he wants to marry Marjorie, even though he hasn't really shown her any romantic attention ever, and he's bullheaded enough to believe he can bend her to his will simply by wanting her bad enough.

Mercifully, Marjorie has a will of her own, and when she decides to seek out her birth family, she goes right ahead and does it, without telling anyone beforehand or seeking out anyone's permission. She travels to the tiny, shabby house where her family lives and is appalled by the conditions. Her family has fallen into deep poverty, as her father lost his job and they lost their beloved house, the titular Brentwood. They are so poor and hungry that they've sold all of their belongings, save one chair, and are living in the cold, snowy Midwest without gas or coal or food, saving all of their money to buy medicine for the mother, who has taken to her sickbed.

Marjorie immediately springs into action: she pays off the family debts, has the gas turned back on, buys two tons of coal to heat the house, brings in a doctor for her mother (whom she hasn't even seen yet), and buys nutritious food. The first person she meets is her twin sister, Betty, who is actively hostile towards her. One by one she meets the rest of her family: her oldest brother, Ted (about 19), and the younger kids Bud, Sunny, and Bonnie. They are all half-starved and sick, and they are all slow to warm up to Marjorie, but she powers through it, happy to know that she has the means to help them. She meets her father that same evening, but its a few days before she can see her mother - though when she does, it is a joyous reunion!

The family slowly but surely warms up to her and begins to accept her: first as their fairy godmother, then as their sister/daughter. Betty is the longest holdout; she is wary and bitter and jealous, and she struggles with these feelings for the entire story. Ted quickly takes to Marjorie, as they have church-going in common; the younger kids take to her because she is kind to them. Marjorie decides to spend the holiday season with them, leaving her hotel that very first day and moving into their tiny house, sharing a bed with her twin and helping out as much as she can.

She learns of Brentwood from Ted, who still attends a chapel near the house. She makes up her mind to restore her family to their rightful home for Christmas, and goes about it quite smartly. She also helps her siblings and parents in their current abode, especially with food, medicine, and the doctor for mother, and the various sick children. They are coming together and enjoying the holidays; Marjorie meets Gideon Reaver, the young minister that Ted absolutely adores and she is also smitten.

Meanwhile, Evan is simmering with rage in Chicago. Marjorie left no forwarding address, and she went to her heretofore unknown family, against his explicit wishes! Practically the moment he learns where she is, he goes after her, stomping into the Gay family house on Christmas day and demanding that she return to Chicago with him. He's just a complete ass to everyone. Marjorie holds her line, though, refusing to leave with him that day, or any day. She's still deciding what she wants to do for the rest of her life, but his sudden and unwelcome appearance makes one thing crystal clear.

Her family insist that she return to Chicago after the New Year for some time and space to make her decision, whether she wants to come live with them at Brentwood or carry on by herself in the social and luxurious whirlwind to which she is accustomed. Marjorie already knows what she wants even before she returns to the Wetherill mansion, but she abides by their wishes. She dumps Evan for good in an extremely satisfying scene that only gets better because he is as stubborn as he is assholish, and he keeps coming around because he thinks he can change her mind. Haha, joke's on him! This is one GLH heroine who knows her own mind and isn't afraid to assert herself.

In the end, Marjorie is happily reunited with her birth family at Brentwood, and they all live happily ever after :)

The romance is rather blink-and-you'll-miss-it between Marjorie and Gideon. Betty also has a romance with the doctor who's tending them all. We kinda spend equal time with both twins, and it really highlights their differences in their outlooks on life as well as how they fit into the family. I think GLH did a great job exploring the feelings from all sides around the issue of adoption and how it affects everyone involved: the birth parents, the adoptive parents, the child herself and the other siblings.

The "God stuff" is of the born-again variety, which is not my thing, but it wasn't laid on too terribly thick. The fact that this is set at holiday time disguises some of this, too, given the customs around going to church in the Depression era. I enjoyed the entire cast of characters and their interactions, and it was a very happy ending all the way around!