Rating: 2/5

2023
Like probably most of you, I hate to DNF a book. It kills something in a my soul a little. But I just really couldn't go on any further with this story back in 2017. 

Recently, I listened to a really interesting lecture, King Arthur: History and Legend, and the professor mentioned this and said how much she loved it.
So, I decided I'd try it out as an audiobook and see if that made a difference.
The short answer is YES and NO.

Yes, I finished it this time around. 
No, I still did not enjoy this book. 
I guess I'll have to read something else by him in order to see if it's just this particular book, or if it's Twain's writing style that doesn't appeal to me. Because I was aware that there were clever jokes in this, but none of them made me laugh. 
But at least I can say I read the whole thing. And don't have to wonder whether or not the story came together in some amazing way that if I'd just hung in there till the end I would have seen why everyone else loved this one.

2017 DNF 60%

I just came to the realization a few minutes ago that I'm a grown-ass woman who doesn't have to read boring shit.
And this?
This was some boring shit.
I'll be the first to admit that classics aren't always a hit with me, but A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court looked, on the surface, fun enough to be readable.
BZZZZT!

Ok, for example:
This woman (whatshername) is reading a reallyreallyreally dull account of some fight between knights. But instead of just SAYING, "Whatshername reads a really dull account of some fight between knights.", Twain writes out PAGES and PAGES of a really fucking dull fight between knights and forces us to read the goddamn thing!
Fuck you, Mark Twain! FUCK YOU!

So what was this about? Fuck all if I know. All I got out of it (and I read over half) was that Twain hates the Catholic church, and thought people in the middle ages were stinky idiots.

Oh, but Anne! What about Twain's trademark humor?
Where was the funny?! Show it to me! Show me the funny! You can't, because it's NOT there! In fact, this book is like some weird black hole that literally sucks the happiness out of you.
Have you been bitten by a good story lately?
Well, here! This...this is the antidote to a good book.

I started this at the end of January and it's now April. 
I'm calling it. 
Time of death: 8:41 a.m. 4/5/17

Buddy read on 1/30/17 with Jeff, Holly, &amp; Ginger!