Rating: 5/5

HAWAII is a work of historical fiction that was first released in 1959. I am rather a late-comer to reading this novel, but it is one that I have always had on my mind to read after seeing the 1966 movie Hawaii when it was finally run on television. The only images that remain with me, at this point in my life, are one of a man walking on the beach (wearing a stovetop hat and an all black suit!), and, the beautiful Hawaiian people. Michener’s HAWAII has forever seared in my brain a history of mankind who were the eventual stewards of the Hawaiian island chain.

Michener’s is an epic account weighing in at 1,136 pages; and, I appreciate that within the book it contained two maps and genealogical charts of the main families that brought the author’s tale of Hawaii to his readers. There are only six chapters. The chapters:

 1.	“FROM THE BOUNDLESS DEEP” - the arrival of the island chain itself
 2.	“FROM THE SUN-SWEPT LAGOON” - a portrait of the Polynesians of the Pacific
 3.	“FROM THE FARM OF BITTERNESS” – profile of the missionaries called to service
 4.	“FROM THE STARVING VILLAGE” – the Chinese immigrants’ influx as laborers
 5.	“FROM THE INLAND SEA” – Japanese arriving to work in the sugarcane fields

When reading HAWAII it is obvious that Michener spent four years researching and another three years writing what culminated in a work suffused with the minutia necessary for the reader to “live” within the story. There are historical events and characters derived from real people whose names are changed—all interwoven to present all sides of the story of Hawaii. WARNING: Racism and abhorrent language are evident throughout.

This book is truly breathtaking and heart-wrenching. HAWAII has taught me much history while also giving me reasons for certain experiences I’ve known. My heart has ached for Hawaii since being welcomed into a family by a stern Japanese father-in-law and a loving and musical full-blood Hawaiian (very rare in 1978) mother-in-law. My opinion is that the Hawaiians lost much compared with what was “given” them. I think if I lived on the islands, I would definitely be a part of the movement to secede from the United States.

HAWAII is definitely a 5-star read and recommended to everyone!