Rating: 4/5

Re Night of the Condor - SC is dragging us up the Peruvian Andes with an h who just won't quit and hikes up 13,500 feet of Andean mountainside to prove it. 

The story starts with the 22 yr old h, who has more of dad's money than God, taking herself off to Peru to find her unhappy fiance. He had been sent there to work for a year as a test of his love by the h's dad. Plus dad wasn't too fond of the young man and he figured absence would cause the heart to forget, but I guess he forgot whose genetics his daughter had, cause she isn't taking the enforced separation any longer. The letters from her fiance sound more miserable with each epistle and she is going to rescue him, no matter if she has to take on cranky archaeologists, raging rivers, altitude sickness and Incan gods to do it.

She winds up in Lima and starts seeking ways to get to the remote native village where there is an ongoing archaeology dig and an attempt to help the native population. She finds out that there is a man at the hotel to see her, assuming it is her fiance, she tells the disapproving front desk to send him on up to her room. She gussies herself up and is awaiting a joyous reunion, but when she flings open the door, it isn't her fiance standing there. Instead it is a man who could be comparable to an Incan god with the most arresting eyes imaginable. He is the director of the archaeology/native aid project and he is NOT happy to see her. He tells her that her fiance has run off with a mule, and while the mule is sorely missed, the fiance was pretty useless and totally not wanted. 

The h doesn't care, it is her fiance and she wants him, preferably delivered clean and shaven and smelling like Drakkar and it should have happened yesterday. Mr. Incan God archaeologist is not impressed. Dad's money isn't an influence with him, even though dad is paying for the project and Mr. Incan God is willing to bet that dad isn't too happy about the h's little sojourn either. The h loses her temper and kicks him out. Then she sets to scheming. She tries every thing she can think of to get to the remote archy dig, but it is a no go. So she decides to use her bodacious flirty charm to get Mr. Incan God to take her with him. 

She goes to his office and waits around, but he had other plans for the morning, so the h leaves a note inviting him to dinner. Then we get some Inca and Peruvian tourism and we find out the the h DOES NOT APPROVE of Pizzaro ( the guy that killed the last Incan king after stealing a ton of gold from him,) so we know that the h is culturally aware now too and not just another pretty English party girl. Mr. Incan God shows up as planned and the h is dressed to impress and doles out the charm like a geisha. Except the Mr. Incan God doesn't offer her a place on his mule up the mountains, he sweeps her up off to her bed instead. The h is somewhat flabbergasted to say the least, she isn't sleeping with ANYBODY - not even to save her fiance. The H leaves after a few salacious and kinda mean comments and so the h is back to scheming, after she gets most of her clothes back on.

Her plan is simple, she will join an organized excursion to Machu Picchu and then from there she will either hire a jeep or find a mule and camping stuff and set off for the dig site. Her plan goes fairly well on the Machu Picchu part, and then she starts running into a bit of trouble. She gets conned on the poor mule she buys, she has to camp out all alone and she doesn't really have hiking boots that work. She doesn't keep her gear in her tent, so when she wakes up in the morning all her stuff has been stolen. She winds up looking for the next village and she only has her handbag, she had to leave her tent and her sleeping bag behind. 

Then she runs into Mr. Incan God and she has a horrible headache too, he is harnessing up a mule at a native house and she thinks it is hers that he has stolen. She runs up full of accusations and in the tradition of good HP h's everywhere, she passes out after delivering a scathing diatribe. This h actually has a reason to pass out tho, her headache and illness is from altitude sickness. She did not acclimatize in Cuzco and now she is suffering for it. The H and the people he is staying with nurse her over the next three days - SC throws in the traditional native treatment of using Coca leaf tea for altitude sickness and here is where her research comes through, she actually gets it right and has the H explain that yes you can make cocaine out of it, but in unprocessed leaf form, it is a mild stimulant and tonic for various ailments and it is non addictive and won't get you high. 

The H also tells her she has to go back to civilization, but the h swears that Mr. Incan God or not, she will trail along in his footsteps if he won't take her with him. The H reluctantly agrees and they start their trek. Mr. Incan God is Mr. Crankypants all the way, even tho the h manage to impress him by not freaking out when she was admiring the cute little guinea pigs the couple they were staying with kept and wondering how they could afford to keep pets and the H asked her what she thought was in the stew. (Word to the travelers here, if you go to Peru or Machu Picchu don't eat the cuy, get the vegetarian option - srsly- meat is not readily available in cow form and most of the natives rely on vegetative proteins so they are really good at cooking vegetarian style and most dishes are quite tasty with no guinea pigs being harmed.)

The H and h are trekking along, the h is valiantly keeping up even tho this whole experience is completely outside her realm of prior existence and then she starts getting feet blisters. She doesn't have any way to treat them, so she just keeps moving and trying not think about it. Then she finds out she has to share a tent with the H when he crawls in after her and she isn't too delighted. However sleeping outside isn't a good idear with all the insects and even worse when it starts to storm. The h is afraid of thunderstorms, so the H hold her hand to be nice while she drifts off to sleep. In the morning she wakes up wrapped up in the H's arms, he sleepily calls out the name "Isabella" and that makes the h sit right up and slap the H awake too. 

He starts a little seduction attempt and when the h protests, he asks her why shouldn't he get some compensation for his trouble. The h flatly delivers the line that she isn't "Isabella" and the H backs off, in a really cranky mood. The h is satisfied she finally got some payback, tho to be fair she had been flirting her little tail off earlier cause she figured the H was trying to put the moves on her to make go home at the behest of her dad. So the little minx was tormenting him a bit, but during the seduction attempt, the H made it clear he never met her dad and did not care. 

The trekking begins again and soon the H and h are at a big raging river, the h is bathing her feet and the H is rather unhappy that she did not tell him about them. Mainly cause hiking with blistered feet can be very, very bad. Too bad the h did not know about the wonders of duct tape, she could have carried some in her handbag. So now the h has to ride the mule, but there is a raging river to forge. The H finds a spot and he and the mule make it across fine. The h strips off her outer clothes and goes to follow, holding her little bundle above her head. But tragedy strikes, the h missteps and loses her balance and gets swept away down the river. She manages to grab a tree branch and the H pulls her out. Everyone is shaking, (except for the mule, who had a spot of lunch) and the h and H have a passionate kissing moment. 

Then the h has to explain she lost her clothes. The H is not happy at all, he lends her a shirt and hands her a blanket, so the trekking stars up again with h on the mule and one really angry Incan god lookalike. They make to the next village where the doctor there is a friend of the H. The h gets some borrowed clothes and when she is ready to rejoin the H, she hears his friend going on to the H about how useless women like her are and reminding the H of Isabella. The h wanders off again and then joins the H and Dr friend for dinner later, where they mostly ignore her. 

 The h falls asleep, but wakes up in time for the village's fiesta - it is an reenactment of the battle between the Conquistadors and the Incans symbolized by a dance fight between a dancer wearing a bull mask and a dancer wearing a condor mask. The condor is the spirit bird of the native Peruvian people - it is the only bird strong enough to fly to heaven and take messages to the gods. (In fact Machu Picchu was built in the form of a condor flying west - the gateway to the gods.) The villagers are performing the dance in order to invoke the old gods to help out their harvests and there is a lot tension running through the crowd as it looks like the condor might be vanquished by the bull (the dancers are really fighting with the bull horns of the mask and beak of the condor,) but the condor wins in the end and the H and h are transported by the night and physical attraction.

They wind up celebrating the victory in a very elemental way and the H gives the h his pinky gold signet ring to wear. There is a night of love but the H doesn't want to know the h in the morning and the h is now sick with love, so she gives the ring back. Then the h goes off to have breakfast with the H's Dr. friend. 

We find out Isabella was another society rich party lady who was engaged to the H, until she realized that he loves his archaeology dig and helping the native people far too much to leave. They broke up and the h is aware of the fact that to the H, she is just another ignorant party girl. Still, she has to collect her now ex-fiance, he may be stealing cultural artifacts, but it is partly her fault he is there and she needs to get him out of there. 

They finally make it to the village and the dig site. The h's fiance has returned, with the mule, but while everyone is happy to see the mule, no one likes or wants the ex fiance around. Too bad, says the h, she trekked this far and her dad's money is running the place, she wants to see what is going on. The h is very sad tho, cause the H is avoiding her like the plague and there is a lady in the camp that is probably his Spanish on site lover. The h makes herself useful to the nurse who is tending to the native ladies and innerly moping about her unrequited love for the H. She let the fiance know that she wasn't that into him anymore and that she wants him to give back what ever artifacts he stole, she thinks he might have found some Incan gold. 

The H and h meet up again while she is bathing in the river and they wind up lost on the shores of transcendental physical passion again when the H tells her the police are coming for her ex. The h decides she has to get the ex away, she feels guilty he is there and she decides to make him give back the artifacts or gold that he stole too. Maybe the police will just kick him out of the country if she can give the things back and promises that he won't do that again. As much as the h doesn't like him and his nasty attitude towards the natives anymore, she still doesn't want to see him in the really bad prison in Lima. 

The h smuggles some food in a pack for the ex, she is trying to convince him to turn over his relic stash when the Spanish girl the h thought was hooking up with the H shows up and we find out that she is actually the ex's lover. The ex hasn't been stealing priceless Incan artifacts, he has been smuggling coke and the h is horrified. She is even more horrified when the ex knocks his lover out and drags the h off on his escape. The h has no clue where they are going, but she knows it isn't good and then she sees a condor above her and she starts singing to it, hoping the condor will take a message to the H. 

Then the ex gets shot on the precipice of a big cliff, the h falls off the side and lands on a ledge, but the ex is definitely not gonna make it. The h hears someone searching above her, she keeps really quiet and pretends she is dead too, until the person goes away. Then some time later the H and her father show up and the h is saved. She has to recover for a week and all the while her dad is going on about how the H insisted on tracking her and the ex by following a giant condor. The h is missing the H and wondering if she will ever see him again when he shows up and tells her he quit his position on the dig to follow her wherever. He proposes and she will only accept if he takes his job back and they hang out there together. The H is overjoyed and swears true love and the h swears true love back. They get on with the lurve clubbing for a condor approved HPlandia HEA.

This one was good and the h was no doormat at all, there was some really funny parts and SC did a great job on the journey part of the book. I liked how she worked in a lot of native belief and I liked how she had the h grow up and learn some self reliance. The H was pretty good too and for once he wasn't overbearingly mean or cruel. I believed the HEA on this one a I fully recommend it for a great HP road trip read.