Rating: 4/5

There’s a Place for Us … Somewhere

I don’t know why but I simply do love this seemingly ramshackle way in which Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu concocts a novel – a lengthy exposition that apparently lead nowhere particular, introducing all sorts of characters that sometimes fade out of the story, dropping hints and red herrings without putting the reader’s nose into them, as Dickens would have done, employing a narrator that somehow is less than an omniscient narrator but then somehow is just that, leaving gaps at the most strange places and expecting us to fill them, and inserting little stories into his main story. You sometimes get the impression that Le Fanu wrote in a most erratic way, like other people doodle on a scrap of paper, but then, in the end, it all falls into place and you notice that the writer must have known all the time what he was doing.

Such a novel is The Rose and the Key, in which we are invited to root for the self-confident young lady Maud Vernon, who suffers from a cold-hearted mother that has never shown her any trace of love and always kept her at a distance. While she is on a holiday with her elderly cousin Maximilla Medwyn, Maud finds herself stalked by a mysterious one-eyed man, but thinks nothing much of it at the time. She also makes the acquaintance of a young man named Marston, who falls in love with her but whom she keeps at bay through her rather wilful and quirky behaviour. This wilfulness and her various quirks adopted on the spur of the moment are later made use of by her scheming mother to have her confined to a private mental asylum in order to get her out of the way and to further her own interests.

The story is rich in atmosphere and keeps the reader following Maud’s adventures with bated breath, although one cannot help wondering at how naively Maud walks into the trap that is set for her. The novel may also awkwardly be taken as hinting that forward and self-confident behaviour does not behove a young lady in that they may nourish suspicions about her mental soundness, but that only happens in the rare moments when the novel grants you some pause to think.

To top it all, there are also some passages of wry humour, like this one in which a professor (actually a madman who deems himself a scholar – but then, differences are hard to tell), who claims to have invented a perpetuum mobile, is accosted by a mad woman who thinks herself a duchess:

“’Well, Mr. Sidebotham, how goes on the perpetual motion?’ And raising her eyes, Maud saw the Duchess of Falconbury before her, smiling.

‘That is a question that answers itself,’ said the professor, slowly averting his face with upturned nose and a sublime sneer. ‘How goes on the perpetuum mobile? Why it goes on for ever? Ha, ha, ha!’”

If you like Victorian sensation novels, and if you have a bit of patience to wait for Sheridan Le Fanu to prepare his ground and then start the chase, I think that The Rose and the Key will not disappoint you.