It was the day Gabrielle de Montfleuri became betrothed to Louis Chauvin. The people of Arcadia, Canada were all in attendance for the party as well as Englisman, Neill Carddock, agent for the C &amp; C Trading Company. He had come to see Chauvin about acquiring some furs. 
Gabrielle had been born in France and come to Canada to live on land given to her father from King Louis XV. When her father died, the land reverted to the Crown so she was told that her family were penniless. Chauvin was the wealthiest man in town and he had taken care of her family. Her mother had been dead for a year and she had a 16 yr. old brother, Simon. Chauvin was 19 years older than Gabrielle but wanted her for his bride. She was grateful to him and agreed to marry him. 
While the townspeople were at his house, the English surrounded them and ended up deporting them all to the colonies. Families were separated after chaos erupted and one of the men of Arcadia was shot. This group of people were put on 2 ships that didn't end up in the same port. Gabrielle was sent to Boston along with Neill. She was determined to find Chauvin and Simon. She searched with Neill's help. 
Neill helped Gabrielle with her search because he was deeply attracted to her. Although he was English, he disapproved of what was happening to her people. They arrived in Boston and he spoke with his partner in the trading company. He helped Gabrielle find a family to stay with. She found out that another ship had come into port. She was hoping that it was the one with her fiancee and brother but it wasn't. She met with the people on this ship and took notes and names to pass on should she find other members of their families. She found out that over 6,000 of the French people who lived in Arcadia had been displaced in the same manner as she and her friends from Laforet. 
She and Neill traveled to Philadelphia. They were stopped by robbers on the road but escaped being killed. She was looking for her family while he used his work as a reason for his journey. He met and they stayed with C &amp; C employees during their journey. In Philadelphia, she met more people from Arcadia but didn't locate Simon or Chauvin. She heard they might be in the Carolina's so they headed that direction. The two of them continued to grow closer and at times fought their attraction to each other and other times got swept away with their passions but never let it go too far. After they would kiss, they would avoid each other as much as possible for days or weeks at a time. 
Their next stop was Williamsburg where they met with the Colonel. He decided that he wanted Gabrielle. They met again with the man who had been in charge of deporting Gabrielle and the people of her village. Neill was arrested and Gabrielle was taken to a house to wait for the Colonel to meet her. Neill met Guy Richaud and the minister who had preformed the betrothal ceremony also imprisoned there. Neill and Guy managed to escape. Neill went to find Gabrielle so that they could leave together while Guy went away on his own. 
They continued on toward the Carolina's with Neill now having a price on his head. Neill learned that Chauvin and Simon were rumored to have left, headed for the island of San Domingo. Chauvin was supposed to own land on the French inhabited island. They headed toward San Domingo with the first leg taking them to New Orleans. They arrived in New Orleans after surviving a storm at sea where Gabrielle was swept overboard and rescued by Neill. 
The two of them enjoyed New Orleans and Gabrielle was happy to be surrounded once again by French speaking people. Neill proceeded to use his time there to work on expanding his business. He was accepted there even though he was English because he was with Gabrielle and let it be known that he didn't like the way the English had treated the people of Arcadia. 
Neill and Gabrielle became lovers during their time in New Orleans. Neill told Gabrielle that he was in love with her and wanted to marry her. Gabrielle told Neill in response that she loved him too but she couldn't marry him without being released from her betrothal to Chauvin. Neill sent a letter to San Domingo for Chauvin requesting his permission to marry Gabrielle. 
They were at a party one evening at the house of Baron de Sandoville. Gabrielle was both surprised and pleased to meet people there who had known her father. Her and Neill and walking outside in the gardens and tt was there that they once again ran into Guy Richaud. Guy had become gardener to the Baron. Gabrielle and Neill found out that Guy had found his wife and daughter and brought them back to New Orleans with him. They went to see them and spent some time reconnecting with their friends. 
The winter months saw good times for Neill and Gabrielle. Neill had someone construct a spinning wheel for Gabrielle and he gave it to her as a present. They heard nothing from Chauvin and another message was sent to him. Gabrielle had found herself tired of waiting for Chauvin to release her from the betrothal and finally agreed to marry Neill. 
There came a day when the Governor and the Baron requested Neill come see them. They met and discussed both business and the politics of a war between the colonies and France and England. Gabrielle was also discussed. The Baron had sent some inquiries to France regarding Gabrielle. He had discovered that Chauvin had lied to Gabrielle. There was a large sum of money and an inheritance waiting for her in France. Neill was told that Chauvin would never release Gabrielle from her vows because she was a wealthy woman and he knew it. 
Neill headed home and was met by a large group of men trying to kill him. The Baron and the Governor heard the disturbance and with the Baron's servants, had come to Neill's aid. Neill hurried to his residence to find the servants wounded or tied up. Gabrielle had been taken by Chauvin. It was from the servants that Neill learned that Chauvin was taking Gabrielle to Virginia. The Baron felt partially to blame for Gabrielle being taken because of not telling Neill of his suspicions regarding her inheritance sooner. He told Neill that he had a ship that he was willing to let Neill use for his journey as well as sending some of his men with Neill to help him get Gabrielle away from Chauvin.
Gabrielle learned many things about Chauvin on the journey to Williamsburg. She discovered that he had lied about her being poor and the reasons he had for educating her and keeping her in Laforet. She learned that he had betrayed the Acadians by gathering them together the night of their betrothal so that they could be deported. Chauvin was given money for his help in the deportation gathering. Gabrielle was returned to the place where Neill had once rescued her after escaping his imprisonment. Gabrielle saw Simon as he was being carted away from the warehouse where he had being kept. Neill had never known that Simon was there during the same time he was there with Guy. Gabrielle saw Simon as he was being taken to an English ship where he had been sold as a slave to the English to fight as a soldier for the country he hated so much. 
Chauvin came to the room and told Gabrielle that they were to be married within the hour and that he was waiting for Neill to come rescue her. He would never arrive because traps were laid to see that he was killed. Chauvin told Gabrielle that he would see what he could do to free Simon so that the three of them could return to France as a wealthy family after they were married. Gabrielle told him that she would kill herself before she would allow him to touch her. Chauvin told her that there was nothing within reach for her to harm herself. He was surprised to see Neill hiding in the room.
Neill told Chauvin that he knew a trap had been set for him so he created his own distraction. They got into a fight and Neill was just about ready to leave with Gabrielle using Chauvin as a shield when the army showed up. All three of them were separated for the night and were scheduled to meet with the Colonel in the morning. 
They were gathered together in the morning along with Simon who had escaped and then been recaptured when he followed Neill to see about rescuing Gabrielle. The Colonel that Chauvin had worked with had been replaced by a man who served with Neill and told him the respected his bravery for refusing to burn a city and its residents when he was in the military. The man heard the storied told by all and all of what Chauvin did was exposed. Chauvin was who ended up arrested and put in jail. 
Neill was convinced that Gabrielle should return with Simon to France to claim their inheritance. She tried to convince him that she would stay with him but their conversation was interrupted by Simon fighting with the Englishman who had driven the cart that was to transport them into slavery. Neill interfered and stopped Simon from getting into more trouble. It was then that Gabrielle saw that Neill meant what he said when he stated that they came from two different worlds and they weren't meant to be together. 
They didn't see each other after that and the time soon came for them to leave by ship to New Orleans and then on to France. Neill had been away conducting C &amp; C business. He returned to see Simon and Gabrielle off but hadn't yet spoken to her. Simon confronted Gabrielle and asked her if she was in love with Neill. She admitted that she was and Simon told her that she needed to go to him. He had matured enough to return to France on his own claim their inheritance. He spotted Neill in the crowd and told Gabrielle. Gabrielle went to him and told him that they were meant to be together. Neill told her that they needed to go find her priest and have him perform their marriage ceremony.