Rating: 5/5

I read this when I was 14 and have been rereading it ever since!
 
This is a creepy, compelling, and suspenseful little novel, one that, in my opinion, might have given Nancy Drew a run for her money had it been spun out into a long-running series.

 
 I'd even swallow the requisite romance between Kelly (I love that Christina figures him out and calls him on his crap in the end) and Christina if it meant getting to watch Christina investigate cases. 

 Of course, she’d do this over her family's and detective Yorke's objections.

Admonitions of "Stay out of this investigation, Christina" from detective York, and the finger-shaking commands to”think of the family, Christina” from a disapproving Cristobel would be met with Christina's unique brand of defiance.
 Meanwhile, Kelly, who wouldn't be a manipulative user, would draw on what connections he has as a budding journalist to dig up what he could on suspects.

 I'd have also like to have gotten a fuller picture of Christina's life, though Nickson does a pretty decent job with this, even in a shorter novel like TKOCL.

 Still, I was left wondering just how Christina made out after deciding to get out from under her controlling grandmother's thumb. Did she find a way to get to Europe on her own dime? Is she working her way through college?

 Does Cristobel ever loosen her death grip on the family and allow things to work themselves out? Do her parents grow spines anytime soon?

 Do she and Lorna ever get back to what they were before the kidnapping? 
 To be clear, Lorna's treatment of Christina in the wake of what happened really, really grated. I don't know how she made the leap from "my friend is really pissed at her dad's religious objections to the class trip and at her controlling ice queen of a grandmother for backing him" to "this chick totally faked a kidnapping so that she could get the money for said trip."

 For that matter, maybe it's the one failing in an otherwise fantastic book, but I'm struggling, even after all this time, to understand how Christina was supposed to have explained away the sudden windfall that would have enabled her to take the trip. Was no one supposed to make the connection after the fact?

 Besides, say she somehow got the money (maybe a generous parent of a classmate decided to sponcer her), could she have simply gone out of the country without her parents' approval? Would the school, not to mention the law, have gone for that? Money hadn't been the only problem; her father had deep objections to her taking the trip that had nothing to do with money.
 
Maybe it's me, but this aspect of the case never quite made sense. 
 
All in all, this is a great introduction to the mystery genre for younger readers who want to move out of the relatively safe (this isn't counting the darker and more adult versions) of the Nancy Drew mysteries and into something with a bit more of an edge.