Rating: 4/5

When Sarah Jay, John Jay's wife, was drafting the toasts that would celebrate the American Revolution in Paris, one of her toasts was "May all our Citizens be Soldiers, and all our Soldiers Citizens." (236). Given that at the time, women could almost never be soldiers, that seemed to suggest that they could not be citizens either. And later legal development certainly suggested that women's citizenship could be lost by the conduct of their husbands. 

Kerber brings out some of the usually-suppressed strains in the Whig myth* of increasing freedom and dignity for all. She explores how women's freedom from obligations, particularly from the military and jury service, was tied up with women's lack of autonomy before the law. 

From this book I learned that the constitutions of nine of the original thirteen states articulated the duty of the citizen to serve and the power of the state to compel him to do so. (242). Since women had not duty to serve they were also, in a deep sense, not citizens. 

The book takes its title from testimony given by Eagle Forum member Kathleen Teague before the House Armed Services Committee on the subject of whether women would be subject to the draft. Seems she said that "'The right to be treated like ladies' . . . is a right 'which every American woman has enjoyed since our country was born.'" xxiv. This book examines the unspoken premise there, that women do not have direct obligations to the State but merely to their families. A premise that, in 1789, was largely law. The consequence was, in almost every way, that women lacked autonomy and dignity before the law.

*"When I began to write this book, I expected that I would find the succeeding generations brought successive issues to closure; that the fragility of women's independent citizenship in the early republic would be resolved by the married women's property acts of the mid-nineteenth century . . . . The story I have told is not what historians once called 'Whig history': a single narrative of progress from the era of the Revolution to the present. Instead, it is a set of complex accounts, often circling on themselves, in which we are challenged to be attentive to the relationship between obligation and rights, and through which we can understand that women, like men, have always been part of the national political culture. We cannot embrace the rights without acknowledging the obligations, Nor do we have the option of limiting ourselves to the voluntarily embraced duties; there waits a steel hand in a velvet glove to enforce obligations." (308).