Rating: 4/5

Another novel in Isaac Asimov’s Robot series, The Naked Sun is another solid entry with some interesting concepts and sophisticated questions and themes that it explores. In this one, we once again have duo of human plainclothesman detective Elijah Baley and his robot partner, R. Deneel Olivaw called in to investigate a murder. 

It seems that in the Outer World on a planet named Solaria a highly unlikely occurrence has taken place: a murder of one of its inhabitants, Ricaine Delmarre. It has become quite a sensation on this planet because: 1) they virtually have zero police and 2) the victim (and largely the population) mostly communicate via a holographic image rather than in person. For this reason, all signs point to the one to see him, his wife Gladia. 

It feels like the setting and, just in general exploration of rules, etiquette and customs on the planet Solaria takes precedent over the actual mystery. It feels like the mystery itself is the vehicle by which several important thematic matters and issues and questions are posed, one of them being “To what extent is one on one contact or familiarity with individuals a necessary part of a functioning and healthy society?” (Readers might see some similarities in our own modern world in how we, too, often avoid personal contact in favor of texting, or other methods of technology). 

What I particularly liked was how Asimov gradually lays the groundwork of how Solaria operates and functions as a society through the lens of our protagonist Baley. There is a slow burn of gradual revelations as Baley digs deeper into the investigation, particularly how both the Solarians and the robots function. Also, as with all the Robot novel, the Robot rules come into prime focus as he conducts this crime case. 

At certain points, there is also an internal conflict that rages within Baley, as he not only confronts his own phobias of open spaces, but also deals with the contrasts between the confined Earth and the open-aired Solaria and tries to decipher how to proceed and dutifully carry out his job: 

“He was trapped on Solaria by the necessities of his assignment. He was trapped by Earth’s danger, trapped in an environment he could scarcely endure, trapped by a responsibility he could not shirk. And, to add to all this, he was trapped somehow in the midst of a Spacer conflict the nature of which he did not understand.” 

This one is a little exposition-heavy in the first half, but this definitely clarifies life on the planet Solaria but also is pivotal in later plot developments. I like how Asimov finishes the novel with not only the solving of the case but examines extensive ideas that will likely be explored in the next book in the Robot series. 

I always find Asimov’s novels interesting and an entertaining time. I would like to dig into the Foundation series in the future and have it on my to-read radar, as well as the next in the Robot series, The Robots of Dawn.