Rating: 5/5

First this volume has been published under two different titles in North America it is published as ‘The Young Man and the Sea’ in the UK it is published as ‘Lobster Boy’, at the time of the writing of this review there are 27 editions on Goodreads under the former name and 3 under the latter. Apparently Philbrick wanted the ‘Lobster Boy’ title, but the publisher kept referring to as ‘The Young Man and the Sea’ and it ended up sticking. And it has been through a wide range of covers over the last 12 years.

A few months ago I was having a discussion with a young man in his early 20’s and asked about his favourite book, because that is what bibliophiles do. He immediately said this Freak the Mighty, no hesitation, no pause just an immediate answer. I looked it up later in the day and discovered there was two books in that series and also a movie. While working on the review of the first Mighty book, I found at least a dozen I was interested in just from the titles. So this is the sixth volume by Rodman reading not quite one every other week, and every time I read one the list of ones I want to read grows! I have now compiled a list of all books published by Philbrick, under his various pen names. I enjoyed that first one so much I had picked up 3 other volumes by Philbrick before I even finished it! And by the time I had read three I had picked up nearly a dozen. 

I have been publishing reviews for 21 years now, first in papers and magazines and then on my blog and other platforms. I continue to read and write reviews because I must. I am a dyslexic bibliophile. I have tagged Scholastic over 450 times on my blog for reviews of books, or for my Top Ten Lists each quarter or year. I was greatly surprised I had not encountered Philbrick, it was absolutely my loss. Back to the book at hand. 

The description of the ‘The Young Man and the Sea’ edition states:

 “A story of determination and survival from the acclaimed author of FREAK THE MIGHTY. "This thrilling and elegant book ... will hold the interest of even the most stalwart landlubber." -- PW

Twelve-year-old Skiff Beaman's mom just died, and his fisherman dad is too depressed to drag himself off the couch and go to work. So these days Skiff has to take care of everything himself.

But when his dad's boat sinks, Skiff discovers it will cost thousands to buy a new engine. Skiff's lobster traps won't earn him enough, but there are bigger fish in the sea -- bluefin tuna. If he can catch one of those monster fish, Skiff just might save the boat -- and his family.”

The description of the ‘Lobster Boy’ edition states:

“Skiff Beaman has a problem. A BIG problem. He needs to fix up his family's fishing boat, but to do that he needs money. A whole heap of money.His father isn't going to help – he can't see further than the next can of beer since Skiff's mother died – and nor is his classmate, Tyler, inventor of the nickname "Lobster Boy".But Skiff can still hear his mother's voice telling him "Never give up". So he comes up with a plan. It's crazy, it's dangerous, and it's going to take all Skiff's grit and strength to win a great battle against the sea. An inspirational and compelling action-packed tale by the internationally bestselling author, Rodman Philbrick.”

About the author in another volume we are informed:

“After years of writing mysteries and suspense thrillers for adults, Rodman Philbrick decided to try his hand at a novel for young readers. That novel, Freak the Mighty, was published in 1993 to great acclaim and stellar reviews. In addition to being named an ALA Best Book for Young Adults and winning several state awards, it was also made into the Miramax feature film The Mighty in 1998. Rod returns to Maxwell Kane’s story in a sequel, Max the Mighty, a fast-paced cross-country odyssey.
Rod takes young readers to the American West in his exhilarating tale of two brothers on the run in The Fire Pony, winner of the Capital Choice Award, and on to a land where nothing is as it seems in the science-fiction adventure REM World. His thought-provoking novel The Last Book in the Universe, also an ALA Best Book for Young Adults, takes place in a futuristic world where no one reads anymore. Rod thought back to his New England roots and knowledge of boat building to write The Young Man and the Sea. School Library Journal praised its “wide-open adventure” and “heart-pounding suspense” and named it a Best Book of the Year in 2004.
Rodman Philbrick has also written several spine-tingling series for young readers with his wife, Lynn Harnett, including The House on Cherry Street and The Werewolf Chronicles. Rod and Lynn divide their time between homes on the coast of Maine and in the Florida Keys.”

There are supplemental sections at the end of each edition. For the US edition they are:

Acknowledgements
About the Author
Q&amp;A with Rodman Philbrick
Rod’s Writing Tips
A Sneak Peek at Freak the Mighty

In the UK Edition they are:

A Conversation with Rodman Philbrick
About the Author (In his own words)
Sneak Preview of Fire Pony by Rodman Philbrick
Freak the Mighty by Rodman Philbrick
More Usborne fiction

A quick check and the text appears to be identical or nearly so. 

This story could be considered a school story because of the school age protagonist, but the events take place over summer vacation. But in many ways it is a father son story. It is a story of both of them dealing with loss. And the son, Skiff Beaman, is just trying to keep things up after the passing of his mother. He wants to restore the family boat in the hopes his father will start working again. He wants to fix things, first the boat, then his father. But life at times is a lot harder than many expect. And Skiff is just trying to live by the three rules him mother instilled in him, and her voice reminding him what she would say in different situations. 

The volume is clearly written in homage to The Old Man and the Sea, And Moby Dick. It is written in a way that when young readers encounter them later in life they will recognize the echoes. And for us older readers we will se a similar story with very different eyes.

This is another excellent story from Philbrick’s masterful pen. It reminds me a lot of the works of Andrew Clements or Gordon Korman, Tony Abbott, and Dan Gutman. All of whom I loved and have read numerous stories. Because of the various genres he writes in I am beginning to think of him as an American Arthur Slade. I am really surprised I had not encountered the author previously. These first six books are so great; I might just end up reading everything from the author. After reading more Philbrick I am also being reminded more of Madeleine L’Engle who wrote adult fiction, nonfiction, children’s fiction, teen fiction, and even theology. 

This is another one of those excellent stories for middle grade or tween readers. It is even strong enough for us older folks for I am in my mid 50’s and could not put it down and read it over an afternoon, over several mugs of tea. It is a very moving story, one I can easily recommend. And I know I will be reading more by Philbrick and the various names he publishes under!