Rating: 5/5

In 1915 Vahan Kenderian was living a wealthy life in Turkey. His world full of privileges came crumbling down when his family is torn apart by the Turkish soldiers. In a short moment, Vahan loses his family one by one and even buries his own family in his backyard. But with the courage he has gotten from his father, you will undertake how Vahan survived during the Armenian genocide. 
	Vahan deals a lot with being alone. He has often found a home to stay at for a few weeks, but then must leave as the family gets worried about being caught with an Armenian. “The problem with loneliness is that, unlike other forms of human suffering, it teaches us nothing, leads us nowhere, and generally devalues us in our own eyes and the eyes of others” (Bagdasarian, pg. 130, 2000). As the story progresses further, Vahan tries to stay with the consulate that his father knew. He then starts to realize that him being overly kind was just a mask to cover up who he truly was. “Only later did I realize how inhuman a well-dressed, well-spoken, charming man could be” (Bagdasarian, pg. 125, 2000). 
	Another theme behind this book is not to get too attached to what you have because in a blink of an eye, it could be gone. For example, Vahan lived a in privileged household who had everything he wanted. Once the Turkish soldiers came, his life turned around and he never saw his family again. Once Vahan is officially on his own he meets a girl in the consulates’ household. She stays out in the horses stable alongside Vhan. Vahan became very attached her because she was a girl and he had a friend in this lonely world. Every night the soldiers would come out and rape her. But one night, when vahan touched her face, he realized she was gone. “I leaned close to her and touched her face. Two soldiers carried her body out of the stable” (Bagdasarian, pg 137, 2000). Later in the book, Vahan meets another girl named Seta. She lives with a different consulate and Vahan also has different parents. Once Vahan sees this girl, he knows he wants to be with her. She gets pregnant by the consulate himself, and seven days after she gave birth, she was pronounced dead. “Seven days after she had given birth, she was dead” (Bagdasarian, pg. 230, 2000).
	The plot of this story is based around the Armenian Genocide that started on April 24, 1915 to 1923. Vahans’ experience is to touch you deep within on how horrible his life was once the genocide took place. Vahan takes you on a world of surprises and roller coasters through out his life as a young boy. You get to understand how survival of the fittest takes on a whole other meaning when you’re completely alone with a surrounding world of murder.
	This book will give you the thrill and earth-shattering experience as you’re reading this book. If you’re someone who likes to read about wars and how someone survived during it, then this book is exactly for you. Not only will you really love this book, you will see how easy life is now then it was back in 1917.