Rating: 2/5

The introduction notes that this text is part of a debate between comedians on the nature and purpose of the thalian arts. The classical theory, “which Ben Jonson had handed on to the Restoration playwrights,” contended that “the purpose of comedy was to expose, by hardheaded, satirical ridicule, the follies and vices” (vii) of fictional persons so as to correct those defects in the Real. We might think of it as a Hegelian theory of comedy, defined by the confrontation of Right with Wrong (as opposed to tragedy, the confrontation of Right with Right)—does Malvolio, for instance, have any plausible Right (as opposed to Goneril)? Goldsmith by contrast thinks that “folly, instead of being ridiculed, is commended” (ix), a sentimental representation that teaches audiences to pardon and sympathize.

This debate is taken up in the text. The Prologue promises that those who deal in “sentimentals” will succeed (xvi), and the aesthetic polemic continues with lines such as “I have often been surprised how a man of sentiment could ever admire those light airy pleasures where nothing reaches the heart” and “There must be some who, wanting a relish for refined pleasures, pretend to despise what they are incapable of tasting” (25). Some equivocation perhaps on whether it possible to be “too grave and sentimental” (39).

Plenty of wit and mistaken identity and whatnot otherwise to go around. As the title suggests, there is a class conflict here. The title refers specifically to  one character’s being “obliged to stoop to dissimulation to avoid oppression” (68).

Whereas a “reserved lover, it is said, always makes a suspicious husband,” it is difficult when “I’m disposing of a husband, before I have secured the lover” (5)—but one also can be ‘threatened with a lover” (6), NB.

Some dialectic between impudence and modesty: “An impudent fellow may counterfeit modesty, but I’ll be hanged if a modest man can ever counterfeit impudence” (15) and thereafter. This is tied into a repeated refrain about the rights arising from the oikos: “a man in his own house” being unrestrained (19 e.g.). This is all ultimately confounded (a repeated term in the text) in a character’s “modest impudence” (58) on the one hand and another’s “mild, modest, sentimental man of gravity” (67) on the other.

Recommended for those who find the art of reconciling contradictions, readers who send forth sublime commands in peremptory tones, and persons who mistake assiduity for assurance and simplicity for allurement.