Rating: 4/5

“It’s not an important novel. I failed of eloquence and many of the immediate issues are rapidly fading away.” said Ralph Ellison in an interview after Invisible Man was published in 1952 and was showered with praise &amp; won the National Book Award (&amp; since then is a regular in lists of greatest 20th century novels.)

Regarding the fading away of immediate issues : in one episode, a black guy is chased by a cop, turns and lands a punch on the cop, who falls, points his gun and shoots the black guy dead. This whole sequence up to and including the community’s outrage and the local politician’s grandstanding has been replicated beat for beat in all those recent police killings (and the next one when it comes) in the USA. The duplication was stunning. So with respect, Ralph was wrong about the fading away of some of his issues. Unfortunately.

WHERE DO I BEGIN

This is quite a tough book to review. It’s big and very loud. There is a long winding road our unnamed young black man takes from true believer to bitter cynic, and this happens not once but twice. 

You could say he is an invisible man, not seen as a real person by anyone, and at the same time, it takes him a long time to see through the fabrications of other people. I guess you could say that!

Firstly he gets disillusioned with his black college – specifically with the nasty unprincipled Principal. Then he moves to Harlem and gets employed by the Communist Party, which RE calls the Brotherhood, and I’m not so sure he joins as a true believer, but he gets on board with the program :

We recognised no loose ends, everything could be controlled by our science. Life was all pattern and discipline.

But he fairly quickly sees that 

I was simply a material, a natural resource to be used

And further, that when it comes to black people, the CP weren’t enlightened at all :

Outside the Brotherhood we were outside history; but inside it they didn’t see us. It was a hell of a state of affairs, we were nowhere

THE B WORD

About half of this large novel is about our guy and his struggles inside the Brotherhood, and sorry to say, the reader gets awfully tired of this B word. Maybe it is supposed to be a humorous exaggeration of the way communists talked, but it wears thin:

“Be more specific, Brother,” Brother Garnett, a white Brother, said .

and

Now several brothers started to speak at once, and Brother Jack knocked for order. “Brothers, please!” Brother Jack said. 

WHAT THE NEW YORK TIMES SAID AT THE TIME

Parts of it consist of long and impassioned, sometimes hysterical, reveries which are frequently highly obscure. Other parts still seem grotesquely exaggerated or repetitious. And these strange interludes are overwritten in an ultra pretentious, needlessly fancy way. Spasms of torrential rhetoric, they obscure the point of some of Mr. Ellison's symbolic incidents and check temporarily the swift course of his story.

(it sounds like a one-star review, but they actually did like it!)

This is a book full of big talkers, and none bigger than our embattled narrator – really, it’s him doing all the talking. And it is perfectly true that RE loves to conjure up towering piles of lurid anguished frothy clogged meditations at the drop of a hat. It gives a stop-start feeling to the whole thing. Maybe this is sacrilegious, but it could possibly might be that some of the more repetitious bitter self-accusations could have been snipped. 

LINGUISTIC NOTE

There is one f word, one more surprising c word, and several mentions of people being “motherfoulers”, which I haven’t come across anywhere else. Also one mention of the word “groovy” in an approbatory sense. Also : “You black and beautiful!” on p301.

CONFRONTING STEREOTYPES

There are stereotypes everywhere you look. There is the toadying stooge Dr Bledsoe. There is a character Ras the Exhorter, who promotes Black Nationalism. There is an older black woman who briefly turns into the mother he never had. There is a white woman who wants our guy to pretend to rape her. There are the party apparatchiks, especially Brother Jack, sincere programmed robots the lot of them. There are looters and rioters from central casting. Hopping and skipping and ducking and diving, always in a mad rush, our guy spends the whole novel trying to figure out what the hell is going on.

Eventually he decides the best place to be is in a basement underground, hiding from the world. 

It’s such a melancholy image.