Rating: 1/5

This should be renamed the "Unwilling reader".. I only was able to make it through this story by flipping furiously ahead. First, there wasn't any romance.. not one iota..nada..nothing. The H and HE didn't even have a slightly romantic scene until 70% into the book. 
The Duke heirs all pass away, and all he has left is his younger son, whom is not really his. The Duke finds out he has sired a daughter with a one night stand, and then contrives to have them marry. He threatens them both and they marry. The rest of the story is arguments, (which are boring at best), and misunderstandings. At one point in the book, when they are going to finally consummate their marriage, (70% into the book), the hero finds some discarded men's clothes in his bedroom and hits the Heroine and then slams her into the wall. She promptly forgives him, ( like the next sentence), and he tells her he loves her. That is the only romance.. 
Now, I like the old Bodice rippers, which are filled with rape, violence etc. Yet, this hitting scene was out of place. Not only that, there was no real ask for forgiveness. He hits her, says I'm sorry , "I love you", and she reply's.."Hey that's ok". Even when he tells her he loves her, it is totally unbelievable, since there is no romance leading up to it. 
Then a totally unbelievable story line happens, that has to do with one of her past students, an unwanted bridegroom , the hero's ex-mistress, his wife and some friends. It is a hurried plot line , since it occurs 80% into the book, more unbelievable things occur, and then the ending happens with the heroine dressed as a prostitute, which everyone thinks is a riot. The plot at the end was hurried at best, and totally unbelievable, and not even engaging . I literally just wanted the book to end. It certainly was not a historical romance ,(and I am pretty liberal in what I consider historical), just because an author add's carriages and describe period clothing , doesn't make it a historical. 
I have read the previous "company of rogues", and thought it horrid at best.. obviously the series does not get better. 
It's a sorry state that historical romances have become in this day in age...