Rating: 5/5

Quote from start of book

"At Lincoln
The 11th Day of April, A.D. 1212

"It is impossible to think. The hammering and clatter from the yard is terrible. And in my chambers, they are packing me.

"We've had two weeks of rain, the roads to Corfe are fit for frogs.

"I do not choose to go. My place is here. Someone is screaming in the yard; undoubtedly, we've lost another mason. They are putting up a new west face to our cathedral. Pride and wastefulness. The old face kept the weather out.

"I must attempt to be more orderly.

"This morning, I was called from prayer. That's never lightly done. I knew at once that something must be very wrong. A clerk, a man of no particular importance; he was waiting in the cloister with, he said, a message from the King.

"I have the text in front of me. It reads:

"'The King to Giraldus Cambrensis: Whatever greeting is due you. We order you to join us here at once. MYSELF AS WITNESS, at Corfe on the 2nd day of April in the 14th year of our reign.'

"Peremptory. Arrogant. No trace of courtesy. Why am I being summoned? 

"For how long? What clothes am I to take? And does he think that I do nothing here? Across the table from me at this moment are the notes for my Prinicipia Universalis. Nothing on this scale has been attempted since Lucretius, who is all right in his way but sadly out of date.

"I've never been much loved by these Plantagenets. Perhaps because I write the truth. And truth, as Esdras tells us--I, 3:10--'beareth away the victory.' Which is more than it has ever done for me. We did not part on happy terms, King John and I.

"They have just come to tell me I am packed. We leave at Lauds, well before the sun is up; this clerk, myself and, of my servants, only Jean, my cook. The King sets an uncertain table; either prodigal or desolate, depending on his mood. I see no reason why, no matter what my future holds, I should not go on dining to the end with some consistency.

"I must go and bid farewell to Hugh. He's not as great a bishop as I might have been; but never mind all that. He is an honest man and I shall miss him.

"Till next time, if God wills its. 

"G."

"At Buckingham
The 14th Day of April, A.D. 1212

"How strange it seems, this being on the roads again. We pass through towns I have not seen in years, past churches shuttered by the Inderdict. So much has changed. Or has it? Is it me? Tomorrow, Oxford. Will it be as I remember?

"I was forty-six years younger when I saw it for the first time. I had been in Paris studying the Trivium; to some acclaim, it must be said. 1167. It was then that Becket and King Henry were at one another's throats and all of us in residence, the masters and the students, were recalled to England.

"Oxford in those days was nothing much. One hundred students, possible, attending lectures on theology delivered by the current deacon or the prior, nameless men of small distinction. Then we came, the refugees from Paris. That was the beginning.

"It took time, of course, and labor, none of which was mine. In any case, four years ago, when last I saw it. Oxford was a university of fifteen hundred students with a faculty of scholars led by Map himself. He's gone now, Map is, dead of age at sixty-nine. They buried him with honors. I was there.

"Till next time, if God wills it.

"At Oxford
The 16th Day of April, A.D. 1212

"The university is desolate. The buildings, like so many bones, still stand about, but all the life is gone. It is a shocking thing to see.

"We arrived in time for Vespers yesterday. The sun was shining for a change as we came down the High Road from the north, past Beaumont Castle and Saint Frideswide's. Carts and wagons everywhere. The town itself is thriving. The demand for cloth, I'm told, keeps rising; there are weavers opening up on all sides and the marketplace was thick with people. ...

... "The fellow fled. In rage, the people of the town descended on Saint Mary's and went off with several students. These they held for weeks, and having asked for and received the King's consent, hanged two of them.

"There was a quick diaspora. The masters and the students, reading what was written on the wall, dispersed. Some went to Paris, some to Reading, and a large group went to Cambridge, where, it seems, they hope to form another university.

"It was late when they had finished and they took me to Map's chambers for the night. I've had no rest. The first bells of the morning should be ringing soon. John prowls, he keeps on prowling through my thoughts. He loves books and destroys a university' he studies law and lets two students hang. He's made of parts that will not fit, like all his family. Damn these Plantagents. They plague me, I've had forty years of it. King Henry and Queen Eleanor and all their sons, alive and dead: I've served them, every one.

***

(This "undrat*" in memory, has blended with Sharon Penman's depictions of King John. 
Here be Dragons

For readers familiar with the author's screenplay, Lion in Winter, Witness might be a sequel, an informative, entertaining view of King John. (*Under-rated)

***

A copied and pasted KIRKUS REVIEW - contains spoilers, as do most Kirkus reviews.

King John of England, from 1212 to his death in 1216; no, not the badman of Robin Hood and Shakespeare, but a tortured semi-hero of national unity--as seen by the witty, learned Mr. Goldman (The Lion in Winter, The Man from Greek and Roman) through the wary eyes of scholar-cleric Giraldus Cambrensis, a bitter Welshman who's ordered to come out of retirement and chronicle the king's battles against enemies at home and abroad. ""He loves books and destroys a university; he studies law and lets two students hang. He's made of parts that will not fit, like his family. Damn these Plantagenets. They plague me. . . . "" So writes Giraldus in the diary that is the whole of this book, and the chief pleasure here is the dustless, contemporary Goldman/Giraldus approach to history--an unstilted, burly, aphoristic tone (""And the people: they have eyes like little stones and souls like raisins. France is too good for Frenchmen"") that only occasionally slips over into distracting anachronism or shallow phrasemaking (""peace is like fornication: there is no way one can manage it alone""). Unfortunately, however, Giraldus' wry narrative, though sometimes dotted with emotional involvement, always keeps us at a distance from the story--and that story, since Goldman sticks close to the facts, is a disjointed one, bouncing back and forth between two linked, ongoing crises: John's much-planned invasion of France; and his problems with rebellious barons at home, barons who hold the purse-strings and manpower needed for foreign wars. True, there are vivid, ironic vignettes along the way--the sneak-attack disemboweling of the French fleet, an appalling betrayal by John's French ally, John's stone-by-stone dismantling of a rebel baron's castle. And those baron problems culminate, of course, in the Magna Carta--which is thoroughly de-glorified here. ("" 'Free men?' . . . You see much harm in it? . . . Then put it in."") But the central unity-vs.-freedom dilemma never quite focuses; and neith≤r the glimpses of John's psycho-moods (paranoia at worst) nor the too-sketchy build-ups to domestic tragedy (the young Queen's secret affair with John's half-brother) provide enough grounding or momentum for the tangle of political/theological issues. History caught at oblique angles, then, stylish and thoughtful but rather slippery and uncentered--a limited treat, mostly for readers who share Goldman's rigorous passion for those rough, elusive Plantagenets.