Rating: 3/5

Great opening where the virgin heroine (who is still grieving her fiance’s death five years later) wakes up naked next to movie man hero. She can’t remember anything because someone put alcohol in her drink and she is worried they had sex. Hero thinks she’s some kind of starlet looking for a part in one of his movies. Heroine does want something – an interview with hero’s elderly father who was married to a famous actress. She’s working on a book and wants the info to be accurate. 

Hero doesn’t believe her and hero’s son, who is 19, doesn’t back up her story. The son invited her to the party and arranged this scenario to embarrass both of them. Seems he has a monumental chip on his shoulder about his dad and his grandfather’s illness and impending death. 

Hero, is of course, smitten with the heroine from the beginning and pursues her. The heroine still holds a torch for her dead fiancé and won’t give an inch. Hero’s son drives his car off of a bridge and confesses to his father his part in setting up the heroine. Hero apologizes and arranges an interview for the heroine with his father.

Heroine resists the H for a long time. Too long for me, I’m afraid. She and the hero bicker a lot. There were scenes where they were getting along swimmingly, but then the heroine or the hero would snap. However, they did learn to communicate with each other and each apologized and explained at least once in the story. (Productive arguing! In an HP! That was a breath of fresh air).

The 19 year-old son was ridiculously immature and rude and it was good the heroine gave him a slap. I don’t think that will make him straighten up and fly right – it’s not as simple as this story makes it – but hopefully time and more life experience will bring some maturity. (Thank goodness they don’t have to live with him).

This is a sexy HP – the heroine has sex dreams about the hero. (Hence the title) Once the conflict is resolved (the heroine letting go of her dead fiancé and embracing the future and the hero sorting out his son) then it’s easy to see how these two will have their HEA.