Rating: 2/5

In trying to understand why this book has been so popular for so long, I can only conclude that its because it is infinitely useful for political purposes. This is basically a book of musings about what drives the average follower of a mass ideological movement, as well as the life-cycles and nature of such movements. Rather than any empirical argument there is a lot of psychoanalysis and pithy philosophical quotes. A book of musings is fine, but Hoffer is unable to make anything even close to an authoritative statement about anything. He just makes declarations and moves on. Unless you assign him some kind of divine inspiration — or more likely are invested in taking what he has to say and applying it to your political enemies — it is highly questionable what the point of this book is.

This book came out in the 1950s, not long after the defeat of Nazism and with the fear of Communism still large in peoples minds. I can see then how the book answered a specific need at the time to get some kind of handle on these movements. Hoffer goes even further and yokes in Christianity and Islam together with these modern ideologies in one more-or-less seamless category of "mass movements." Although these modern movements undoubtedly have religious overtones it's also possible to get very lazy with this analogy and even become wildly inconsistent in argument. I'm not going to bother going through a point-by-point analysis but needless to say his grasp of history is very superficial and mostly based on popular stereotypes. Hoffer's general idea of what causes people to join mass movements today is their own feeling of inner void, with outside material factors not being decisive. People get swept up in things for personal reasons not necessarily related to the stated goals of any movement. This should already be obvious to anyone. Almost everything Hoffer says in this book that is true is similarly obvious.

The book is mercifully redeemed by its brevity. For this Hoffer deserves some genuine credit. His book is a useful tool for denigrating and insulting any new political movement by accusing their members of personal psychological shortcomings. No doubt everyone is driven by such shortcomings at some level, no less those in the status quo. The problem is this book fails to substantiate anything, it just makes blank assertions which may or may not be useful to someone in power at a given political moment. Also in an era of deep ironic feeling (at least in the West) where people are disinclined to believe too much in anything, it is unclear who exactly this book still applies to. Pass.