Rating: 4/5

The book opens with 8-year-old Meredith Seaton being roughly separated from her black half-sister. Widower Seaton had become involved with the housekeeper and their offspring - Lissa - was 6years of age. Widower Seaton was concerned that the girls looked so much alike and that others would notice this light-skinned mulatto was his. Thus, he sold the child; and Meredith swore she would find her sister.

Meredith became a helper in the Underground Railroad while seeking her sister. Meredith is now 24 years of age and dresses as a frumpy, mindless Southern belle. As she travels to friends along the Mississippi River, she helps slaves to escape their lives. By dressing and acting silly, she protects herself from the slave hunters, who would have to imprison or kill slave helpers.

While on one of her trips, she finds herself on the Lucky Lady and meets the captain -- Quinn Devereux. They are instantly involved in a sparring match - one trying to figure out the other. Quinn also has secrets; they are so horrible that he has never told anyone the full story.

Quinn's back story is so gruesome that Potter only shares a bit at a time. He has become a gambler and a wastrel; his demeanor is cold and arrogant. He and Meredith lock horns quickly. The story is complicated with subplots aplenty.

This book is about change; the country is heating up over the issue of slavery. The folks on each side of the argument are hardening their stances. Quinn needs to change, but his past experiences stand in the way. Meredith is often wary of her role and would like to change - but feels committed to finding her sister, Lissa.

Through the story, I felt the ominous marching of time toward a conflict that would become the Civil War. Helping slaves was becoming more dangerous each day. Potter does a great job of building the tension. I didn't think her plotting was as tight as most of her other books; however, I had a hard time putting it down.

Quinn Devereux will reappear in NOTORIOUS, the 3rd book in this trilogy.

Loosely Joined Series
Rainbow - the story of Quinn Devereux
Lawless - the story of Lobo/Jess
Notorious - the story of Marsh Canton