Rating: 4/5

Reading this was a bit like living through Britpop itself. At first rather joyful as the car radio sparked out tunes that did indeed have this child of the sixties returning to HMV to begin a CD collection. (My first three CDs were Pulp’s Different Class, Ocean Colour Scene’s Moseley Shoals and Radiohead’s The Bends. Then it all got a bit silly with the battle between Oasis and Blur (both of whom I liked depending on mood and both of whom I still quite like) and smacking of sell-out to the powers that be in dropping the knee to Blair and his spin doctors. (My love affair with New Labour was about as short-lived as my fling with Britpop and this too is well covered in the book). Eventually, like with the real thing it came to an end and we were all quite glad. I enjoyed the final two chapters better than the rest of the book. A huge sense of relief in it all being over and the charts could be left to the latest trend of Spice Girls and Robbie Williams and real musicians and poets could get on with developing their craft and regard entering the charts at 29 as an achievement to be celebrated and not a disaster to be sneered at. 

I really like John Harris’s work. He is so good at writing about the lives and beliefs of the everyday folk such as the fears of the people of Boston Lincolnshire over immigrants and Brexit or how the people of Milton Keynes are getting on fifty years on that it seems to me a bit of a pity that he focussed this book on the big names of the movement, Oasis, Blur, Suede and Elastica. The last two date the book. I’d have liked more of the lesser bands of the era who perhaps remained truer to any ideals of indie and reflecting their culture to the ones who were battling it out for millions and spending it all on short-term hedonism. 

Not that I hold this against Harris. I found the subject matter of this tome (and its a substantial read) heavy going after a while but the style and quality of the writing never faltered. 18 years after he wrote it it has become a historical piece. As with other rock history books I spent a fair bit of time reminding myself of the music. Like every trend since the fifties, there was some very good stuff: very good stuff indeed, but the majority hasn’t dated well. I don’t think I’ll be queuing up to buy my ticket in 2038 to see the Britpop tour with a collection of Suede, Boo Radleys and Sleeper in their sixties and seventies touring Blackpool, Mansfield and Milton Keynes.