Rating: 3/5

In terms of paperback romances of decades past, I overall found this a pretty decent read because the author writes well--lots of flowery, passionate language that sets the scene well and hones in on that dramatic romance atmosphere that's so quintessential to vintage romances--and although imbued with some problematic behaviors, Windhawk is a more gentle, calm, and affectionate lead in comparison to a lot of others I've encountere.

Of course, this comes with a territory that there's an air of dubious consent (Joanna says no, he kisses or embraces her, all resistance fades and they passionately give in to one other) but it's sitting lower on the scale in terms of yikes factor than it could have been. Like the other novels by Ms. Banyon I've read, the leads profess their love and ask for forgiveness and are so emotional and devoted that it almost makes up for the times the leads did something that wasn't great. 

Note: my rating is adjusted as a result of the age of the work and the genre; the bar can be very low, so ratings are more so a reflection of them against other vintage romances.

I think the biggest reason why this doesn't rate higher is because a lot of the conflict was based on the leads not communicating and misunderstanding one another without there being any supporting justification for it beyond it being a reason for them to not get together immediately--which, naturally, could have been accomplished with many other plot devices. 

The author tackled the conflict of misunderstanding and not communicating the truth much better in another work, Velvet Chains, because there is an actual reason given that has some bearing on the plot itself.

In this one, the issue arises when Joannna immediately jumps to the conclusion that Windhawk was responsible for the raid on the wagon train that killed her brother and Windhawk, weirdly, decides not to defend himself to her. Instead, he decides it'll all just settle itself because once she loves him and realizes he won't hurt her she'll automatically realize he didn't have anything to do with the raid. That's very strange logic, in my opinion. Especially because he ultimately takes it pretty personally that Joanna doesn't just magically know the truth and his feelings.

Then, of course, it doesn't just stop there because Windhawk must also misunderstand Joanna in return when she expresses a desire to leave to go see her father settle some unfinished family business (as Joanna originally was ousted from her family home in New England by a conniving aunt and uncle after her mother dies, which is why she went out west and how she met Windhawk). 

Windhawk assumes that she's never loved him and that her escaping to handle this unfinished business is the ultimate betrayal for some reason (honestly, a missed opportunity to go: since this is important to you and I love you, I will help you do what you feel you need to). This then creates a domino effect where now he is angry for this perceived betrayal, takes his anger out in Joanna, she ends up being physically harmed, all snowballing into a bunch of compounding misunderstandings as both of them are certain that the other now hates them while still being very much in love with one another.

It's very much a case of had they just honestly spoken with each other, most of this conflict wouldn't have ever happened done so in an exasperating and unappealing way that isn't fun or entertaining to read. 

I do also want to mention that, as this was published in 1990 and features a Native American hero by a white author, I'm sure there's a lot of problematic content in the execution of things regarding race and culture. I'm sadly not versed enough in the subject matter to feel comfortable speaking about the topic at length, but it is worth acknowledging the pitfalls and problems of how any non-white race may be handled in these old romances.

I do think, overall, the author meant well--Windhawk isn't described with weird language like comparing his dark skin to food or anything, and the book ultimately has a narrative that portays Windhawk and his people in a positive way, with Joanna coming to love and accept them and their culture. It could have absolutely been worse, so take this reading as being graded on a curve to account for just how low the bar can be. 

Also, as this is a historical romance, we do see the author use the term "indian" and I can't say if that's something she felt was find under the shield of it's historically accurate or if the debate on whether it was problematic ever crossed her mind, as this was published in 1990, but it is worth mentioning that facet for anyone going into this novel. 

On the topic of historical accuracy is probably the shallow excuse for this Joanna is 17 and Windhawk is 27, so, pretty big age gap. Not my favorite and I find it very uncomfortable, but you almost wouldn't know it if they didn't mention their ages a few times, considering Joanna doesn't really behave like a teenager, and then there's that one line where Windhawk says, "You're so young, have I married a baby?" which was... ew. 

I think it's unfortunately pretty common for these romances to think 16-18 year old heroines are like, perfect for being taken by men in their mid twenties to early thirties as like this, idolized picturesque fantasy of youthful, beautiful sexual awakening ripe for romantic thrills at the hands of mature, skilled men who are young enough to be handsome beyond reason but old enough to be confident and worth submitting to the care and desire of, even as the girl vainly declares she's a free spirit who will never submit to any man. 

Overall, it kept my attention and was a passable read. Nothing extraordinary and certainly not above criticisms of some serious shortcomings, but decent for what it is: a vintage paperback romance. The bar is a little low because things can get really dark and bad really fast in these kinds of reads.

Also, surprisingly, this isn't a standalone and we see more of Windhawk and Joanna in the next book, and then the following books follow Joanna's brother and then later her daughter and niece in their own romances. I looked into Savage Winter and oh god, it's just misunderstandings and fighting between the leads dialed up several notches. I will be passing on the next three books as a result.