Rating: 4/5

ranchers, railroads, rebellion, redemption, and revenge

 Prolixity, thy name is Norris ! My edition of 448 pages says that it has been edited. I would have been interested to know in what way because Norris is nothing if not verbose and repetitive. Add a healthy dose of 19th century idealistic, rosy romanticism, a bit of extra-sensory perception, communication with "shades", melodramatic deaths, and some old Anglo-Saxon racial prejudices and one would think, "Bob, why did you bother ?"
 But you would be wrong. Though his earlier novel, "McTeague" is probably his best work, Norris comes close, in many ways, to his idol, Zola, in creating a realistic portrait of a whole time, a whole area, a whole way of life. The time is late 19th century, the place, central California's San Joaquin Valley, and the way of life the one centered around wheat production. No detail escapes the author's eye---the tools, the land, the houses, the railroads, the dialogues, the flowers and animals. His characters are most lifelike, real people who will stay with you for a long time. The railway, whose many tentacles sucked the blood out of farmers through freight rates and crooked land deals, is the Octopus of the title. The vast production of the fertile valley is chased, rounded up, and cornered by the railway monopoly despite the best efforts of a group of wheat farmers to prevent it. They fight the railway by means of clean politics, dirty politics, and ultimately through violence. The story is a gripping one, no less than Zola's "Germinal", but differing from the latter because California was such a different environment from a French coal miners' town. Class existed---it was not so binding as in Europe---but those at the lower end still lived extremely precariously, as Norris shows.
 You could say that three young men; one a farmer, the other two intellectuals or dreamers, make up the main characters. One tries to fight the Octopus and pays the price. The second remains what he has always been-an introspective dreamer with no thought of creation, only trying to re-create the past to link up with a dead love. He sees more clearly than the other two even so. The third is perhaps closest to Norris himself, an upper class urban intellectual cast into this battle of Titans. He writes poetry expressing his overwrought emotions, he tries to give inflammatory speeches, he even throws a bomb. He remains peripheral, sailing off to India at the end, not having succeeded in anything, forced by the web of class and social obligation to be closer and more beholden to the capitalist owners of the railroad than to his erstwhile comrades. Yes, you could say this. But I think the main characters in this flawed but great novel are the wheat and the railroad which determine the lives of many, forces greater than any one man. A pity Norris died at the age of 32. He might eventually have won a Nobel Prize, but for sure he would be remembered as one of the greatest American writers.