Rating: 3/5

Maybe 3.75? There are some wonderful stories, especially the two linked longer ones, which have this whimsical tone and comic-ironic down-home diction and setting but also an oddly hard-sf core about time flow. The second is a very funny parody of NYC lit as well. A bunch of pocket-universe stories that generally find different angles of view so they don't feel like the same thing over and over, and one where the families of Oklahoma City victims each get a McVeigh clone to kill or torture, as they see fit--an idea that feels all too apropos to what a large swath of contemporary America seems to want to do to fellow Americans. Bisson's prose is frequently hilarious, with an understated wit packed into laconically funny sentences. 

And then there are the sex stories, all of which ran in Playboy in the 90s. I don't know what to make of them. On the one hand, they feel like intentional parodies of consumerist sexuality, especially the one where the guy falls in love with, and has his life ruined by, a chat app that is executing his trades, selling lingerie, and later working for the MLA and selling cars. It's Her, basically, except more profane. But...wow, is there a lot of detailed description of lingerie, like really detailed, to the extent that feels like any attempt to turn this into satire feels like theorizing your way out of the obvious, like when Henry Louis Gates argued that 2 Live Crew was satirizing common stereotypes of Black-male lasciviousness. Or you could read their song lyrics and conclude that they were pretty much saying what they meant. Kind of feel the same way here: for all my attempts to think of these as parodies of...what the Playboy connoisseur in the 90s, whoever that was and whatever aesthetic the magazine aimed at, maybe assumed that dumb, less sophisticated men thought the internet was going to make possible in terms of satiating sexual fantasy, there's a lot of sexual fantasy going on, all of it involving willing, teasing women. 

Given how consistently these stories overturn the expected narrative, I suppose I can grant more of the notion that Bisson means to subvert those masturbatory takes rather than, uh, gratify them. Our culture needed to regress for another 30 years before AI made vividly possible the fantasies of male dominance that he's mocking here. Have I argued myself into some Gates-like rationalization? Possibly, though I would venture that this is based on the bold take that Terry Bisson is a more complex literary theorist and student of narrative than Luther Campbell.