Rating: 3/5

So I read this as part of the process of selecting textbooks for a class I'm building which means to be an intro to creative writing, and this has a lot of the features I want for the class' book: namely, it covers a variety of approaches, it has sample essays, and it has a unified authorial voice that can draw contrasts between the schools.

One drawback is that the newer edition of this book appears to be seriously larded up; it's about 200 pages longer, and priced at a little more than I think it's probably worth; amazon shows it as something like $65, which I think is too much for what this is, even at twice the size.

My main problem, though, is more substantive: I don't really like the writing here, or trust it as being accurate; as much as I think its interesting to give the historical development of the critical school, I think the way that its done here is, well, a little weird and judgmental. And it's possible that I wouldn't care, but that I think it takes pages away from what feels to me more relevant, the assumptions and methodology sections that feel pretty impoverished at their best, and at spots kind of inaccurate to boot.

I remember when I learned theory as an undergrad, and the portrait that always emerged from reading chapters and intros was always greatly supplemented by what I learned in class-- in other words, it's not only Bressler who suffers this fate of giving what feel like partial and occasionally misleading intros to the schools of theory. But it does make me wonder why you'd assign materials to a class where several times you're going to need to come in and say, "okay, that's not quite right at all." It feels a little contrary to the purpose.

I do really like some of the sample essays, though, even when they seem to draw on a much wider range of terms and approaches than the chapter presents. Maybe that's a note that should be pursued by someone new when they put together a book like this: commission the essays first from your most talented students, and then write the materials that allow those essays to make sense. Here, I'm not sure that works as smoothly as it ought to, and on occasion, at least, that means that the richest and most valuable parts of the chapters are potentially at least a little mystifying.