Rating: 5/5

I listened to this book while working on a jigsaw puzzle with my family. We finished both and felt most satisfied! 

I love that this book begins with making a cup of tea. The first sentence, "It was Miss Somer's turn to make the tea." Apparently, she was not very good at it, and was "the most inefficient of typists" to boot, with "a mild worried face like a sheep." 

Growing up in England I learned that the water needed to come to a full boil to make a good cup of tea. Alas, "Poor Miss Somer's was never quite sure when a kettle was boiling. It was one of the many worries that afflicted her in life."

Miss Marple is renowned for her ability to winkle out the details from people. They confide in her openly, as she appears harmless. Indeed, people seem to fall over themselves to share their juicy bits of gossip or their opinions on things. One such person was the lonely Mrs. Emmett, the bank manager's wife.

"The necessity to talk grew upon Mrs. Emmett, and on that particular day it had burst its bounds, and Miss. Marple had received the full flood of the torrent." Mrs. Emmett's complaints about village life and the inhabitants in particular illustrate the nuances of class and how she did not fit in "the old guard of ladies" and she could not "associate with the wives of trades people" either. In short, Mrs. Emmett had become an unlikeable snob who lacked self-awareness and had managed to isolate herself. 

Narrator, Richard E Grant reads her diatribe with such great expression and captures her disdain with particular feeling. One phrase in particular stood out to us, "Then, of course, there's a sprinkling of - well, you can only call them old pussies who love to potter round with a trowel and do the gardening." Mrs. Emmett fails to realize that her audience, Miss. Marple "an inveterate gardener" fits just exactly this description!

Overall, it was a wonderful read, with a cast of interesting characters and a complex mystery to unravel. It is one of my favorites of the Miss. Marple series. How wonderful to wile away the hours with family and 'old friends.'

I'll leave you with one final pearl of wisdom from Miss. Marple, which seems particularly apt, "One needs a great deal of courage to get through life."