Rating: 2/5

It started off great. The sweeping adventure feel of the first book, a grand adventure back to the ringworld; a sad twist of fate for Louis Wu, now a junkie of sorts and so in need of such adventure more than ever. Ringworld Engeineers was fantastic and equal to the first novel in every way except for two fatal points for me.

1.) The rishathra is too strong with this one. A surprising number of reviewers on Goodreads whined about this with the first novel, which baffles me because he's essentially on an adventure-sabbatical with his dream girlfriend (who is probably chosen by Nessus for that reason). He's a 200 year old hedonist of refined tastes. Sex happens, frequently. Makes sense. Flash forward 23 years to the sequel. Louis is battling to recover from "wire addiction", the worst of all human-made dubious recreational activities. Conveniently, the practice of rishathra, or sex between hominid species, is in over-abundance in this book. Ok. It's an interesting/entertaining idea that does have some plausibility on this ringworld. The problem is how casually and meaninglessly it is in the story. It just felt laughable. Here comes a female character: begin countdown until rishathra. It was tolerable until we at last meet the ONE female character who is not really into rishathra for valid reasons. But then almost immediately she has to have Louis by a very sleazy, cheap (and a little disturbing) little plot twist. It cheapened her character by throwing away a small but crucial point for development between the two. Hell, I'm not even saying Louis shouldn't sleep with her, it just would have actually meant something if it had to develop along with the plot arc some rather than just happen.

2.) Mass confusion at the climax. Most critically, the story became very rapid, high tension but extremely vague right at the climax. Suddenly there was a plan of action in place, which we were not privy to. Characters moved with desperate frenetic energy towards a goal, whose details not only eluded me, but where whose effect was also uncertain on the looming problem of ringworld's fate. 

It started with a surprise return character who is now a badguy for unclear reasons. Descriptions of places, objects and setting became virtually non-existent. Martians, what? Living quarters for the Pak? Are we in a cave or a structure underground, how the hell do we know where we are going now? I reread the chapter "Wheels within Wheels" and before and afterwards some but still felt swept away. By the novel's end I had to read a summary of it just to get the actual explanation of what they do to fix ringworld's instability.

And it's too bad because I like so much of what Niven does. Chmeee/Speaker-to-Animals is great and the Kzin and Puppeteers are really interesting and fun aliens. But I'm not sure if I'll return.