Rating: 2/5

Nothing wrong with this book, it was just aimed at a far younger audience than me and there are honestly other children's books that I, even as an adult reader, have enjoyed a lot more than this one. This book is probably best for kids who are just getting into chapter books and who's parents want to introduce them to fantasy with an extremely simple, short (Seriously, the audiobook version was barely an hour long), and safe adventure. 

Part of the reason I read this (aside from being Christmassy at Christmas time) is that I thought because the cover AND Goodreads said that it was the first in this series I could pick it up without being lost from having not read the rest of the series. But upon starting the book there was this whole rundown of these kids' previous adventures in Camelot, and things that they did on those previous adventures got referenced throughout. So apparently it's actually the first book in a spin-off of another series. I actually didn't feel that it did that well at standing on its own as the start of a spin-off series since it felt like I'd missed out on a ton of stuff that was kind of essential to know who these kids were and why they knew these people from the legend of King Arthur. So, heads up to parents looking for books for their kids: you may find yourself buying an entire series just to prep your kid to read this 27-book spin-off series. If your kid's a voracious reader, that may not be a bad thing, though.🙂

In summary, this is probably a perfectly fine read for young elementary school kids, but I didn't grow up with the Magic Treehouse series, so it holds no nostalgia for me and this story did very little for me as an adult who typically still enjoys many children's books. Even as a kid, I was testing on a college reading-comprehension level by 3rd grade, so probably grew out of books this simple really fast. Just not what I was hoping for, unfortunately. But again, there are very young children who would like it. 

Content Advisory:
For parents who want to know, this book is perfectly appropriate for the age range intended so long as they enjoy magical fantasy. The adventure has extremely mild peril (Everyone in Camelot is under a sleeping spell forever unless the kids succeed at bringing back magical water, some knights are enchanted into dancing for eternity unless the kids save them... that kind of thing) that the kids problem-solve their way out of. No one gets hurt at any point, and the kids succeed in their quest to save Camelot. 

The magic in the story is of the same variety as one finds in the original King Arthur legend. Morgan le Fay is an enchantress from the original legend who is apparently responsible for having summoned the kids to Camelot from their own world (via the magic treehouse) during their past adventures and the kids seem to be good friends with her. As the title of the series suggests, they also meet Merlin who does some magical shape-shifting during the story. But the "how it's done" of the magic never gets delved into. It just happens. 

I think the girl said "darn" out of frustration once.