Rating: 4/5

I have become deeply interested in the American Revolution lately. Anyone, who bothers to follow my reading, will know this is not an atypical occurrence. I get super interested in a topic and read obsessively about it for a time. To better understand the Revolution, I decided to read a Thomas Jefferson bio. After reading Fawn Brodie’s Jefferson bio. Interesting as it was, Brodie’s work left me with a lot of gaps in my understanding of Jefferson’s character and actions. After reading Willard Sterne Randall’s Jefferson bio I filled some of the gaps, particularly in Jefferson’s early intellectual life), but left other gaps untouched. 

Randall is a careful somewhat obsessive biographer. His prose is excellent, and he layers his text so that you get a sense of Jefferson’s early to mid-life experience on a local, national and ultimately international stage. Some readers found his focus overly detailed, but for me it provided a broader sense of the events surrounding Jefferson and how it affected his tastes. 

However, no one will ever convince me this was not intended to be a two-volume work. As others have said Randall spent 493 pages getting Jefferson to Washington and federal office, only to dispatch his term of Secretary of State, two terms as President and his declining years at Monticello in less than four hundred pages. After the careful detailing of his early to midlife, the handling of the latter portion of his life feels slapshot. Another volume would have provided Randall the scope to tell the whole of Jefferson’s life. 

The only other plausible explanation I can imagine is that Randall found post Paris Jefferson a bit difficult to reconcile. Those years in Washington and beyond are a time when Jefferson, as Randall notes, dismissed his early convictions and beliefs in favor of acquiring and poorly delegating power. Randall calls him a pragmatist but does little to hide his growing disdain with his subject. 

Randall also is far to quick to casually dismiss uglier sides of Jefferson’s character. For example, his casual dismissal of both Jefferson’s attempt to seduce the married wife of a close friend, and the possibility now accepted of Jefferson’s decades long dynamic with Sally Hemmings. 

In the first case, Randall clearly buys into Jefferson’s romanticized self-justification of pursuing love, modern readers, however, may be less comfortable with the notion of Jefferson, self-proclaimed moralist, hiding in a woman’s bedroom, trying to talk her into a romance particularly when said woman was the wife of a close friend. 

Likewise, his petty attack on fellow Jefferson author Fawn Brodie, and her belief Jefferson and Hemmings engaged in a sexual relationship, feels overdone bordering on delusional. Sally Hemmings is a real issue for Randall, as he has bought wholly into the notion of Jefferson having an undying love for artist Maria Cosway. Jefferson engaging in a relationship of any sort with Hemmings, places his Cosway theories into real doubt, and he seems far to eager to dispatch Hemmings back into the slave quarters and into a sexual alliance with a dimly introduced figure. He then proceeds to ignore Sally Hemmings ongoing presence at Monticello, which is so obvious as to render his dismissal almost comedic. 

Having acknowledged these significant flaws, I still think Randall’s book is a great window into the early intellectual life of Thomas Jefferson, as well as the Revolutionary period in Virginia. For a discerning reader there is much to consider and much illumination into the forces that shaped Jefferson.