Rating: 3/5

By today's reckoning, this book is terribly implausible to the point of silliness. A young teenager from NYC runs away to the woods in only the clothes he stands up in, and embarks on a year of living off the land and self-discovery. 
1) His wilderness skills make him a combination of a SAS operative and a Hudson's Bay fur trapper, on the strength of reading a few library books. He is never freezing, wet, sunburned, injured, plagued by poison ivy or insects, but instead becomes an accomplished falconer and a gourmet chef who can whip up cosmopolitan meals for four in a bowl fashioned from a leaf. Even tapping trees and making maple syrup over a campfire doesn't elude this boy. Conveniently, he never runs across a really threatening animal, like a bear or a bobcat or a wolverine. And he can pop down to the library in his deerskins whenever the mood strikes him.
2) A teenaged runaway in pre-Amber Alert times, he leaves a blazing trail behind himself. He tells several people his name and exactly where he's going. Nowadays it would take a search party roughly two hours to find him. But in the adventurous '50s, his parents just say to each other, "he'll be back when he gets hungry", light another smoke and pour another Old Fashioned.
3) When this book was written, the current leave-no-trace wilderness ethic was unknown. Making bough beds, chopping down limbs, burning out trees, setting snares and figure-four deadfall traps, nest-robbing from birds of prey, and feeding wildlife are just woodsy activities. Long before a year was up, this kid would have used every scrap of available firewood in a 20 km radius. 
4) The ending is ridiculous, so fanciful, sad and obvious that it could have been written by a lonely child wasting away in an orphanage. And I *almost* made it to the last page before the inevitable 1950s female stereotype arrived like a scheduled city bus!!

Now, with all that said, here's why this book is wonderful:
1) It shines with a deep love for the outdoors, demonstrates respect and kindness and patience for animals, and the wonder of a child's new independence. It suggests that living one's life as a truthful and sincere example can bring others around to a way of thinking, in a way that words could never do. Had I read this book when I was twelve, I would have thought it absolutely magical. Maybe it's nothing like reality, but it has probably made generations of kids want to be outdoors and perhaps a bit more motivated to learn new things.
2) It's inspiring in the way that old kids' books always used to be. Kids in those days did stuff like Scouting and got into schoolyard fights. They were expected to work hard and take responsibility for themselves. They read adventure books like this, which taught that being tough and self-reliant was expected, and that with enough initiative, gumption (an almost extinct word) and persistence, they could do anything. Like go to the moon, for instance. Nowadays most kids in the same circumstances would go to pieces in ten minutes.