Rating: 3/5

3.5* for the well done sarcastic dialogue.
I also liked the finale and how the main characters in the book evolved from aggressiveness and fear to a relationship of kindness, love and finally trust.

I've just read Tomorrow - Come Soon and, even though the plots are very different, they seem to share the same theme: heroine decides to take the fallout instead of someone else, submitting herself to the hero's blackmail, aka sex.

While I understand these books can't be taken seriously, there are several details that bother me:
- plenty of men enjoying one-night stands, but what kind of alpha man used to have any sophisticated woman he might set his view on, would want to sleep with a profusely sweating thief he just caught red-handed?
Granted they think the heroines are well experienced despite their young age, but is this common behaviour? How many times have they done this in the past?…
At least in this book, the hero still seemed to choose such words mainly to mess with her, while his main focus was on the role she had to play in front of his family.

- at the same time, what kind of man would take such a woman to his own home the very same day, let alone to visit his mother?? Sure, a thief would probably be able to lie and act a bit for him, but what would his family think if they ever found out?!
They’ll have to make up a story about how they actually met.

- the super short time span in which the whole thing happened: a weekend.
It’s just too big of a development for merely 48 hours, too fast for me to really enjoy it.
In the course of a weekend, the heroine, who until then had her heart set on another man, ready to meet his parents and get married, suddenly is meeting some other man’s family and finding out what real love feels like. An upgrade in more than one way $$. 
Howard’s sour attitude certainly helped her into making a decision, but wouldn’t a woman still ponder about things a little longer before jumping into another relationship/ marriage with another man?

No one seemed to like Howard, including her brother Richard. However, Richard was literally an idiot and lacking in character as well, thinking the world owed him. He was a bit too lucky to have the hero siding with him because of his feelings towards the heroine and having his back covered all the way to France! 
I understand, but somehow still dislike it.