Rating: 5/5

When choosing a biography, I have two primary considerations. First, I want to get a good view of the time period -political, economic, social, etc. - in addition to the subject's personal details. Second, as much as possible, I want an even-handed account presented in a straightforward manner. I research the author as much as the book. A particular political or philosophical leaning don't necessarily disqualify a work or an author, but they definitely factor into the author's objectivity. Robert Remini meets both of these considerations. His works are meticulously researched with extensive primary sources, and he doesn't insult by seeming to lead the reader to a certain conclusion or thought pattern. His opinions are obvious, whether stated or implied, but he presents the information in such a way that allows the reader a full consideration of the topic instead of a narrow one. (For some context, Remini was considered perhaps the leading Andrew Jackson scholar of his time, and he produced several extensive works on Jackson's life and the political environment in which created. This work on Clay resulted from Remini's research on Jackson, in which Clay's name naturally appeared often.)

There aren't many Henry Clay biographies, certainly not any as extensive as this, but Clay was a key figure in the generation of political leaders immediately following the Founding Fathers. His political life spanned a pivotal period in our nation's history. From the Treaty of Ghent to the Missouri Compromise to the Compromise of 1850, he was instrumental in shaping nation in the first half of the 19th century. Despite his considerable political influence, his character flaws arguably kept him from attaining the Presidency despite multiple attempts. Clay isn't as well-known as many of his contemporaries, and his influence and contributions aren't as obvious as some of theirs, but there's no doubt he was one of the key contributors to the early days of our nation's political development. 

In telling Clay's story, Remini also presents the amazing complex political machinations of the time, which is an interesting story in itself. Additionally, the latter part of Clay's political life highlights the increasing Southern secession attitude, and Remini lays a good foundation for understanding the eventual Southern secessionist movement.