Rating: 4/5

I might have written before about the fascination I have with the sailing ships of a bygone age, but reading this book has rekindled my wonder at the mastery of the art of naval warfare as it was practiced in the so-called "Age of Sail". Again and again I am awestruck at the huge accumulation of knowledge required to command a single ship effectively, and how worthless individual lives seemed to be when ships faced off against each other in combat at sea. This particular novel is an account of Hornblower's attempt to outfit the Sutherland and his eventually successful harassment of the French army marching along the Coast of the Mediterranean, pinned between the beach and the nearby mountains. Not having read the immediately previous novels, I was struck at how much less I liked Hornblower as a person even as his stature as a captain grew to superhuman proportions. Forester has done a remarkable job at sketching this latest evolution of Hornblower in continuity with his earlier years as a midshipman and lieutenant while presenting the unique challenges and concerns that continue to shape him as a sailor and a man--relative poverty, lack of seniority, hopes for advancement, an implacable and numerous enemy, doubts about his own capacities, and the secret fears of dismemberment and death which he must repress in order to command the respect of the men he leads. 

Each time I read these accounts of hundreds of cannon being discharged at short range into the wooden hull of ships filled with defenseless sailors, there is an aftertaste of awe and horror at the cavalier destruction of so much life. Those men who chose the life of the navy were either deeply in love with the sea, or profoundly insane; few chose it freely, impelled by necessity or the bludgeons of the press gang. Yet on those ships, which were a unique blend of village, barracks, and prison, somehow life managed to flourish--men relished the performance of their duty, knew the heady triumph of victory, and put away against the more bitter days of naval service the small pleasures of drunkenness and song. And some life it was...

Ship of the Line ends with a real cliffhanger that absolutely must be followed up quickly with the next volume in the series,  Flying Colours.