Rating: 3/5

If you're looking for some light reading to boost your holiday spirits, you may want to consider this short story collection by O. Henry. Many of the stories are set in New York City, around the turn of the 20th Century. The remarkable diversity of O. Henry's writing style is what stood out for me. He was truly a gifted storyteller with a knack for the twist ending. After a while you do begin to see the pattern and anticipate the twist, but the tales are short enough that it's not much of an issue. 

This collection includes sixteen stories, so to keep this review from becoming too lengthy what I've done is simply highlight a relevant quote from each, then follow it with a line to encapsulate the overall message. 

The standouts for me were: The Cop and the Anthem, The Ransom of Red Chief, and The Gift of the Magi. There were also a couple of clunkers: The Furnished Room and A Municipal Report, which I didn't care for whatsoever. 

Here's the list of stories, presented in the order in which they appear:

The Gift of the Magi: ★★★★★
“Of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are wisest.”
--You before me.

The Cop and the Anthem: ★★★★★ 
“Three months on the Island was what his soul craved.”
--Can't a bum catch a break?

Springtime à la Carte: ★★★☆☆½
“It was a day in March.
Never, never begin a story this way when you write one. No opening could possibly be worse. It is unimaginative, flat, dry and likely to consist of mere wind...DEAREST WALTER, WITH HARD-BOILED EGG.”
--Nessun amore perduto.

The Green Door: ★★★☆☆
“The true adventurer goes forth aimless and uncalculating to meet and greet unknown fate.”
--Life is like a box of chocolates.

After Twenty Years: ★★☆☆☆½
“A man gets in a groove in New York. It takes the West to put a razor-edge on him.”
--Some friend.

The Furnished Room: ★☆☆☆☆
“No. Always no. Five months of ceaseless interrogation and the inevitable negative.”
--I can't go on without you.

The Pimienta Pancakes: ★★★☆☆½
“Somebody's been dealing me pancakes from the bottom of the deck...”
--There's a sucker born every minute.

The Last Leaf: ★★★☆☆
“I want to turn loose my hold on everything, and go sailing down, down, just like one of those poor, tired leaves.”
--Can you hold on for one more day? ♫

The Voice of the City: ★★★☆☆
“Tell me,” I said, stammeringly, for I have no voice of my own, “what does this big - er - enormous - er - whopping city say? It must have a voice of some kind. Does it ever speak to you? How do you interpret its meaning?”
--It's those magical moments of silence at the end of a hectic day.

While the Auto Awaits: ★★★★☆
“I wanted to talk, for once, with a natural man -- one unspoiled by the despicable gloss of wealth and supposed social superiority. Oh! you do not know how weary I am of it -- money, money, money!”
--Oh, what a tangled web we weave...

A Retrieved Reformation: ★★★★☆
“Me?” said Jimmy, in surprise. “Why, I never cracked a safe in my life.”
--A second chance at living right.

A Municipal Report: ★☆☆☆☆
“Of course,” said I platitudinously, “human nature is the same everywhere; but there is more color--er--more drama and movement and--er--romance in some cities than in others.”
--Like a boring Sherlock Holmes mystery. zzzz

A Newspaper Story: ★★☆☆☆
“After this can any one doubt the power of the press?”
--Both literally and figuratively.

The Ransom of Red Chief: ★★★★★
“I've stood by you without batting an eye in earthquakes, fire and flood--in poker games, dynamite outrages, police raids, train robberies and cyclones. I never lost my nerve yet till we kidnapped that two-legged skyrocket of a kid.”
--The best-laid plans of mice and men...

A Ghost of a Chance: ★★★☆☆
“Then why,” said Mrs. Bellmore, looking the young man gravely in the eye, “should that ghost have kissed me, as I’m sure it did?”
--You're too shy shy, hush hush, eye to eye. ♫

Makes the Whole World Kin: ★★☆☆☆
“Don't stand there making faces,” snapped the citizen, bad-humouredly. “If you've come to burgle why don't you do it? There's some stuff lying around.”
--One touch of nature makes the whole world kin.

So there you have it, a bit of a mixed-bag, as they say. My ratings averaged out to 3.2 stars.

Read as part of another Non-Crunchy Cool Classic Buddy Read.