Rating: 1/5

Recommended and lent to me by a friend under the false pretense of science-fiction, Dying Earth summed up everything that I dislike about sword and sorcery fantasy. Admittedly, I only read the first three of this four novel collection and cannot bring myself to read the first.

The first novel is a number of short stories centered around the premise of an Earth so far into the future that the world seems to have completely abandonned modern civilization and now relies on a sort of medievil fuedal system in which 90% of the population either knows powerful magic (of the recited scroll variety) or posesses a number of powerful magical items. Allow me to say that this is not generally my cup of tea for setting, but I did see some potential in the stories contained within. The characters were difficult to like, but in such brief passings, it didn't matter; the stories at least held some manner of intrigue. One of the stories even had genuine sci-fi elements.

The second novel follows the journey of a very-unlikeable rogue named Cugel as he tries to work his way back home from a far away land. Along the way, he meets a variety of characters who are either helping or hindering him, but his reaction is always the same: take advangtage of them to the extent of robery, murder, or, in one case, trading the person into sexual slavery (I feel that it should be noted that this was the only female character that had personality beyond being being a vessel for sex). Needless to say, a fellowship is never formed and we're forced to put up with more of the same machiavelian bumblings that more often than not leave him worse off than before. Eventually Cugel reaches his goal and the reader enjoys (or not) the final confrontation between evil and... a different shade of evil?

Finally, we come to the third novel and the last in the two part Cugel saga, where the author provides us a fresh dose of the same story through the clever use of a different path. I'm not exagerating. Same beginning location, same exact goal, same asshole protagonist. My only regret is that I kept reading.