Rating: 5/5

I really enjoyed this tale of Gloria, a woman with mysterious healing powers in a post-apocalyptic world. I liked the way it was told from her point-of-view, so the reader only knows what Gloria knows, which isn't much, given that she only remembers the most recent 10 years of her life. We glean that sometime in the distant past, a calamity befell the Earth and people blame technology. There is very little technology left, and it is considered dangerous. Humans have gone back to a more communal, small-scale way of life. But a sickness is spreading and although she has an amazing ability to heal through laying on of hands, Gloria cannot heal the new sickness. 

As a character, Gloria is very compelling. She acts under a code of ethics of "do no harm," but she's definitely no saint. She likes sex--a lot--and also gets angry and annoyed. She prefers to be alone in nature with her animal companion, but yearns to feel connected other human beings. She defends her friends and isn't afraid to speak truth to power. 

Although written in 1997, this book feels like it shares genetics with today's crop of "cozy" scifi by authors like Becky Chambers. There are great descriptions of the landscapes of the desert Southwestern US:

We got out and walked along the stone walkway, through piñon and twisted juniper, to a view that made me gasp. . . . Suddenly the world was completely silent as we gazed into the beautiful zigzag opening in the Earth. The Grand Canyon. Layers of red, white, green, turquoise. At the bottom of the canyon the river looked solid and immobile like a green vein on a young girl's arm. No, an old lady's arm: this place had been here forever.

And wonderful depictions of delicious food, including tea:

...I was greeted with a melding of aromas; this morning lavender and rosemary distinguished themselves. A pot of rose hip tea awaited on the rickety table off to the side of my examining table. A piece of corn bread slathered with butter lay next to it.

It was nice to read a book where the conflict isn't so much physical as it is emotional and philosophical. And the resolution doesn't come through brute force, but through love.