Rating: 2/5

Re Expectant Mistress - Sara Wood gets a slot in the Expecting series and provides another opportunity to wince over an utter trainwreck of an HP outing.

This is typical messy, disjointed Sara Woods, but this time she takes us to Bryher, a tiny little island that is part of the Isles of Scilly off the coast of Cornwall. The book descriptions of Bryher are very accurate, right down to the Fraggle Rock bar, and since only about 80 people live there in real life, things don't seem to change too much.

As for the rest of this mess, I am holding my nose and writing the quickest spoilerization I can, because sometimes SW just gets too squicky with it.

The h is 22 and the H is 38 when the story starts and the h is attending the engagement party of the H to another woman. 

The backstory on this is that when the H was 16, he and his twin brother had to go into foster care. His brother got ill with meningitis and died as the H was rushing him to the hospital, after stealing his foster families' car because they did not believe the H's twin was that ill.

This led to the 17 yr old H being put into counseling with a woman therapist who was ten years older than him. Because this is SW's HPlandia, when the H turned 18, he married his counselor - ostensibly because the woman needed childcare for her three year old daughter. But since the H and his wife have a baby boy approximately 9 months later, I let you draw your own conclusions about that.

Years later the 16 yr old h shows up to board with the H's wife and himself. The wife is dying of cancer and the h is there because Bryher island is tiny and has no advanced career schools. Everyone likes the h, who the SW favorite fiery nature child type.

There is a roofie kiss between the h and H when his wife finally passes, the h is ashamed of being practically assaulted by a guy whose wife just died and leaves to return to her island. 

 When the story starts, the H decides that even tho he is engaged and looking forward to marriage with his beautiful business partner, he still has a yen for the h. So he is going to force himself upon her and when she rejects him, he will be cured of his longing for her. 

The H shows up at her guesthouse home she runs on Bryher, since the h is also very into holistic healing, we get some great travelogue and a bit of herbalism. There is the usual SW back and forth and personality flips, but the salient points are:

 the H puts the lurve mojo moves on the h, she leaps on it, they have a purple passion event, the h gets preggers and then the H's fiancee telegraphs the h, to her mortification and shock.

The h apparently thought that the H had gotten unengaged before he showed up for a romp, but the telegraph the fiancee sends seems to prove that line of thinking was wrong. The h has a mopey moment and the H pov is that he is entranced by the h, but we don't know if he is serious about the h or not.

There is more living on a tiny island stuff and the h and H have more misunderstandings. These are randomly brought up at various times and include the h being preggers, the H moving to the island permanently and running his business from there and the H's penchant to be on intimate terms with a variety of women who stumble into his life.

Supposedly the H is thrilled about the h having his baby, he buys a farm right next door to the h's guest house on the island from a retiring couple and helps the h's stuttering female helper learn to breath. The H also claims he isn't engaged to his business partner anymore and has to buy her out.

After many, many scenes and tantrums and some outdoor lurve club events, the H and h decide they need to get hitched, after the H explains that he can't say he loves the h out loud since his brother died, and that is also the reason he has to be emotionally unavailable.

That half hearted lurve declaration is good enough for the h, so she calls it a win and agrees to marry him and we close the book on another SW sorta HEA.

I was utterly squicked out by this one, it felt like a continuing cycle of creepy grooming and the whole thing with the H and his first wife just really, really creeped me out. 

 Still, I am very biased about Sara Wood and this one is a bit more coherent than her other ones, plus we do get more H pov and the island travelogue was interesting. So it might be worth a read, but I am just not feeling the lurve on this HP outing.