Rating: 4/5

Bella Puentes p.6

Goodreads Review

“Becoming Naomi Le’on- Pam Munoz Ryan

1. The book “Becoming Naomi Le’on” is very interesting and wants you to read the book all in one day. It all takes place in Lemon Tree, California, in a trailer with a great grandmother, a brother who has slightly physical problems, and the main character Naomi, she is shy and is amazing at soap carving, but also gets teased at school by boys who make fun of her last name, Outlaw. She takes us on a journey along with her going on a goose chase trying to find her father after some family issues.

2. This story takes you on a journey with real life relative problems. Showing us what some families have to go through, and how they live if it's the other way around for them. Its inspiring reading it to see what Naomi sacrificed to live in Lemon Tree. Also, what the characters do to be together. I would describe Naomi as strong, brave, and creative.

3. She is a mexican girl and have brown hair and brown eyes. She takes her traits from her father and Owen (her brother) looks like his mother.

4. Naomi states in the end of the novel, “No, I belong with Gram and Owen”. It represents that Naomi was not a shy little girl. She fought to be with her Gram and brother. All she had to do was listen to her father saying ,” Be strong Naomi” repeating in her head to make her confident. She turns into a shy person in the beginning to a headstrong lady.

5. An action Naomi does that make a change to the story is her standing up for herself with the life changing change on the border. Of staying in Lemon Tree with Gram and Owen, with her friends or being taken away to live in Las Vegas with a drunk mother and her tattoo artist boyfriend, to baby-sit her mother’s boyfriend's daughter.

6. I thought this was an amazing story because it's a unique story that gives you a second to think about. Breathtaking events come in and surprising changes occur that you didn't think would happen. It's a story based on family, friends, and changes in your life you stand up for. I recommend this to everyone who likes a inspiring story to be thankful of.

7. The theme of the novel was to appreciate you love ones around you and to appreciate them every day. Some people don't have that atmosphere around them. Even though you might have a physically not well brother, a crazy drinking mother, and long distant father, and your caregiver, Gram. Be grateful for your family around you.