Rating: 4/5

Treasures, tropical islands, and rum soaked trope creating overkills

Amazingly good, dense, and complex writing for its time
I don´t want to say that professional college course creative writing is what makes US and UK authors so outstanding, but well, which other countries produce so many amazing fictional works? Before, there were a few classic pearls by authors that weren´t just able to write good stories, but understood the most important ingredient of compelling art 

Mixing character and plot
From the beginning, there are more and more unfolding open questions, mysteries, Chekhovs, and MacGuffins that are always fused with character motivation. This today totally normal thing was outstanding in the old days and is a reason why many classics are average, boring, or just simply bad. Take the terrible other island classics like Robinson Crusoe
https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/2...
or Lord of the Flies
https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/7...
They both don´t just suck at being mind blowing, but have stupid messages and ideologies integrated the authors want to get into the readers' brains. In contrast,
 
Stephenson understood that there should be just a high and good entertainment level
He creates a complex crew of characters, always throws them in a small territory they can´t escape from, ships, forts, a treasure hunt, and slowly escalates the whole thing. Because I´m a fan of epigenetics and the sociocultural evolution of fictional concepts, I could already search, find, and see the progress of a once spread trope idea in
 
So many other works inspired by it
Be it horror, fantasy, or my favorite genre to rule them all, sci fi, they all developed new ideas about how to find the magic stone, the skull of the necromantic god emperor, or the alien artifact. And what leaves me stunned in even more awe is that, in the other time direction, a few thousand years ago the first ancient storytellers were inspired by the totally forgotten tales of primitive starving stone age artists. Who probably invented the idea of a hero's journey to find the fattest and most delicious mammoth.

Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...