Rating: 4/5

A Deadly Game of magic, by Joan Lowery Nixon reading Lexile, is 670L 
The main characters Bo, Julien, teena, and Lisa ( main characters )are going home from losing a competition in a big city to their little town ( so it’s far away and a long drive ) but when they were going home it started to rain terribly. And it got worse and so bad that it flooded up halfway to the side of the vehicle. They had to stop at a house on a hill to get away from the rain so it wouldn’t hydroplane their car. So they go up to the house and they can hear the television all the way outside they’re greeted by a man inviting them and leaving them in the house when they are not there. Things get worse every second they are there until the lights went out they discovered, even more, a dog came and helped with the dark. In the end, it was a very scary magician versus magician showdown and a sheriff took them home after he found out from the scared silly towtrucker 
	The mood is very tense ominous and thrilling in the story. For example, it opens as a very dark (scary ) rainy(pg. 1) (gloomy, mad, and sad ) but if the author would to make it day time then it wouldn’t be scary it would be gloomy. And if it weren’t to be raining they wouldn’t have to stop at a house and there wouldn’t be a story to tell . if bo was smart ( pg. 89) then he wouldn’t have to be the main character 
	I like this book it was very interesting and it can keep your mind on this story I recommend this book the reasoning is because it can really put a visualized movie in your mind. It really describing I got confused one time only because I missed a word. If you’re at this Lexile then it’s a great book to read. Some things to say great ending, my favorite part was when the dog was missing and he was in the car but they thought bo was in the trunk and he wasn’t !! My biggest connection with the book with real-life was that it is scary to go into a different hose for the first time but keep your guard up it could get bad….