Rating: 3/5

I have owned the copy of this book I just finished since 1997!

I originally got it for a school project and only finished the first part of it (Oops!).

Now, years later, I read it as part of a Goodreads book club that focuses of reading books on “Must Read” lists. I am glad I had the extra motivation, or it may have been another 20+ years before I would have finally completed it!

I see many sing the praises of this book. It is a classic novel of Arthurian legend that many swear by. When looking at lists of both essential classic novels and essential fantasy novels, it is likely that you will find this book. Alas, for me, it was only mediocre.

First of all, this is probably the longest it has taken me to finish a book in several years. It was a chore to convince myself to read a few more pages each day. The writing was just not motivating me to come back to it quickly. 10 pages a day (sometimes with a few days break in between) was about all that I could muster. Not a good sign if a book has me that disinterested.

Another odd thing about this book is, despite how long it is, it felt like most of the action was taking place unwritten between the chapters. The best I can describe it is they might spend a chapter talking about going off to a battle. At the beginning of the next chapter they are returning from the battle. The only thing we end up finding out about the battle is from hints dropped by characters in the follow-up chapters. It just felt like I was missing a lot.

Finally, the fantasy label. I mean . . . there are kings, queens, and nights. They live in the Middle Ages. But other than that, it is basically just a love triangle story with a few medieval fights here and there. Most scenes are in a castle chamber somewhere with Lancelot, Arthur, or Guinevere brooding about something. If you are a fan of High Fantasy like Lord of the Rings and Game of Thrones, that is not what you will find here at all! Not even close! 

I wish I had better things to say as I know that this is beloved by many. And, based on the response to many of my statuses, I might disappoint a few people with this review. But, it was just another so-so entry from the must read list for me.