Rating: 3/5

There were definitely some things to like about this. Crenshaw is a good writer, but I had problems with the hero that were never satisfactorily dealt with. 

The heroine is quite well drawn. She was raised on the east coast with a stepmother who was very cold, puritanical, and controlling/abusive. The heroine had musical talent and the stepmother was determined she would become a professional concert pianist and was very pushy to the point that she almost destroyed Laura's love of music.

Laura runs away at the age of 20 and takes a train out west to Sacramento. She is immediately overwhelmed after her sheltered upbringing and quickly falls into an engagement with a local rancher, Laird, who pursues her aggressively. She doesn't know much about this man other than the nice face he put on for courting. On her wedding eve she starts to have misapprehensions about Laird, but before the wedding night she is kidnapped by the hero.

The hero, Andre, hates Laird and has been waiting for five years to get revenge on him. Andre had been married to a Chinese girl who Laird brutally raped while he was away getting supplies. His wife committed suicide shortly afterwards. Andre's plan was to wait until Laird married and then steal his wife and take her to the cabin he lived in with his wife. His plot was that Laird would show up to get his wife back and Andre would kill him.

Andre never intended harm against whoever Laird married. She was just an abstract tool of revenge that he planned to set free once he killed Laird. In reality, things didn't quite go to plan. For one, he didn't expect Laird's wife to be someone he was drawn to and he didn't expect her to be a nice, naive girl. He also (and this is shocking) overestimated Laird's humanity. He expected him to come right to them, while in reality Laird wasn't even sure he wanted Laura anymore now that he assumed Andre had raped her. He'd married her because her purity was a novelty and now Andre had, in his mind, ruined her. He still planned revenge, but he wasn't going to go off half-cocked and rush into a fair fight with Andre. Instead, he goes back home and puts together a band of hired gunman to go in and take Andre out.

Andre realizes his miscalculation when Laird doesn't show up as soon as he assumed. He's also become very enamored with Laura. So, he decides he'll just take Laura and keep her. Aside from being a rancher, he's also a bigshot tycoon type in San Francisco, so he has lawyers who he intends to use to get Laura an annulment on the grounds of non-consummation so she can marry him. 

Laura doesn't get much say in this. You can feel her frustration. She finds Andre dangerously attractive, but she's not sure she believes the story he tells her plus she holds marriage vows sacred. Andre is determined, however, and eventually in a very dubious consent (but not quite bodice ripper style) situation they sleep together. Laura also admits she's in love. 

Andre can be a really sweet guy once he sees past his vengeance, so I didn't dislike him. I did, however, want to smack him several times.

Andre leaves for a few days to confer with his lawyers and this is where things get really messed up. Andre's dead wife's father is his servant and obviously not happy that Andre didn't follow through with the original plan. As soon as Andre leaves he tells her that Andre doesn't want her anymore that he's to take her to the train station and send her back to her husband with one word "revenge". 

Laura is heartbroken and when she arrives back at Laird's he sees her as damaged goods and almost beats her to death, thankfully he doesn't rape her too. So, she sets out to live her life on her own in San Francisco, taking a job in a pharmacy and barely surviving. Plus she finds out she's having Andre's baby. Lots of drama.

When Andre finally tracks her down he's very angry that she left him and forces a marriage. Even when the truth comes out about his father-in-law's lies he still blames Laura. He even refuses to dismiss the old man. I understand some loyalty and guilt, but come on! 

Of course, Laird still plans revenge and there is drama around that. At that point Andre really realizes everything Laura went through (the beating, almost starving in San Fran) but as usual the grovel was a bit late in the game.

It also bothers me that several parallels are made to Laura's looks and those of his dead wife. Obviously, Andre is attracted to small women with dark hair. Many people have a preferred physical type, I get it. However, it does nothing for me to have the heroine being compared to the dead wife even if it is in a purely physical sense.