Rating: 4/5

In my personal library. Well. This was... interesting. Also slightly disappointing. I'd been hearing about this book in hushed conversations for as long as I can recall, and by its very controversial nature I'd determined one day to read it. I thought it was relatively modern. I was saddened to learn it was written in the late 60s. Result: much of the technological tomfoolery is no longer valid. Still, there are some cool things: recipes for LSD; how to hotwire a pre-1964 Chevy; how to build silencers; recipes for nitroglycerin, TNT; and the best placings for those concoctions to disable various types of bridges. But the instructions seemed very rudimentary to me. They mostly reminded me of the Monty Python skit where they give you instructions on how to play the flute (see link. It's well worth the watch).

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tNfGyI...

Anyway, the most interesting aspect is how I acquired this book. Found it at an estate sale in my neighbourhood. The house was literally over-packed with thousands of old books ($1 each!), mostly junk like Reader's Digest Condensed versions of Dickens, Proust, Hugo. The Cookbook seemed very out of place, and indeed, out of place is where I found it. With books all over the house, I found the Cookbook sitting by itself on a table of knickknacks, supervised by one of the sellers. Being that the Cookbook seemed intentionally separated from the thousands of other tomes, I assumed its price might be equally different. I asked, "How much?"

He said, "Not for sale. Gonna burn it later today."

I replied, "Hahaha. I understand. You could get put on a federal watch list just for owning that thing".

He responded with something akin to, "Yep," which carried a tone of "I'm not gonna let this book get into the hands of any impressionable youth. 'Murica's not gonna be compromised, not on my watch."

And I walked away, feigning as much ambivalence as possible, all the while knowing in my heart that I was not going to let that man burn that book. No, not on my watch.

I continued perusing the junk-- old records, 8 track tapes, lamps with dingy shades, though never letting that book out of my peripheral vision for more than 30 seconds. Guy at the knickknack table seemed pretty sure of himself, as if the very fact that he had the book sitting on the table in front of him meant that the book's fate was solidified, and that mere hours hence, it would be ashes.

I wandered about the house for an agonising 25 minutes, surreptitiously glancing at him at his table, listening as he answered questions from little old ladies about the prices of small porcelain doggy salt-and-pepper shakers. I waited, biding my time. He couldn't remain seated forever. Then it happened! He got up to go help some octogenarian discern the value of a piebald quilt in a bedroom.

I followed them into the bedroom to gauge approximately his level of commitment regarding the negotiation of this sought-after quilt. I didn't want to make my move too soon and have him appear suddenly back at the table as I was grasping the Cookbook.

The words they were exchanging gave an indication that there would have to be at least 75 more words between them before he could return to his table. Given their rates of speech and figuring in the amount of silence required between the end of one person's statement and the beginning of the other's, I calculated that I had a solid 45 second window. I made my move.

I went back to the table, picked up the most famous Cookbook in the world, and took it to the sweet little lady running the register at the front door. She smiled and asked if that would be all. I said yes. She said, "That'll be one dollar".

I handed her the required dollar and we exchanged thank-yous. I walked out the front door and into the most wonderfully sunshiny day I'd seen in years. Not only had I found a treasure, but I had saved a book from being burned by an information-suppressing Nazi. Life had meaning that day, my friends. Life. Had. Meaning.