Rating: 3/5

***SPOILERS HIDDEN***

Nightmare on a train. The premise is simple enough. Two men meet on a train and have a weird discussion about swapping murders. Patricia Highsmith’s intriguing but imperfect tale is a chilling portrait of obsessive psychopathy. It also asks an unsettling question: Do we all have a dark side?

This book is short and mostly to the point, but it could have been shorter, perhaps even a novella. Told in third person omniscient point of view, Strangers on a Train features nicely fleshed-out main characters Guy Haines, a buttoned-up architect, and Charles Bruno, a relaxed character who spends most of his time drunk. 

The story’s hook is decent and propels it forward most of the time, although Strangers on a Train slows whenever Highsmith wrote about Guy’s career woes. This instantly destroys the nicely building tension surrounding the murders and subsequent investigation. Guy’s work situation has little, if any, relevance to the greater story, so it’s hard to care about his work worries. This is partially where Strangers on a Train carries on for too long.

The story has an odd set-up in the sense that for all the focus on murder, the murders are carried out with ease and happen too early in the story. The story then devolves into a focus on Guy and Bruno’s respective domestic affairs, with a hyper-focus on Bruno’s drunkenness. Here the tension trickles away while the story is prolonged far past where it should have ended. Bruno is drained of his creepy—but controlled—malice, so perfectly portrayed in the first half, and is merely pathetic. Guy is no longer paranoid and scared of him; on the contrary, their strange dysfunctional relationship morphs into one in which Bruno is enamored of Guy and Guy can’t seem to—mostly doesn’t want to—detach from Bruno. It’s as if Highsmith didn’t know how she wanted Guy and Bruno to be, despite crafting them distinctly. 

The attention on obsessive psychopathy is mostly in the beginning and is fascinating and the main reason to read Strangers on a Train. Highsmith didn’t portray it complexly, but she understood this frightening disorder, and she knew how to portray harassment and obsession at its creepiest. 

Strangers on a Train is a simple, merely good story. For every strength it has a corresponding weakness, and its loose organization and capricious main characters are frustrating.