Rating: 1/5

1.5 stars

I first came across My Dog Tulip when it was being adapted into an animated film back in 2011 and how renowned film critic Roger Ebert expressed his great admiration for the film. I went on to learn that this film was adapted into a book with the same title and the same story, that of J.R. Ackerley's bond that he had with his Alsatian (German Shepherd), Tulip. While this is a true account, Ackerley's dog was actually named Queenie, but since he himself was gay during a period that was not as accepting of this community, he renamed the dog Tulip for the purpose of this account. Since my sister's dog was named Tulip, I possessed a personal interest in reading this account. After reading this book, I felt as if I was let down.

Approaching this book, I was expecting a bond that was bound to have struggles, but seemed to be impactful for both Ackerley and his dog. When reading this, it sounded like Tulip was more of a burden and a nuisance to Ackerley than anything. Of course, it was not Tulip being a burden that was the issue, but more so Ackerley having such high standards. The novel really concentrates on Tulip's inability and misfortune when it came to breeding and possessing an active sex life and while she loved him and was as loyal as one can be, he proved to be a tough customer. Aside from her breeding and her "liquids and solids," Ackerley skimmed over just about everything else.

This book had the ability to be something amazing, whether it be heartwarming or what not, but it failed to do so. When talking about this novel, someone brought up the idea that Ackerley may have been doing this intentionally in how people are so judgmental of others and their love lives that to apply this to a dog may make for an interesting critical perspective. To me, applying ones expectations onto a dog that wants to do nothing but provide you with unconditional love is a bit cruel. Then again, I see this novel for its face value and not as an intended cryptic message, but it could very well be just that. Either which way, I would advise against one's readership of this book.

I wrote a more detailed review back in 2014, when I first read this book, which can be found on my blog. I also discussed this on the third season of Literary Gladiators, which made for what I felt was an underrated discussion.

Written review on my blog:

http://caponomics.blogspot.com/2014/0...

Literary Gladiators discussion (which includes spoilers):

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C4TDx...