Before Gary loses his mind altogether about how much reading I do, I’ve been at this one since April of 2014. I list it as ‘new’ this year (as I did earlier with the NIV Study Bible—in its case also a different translation, something not applicable to Shakespeare) because all the scholarly apparatus is new to me: introductory essays, notes on source texts and variants, general chronology of other events during Shakespeare’s lifetime, critical surveys of performance history, etc., are new. I had read most of the plays before — with the exception of the ‘doubtful’ Edward III — as well as all the poems. I started reading the second Riverside edition while I was still teaching Shakespeare—which I have not been doing since 2015. My previous ‘standard’ edition had been that of Hardin Craig (1951), which my mother, then myself, then Michelle used in undergraduate study: three separate sets of marginalia, often in different colours. So the Riverside reading began for me in the spirit of Sir Georg Solti, who once mentioned that he would occasionally begin conducting Beethoven by starting with a new, unmarked score, rather than just repeat what he had previously done. I did not know at the time that I would soon no longer have quite the same professional need for the text. I finished it anyway. I tend to be like that. I did find the scholarly apparatus informative; there was always something new to consider about each text. And while I was reading it, I was in productions of The Comedy of Errors, Richard III, and Timon of Athens, so I used the ‘new stuff’ to some degree, even if not in the virtual or actual classroom. I won’t presume to review Shakespeare himself. We each have our views, some of them held very deeply, about which texts represent his peak achievements. For some, there are no troughs in the work. I tend more towards the view that Shakespeare could, on occasion, produce inferior work, that he was, in his own time and practice, at least as much a businessman (or theatre impresario) as he was an artist. I have my favourite bits, as well as passages that, after this third read through the entire canon, I will probably never see again. It annoys me that, having read three different collected Shakespeares, my total texts read still stands at three. Must go in and add each individual text, I suppose.