Rating: 3/5

Quick Recommendation

A quick read with a conflict between good and evil and choosing between selfish or selfless love. It's also about obsession and unfulfilled desires which leads to a tragic tale. It has a great gothic atmosphere where the Paris Opera House in France is told to be cursed by a mysterious Phantom which is described to look like a 'ghost' or 'angel'. Occasionally the Phantom is even called to be the Angel of Music. The mask he wears adds to the mysterious and suspenseful elements of this short book. The tone is very melodramatic but blends into the background with intriguing characters that are flawed and by the charming music(al) (performances).

One might stumble a bit when reading the French terms if one isn't familiar to it. Watching one of the film adaptions first makes it perhaps easier to get into the book.

  Writing Style

French and musical vocabulary
I had some trouble understanding (but I understood the important things). Fortunately, in the edition I read were footnotes included, but it's still a bit difficult to read at the start when so many French terms were used, especially for the French Opera House industry and the types of ballet dances.

Atmosphere
Except that, it built a mysterious and ghostly atmosphere that stretched itself from start to finish. One could feel how ‘haunted’ the whole Opera House was. The fears in the characters also added to it. It also creates suspension from the middle to end part where Christine Daaé has to make an important decision that will change her life forever.

Tone
Of course it also reads very melodramatic (especially the dialogues) but that makes it so intense while reading. Characters are filled with lots of emotions which makes them so intriguing. The Phantom of the Opera is so interesting for not only having flaws but also being quite the romantic. The themes are also very simple and easy to relate to which makes the melodramatic tone blend into the background. What a silly little story!

  Themes &amp; Symbolism

Themes
One of the main themes in this book is the conflict between good and evil and obsession vs true love. Other notable ones are being beautiful vs ugly, social norms and social expectations, isolation and rejection, selfless vs selfish love and self-discovery.

Symbols
The most important symbol is the music. Not only is it used in Opera Houses to perform but also lets the characters speak their minds, their passions, emotions and feelings freely. The melodramatic tone enhances the musical symbol throughout the story. Music is also a way to showcase power and control which the book used in a ambiguous way to show that music isn't always lovely but can also be scary.

The mask The Phantom of the Opera wears is not only a symbol for a hidden identity but also adds a mysterious touch to the story and makes the reader curious to find out what The Phantom tries to hide.

The Opera House is a symbol for hiding behind a charming facade with ugly secrets. It's also the place Christine and The Phantom engage with eachother the most, making it both a place of beauty for the performances, but also horror for the haunting incidents occurring almost solely in Box Five.

Own thoughts and opinions about the themes &amp; symbolism
The Phantom of the Opera is such a mysterious figure for being the villain, but also full of passion and love for Christine. His flaws made him so interesting for me, but also his mask for not showing his face. I wanted to see it, see the beauty or ugliness it inhabited. Finding out the reason why he wears a mask was for me the strongest climax to understand his character even better. His hidden identity, everything he tried to hide was revealed in that moment which was such a vulnerable moment not only between him and Christine but also the reader. I felt so bad for him, but didn't quite want to pity him like Christine did. That's when I started to think that the true villain in this story was the society for having its norms and expectations, blaming him for not fulfilling them like he was supposed to do as a 'well-behaved' citizen.

  Characters

The Phantom
The Phantom of the Opera is a cruel figure often called to be a 'ghost' or an 'angel' who haunts the Paris Opera House in France. He has a soft and kind side but can also be evil by his dangerous actions which are full of anger and terror. So he can be gentle but also violent which makes it hard to like or dislike him, but he isn't a character one stays indifferent to either. For me it was a hate-love relationship. I understood his point of view and emotions, but I would never approve of his violent actions driven by such enormous rage.

‘[...]you’re crying! You’re afraid of me! And yet, deep down, I am not a bad man. Love me and you’ll see! To be good, all I ever needed was to be loved for myself. If you loved me, I would be as gentle as a lamb; and you could do with me as you pleased.’

Viscount Raoul de Chagny
He was both irritating and yet so loveable. I didn't like at first how he was running after Christine even though she told him that she has no romantic feelings for him. He felt pushy and needy and I didn't like that, but he started to become a protector to her. Compared to The Phantom his love was more safe and also controlled, not filled with obession. Seeing him going out of his way to protect Christine and offering support to her was really heartwarming. Perhaps he was stupid or actually brave for facing The Phantom which Christine was too afraid to confront. He was like some Prince, rescuing a Princess. Raoul was also pretty much selfless, not wanting in return that she marries him or something.

‘You are lying, mademoiselle, for you do not love me and you have never loved me! What a poor wretched soul I must be to let you play games with me and deceive me!’

Christine Daaé
I disliked her at the start for not being able to choose who she loves and making both men a wreck from this. Fortunately, she seems to discover herself more while the story proceeds and is in the end finally able to choose who she wants to spend the rest of her life with. Didn't like how much she pitied The Phantom, but was glad that she showed compassion and empathy towards him despite his sometimes evil nature which also made her afraid of him.

‘[...]tonight I gave you my soul and I am dead!’

  Outroduction

I gave it only 3 stars even if I enjoyed it 'cause the melodramatic tone was a bit too much for me after a while and the French and musical terms made it hard for me to get into this story.

The ending was so satisfying as the unrequited love made this story even more tragic. It also read a bit like Frankenstein as The Creature faced the same rejection by society 'cause of his appearance and they reacted to it quite similar. What poor souls. Both of them have my sympathy.

StoryGraph review