Rating: 1/5

Within the first few pages, it became clear this book isn't for me. Phelan opens with an example of a mother raising 3 boys who tries 1-2-3 magic. At the end of the program, she said she experienced for the first time liking her kids and missing them when they went to school. This book really seems geared at the kinds of parents who want their kids to do exactly what they want them to do and if they don't, they don't enjoy their kids. 

Second, the book lists reasons to trust this method with the first several being some of the weakest support I've seen for a program of any kind. The book lists: the number of copies it sold, the number of languages its been translated too, and the amount of time it's been on the top of Amazon's parenting list as the top three reasons to trust this program. It lists that this program is evidence based last and that fact says a lot about the quality of the program. 

Third, one of his first arguments for his program is that the alternative, reasoning and talking with a child, will very quickly devolve into arguing, yelling, and hitting your child. Yes, hitting your child. Because it is his opinion that reasoning almost never works with children so the parent will always become so frustrated that they will engage in aggression towards their child. Again, this is evidence that this book is geared toward parents who want to control their kids behavior only and not work on developing a well rounded child. 

Fourth he argues that all children are illogical, unreasoning, selfish beings who are incapable of understanding another's emotions or reasons or explanations. While this is true to an extent for toddlers, it is not true as children age, especially as they become school age. This book is geared to raising children from as young as 18 months to as old as 12. Normal 12 year olds are capable of compassion and reason and arguing they're not raises serious doubts about Phelan's qualifications on the subject. 

These are the issues I have with the book at only 12% of the way through.