Rating: 3/5

The other day I was sweeping my apartment. It had been awhile. The dust bunnies were visible, in some places able to be gathered and collected by hand. I hit all the usual spots, then for good measure vacuumed. When I was done, after I had put the broom, dust pan and vacuum cleaner back in their respective closets, I noticed another large pile just inches from my bed. And so it was, dust everywhere, remaining, omnipresent, visible and hidden, in places I could plainly see–and likely in every other place.

Is there any other religious and spiritual dictum that also happens to be cliche as well known as “from ashes to ashes, dust to dust?” From dust were we made, to dust we shall return. We are stardust, we are golden, we are billion year old carbon. From hippie song lyric to humbling proverb, it turns out it all happens to be true.

The final chapter of “The Secret Life of Dust: From the Cosmos to the Kitchen Counter, the Big Consequences of Little Things,” written by scientist Hannah Holmes, is about what happens to our bodies after we die. Whether we are cremated, or buried, or buried in a wooden or steel casket, with enough time, Earthly, geologic time, we all return to dust. And become part of the soil, and return again to the process of recreating whatever becomes of the nutrients and elements that comprise our body.

The first chapter is about space dust, and how much of outer space is comprised of dust, and what happens to that dust when it collects, by a force of gravity, into a celestial body, whether that be a star, a comet or eventually a planet. In between are explications of how and where the dust on our planet exists and moves, from deep underground then spewed into the atmosphere by volcanoes, or swept off the surface of the ocean into the clouds, to be rained down upon us again in cycles that are ageless. And this is just the natural dust, not the dust and soot that are by-products of the Industrial Age.

There is so much dust on Earth that it is almost impossible to comprehend, considering how so much of it is barely even visible under a microscope. And in reading how prevalent dust is, both outdoors but even more so indoors (I will never cook in my kitchen again without thinking of what I am putting into the air that I will eventually breathe) that it is a wonder any of us can get through a lifetime of breathing without choking to death.

In fact, Holmes spends a chapter examining the growing rates of asthma. While she doesn’t come to any conclusions, as the science is unclear, it is likely a combination of factors causing the increased rates of breathing difficulties. Our lack of exposure to as many germs and bacteria as children, the rising amount of time indoors, the higher intensity of pollution and chemicals in our lives (from the fuels in our cars to the chemicals in our detergent)–all contribute to added stress on our fragile lungs and breathing passages.

While this book is highly studious and detailed, leaving it dry at times, what is fascinating is just how prevalent dust is–and how much of it comes from the very roots of life on our planet and in our solar system. We live our lives surrounded by dust and don’t even know it. We shed so many skin particles (most of which goes down the drain when we shower or cleaned when we wash our sheets) but those particles need to go somewhere.

Reading this book was like standing at the ocean’s edge or looking up at the starry sky. It imbued a sense of humility, of smallness of our individual selves in relation to the world around us. And all this from the accumulation of dust particles we can’t even see.

It doesn’t make me feel better when cooking or cleaning, nor imagining what lies ahead, many, many years down the road, for the physical essence of my body. But everything that ever was is still around, somewhere, just in a different form, everlasting. Not a bad take-away from a book focusing on something so small as dust. We look at dust as inconsequential, though this book shows how that is not the case. Because of dust are we made. To consider dust meaningless and simply something to be disposed of is to case the same fate upon ourselves.