Rating: 5/5

*Do NOT read the synopsis on the back of the book/goodreads—gives away the entire story. Literally. The whole plot.*	

It’s been almost ten years since I read this book for the first time, and it still has a powerful hold on me. I can’t explain exactly why it is a favorite; sure, it has the bold and brave girl-who-disguises-herself-as-a-boy in order to do what she loves, but it’s so much more than that. Charis is one of those characters that I can’t help loving and rooting for, and her journey during the declining years of the Roman empire is both vivid, uplifting, and sad. Despite sounding like a modern heroine, she feels totally authentic, as do all the characters. In some ways she reminds me of Amelia Peabody, another favorite heroine of mine, but minus the tongue-in-cheek humor and over-the-top adventure. Charis’ story certainly has some over-the-top qualities to it (and even a little bit of humor), but it never veers into melodrama, and while her disregard for danger leaves her friends throwing up their hands in despair, the author has her face very real and complex situations, without any glib solutions. This is one of those novels that transcends genre, that is thoroughly enjoyable to read but also impossible to stop thinking about. It’s a rare book that will keep you up to 4 a.m. for a re-read.

The plot: Charis is the daughter of a well-to-do Greek politician in Ephesus. Despite her interest in all things medical, she never imagines any life for herself other than that of dutiful wife. But when the malicious new governor Festinus accuses her father of treason, and then announces that he will marry her, she knows she has to real choice but to flee. Disguising herself as a eunuch (which makes the story a lot more believable than the typical girl-dressed-up-as-a-boy), she travels to Alexandria, where she hopes to study medicine at the famed university. But Charis quickly learns that eunuchs are almost as much of outsiders as women are, and she struggles to earn the right to study.

And that is just the beginning: but to tell more of her story would be cheating you of the chance to experience it yourself. The simultaneous splendor, squalor, nobility, and corruption of the empire is presented in both beautiful and heartbreaking ways, and it is a love letter to that civilization as well as a meditation on living in a world that is falling apart.