Rating: 2/5

I remembered this being a whole lot better than it was. The premise is SO COOL and there are moments of genuine introspection / exploration of mortality / identity / human nature BUT oh my god 90% of this book is macho dudes having pointlessly overwrought conversations with each other and engaging in pissing contests about who is more of a "real man" and who is going to win the trophy woman. (Also CW for casual domestic violence yeesh.)

The conversations Main Scientist Dude has with his girlfriend are actually super unintentionally hilarious because he just Wall of Texts her all the time (for PAGES) and never lets her say anything and then she's like "I love you". I just chose to read all her replies to him sarcastically, like when he's all telling her about his childhood and then:

'Please go on telling me about yourself,' she said.

NO REALLY THIS IS FASCINATING PLEASE CONTINUE.

Later:

'Do you want to know what it is with you and women?'
Hawks blinked at her. 'Yes. Very much.'
'You treat them like people.'
'I do?' He shook his head again. 'I don't think so.'

She goes on to credit him with doing a ton of things we've never explicitly seen him do, like respecting her boundaries and not being condescending toward her. And then he contradicts her again!

'I take up as much room in the world, the way you see it, as you do. Do you have any idea of how rare a thing that is?'
Hawks was puzzled. 'I'm glad you feel that way,' he said slowly, 'but I don't think that's true.'

Sorry, Elizabeth, I'm with him on this one.

'Cobey'll be very upset,' Hawks was saying, lost in thought. 'He'll have to pay the technicians bonus-time rates.'
'Who's Cobey?'
'A man, Elizabeth. Another man I know.'

YES THIS IS DEFINITELY YOU TREATING HER LIKE A PERSON.

Then there's this gem:

'Women--' he said earnestly, 'women have always fascinated me. [...] there was something about women. I don't mean the physical thing. I mean some special thing about women: some purpose that I couldn't grasp. What bothered me was that here were these other intelligent organisms, in the same world with men, and there had to be a purpose for that intelligence. If all women were for was the continuance of the race, what did they need intelligence for? A simple set of instincts would have done just as well. And as a matter of fact, the instincts are there, so what was the intelligence for? There were plenty of men to take care of making the physical environment comfortable. That wasn't what women were for. At least, it wasn't what they had to have intelligence for ... But I never found out. I've always wondered.'

[Cue another long scene where he tells her his life story and she quietly listens. This story is about how he was dating a woman in college who once said she didn't want to spend the evening listening to him talk and he immediately fell out of love with her and never spoke to her again.]

He opened the car door, half turned to step out, and then stopped. 'You know -- You know,' he began again, 'I do talk a lot, when we're together.' He looked at her apologetically. 'You must get awfully bored with it.'
'I don't mind.'
He shook his head. 'I can't understand you.' He smiled gently.
'Would you like to?'
He blinked. 'Yes. Very much.'

THEN MAYBE TRY SHUTTING UP AND ASKING HER ABOUT HERSELF SOMETIME

'Maybe I feel the same way about you?'
He blinked again. 'Well,' he said. 'Well. I've been sort of assuming that all along, haven't I? I never thought of that. I never did.' He shook his head.

*facepalming intensifies*

Bonus: I definitely decided from the tenor of their weirdly-emotional conversations that he was in a closet relationship with his second-in-command. There's a bunch of this sort of thing which doesn't seem to make much sense otherwise:

'My God, Ed, what's happened to me? What am I doing to both of us? All I ever wanted to do was help you, and somehow it's come out like this. I never should have come here today, Ed. I shouldn't have done this last thing to you.'

So anyhow someone who is not from the 1950s should write a better version of this book pls.