Rating: 2/5

For a long time it's not clear what kind of book this is. It's not cognitive neurology, nor is it philosophy of mind. Given de Bono's background in physiology and medicine, it is strange that it is not a popular account of how neurologists thought the brain worked back then (1969). Towards the end of the book, there is a short chapter on Physiology. Here de Bono claims that, given the knowledge physiologists had, the human brain could work like the information processing system that he describes. I suppose the problem de Bono faced was that then there was simply not enough science available to write a book on the mechanism of mind. So he turned to philosophy instead. 

The first part of the book reads like a series of thought experiments, speculations on how 'memory surfaces' could 'process information'. Here we have sheets of jelly, tumbling tower blocks, restraining springs, and arrays of tiny bulbs. This section I found confusing, and abandoned this book here the first time I tried to read it (1984). These days I'm made of sterner stuff...and I've studied some philosophy. I'm still not sure what this section is here for, perhaps to illustrate the development of his own thinking, or perhaps to provide the reader with a series of stepping stones, physical objects which we are familiar with, to the mechanism of the mind, with which we are not. I would have prefered to start with neurons, not least because I don't like to think of my mind as jelly. 

What de Bono's towers and bulbs do do is get us swiftly away from any idea of mind-body dualism, the belief that the mental and the physical are essentially different. Having constructed his physical memory surfaces, he then explores their behaviour and considers whether it looks like the mental phenomena we are familiar with; attention, self, emotion, insight, bias, and prejudice (this list looks quite biased itself). Of course they do, so we don't need to concern ourselves with any non-physical accounts of mind. Or indeed anything that minds can do that jelly and springs cannot. I very much like the idea that the information processing of the mind is a result of it's structure, it doesn't need any outside programming. But I dislike the idea that the mind is just an information processing device. The biggest oversight de Bono makes here is language. Probably the most significant distinction between the minds of humans and the minds of jellyfish - which are probably as sophisticated as the special memory surface - is the use of language. Traditionally philosophers of mind have been more concerned with the products of the mind, thoughts, rather than with the mechanism of the mind. And those thoughts are usually couched in language. Any convincing account of the human mind is going to have to include an account of language. 

Without any attempt at explaining how language and mind interact, de Bono moves on to give accounts of natural, logical, and mathematical thinking. For me these all require language; logic and mathematical thinking are culturally refined forms of language. Still without any grounding in philosophy - philosophical logic this time - he goes on to point out the limitations of logic. This, he thinks, functions merely to put a brake on particular lines of thought. "No!" our culture tells us, and we cease to think about something. His account of natural thinking is quite persuasive, and does remind me of discussions with people who can't get beyond their prejudices, the well worn grooves of their special memory surface. But it seems to be a prejudice of his that nothing positive can come of logic, and he doesn't consider that logic can equally show us that no 'No!' actually exists, and we are logically free to develop a non-'natural' line of thought.

In the absence of the good 'No!', the last part of the book offers us 'Po!' a new functional word that will liberate our thinking. I think at this point it becomes clear what kind of book this is, it's a self-help book, not philosophy, not cognitive neurology, it will probably pass as psychology. I shelve mine with religion.