Rating: 1/5

I read this book a while ago. I feel kind of bad that it took so long for me to write about this deluded self-help guide because it warrants being discussed with a certain attention to detail. I don't mean that attention to detail should be paid due to this book's startling revelations. Instead, it was a relatively banal mixture of Taoism, nihilism, and good ol' Hollywood filler. Attention to detail should be paid with Matrix Warrior: Being The One because it uses metaphorical sleight of hand in its discussion about what it means to be alive. Philosophers from Frege on down to Carol Gilligan would hate this book, and they'd be right to.

This book was a well-meaning gift from a family member from years ago when the Matrix trilogy was a-bornin'. For those unaware of the broad themes of The Matrix films, read on: essentially, the reality that we know and love is actually a computer-generated façade programmed and maintained by an artificial intelligence. This same artificial intelligence uses our bodies as fuel by draining us of our organic compounds; hypnotized as we are by the breathtaking simulacra we believe to be reality, we are ignorant of these facts. Horsley's point in Matrix Warrior: Being The One is that the Matrix film franchise speaks the truth . . . !

So, because reality doesn't really exist (whaaaat?!) and we're all being slowly ingested by nefarious beings (Horsley says they're from another dimension, I think), we should cut off all ties with anyone that we perceive to be negatively impacting on our ability to transcend reality towards the next level of enlightenment, which we attain through unclear methods. Horsley's levels are here displayed from order of least enlightened to most:

Humatons (us jerks who don't understand that reality isn't real (whaaaaat?!)

Matrix Warriors (we jerks who understand that reality isn't real and use our powers to attain enlightenment)

Matrix Sorcerers (Those who can see the code and rewrite fake reality's (whaaaaat?!) programming)

The One (Ringo Starr . . . oh, uh . . . the one who becomes one with the program, I guess . . . ?)

Throughout the course of the book, Horsley gets astonishingly derivative, ripping off Taoism, T.M., nihilism, Mormonism, The Matrix trilogy, Carlos Castaneda, and Philip K. Dick (Horsley does have the decency, at least, to openly admit that he's ripping the last three off).

This silly book is good at exposing the underlying weakness of The Matrix franchise, namely its much-vaunted philosophy. The idea that everyone else's needs and wants don't matter because they aren't "real" is a tantalizing idea, but could it possibly make any sense? In what sense isn't reality "real"? In what sense aren't the people around one "real"? In the world of the films, isn't the security guard that a matrix warrior blows away that same warrior's comrade in the fight against the oppressor/devourer? Is Horsley serious, as we're to believe the allegedly drug-addled mind of Philip K. Dick was, when Horsley says that we're being fed upon by some nefarious force that we can't interact with in any way that's meaningful to us? Blue pill/red pill metaphors aside, that's a tough one to swallow, and it sounds like a line that a huckster-cum-cult leader would use.

And that brings me to the reason this book cheesed me off so much. Why would Horsley think that creating a faith-based system around the sloppy tenets of the Matrix franchise's philosophy be a good idea? Aren't people jaded and self-absorbed enough? What possible benefit could come from people thinking that they're the only ones who matter? It boggles the mind, but maybe one has to be a sorcerer to figure out complicated questions like the above.