Rating: 3/5

Like many women I grew up reading Nancy Drew mysteries, which fostered a life long love of mystery and detective stories. At this point in my life, an easy reading mystery is still my preferred genre to cleanse my reading mine after heavier reads. I will admit, this has not been an easy year on a myriad of levels. I told my parents recently that I think all my brain can handle this summer is Agatha Christie and baseball books. Segue, a few woman in my retro chapter chick group still read Nancy Drew regularly. Apparently there are even Nancy Drew book clubs for adults, who knew. They do know that mentally I have been going through hard times so they invited me to buddy read a Nancy Drew mystery with them. Granted the read is not scheduled until next month but I read in order of library availability so here I am back in the comfort of my favorite childhood detective. 

Nancy Drew receives a letter from an old friend Heather McGuire. Apparently the ranch that her family bought in hopes of creating a getaway destination and stable income is being spooked by a combination of previous owners and Kachina doll ghosts. Heather remembers that Nancy is the best at solving mysteries and within a day Nancy and friends Bess and George are on their way from River Heights to the southwest to see if they can solve the mystery of the spooky kachina dolls. 

This installment in the Nancy Drew series had been originally published in 1981, and it had late 1970s to early 1980s vibes. The McGuires drive a station wagon. The supposed enemy is an adult who does t want Nancy meddling in local affairs and is out to get her and continues to send signals that are meant to take her off the case. Of course, there is a “ghost.” Of course, there is a second mystery in which a twelve year old is being framed for crimes he didn’t do. Of course, it is up to Nancy Drew to solve both cases and save the day. And of course, there are southwestern style parties and food when Nancy solves the first of these mysteries. 

In the 1970s and 1980s although at that point more than one generation old, I believe that Nancy Drew and Barbie, two icons I have read about recently, were responsible for telling another generation of girls that they could do anything. That is why both icons are still around and more than relevant as the 21st century nears its one quarter mark. A woman wants to stay home and raise kids, fine. A woman wants to be like Nancy Drew and solve mysteries, great. A woman wants to fly a plane or be a firefighter or is a math genius and decides to crunch numbers (the three professions my three daughters are interested in), fine. Women like Nancy Drew who solved cases on their own facilitated women as primarily stay at home moms to girls knowing that they could be moms and detectives. Hence, when I get an opportunity to read Nancy Drew again, I will gladly jump at it. 

The writing is obviously not designed for a forty something teacher on summer vacation. There are illustrations for every chapter and the text itself is under two hundred pages. Of course I finished in a little under two hours. The writing, not the greatest, but again, geared toward youth audiences, not their mothers. Yet, Nancy Drew should be geared toward mothers who grew up reading her. If Carolyn Keene is a consortium of women writers, she could just as easily create an adult Nancy solving cases with her daughter as she has created modern books featuring Nancy and friends in elementary school. Wouldn’t that be fun to read. In the meantime, I am happy to pick up a few Nancy Drew books a year. They are refreshing and bring back wonderful memories. 

3.5 stars