Rating: 3/5

Many interesting details, but also many flaws and finally lacking structure and an argument.

In his book Hobsbawm draws attention to different forms of social rebellion that predate a class consciousness in the Marxist sense. The first chapters of the book is dedicated to cases from Italy, primarily the South (+ Andalusian anarchists). In these chapters he provides a lot of interesting insights into the country’s social history, some of it building on his own research, most of it on Italian research literature. He acknowledges that these groups could flourish due to the feudal character of society characterized by latifundia, hence they are not very well suited for highlighting a general European tendency (Northern Italy included). Moreover some of them were actually powerful elites like the Bourbon dynasty, or after the unification segments of the Northern Italian elite (as in the case of the mafia).
A similar problem appears in the superficial chapter on urban mobs, where it seems to me that he sets ut to refute Engels’ concept of the “lumpenproletariat” but finally has to accept its viability.

The best chapter of the book is the one on labour sects in Britain, which deals with the big importance of nom-conformist religiosity for the formation of the British labour movement, at least outside major urban centers. He ascribes the strong importance of those religious element which lead to a resurgence in non-conformism to the fact that already the bourgeois revolution expressed itself in religious, not secular terms in Britain. The phenomenon is, however, not as specifically British as Hobsbawm asserts, as pietist religiosity played an important role in Northern Europe as well, with the notable exception of Denmark. A well known result of this are he restrictive rule on alcohol sale and consumption in these countries. Moreover, German Social Democrats had hard times with finding supporters among workers in traditionally Catholic cities and regions, where many Catholic workers rather joined church lead worker associations than socialist unions or the Social Democratic Party. Notable exception can be found (Munich, Mainz), but this phenomenon accounts for the weakness of the Social Democrats in the industrial heartlands of the Rhineland and the Ruhr Area around 1900, and it was thoroughly discussed in the Social Democratic Press.
Another interesting chapter deal with rituals among early labour movements which were in parts derived from the artisan tradition or adapted from masonic rituals (which were based on artisan initiation rituals as well). With the growing influence of secular socialist movements they gradually disappeared before the mid-19th century. Hobsbawm ascribes this to Marx’ critique of such activities, which in my opinion can only apply to the few countries where his ideas were influential. Th question why rituals later became so important for Marxist movements, is not discussed.