Rating: 3/5

I LOVE Ellis Peters’ Brother Cadfael series and was thrilled to find this book, evidently from another series at my local used book store. Mourning Raga transports us to India via England where two young college students are asked to “deliver” an international star’s 14-yr-old daughter to her Indian father who, because of a bitter custody battle, she hasn’t seen in nine years. Upon arrival in India, things begin to fall apart and before you know it, we have a murder, a kidnapping and a couple of missing key characters. 

In this story, which takes place mostly in Delhi, we have an introduction to the Indian culture and our connection is partly through the film industry. According to Peters, a Raga is “the basic material for all (Indian) classical music, and there are thousands of them, the ragas, each for a special time and season, and a special mood, so that in a few rising and descending notes you have the mind’s first statement, the one thought out of which a work of art grows.”

I enjoyed the story. Evidently this is book 3 or 4 of a series and not having read the others first, I was not acquainted with any of the characters. It is quite possible that I did not enjoy this as much as I do the Cadfael novels because I did not have that sense of familiarity with the characters and setting as I do with Cadfael and in a book of less than 200 pages, there was not much room to develop extensive backgrounds to characters beyond those featured in the current mystery.

I’m not saying I didn’t enjoy this book, I did. I found the cultural and historical references interesting and the story picked up speed and intensity significantly about halfway through. I just didn’t find this as compelling as I do her Brother Cadfael novels where I let them envelope me. With Brother Cadfael, every time I pick up the book I look forward to being lost in his world and am ready to sit in his shop and listen to him putter and wax lyrical. With Raga, I was much more willing to stay at arm’s length and view the story from a distance. Part of this could have been because this was my right-before-bed reading and numerous other activities have meant that my nightly, exhausted attention span was less than optimal and spread what was meant to be a very short read over a couple of weeks.

If I find others in this series I will certainly give them a try. Ellis Peters’ use of language is a delight to behold. Because most of her writing was done in the middle of the 20th century her stories are usually devoid of graphic elements that would tend to scare of the squeamish (like me!) and her research and love of history comes through so I never read one of her books where I don’t learn something new.