Rating: 4/5

Cadfael adds 'diplomat' to his resume in this one, as he is chosen to negotiate a prisoner swap with the Welsh prince Owain Gwynedd. 
The action opens in February 1141, in the aftermath of the fighting at Lincoln. The Shrewsbury men bring home dire news--King Stephen taken prisoner by the Empress's men; Gilbert Prestcote, their sheriff, taken by Welsh marauders who had joined in the fight for the possibility of plunder.
The Welsh band, still looking for adventure and loot, continue raiding--this time closer to Shrewsbury. They attack the convent of Benedictine nuns at Godric's Ford, and come away empty handed, as well as losing one of their own--a well-placed young man, Elis ap Cynan, now held prisoner by undersheriff Hugh Beringar.
So off goes Cadfael, with his abbot's blessing, on this mission for Hugh--arrange a swap of Elis for Gilbert Prestcote. Cadfael's mission is a success. All is looking upbeat. Well, that doesn't last very long.
Elis manages to meet (and fall head over heels for) Prestcote's daughter Melicent (who is likewise smitten). No good outcome here, for once Gilbert arrives home, Elis must return to Wales. There are other complications, of course, both in Shrewsbury and Wales.
Gilbert had fallen ill during his captivity and was still very weak and ailing. When he came home, his Welsh escort took him straight to the abbey's infirmary. All agreed that he would recover, with time and rest. Alas, he was not given the chance--someone murdered him as he slept.
The author presents the reader with a goodly roster of possible villains--in the abbey and among the Welsh. Cadfael now has to turn sleuth to ferret out the culprit. Surely not young Elis, who is the prime suspect. But if not him, then who else could have motive and means?
All sorts of twists as the rest of the story unfolds. The revelation of whodunnit is heartbreaking; the resolution just and merciful (as well as very clever).
I so enjoy entering this world. I'm already looking forward reading the next.