Rating: 4/5

When I think about Tayeb Salih’s novel, one image keeps recurring: Mustapha Sa’eed digging up the ground around a lemon tree whose branches sometimes, remarkably, also produce oranges. A lemon tree, not typically a hybrid plant, can produce oranges only through a careful process of grafting between the scion of an orange tree and the rootstock of a lemon tree. “How extraordinary!” the narrator exclaims, without meaning it, to get a rise out of Sa’eed. Yet, the image is extraordinary insofar as it represents the tragic, unfulfilled potential of Sa’eed’s life: the Arab-African, British-educated post-colonial intellectual whose cultural hybridity could not yield as healthy an outcome as that of the lemon-orange tree.

Another thing that arrested my attention is the heavily gendered discourse of the novel. Sa’eed returns to his native Sudan with a legacy of murder and betrayal from his overseas encounter with the colonizer’s culture. In England, Sa’eed plays into his exoticized masculinity and destructive sexuality to embark on a relentless (anti)colonial revenge tour—"I’ll liberate Africa with my penis"—that causes the anguish and eventual death of several English women. The novel deliberately stages the South-North/East-West divide through a hegemonic form of sexual dichotomization. Yet, unlike the popular genre of colonial travelogue, where colonial discourse represents a masculine Europe dominating a feminized Orient, Season of Migration to the North offers a deliberate reversal by transforming the colonized into beholder, whose very gaze feminizes the colonizer in a perverse seduction plot. 

Sa’eed’s life achieves completion when the seduction is consummated through a murderous act of violence. But, unlike Shakespeare’s Othello, Sa’eed is too afraid to kill himself. The tragedy of Sa’eed is that his staunch rejection of imperialism could not prevent his entrapment within its epistemic universe. It followed him upon his return to Sudan, to the small village on the bend of the Nile, and ultimately, it lead him to the Nile itself.