Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars. (This rating is rounded up to 3 rather than down to 2 because I’m incredibly annoyed to see that some people have left reviews or added this book with descriptions of their experiences at Sears stores that are so completely irrelevant I find it baffling that someone thought to mention that on this platform.)

On to a review: This book was simultaneously interesting and boring, if that is at all possible. The subject matter, the rise and fall of Sears, is interesting, but the writing really seems to have let it down, in my opinion. 

For starters, with the amount of genuine content in this book, Katz did not need 600+ pages/30+ hours. You could have easily done this book in 300 pages and fit every ounce of relevant content that Katz found. This book felt heavy on fluffy, repetitive filler description, and maybe that was intentionally. It gave the book the same redundant, overgrown vibe that Sears had, but it was just not a good stylistic choice. He could have made this into a far more concise work and given a clearer picture of Sears if he had. 

Ideally a picture with a better structure, this book jumped around much more than felt necessary. The number of times he was talking about Sears in the 80s and made a sudden swerve to give more fluffy, irrelevant description of the glory days of 60s Sears was ridiculous. We all got the picture the first twelve times you described it. 

As a final point only relevant to the audiobook, I’m never listening to anything read by that guy again. I have never heard someone else hired to read an audiobook be so boringly monotone that I was worried to play it on my drive home for fear of falling asleep at the wheel. Granted, the writing was boring and repetitive too, but you could have at least hired someone to read it who wasn’t going to exaggerate the problem. 

Overall, this book was an interesting topic almost ruined by a bad audiobook and bad writing. If you’re really interested in Sears, I’d recommend it (only in paperback form, not the audiobook), but if you’re just a passerby looking for a good read, pass on this on.