Rating: 4/5

The version I'm reading is from 1976 and is actually titled "Self Assertion For Women: A Guide to Becoming Androgynous* (*Fully Human)." Not surprisingly, the first few chapters are REALLY dated. Like so dated that I almost it gave up entirely as not being remotely applicable to my life. HOWEVER, after getting through the first two chapters describing the problems with the traditional stereotypical representation of women during/up to the 1970s, the rest of it has been great (so far at least, I'm not done).

Butler takes the four areas in which women typically have trouble asserting themselves (Setting limits, Self-initiation [e.g. saying &amp; doing what you want], Expressing negative feelings, and Expressing positive feelings) and sets out a plan for women to identify in which arenas and with which people they have the most difficulty being assertive. Once those areas are identified and ranked in terms of difficulty, she helps women create a plan to start asserting themselves in areas that are easier for them and gradually work up to the situations that make them most anxious.

She also addresses how to deal with anxiety, how to respond to success, feedback, failure, and criticism, as well as how to identify harmful patterns and responses to influential ppl in our lives. Also covered: nonverbal &amp; physical messaging, distinguishing assertion from aggression (e.g. asserting yourself doesn't make you mean), boundary setting, and power distribution. So, I pretty much love this book, despite it's datedness. I mean really, to make it more up to date she would just need to replace the first few chapters of Women Are Supposed To Be Weak And Submissive All The Time with a more nuanced discussion of the slightly more complex You Can Be Powerful But Don't Say What You Want Or What You Don't Want And Make Sure To Take Care of Everyone But Yourself message that women now get instead.

Also? On the back cover the author is wearing the most badass pinstripe three-piece suit with long hair and cufflinks. &lt;3