Rating: 5/5

For Hammett fans who may have found themselves saddened by the fact that he wrote so few novels, this collection is something of a find and a reason to rejoice. 

The introduction tells us that he wrote something like 100 stories - some of which appear in other collections. But the 20 found here show the writer in top form. None of them give the suggestion of someone reaching to 'find his voice'; he's already talking much like the Hammett of his novels (esp. in the seven 'Continental Op' stories that are entertainingly included). 

The range in storytelling is impressive; Hammett finds plenty of ways to place crime in fresh settings. (I kept in mind that his own reality was largely responsible for that; his personal experience of being employed in detective work for some years.) 

I don't think there's a story here that doesn't allow the reader to zip through it; each of them holds that kinetic (and often sly) 'something' - even the final one, 'The First Thin Man'... which may not have been Hammett's own title for it since it was left unfinished when he gave it the heave-ho in order to completely re-fashion it as 'The Thin Man'. It ends up being fascinating comparing both versions of the tale. The first one doesn't even have Nick and Nora Charles in it (!). And, while one can tell the superiority of the final product, its first form is also riveting. 

The writing, of course, emphasizes the hard-boiled but Hammett's wit can be found peppered throughout - for example, in 'They Can Only Hang You Once' (a murder tale which takes on an element of farce):
   A young woman came in crying angrily, "Wally, that old fool has--" She broke off with a hand to her breast when she saw Spade. 

Spade and Binnett had risen together. Binnett said suavely, "Joyce, this is Mr. Ames. My sister-in-law, Joyce Court."

Spade bowed.

Joyce Court uttered a short, embarrassed laugh and said: "Please excuse my whirlwind entrance." 
I'll have to remember that line the next time I make a whirlwind entrance. 

An aside: Not that I'm making any claim here but, twice in the collection, Hammett seems to delve into gay territory - first in the area of homoeroticism (from the male narrator in 'His Brother's Keeper'):
   I started to say something and then stopped, and I had a goofy idea that I would like to kiss him or something and then he was climbing through the ropes and the gong rang.
...........
Loney was not looking sick anymore. I could tell he was excited because his face was set hard and still. I like to remember him that way, he was awful good-looking.
 An affected thing (shall we say) is off-and-running in the first-person narrative of 'A Man Named Thin': 
  Papa was, though I may be deemed an undutiful son or saying it, in an abominable mood. His chin protruded across the desk at me in a fashion that almost justified the epithet of brutal which had once been applied to it by an unfriendly journalist; and his mustache seemed to bristle with choler of its own, though this was merely the impression I received. It would be preposterous to assume actual change in the mustache which, whatever Papa's humor, was always somewhat irregularly salient.
 "... the epithet of brutal"?! Hmm... seems more gay than just... elite. My fedora's off to ya, Dash!

'Nightmare Town' starts off with a story of the same name. It is a yarn of non-stop action so high-octane it almost reaches the level of comical. The rest of the stories are not nearly as zany but the tone is nevertheless set: the deadly with the tongue-in-cheek; add talent and stir.