Rating: 4/5

James Cain’s Mildred Pierce focuses on a down-on-her luck mother named Mildred Pierce (big surprise there). The book is set in sunny California in the Depression era, and Mildred is in a pickle. Her husband has just left her, and she has two young children to support. With no work experience, how will she survive?

The first half of Mildred Pierce is fairly entertaining. However, the pacing overall is a little slow. This book was published in 1941 so this is before the internet, YouTube, and 5-second attention spans. Yet, I could not help but think that Mildred Pierce would be better off as a play or movie. And I was not disappointed. There is apparently at least one HBO miniseries and a movie based on this book.

On the one hand, parts of this books are very relatable. Mildred is determined to find work to support herself and her children, but she discovers that employers don’t want to hire women. She is not considered qualified for jobs because she doesn’t have any experience. Even in the 21st century, I was told by employers that I didn’t need a job because my “father would take care of me.” 

Yet, on the other hand, Mildred Pierce did not feel real. All of her exes just agree to everything. Do you want a house? A loan? A car? They always seem to say yes, no matter the request. Where are all of these people in my life? Because most people tell me no. And these exes are always so happy with Mildred, drama free. Yeah right…..

When applying for jobs, at least two people tell Mildred straight away that she has no hope. In this internet age, applicants aren’t told anything for fear of being sued, only to receive a rejection email months after initially applying. 

A bit farther in the book, Mildred begins to associate with other people (trying to be a bit vague here to avoid serious spoilers). None of these people ever quit or move away, they never call in sick. 

There are a couple of twists at the end that I didn’t see coming, and I also enjoyed Mildred’s internal battle with herself. She is insecure, and she questions if she is being judged by others. Is Mildred just projecting her own insecurities or are other people judging her? Guess you will have to read this book to find out! 

Overall, Mildred Pierce is a very solid novel, particularly for being published in 1941. 

2024 Reading Schedule	
Jan	Middlemarch
Feb	The Grapes of Wrath
Mar	Oliver Twist
Apr	Madame Bovary
May	A Clockwork Orange
Jun	Possession
Jul	The Folk of the Faraway Tree Collection
Aug	Crime and Punishment
Sep	Heart of Darkness
Oct	Moby-Dick
Nov	Far From the Madding Crowd
Dec	A Tale of Two Cities

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Facebook Insta