Rating: 5/5

I so wish that T M Wright had called this book "Strange Seed Take Manhattan" as it appears everybody wants to, even The Muppets. Joking apart, The Children Of The Island is the best book in the series, hands down.

One of the Earth Folk, Seth (who we're introduced to in Nursery Tale), has a plan to take his brood back to the original spawning ground, which is unfortunate for the people in the metropolis it's become. One of the reasons I loved this novel was how Wright expands the Earth folk's territory. In book one, we are on a disused farm. In book two, we have moved into a housing development. And in book three, we're in the big bad city. More people equals more Good Eats.

But there's something special in the pages of this novel. Multiple stories twist and intertwine to create a beautiful and believable environment for the Earth Folk to invade. You have the tale of Jim Hart and his friends who stumble onto Seth and his brood and Jim's descent into madness. Then you have Winifred Haritson and the residents of The Stone, a dilapidated hotel, and their siege when the hotel is overrun by a gang of youths called The Ravens. Next is Georgie MacPhail, a twelve-year-old cat-burglar, who literally stumbles upon Winifred Haritson while looking for enough loot to help his mother feed the family. And we have down-and-out-and-homeless Whimsicle Fatman who staggers around the city and starts to notice some peculiar changes. And good-ol' John Marsh is still knocking around, and he is on the search for Seth. There's so much going on in this book that I dare you to be bored.

Wright, even finds pages to add the previous history, in the way of news articles, placed at the most strategic points of the story to get back under your skin. I said Nursery Tale gets under your skin, and you can feel the scratch on your bone. The Children Of The Island sink their teeth down to your marrow.

A good series keeps getting better. Have fun and enjoy.

Take Care, Stay Well, And Make Love Not War.