Rating: 3/5

To Have and Have Not (1937) is usually seen as a “minor” novel of Ernest Hemingway, sandwiched as it is between two of his major novels, A Farewell to Arms (1929), and For Whom the Bell Tolls (1940). It had its beginnings with a short story about main character Harry Morgan, a fishing boat captain and sometime smuggler-for-hire, that was followed by another story about Morgan, and then Papa decided to stretch it into a full-length novel, using some seemingly unrelated stories along the way. It received mixed reviews and is still receiving mixed reviews, but there is still some great writing in it. I hadn’t read it for years, so dusted it off to see how it held up for me.

Of course, my temptation is to write a review in the manner of Paul Bryant’s brilliant Oliver Twist review, which is to say, where’s Lauren Bacall??!! (because, for the younger readers here, Howard Hawks made a film loosely based on the book, creating more of a romantic thriller than Hem ever intended). The romance in the book, such as it is, involves Harry and his wife Marie, who gets the final say in the book, sweetly. 

The book feels like it is quite cobbled together, using Morgan stories of desperate “adventure” against stories of wealthy yacht owners. My early impression of the book is that it is noir, focused on the rhythm and colloquial talk of hard-scrabble working-class folks--Conchs-in Key West, reminding me a little of Hem’s short story “The Killers" for its noir feel. The other aspect of noir here is the focus on what it means to be poor and pushed to the edge, into crime, to do anything to survive. Papa was writing this while going back and forth between the US and the Spanish Civil War, where he was exposed to some Marxist ideology, including critiques of the rich that we also see here.

A lot of people call this an experimental novel for Hem, as he tells the story or stories, in the novel, through multiple points of view, including two women. He’s also working on stream-of-consciousness writing in the heads of a few characters. While I like Harry as a character, the “rummy” Eddie (who also is featured in the Howard Hawks movie), and Marie, and like some of the action sequences, I don’t find it a successful work (and as I recall, neither did he), but you know, he's Hem, and I'm not going to rip on him too hard here.