Rating: 3/5

Last year I read William Poundstone’s Head in the Clouds, the underlying thesis of which is that even though 99% of all knowledge accrued by man is now accessible within seconds to anyone with a smartphone, it’s still important to… well, actually know stuff.

Central to this is the concept of “Cultural Literacy”, something many of us might call world knowledge. It’s the idea that a truly literate society must share a general knowledge; background information that “enables us to pick up a newspaper and read it with an adequate level of comprehension”. It also allows for citizens with different backgrounds and professional specialties to engage with each other in a more than cursory way. I think we’d all agree that it would be difficult (or at least tiresome) to have a conversation with an individual who had never heard of Shakespeare or wasn’t able to name the capital city of their own country.

I read Hirsch’s initial 1983 paper on the topic and decided to move on to this popular book where the author had the space to expand on his theory and ideas.

Much (too much?) of the book is given to research on memory. Interesting, but not the reason I decided to buy the book. Hirsch further lost me in the chapters in which he became prescriptive with policy advice. After all, it was originally published in 1987. If action was going to be taken, they would have been taken by now, right? I was a bit surprised that Hirsch is staunchly against the adoption of a second official language in America: “tolerance of diversity is at the root of our society, but encouragement of multilingualism is contrary to our traditions and extremely unrealistic… well-meaning bilingualism could unwittingly erect serious barriers to cultural literacy among our young people and therefore create serious barriers to universal literacy at a mature level.”. I don’t think I can really agree with Hirsch here. Of the current woes of the American education system, multilingualism is not one I would suspect of being all that malevolent.

I admit that I ordered the book in large part to quiz myself on the 5000 snippets of information that Hirsch deems essential for “literate Americans”. I honestly didn’t fare as well as I expected. And therein lies the chief shortcoming of this theory. Who decides what cultural nuggets are so important that they should become part of the shared “general knowledge”?