Rating: 5/5

How little we reflect as we pursue our busy, busy lives that EVERYTHING that crosses our path has a History.
And that we are so often indebted to persons unknown for the creation of all these EVERYDAY things.

I can always recall my mother exiting the Archaeological Museum in Athens and announcing with utter wonderment: "They used exactly the same dental instruments that we're using today."
First of all, she wasn't a dentist but ran a big dental practice for many years and what dental knowledge she didn't pick up there...
Secondly,she wasn't talking about electric drills, smarties!!!
And finally she really got me thinking...about the history or origins of the chair, the fork, the handkerchief....I already knew about the History of the Sandwich!!!(You know, Lord Sandwich, the inveterate gambler,who couldn't drag himself away from the gambling table even to eat, so had the servants slap whatever was on between two bits of bread!!!
Voila, le sandwich!!!!)

When I eventually came across Margaret Visser's books many years later, how I blessed the gods( whose histories I'd already exhausted, and thankfully Margaret is NOT a theologian) for whoever created Margaret!!(Mr and Mrs Visser, of course)
Margaret also goes into the origins of habits and customs...I'm sure 'spitting' is one of them.(As you can see she left no stone unturned.)
Margaret's "Much Depends On Dinner" which has the MOST amazing chapter on corn you'll EVER read, and you'll find out that a meal at table is one of the most dangerous places you can ever be in which is why so many taboos have been set up to ensure our survival there....and see, they work, which is the only reason you are reading THIS!!!
And the other book "The Rituals of Dinner" which is where the survival bit may actually be found...can't remember now.
But READ ALL THREE!!You won't be sorry and you'll be the MOST interesting Bore at the next Dinner Party you attend, but I can't be certain about your survival.But if you do, you are certain to be invited back, more credit to Margaret than to you, I think.