Rating: 4/5

A hard book to read. Judge Wright was born into Jim Crow Baltimore; fought in World War II in a segregated unit; was admitted to Princeton; was rejected on arrival upon the discovery he was a Black man; and was appointed to the bench younger than me. He locked horns with Ed Koch and the New York Police Unions over his revolutionary idea that bail should ensure the defendant’s appearance, not itself be a punishment. He walked a lonely road as a Black judge in a world of whiteness. This book is a scathing indictment of the justice system he himself was a part of. 

This book is thirty three years old, but so much of it could be written about today. He starts with a description of courts in the 1980s that is still largely true:
Most of the judges of America are male, white, middle-class, aloof and conservative. Brought before them is a parade of dark-skinned defendants, all alien to the concept the judges have of the way life ought to be. 
In New York City, most judges have completed four years of college and three of law school. Presumably, such scholars are intellectuals of one kind or another. But more often than not, they are acquainted with no more than theories. Seldom do they have any personal familiarity with the reality and cruel adjectives which modify and diminish the lives of the poor. Such judges gaze upon the captives of the police across a vast expanse of social distance. (12) 
The bench is more diverse today, mercifully, but there are plenty of judges I know and even consider friends who fit this description. 

The book is uncomfortable on a lot of levels. His description of his own life and the constant disrespect he received was hard enough. His critique of American Jewish lawyers as failing to be allies to Black Americans made me cringe for different reasons. The story I know is a different one, but who am I to deny his experience? 

It seems like he tried very hard to speak the truth whether it was welcome or not. This reminded me of some people I care about on in the bar and on the bench today:

I never ceased to remind my white colleagues of the repressive influences that were allowed to shape their thinking on race and created so much social distance between them and all blacks, including those of educational and artistic standing. My words did not ingratiate me with the judges of my generation. Except for one or two white judges, my relationship with my fellow jurists was one of surface courtesies and an occasional exchange of greetings. I had no love for them and less respect. 
	Early in my career, I had protested to Judge James Leff that most of my colleagues did not speak to me. With characteristics bite and cynical insight, he said ‘It’s a fringe benefit.’ Other than Arthur Blyn, for whom I have the highest respect and affectionate regard, I have never wished to chat with any of them. I consider most of them as an abject lot, religiously devoted to obedience to the dictates of court administration as a way of advancing their own promotion within what I regard as a Neanderthal system.
	Although they might grumble quietly, they are obedient to the administrative infrastructure, knowing that steadfast allegiance will promote their careers and that criticism would accomplish the opposite. (112-13). 
And this could have been written this summer about so many places:
I deplore the killer instinct seemingly aroused in so many white police officers by the sight of black skin. I expressed the view that New York had deteriorated into a police state where no white police officer would ever be convicted for the slaying of a black. (153) 
The slings and arrows of racism just keep coming. The head of the Ford Foundation invited Judge Wright to his place for what turned out to be an attempt to get advice on how to keep Black students at Yale from protesting the school’s investments in South Africa too effectively. The doorman insisted the judge use the service elevator. (157). I know judges who have had courthouse security try to exclude them just in the past few years. He talked about racist comments judges made in his presence from the bench and racist notes left by jurors in the jury room. He talked about his son’s elementary school teaching Little Black Sambo and assigning roles to the students. 

A hard book to read. Raw and somewhat disjointed. I’m really glad he wrote it and that the Washington State Supreme Court Law Library has a copy.