Rating: 4/5

3 stars if you are a casual King fan

4 stars for being a very decent dissertation on the horror genre (remembering that it was released in the early 80s, so any horror between then and now is missing)

I have been in the middle of rereading King’s books in chronological order – mostly on audiobook. This is the first one in order that I got to that I had never even read before! This one I did not do on audio. I have actually had a paperback copy of this for decades and it is quite beat up. In fact, on the cover it says it is by the co-author of The Talisman.

Danse Macabre is an extended book and movie report. If King had done this as a master’s thesis, I would not have been surprised. With that in mind, unless you are really into the history of the horror genre, really enjoy non-fiction, or are a King completist, I don’t think there is a reason to give this one a try. If you are a casual or occasional King reader, it is likely that this book will bore you despite the fact that he does interject some King charm and anecdotal humor from time to time.

Now, even though I did use the word “bore” in the previous paragraph, if this sort of book is your thing and you are passionate about the horror genre, I think you will enjoy this book quite a bit. It is well written and researched. There are lots of different books and movies discussed so you might find yourself wanting to hunt them down to read and watch as you go along. There were a few parts that drug on a bit - since he is a novelist, his chapters on novels felt a bit longer than they needed to be. 

A thought I had while reading this is that he released it when he was less than a decade into his career. I was only about 3 years old when it came out so I don’t know what the feeling was on King at the time, he only had 7 novels out, and had not yet been revealed as Richard Bachman. The reason I point this out is he definitely presents himself as an expert on the topic and pulls no punches when he his describing something he does not like. With how we feel about King now we would probably think “Why, of course, he is THE KING, and THE KING has spoken”. But back then I wonder if people were more like, “I know he has had a few successful books and movies, but who does this guy think he is?” 

In summary – a great book for hardcore horror and King fans. Not really necessary for those casual in either of these areas.