Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars. Tapestry is a beauty and the beast, Georgian era, historical romance with a scarred/masked hero and the woman who has loved him for years. 

“Life is like a tapestry, don’t you think, Alex?”

Alex, Earl of Cardiff, was injured during the war and now has burns and scars all over, he lost an eye, has an injured hand, and even wears a leather mask. After returning from the war he found out he inherited the Earldom after his father and older brother passed away in a carriage accident. Alex has holed himself up in his estate, Heddon Hall, and while most of his staff seem to be afraid of him, there is one new worker who isn’t afraid to look him in the eye and spend time with him. 

Laura fell in love with Alex when she was young, he was 10 years older, but she spent time with him off and on when she was growing up, he even consoled her and spent time with her after her parents died. Now it’s been 4 years since she last saw him and since all of her letters she wrote to him have been returned, she decides to don a maid’s outfit and apply for work at his estate under the name “Jane”. I really liked seeing how she goes for Alex immediately and wants to show him love and appreciation and how she isn’t afraid of how he looks. 

Alex and Laura are very sweet and perfect as a couple, I enjoyed seeing them together when we did. I do feel like some of their moments together are glazed over and time flies before they spend time apart and trauma and heartaches ensue. This book is ripe in the melodrama and how much the characters go through. I had heard from so many people ahead of time how emotional this read was, and while it never had me in my feels, I can see how it would pull on some heartstrings. This couple goes through a lot and I just wanted a little bit more time spent in each moment instead of moving on to the next so quickly, and seeing them happier together for longer would have been nice too. The villainous character was super frustrating and their POV would get kind of old. I did really like seeing Laura’s relationship with her Uncles! 

CW: grief, loss of a child