Rating: 4/5

I think this is one of the first full text books I’ve actually completed and I have to say, it actually wasn’t too terrible. The subject material is interesting and the author presents everything quite well.

Personality, as you might have guessed, is a book about personality psychology, a branch of psychology that studies human personality and how it varies between individuals. This book was actually pretty well rounded, covering multiple approaches to personality theory. The first few chapters start with the history of Personality psychology, introductions to each approach, and information on some research methods. The subsequent chapters dedicate two chapters each to the other approaches. The book follows a timeline fairly well, starting with grand daddy Freud and the Psychoanalytic approach. Naturally, there were extra chapters on Freud and neo-Freudian theory. The book starts with the earliest forms of personality theory and ends with some of the most recent. I think the only thing lacking from the book is the lack of any kind of closing chapter. After finishing the final chapter with the last approach it feels like the book ends rather abruptly, which may sound silly given that it is a textbook. The author could have discussed current personality psychology research or a final comparison of the approaches and how influential they still are today.

With the exception of the last two chapters, each chapter is roughly thirty pages in length. It may seem a bit funny to split each approach into two different chapters, but from the point of view of a student, this is actually quite handy. It makes it easy to just do one chapter a week along with assignments without feeling overwhelmed with the amount of information. Each approach is given an equal amount of background information and good support as well as criticisms for each. It is made quite clear in the introduction that varying approaches shine in different areas, and no one theory alone is applicable to everything. This I think is one of the book’s strongest suits as it gives the reader a chance to decide what approaches fit best and form their own opinions on the topic, something that I think is important for an academic work as opposed to just force feeding one point of view.

I did have a few very small criticisms of the book and I couldn’t give it full marks, and most of them are just my own pet peeves that others may not share. First was the in-text citations, which I know are necessary for academic works and are included in the standard format for Psychology. They just drive me batty and disrupt my reading skimming over them in the middle of a sentence! Especially the sentences that have multiple citations in one. I also found at least two grammatical errors throughout the book, which is actually quite good considering it’s rare to find a work that is perfect, but still a slight oversight considering this is a hefty and expensive text book.

Lastly, littered throughout the chapter are tables with graphs, personal evaluation tests, and short profiles about some important theorists. While I loved having all three, sometimes the placement was pretty awful. I’d be in the middle of a paragraph when the whole half of the page would be interrupted with a giant profile about a given theorist, and I’d have to skip over it to finish the section, then back track to read the profile. Often the profiles for the theorist would be placed right in the middle of the section talking about their work. I think it would make a lot more sense to place those profiles at either the very start or the very end of the chapter, preferably the start so that the reader can get an introduction to the theorist. I know that with printing it’s difficult to make everything fit, but I just found it bothersome having so many interruptions while reading and having to flip around so often.

Overall, not too shabby for my first complete text book. The book is of course inherently inhibited by it’s format, you’d have to be intensely interested in psychology and personality theory in particular. However if you wanted a crash course on the subject that is well written, evenly paced, and even has some humor to keep the chapters interesting, this book does it pretty well.

Strengths: Well rounded and informative
Weaknesses: Dense, bad locations for tables and profiles, in-text citations clutter the paragraphs