Disclosure - it only took me a couple of days to actually read this but I wanted to write my own review of this 'review' before purging it from my reading lists. At this point, I wish I had made notes while reading it of all the instances of blatant stupidity to post in this review. As it is, I didn't. My apologies to people who do enjoy a good rant that also contains direct quotes. Please trust me that I did read this book and likely spent more time reading it than the author did reading any of the books he was tasked with reviewing.

I will only give the author credit for maybe reading the first of the four books in the Harry Potter series that he was supposed to review for this book. And that's only because the first book is the shortest of the given four. Even then, it feels shoddy and cherry-picked with instances of outright lie for lies sake that any child would be able to poke a hole through. Example right off the top of my head is how Abanes insists that Dudley was viciously attacked by Hagrid's magic for no reason at all. Seriously? Dudley got his little piggy tail because he outright stole Harry's birthday cake - the only cake / birthday present he had ever received - and was stuffing his face with it while his parents were busy insulting Harry's dead parents and the headmaster of Hogwarts in front of both Hagrid and Harry. He was being a piggy and he got a piggy tail. An easily removable one apparently as that's how Harry got his trip to the London train station - they needed to stop at a hospital to get the thing removed before school started. But let's forget that Dudley or the Dursleys in general did anything to deserve anything because after all, Hagrid is a horrible magic-welding brute. 

Hermione? According to Abanes, she only becomes friends with Harry and Ron after deliberately turning into a nasty little liar on their behalf. It totally wasn't because the boys were the only ones to remember she was being miserable in a girls' loo and went to get her. They risked their own lives just trying to get her to safety because she was their classmate and worth that unplanned risk. Hermione's lie may have lessened the punishments all around but they wouldn't have become friends if they weren't already headed in that direction. 

In the pick-apart of '...The Chamber of Secrets', after Abanes pokes at the parallels of the various Hogwart's textbooks and books the exist in the real world as well as decrying the idea of a fantasy world that 'exists' in the present world, he goes after Mr. Arthur Weasley. Hagrid is old news. Mr. Weasley is the new terror. He's helping to raise horrible children who lie and steal cars. He works for the Ministry of Magic to protect Muggles and yet he dares to tinker with Muggle objects himself [something which becomes very important later in the series but I doubt Abanes got that far]. Arthur Weasley is a 'liar and a hypocrite' who even starts a brawl in a bookstore with another wizard. Yep, nasty Arthur Weasley started all the problems in the bookstore. Lucius Malfoy gets a total pass. In fact, Lucius Malfoy gets all the passes in this review. The only mention of his actual involvement with the whole Chamber event is a brief mention that he was the one to deliberately slip the knowingly cursed diary into Ginny Weasley's cauldron at the bookstore during the brawl that, naturally, was all Arthur's fault after all. All the other adults in the Wizarding World are horrible creatures who encourage law-breaking. Except the adult who deliberately decides to curse an 11 year old girl as well as threatens familial cursings to the governors of Hogwarts if others didn't join his crusade to remove the Headmaster [which would help greatly with the purging of any students that don't fit the pure-blood criteria]. He's the invisible man despite his every action being one of malicious intent. 

For '...Prisoner of Azkaban', Abanes needs to take a swipe at all the classes offered at Hogwarts, especially Divinations which he becomes absolutely obsessed with to the point that he carries that over into the fourth book's review. He even goes so far as to claim that Harry's random 'prediction' done during his Divination's final is supposedly Rowling's way of making Harry a 'True Seer'. As opposed to, you know, foreshadowing for the rest of the book and, at the very least, Harry making something up that he'd like to see happen in order to finish up an annoying class final. 

Swearing is a mortal sin. Especially the word 'git' which means little to nothing to everyone not British and even then isn't exactly a fighting word. The equivalent of calling someone a 'moron' is the height of literary terrors in a children's book though. Hagrid's sins are back because he's an adult who drinks when he's off duty and not responsible for children. All lies told by 'good characters' are the absolute worst of the worst no matter the reason. Dumbledore lies in order for a young Lupin to actually get a real Wizarding education despite his disability? Absolutely disgusting of course. Werewolves aren't people and should be left uneducated and homeless somewhere for something they can't control. Mocking Dudley for being the size of a small whale because all he does is eat is an unforgivable affront to fat kids everywhere though. More on the Dursleys in a bit because Abanes loves them enough to ignore everything they do. 

'...Goblet of Fire'...pure Cliff Notes review and not even that to be honest. The book is about the Tri-Wizard Tournament but that's barely mentioned. This review is more rehashing of the types of grievances brought up in the previous reviews with nothing new to add except more complaints about real world = Wizarding world cross-overs like books that cover the same topics in both areas and the ever present hatred of Arthur Weasley and all other 'good characters' who do nothing but lie, steal, cheat, and behave poorly with no signs of remorse for their actions or punishments dished out. How does Abanes know that Mrs. Weasley doesn't smack Mr. Weasley upside the head with a spoon for saying or doing something stupid once the kids are out of sight? The series is taken predominately from the view of Harry, after all. You know, the kid who has to survive all this stuff and honestly has better things to focus on because of that. And Dumbledore pacing his office at all hours of the day and night [according to the Marauder's Map] definitely isn't a sign of someone having to do a lot of thinking about things. 

And now to my problem with Abanes and the Dursleys. At absolutely no point anywhere does he have anything to say about the Dursley's treatment of their nephew. Their horrible, abusive, and at points criminal treatment of their nephew. One can only gather that Abanes thinks they are the greatest people in the world and everything they do is perfectly acceptable because he never mentions jack-squat-one about what they do or how any of that could have any effect on Harry's view of the world and how it works. Harry lives in a cramped storage space under the stairs until he's 11 years old, given things that Dudley has either outgrown or outright busted, receives no gifts at all while in the Dursley's exclusive care [the birthday cake that Dudley steals and ruins with his gluttony being literally the first gift Harry had received in known memory], is outright beaten for things he has no official control over [such as his hair growing back immediately when the Dursley's deliberately cut the ever-loving crap out of it], and is locked in a room with nothing but a cat flap for little bits of food to be pushed in when they remember to do so the second they realize he isn't allowed to deliberately use magic outside of school. Harry making them supposedly cower in fear at the start of book two is such a bad thing? Really? It was the only thing keeping the Dursleys from continuing to abuse him as they had for the last 11 years. Once that particular 'threat' was gone, they locked him up and started starving him. Is that acceptable 'Christian' behavior considering this book is aimed at Evangelicals? Must be. Feel free to beat, abuse and starve your kids as long as it's done to beat, abuse and starve the strange out of them. 

Harry not trusting adults with the 'truth' when asked about things doesn't make Harry the most horrible liar on the planet. It makes him a child who grew up in an environment where you got punished for telling the truth and still called a liar. It makes him a child who grew up having to fend for himself because the adults he knew during his young impressionable years couldn't be trusted. But that sort of revelation doesn't sell books to the targeted Evangelical crowd. It would be like selling mirrors to the Amish. 

This book of reviews reads as if the author only read the titles of the chapters, the first and last paragraphs of said chapters, and then asked small children to summarize things once it got too much. He definitely knows his audience as to what to complain about but literally anyone in that audience who actually took the time to read the books themselves should be able to point out the biases and outright cherry-picked crap as being just that - biases and cherry-picked crap. Christian Publications, Inc. should ask for their money back in light of this. Unless they are all for people who lie as long as the lie is in their particular favor. That isn't hypocrisy or anything. That's called 'marketing'. 

Read this book if you like Harry Potter themed train wrecks written by people who got paid to hate in the name of religion. Or if you want to make up your own drinking game every time you read something extra stupid. Fair warning though, you could end up in the hospital before you get halfway through.