Rating: 5/5

Flannery O'Connor is a diminutive, sprite-like woman who writes some of the most powerful fiction (of its type) that I have ever read.

If you like Faulkner, you will most likely enjoy O'Connor's work as well. It is a kind of theater of the macabre, southern, holy, and surreal all at once. The characters arrive in the story as if in a fever dream, emerging from some faint mist that she has shrouded them in so that they may pop out at just the right moment; they take on their lives fully-formed, portraying real people with extraordinary personal problems embedded deep in their psyche. O'Connor's action takes place deep in the minds and beliefs of her characters, with their thoughts boiling out into the area around them to wreck havoc. I have seen stills from a movie created about Wise Blood; the characters look like they fell out of a Magritte painting, which I think is an apt tone to give to them. 

There isn't much action in the two main novels in this collection (at least not in the traditional sense of action), but the work still draws you in nonetheless. With that in mind, I believe that O'Connor should be read for one of two reasons (though you can get a casual reading pleasure from them both as well):

1) To study, digest, and think about. Her work is incredibly complicated, with symbolic set pieces strewn throughout. Quite frankly, when I finished a recent reread of Wise Blood, I felt like I needed to sit and talk about it for an hour with other readers just to scratch the surface of the meaning. The same could be said of The Violent Bear it Away--each of these two novels captures your (can I call it this?) critical-thinking attention and will not let it go.

2) As a writer. Just as Faulkner, Joyce, and Woolf should be read by serious writers in order to explore both their style and the ways in which they bend and break the rules of language, so too should O'Connor be studied for the ways in which she extrapolates character in the simplest of beliefs. O'Connor has a way of stretching these beliefs into monstrous proportions, pulling them like taffy to find all the little nuances that lie within. As a writer, I found it fascinating that she could pull and pull on a character like that, finding new truths hiding deep within that she would then share with the reader. Though in The Violent Bear it Away it gets a bit tiresome at in the first 30 pages, the rest of the two main novels in this collection are to be studied and admired for their scope.

The Signet edition of O'Connor's work is a steal. For less than ten dollars (when I bought it) you can get two of her novels, plus a collection of short stories.