Rating: 5/5

By way of disclosure, I am not a Catholic or a Christian. As an outsider I had never understood why Christianity had chosen for its central symbol the cross.

That a cross can be made by holding a sword by the blade must have been convenient for a would-be conqueror, in particular, Constantine. But it also makes the central event of Christian belief the torture and murder of its most sacred founder. A religion that espouses peace should not want so much violence embodied in its embodying symbol. The best symbol for The Prince of Peace should not be a sword shaped reminder that this prince was the victim of a political assassination. The Prince of Peace would reject the sword as his personal emblem

Ex Priest, a former Catholic columnist, now a writer, play write and historian begins Constantine's Sword with this same observation. His central thesis seems to be that by making the death of Christ the most important event of his "human" life and by adopting as an article of faith that only through Christ can one's soul enter heaven, the Catholics created a set of justifications for violent anti-Semitism. Further Carroll argues that Antisemitism is a most shaming rot at the core of what is otherwise a beautiful religion. Carroll pointedly rejects the defense that evil is done in the name of the Church but never by the Church. In other words: the riot was not started by the person who falsely shouts "Fire" in a crowded theater, but by the people who panic upon hearing of the supposed threat.
In my taxonomy, Constantine's Sword is a second level of history. It is not the recounting of events for the purpose of detailing what happened. It is the deliberate selection of key events for the purpose of proving a theory. However this is an incomplete description. James Carroll recounts his personal journey, relating his experiences as a privileged child of a family living a privileged life as American in post war Europe. In his house the devil was incarnated as the threat of Communism. His mother's example was a loving influence for living a Catholic life.

The result is a very personal view of history. Not a remote or subjective recounting of history but one driven by his passion for his topic and insistence on a more impassioned appreciation for "what all this", the events of the remote past, means to us today.

His agenda is not hidden. He is positively advocating that the Mother Church has a duty to do an honest introspection, followed by unequivocal repentance and move forward with an improved catechism. The new catechism must emphasize The Mother Church's comment to Love and Peace and that there is no place for violence.

Carroll has taken a very vocal stance against the roll of the Pope during World War II. He argues that the Pope had a moral responsibility to force a direct confrontation with Hitler in particular and Anti-Semites of whatever politics or nationality. There is much to this argument. The history of Catholic Church's response to 1930's fascism and the Holocaust is a complicated story. I regret that Carroll does not allow for more of that complexity.

On the other hand, Carroll provides the right answer to Pope John Paul II's apparent deafness on the subject of placing Catholic memorials at Holocaust sites and the decision to beatify Pope Pius IX. Given Pope John Paul II sincere pain over the failures of Catholic individuals and his leadership in building peace between the Mother Church and the Jews of the world, one may choose to overlook these examples. However Carroll's reply is that the Church must take full and honest ownership of the evil done by its leadership. The Church should also understand that by inserting its presence on grounds made sacred by the blood of another faith, it is inciting the legitimate fears of those of that faith. As for Pious IX, he was not saintly in his attitude toward Jews. Furthermore, he abetted one of the last known cases of the kidnapping of a Jewish baby, his improper Baptism and refused to restore the child to his rightful family.
I turned to this book as a means to gain understanding what a modern Catholic might see in reading his own history. I had not expected such a powerful book. Carroll's writing makes ancient events immediate and relevant. Unfortunately, when the topic is religion, there are too many who cannot tolerate criticism. There is nothing in Constantine's Sword that should make a Catholic feel attacked. James Carroll bares his soul and his fears. He looks directly into the evil that he believes is the logical result of illogical aspects of Catholic theology. It is for the reader to make an equally soulful and passionate examination of Catholic history and determine the connections between their faith and the evil men do.