Rating: 5/5

This is a story about scandal - but more deeply, it's a story about loneliness. Pure, desperate, bone-aching loneliness. As I wrote that, I realized it was a weak, paraphrased version of the most powerful passage in the book. And that's the difficulty of reviewing Notes on a Scandal - everything I try to say, Heller has already said, and much more powerfully. And she manages to do it all neatly and beautifully - there are no bloated metaphors or silly comparisons, only acute observations and layered themes.

It's a story that's been done before, in many different forms - the student/teacher affair, the older man/woman preying on the vulnerable youth - but Notes on a Scandal takes this story and makes it better. Instead of a scandalous account of the affair from the point of view of one of the participants, it is told by Barbara - the self-appointed narrator of Sheba's fall from grace. This gives the events an unemotional tone; Barbara doesn't really understand what actually attracted Sheba to Connolly, and therefore you don't either. You start to understand that Barbara is a strange, desperate, overly attached woman - but you can't help but sympathize with her. At the beginning, Barbara claims the story is about Sheba, not herself, but Barbara's story is the more compelling one, the one that starts to seep in and take over.

I did wish the ending had been a little more sinister - I was expecting more of an explosion, but I should have known it would only be quietly disconcerting.

Finally, one of my favourite quotes (other than the aforementioned one on loneliness): "I'm a child in that respect: able to live, physically speaking, on a crumb of anticipation for weeks at a time, but always in danger of crushing the waited-for event with the freight of my excessive hope."

All of this in 258 pages! I am a self proclaimed lover of sweeping, lengthy novels, but this didn't need to be any longer. It was perfect in its length. It tells its story, it unsettles you and makes you reflect, and then it's done. 4.5 stars - almost teetering over the edge to 5.