Rating: 4/5

The first Zoe Heller novel I read, The Believers, left me manically scouring the library for more of her work. I found Everything You Know; a novel with characters easily as cringe-worthy as the Litvinoffs who feature in The Believers. It is the story of Willy Muller whose life has a delightful awfulness about it. Written in the first person narrative, Heller treats the reader to Willy's sarcastic, witty outlook, his superbly droll thoughts and wry observations. He has a dim-witted girlfriend, one daughter just wants to fleece him, the other has recently posted him her diaries and then committed suicide. He's been commissioned to write the screenplay for his book based on a most unfortunate incident in his life and to top it off, he's just had a heart attack. Willy deals with all these trials in a manner which is comically unrelenting: he has some truly memorable experiences in Mexico to where he escapes to write the aforementioned screenplay and some equally sad and pathetic moments in London when he visits to attend the funeral of his German-born English-resenting mother. 

Some of Willy's observations of his fellow characters were uproarious and had me laughing out loud:

“ The first person to greet us was Sissy Yerxa, looking like a lipsticked ferret in a very short skirt and an electric pink halter-neck.”

“He had a long arrow mouth and almost no lips – his mouth was just an unannounced slit in the final third of his face, like a muppet's.”

Belatedly, Willy is offered the thought:  “Only when you die do you run out of chances to be good. Until then, there is the possibility of turning yourself around”. And this is indeed a thought that Heller poses for the reader to consider. Even if your life situation is not as precarious as is Willy's, just when do your chances to redeem yourself run out? Ostensibly, I love Heller's warts and all portrayal of her character and that she provides no pretty window dressings in her novel. Everything You Know is indeed a tragi-comedy; a story which charmed me and made me wince in equal measures. A definite 4★. 

Note: my copy was Large Print.