Rating: 2/5

I was nineteen when I first picked up Ladder of Years. Although well-versed in feminist prose at the time, I remember feeling taken aback by the concept of a modern, 90’s mother abandoning her family in Nora Helmer fashion. In a culture firmly cemented in women’s rights, how could an educated, upper-class woman entrap herself in an unwanted life? I was unnerved by Delia’s erratic behavior- of her leavening her life with nothing but a beach robe and a tote, of planting herself in a foreign town, in a rented room, essentially beginning her life again as a caricature of some idealized self. 

So I shelved the book, picking it up again (now) twelve years later. Thinking perhaps that my culmination of years and experience may help me appreciate the plight of Tyler’s heroine. This time I finished it, much to my own consternation. 

Alas, Tyler does create an ensemble of quirky, eccentric, unbalanced characters, all of whom share two common traits: failed relationships and deep neurosis. The message which Tyler seems to be sending is that people have no business getting marriage, that no woman (or man) knows what they want in a mate, that men becomes monsters in marriage, and that all marriages are doomed to fail. Cheerful stuff, right? But the message is relayed oh so subtly, through a series of unfortunate, and oftentimes comical, events. Furthermore, what begins with sympathy for Delia (because, in true middle-aged, chick-lit fashion, could this woman have a more spoiled, ungrateful, neglectful family???) quickly turn to frustration and disgust in the novel’s concluding chapter. I suppose the lesson that Delia teaches us is that it’s ok to mess with the lives and delicate emotional balance of others, as long as it serves one’s own, dysfunctional agenda. Also, she teaches us that even adults have wild, hissy fits-it’s ok- provided that, in the end, you’ve decided that the things that you weren’t willing to settle for-that were important enough at the time to ruin lives over-will turn out to be ok in the end, because….well, for no good reason, really. Just because you decide that they’re better than nothing?!?!

I wanted more from this book than a bunch of forty-something’s acting like spoiled teenagers in need of a good grounding. On a positive note ( if there is, in fact, one), like reality tv, talk shows, and the VMA’s, this book will leave you with the cathartic feeling of relief that comes with the knowledge that there are lots of people out there way more messed up than you.