Rating: 4/5

This is huge, terrific, blood-and-thunder stuff of the highest order. The real Conan, not the sanitised version of De Camp or the movies, even though I enjoy the 1982 film for what it is. While at times unbelievable deeds of heroes in stories can be irritating because of a lack of realism, it was these tales that made me decide the difference is all in the quality of writing rather than the likelihood of the acts themselves. After a while you just get so used to rolling with the style of Howard's voice that you don't even raise a brow at Conan being able to knock down a dozen soldiers or take on a vast toad-like fiend with poison tendrils from another universe. Yes, it's a little surprising to note just how good of a writer Howard is, even though he often works with the same archetypes and displays the same bloodymindedness in most of his work, whether he's writing about prehistoric kingdoms or boxers in the ring. There's a certain catharsis to be had in the violence of Howard's stories, and not everyone will be comfortable with that, it has to be said.

But, and I think this is important, the vioelence is always tempered with a little philosophy, and while you might not really want to be "best buds" with Conan, after a while you simply get to know what he's about, and he earns your respect because you know you'd want to be on his side if your city was besieged or you were lost in a wilderness full of enemies. I think it's also relevant to note that there was more to Howard than just Conan, and that even if his heroes are mostly big warrior archetypes, they didn't all necessarily stand for the same thing or want the same aims. Kane is a religious fanatic on a quest in a pagan world, Kull is an exile trying so hard to be a just and fair ruler, and Conan....well, Conan is just out for himself, trying to make his way in the world with his sword and his wits as only he knows how. His actions aren't always moral and he certainly isn't kind for the sake of kindness. But howard doesn't hide Conan's motives; it is, in fact, his brutal honesty that appeals. Though I never truly understood why he wanted to be king of Aquilonia, it's notable that the kingship stories don't really take up a lot of space in Conan's written history, and that "The Phoenix of the Sword" is basically a cannibalised king Kull tale (yes, I think it does work better as a Kull story, myself). 

I recently had a debate with a friend about the merits of Conan, who is, after all, a womanising racist and all that. Well, just because we admire and respect Conan doesn't mean we should idealise him, and I really can hardly believe I would have to say this to anyone. In probably the most contentious Conan tale, which happens to be in this book, "The Vale of Lost Women", Conan is working alongside a tribe of dark-skinned natives who are going to sacrifice a beautiful white girl. In the end Conan turns on his allies and he and his freebooters massacre them, and Conan goes off with the girl, telling her that he basically felt he had to save her because she was white and so was he, and it wasn't right that these savages should have her way with her. Sound horrible? Sure it is. But the story also happens to be an incredibly moody and atmospheric piece of writing, and Conan's words can just as easily be interpreted as, "you're an appealing wench and I just decided on a whim that I was going to have you instead. And you'll get to live...how does that sound?" There are other hints of what we'd term politically incorrect sentiments on display in the Conan stories, but, as another friend of mine once said about Howard, "Small town Texas guy in 1930s who never travelled has some ignorant views about stuff. More exciting news after the film."

But enough of the Howard apologetics. The truth is that these stories are great fun, that Howard is always a pleasure to read (if you like this sort of thing!) and that he puts plenty of modern "action-oriented" writers to shame. he churned out dozens and dozens of stories within the space of a few years and then blew his brains out when he was thirty. I believe if he'd not let life crush him so, he would have refined his craft and become a truly well-respected writer who would have penned novels for big publishers once the end of the Depression marked a growing interest in novel-length genre fiction. We'll never know for certain of course, but I feel intense regret that Howard's legacy was so brief, like a quick, surging flame. It is a glorious legacy, though, isn't it?

By the way, you can read these stories in any order at all, and this book does contain some of my favourite Conan tales: "The God of the Bowl", "Rogues in the House", and "Queen of the Black Coast".