Rating: 3/5

This review is of “”Surrender to Ecstasy” by Rochelle Wayne.

The book begins in Kansas in 1865. It is here that Amelia Adams, the heroine of the book, lives with her aunt, Lillian, and uncle, Calvin. (Amelia was born in Massachusetts, and her parents passed when she was a child). Looking out her window one day, Amelia sees Union Army captain Jason Bishop, and thinks he’s the man of her dreams. They later marry, and Amelia quickly realizes the error of her thoughts, as Jason is emotionally, mentally and sexually abusive to her.

Later, Amelia meets another man named Jamie, whom she begins to develop feelings for. There’s a lot she doesn’t know about Jamie. For starters, his real name is James Henry Stewart, the hero of the book. James Henry-that’s how he’s referred to throughout the book-is a captain in the Confederate Army, and he and his uncle, Buford, have come to Kansas for two reasons. One, to get information from a Union official who is secretly loyal to the Confederacy. And two, James Henry wants revenge against Bishop for what he did to James Henry’s family.

As part of his revenge plan, James Henry seduces Amelia, and they become lovers. (James Henry never allows Amelia to see his face when they are making love). Amelia becomes pregnant by James Henry, later giving birth to a son, whom she names, James Henry, after her and Jason’s fathers, completely unaware who else shares that name.

When James Henry comes back to Kansas, Amelia discovers that he is her mystery lover. James Henry then takes Amelia to a Pro-Confederate camp, where she is to be killed for knowing the identity of their northern informant (she doesn’t know). She spends two months in the camp, making love with James Henry and earning the respect of the men, including “Bloody” Bill Anderson, an associate of William Quantrill. Anderson is under orders to kill Amelia, but decides not to. James Henry, meanwhile, believes Amelia was assassinated. He later finds out that was not the case when he sees Amelia and Jason together. He also discovers that the child James Henry is his son. 

In the end, Jason gets his comeuppance-he is killed, not by James Henry or Buford, but by someone who also had a reason to do the act-Buford falls in love with Amelia’s bestie, Cynthia Coffman, and they, along with Amelia and James Henry, move to Texas to begin their Happily Ever Afters.
Upside: I imagine it is very difficult to integrate real life people with fictional characters, but Ms. Wayne does so quite well in “Surrender to Ecstasy”, integrating Bill Anderson into Amelia and James Henry’s lives. 

Downside: Ms. Wayne rarely digs deep into the soft underbelly of her characters, and this is true here as well. There are times when she could have, but chose not to. Amelia is strong is some areas and whiny in others. I’m not fond of the “sneak around and seduce a woman” storyline. James Henry is not a particularly deep character either. The “B” story involving Cynthia and Buford feels like filler more than a storyline. 

Sex: There is a lot of sex in “Surrender to Ecstasy”, but most of it isn’t highly erotic nor exciting.

Violence: Jason beats Amelia multiple times. Jason shoots and kills multiple people because they are Confederates. Later, James Henry and Jason get into a major brawl. Most of the violence is not graphic.

Bottom Line: “Surrender to Ecstasy” could have been a great book, but Ms. Wayne’s inability-or choice-to develop the characters to make them more likeable and human brings the grade down a peg.