Rating: 4/5

3.5/5

This compilation delivered exactly what I expected of it. It's part sci-fi, part journalism, part biography, wrapped up in social critiques of past and present and delivered in the manner of the short and the sweet. The problem with this is, when theory rather than narrative is the concern, it's difficult become engaged if one has already encountered the critical jumps elsewhere. True, I haven't paid much attention to the social justice of Bangladesh beyond some general overviews of India and Mughals and independence, but what little history I knew was enough to to make Hossain's context a matter of review rather than a learning experience. I highly recommend it to those who range from complete lack of knowledge to touting Gilman as early feminist utopian extraordinare, but if you're well on your way past that, this is more of a bucket list check mark than a revelation.

In terms of the story: other than using neuroatypical people as a metaphor when it came to justifying the institutionalizing of men (lol fuck that shit), it was admirable in its density and clarity. With regards to the journalistic 'Secluded Ones', I'd be tempted to check out the complete work if there was a guarantee that the rather sensational stories are contextualized to the point of spawning real critical engagement rather than instinctual "OMG! Save the brown women from the brown men!" As for Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain, she's obviously a historical personage whom I'm grateful for having existed once upon a time and dedicated to enlightening other people with, but I'm content with the bio I received here. My least favorite part was the afterword, which was obsessed with hammering home the point of patriarchy = bad without mentioning how the 1980's resurgence of Islam vs the so called "West" has been monumentally instigated by said so called "West"'s rampant imperialism. There's also the super nit picky point that a paragraph concerning Christianity-fueled anti-abortion activity in the beginning looks to have been copy pasted here and there, which didn't help the incessant religion = bad go over any better.

I suppose what I could have used in this mix of genres is a little more subtlety. Yes, it's wrong to restrict women's choices. Yes, various religions have been used in such a way as to enable the previous. However, I didn't see much about women's choices when it came to valuing their faith, other than an anonymous anecdote that passed over the spiritual crisis rather quickly for all the author seemed to value their beliefs. As such, like other feminist texts I've come across, I don't recommend this as an introductory one. Considering how rarely English-only audiences find themselves in this section of the literary world, I doubt there will be many of those, but with rampant anti-Islam these days, one can never be too careful.