Rating: 3/5

I came to Grant's memoirs, not because of its military history (though I am a fan of that sort of thing), but because both Gertrude Stein and Ernest Hemingway were fans of Grant's work. I have only read the first volume, which takes the reader up to the fall of Vicksburg. What a trudge! Actually, up to Shiloh, I was rating the Memoirs much higher. Grant (or Twain for him) could write some really clean, uncluttered prose. His sharp eye for telling (and economical) detail certainly must have been attractive to Hemingway. My favorite portions were the times where Grant wasn't recounting military events (though the war with Mexico is stunningly told stuff). Grant's descriptions of visiting a Mexican cave, or San Francisco during the Gold Rush (each of these segments represent only a few pages), stand out a crystal clear portraits, where eye and pen achieve perfect balance. 

One aspect of Memoirs that surprised me is that they are hardly as egoless as many have portrayed them. Grant does indeed come across as a humble, straightforward guy, but then again, he almost never dwells on himself in any deep way. You do see flashes when he discusses his politics -- and his dislike for the "rebellion." You can't help but admire his passion and devotion to his country. But he's also quite capable of snark, and he does get his digs in at those he feels were incompetent or a drag to the cause. You also sense a thin skin.This sensitivity really jumps out at you when he discusses Shiloh. Essentially he got caught with his pants down, as the Confederates launched a berserker attack that almost swamped the Union troops. Grant tries to wave this off, insisting that the battle was never in any real doubt. He then disparages the Confederate General, Albert Johnson, as being overrated and vacillating. I tend to agree with him on the first point, but his loss along with his coordinating eye, certainly damaged the Confederate chances on the first day. Grant also insists (in a contradictory way) that Shiloh was "the severest battle fought at the West during the war, and but few in the East equalled it for hard, determined fighting." 

Shiloh was a wild affair, fought by two undisciplined and green armies. But there are a number of more savage (and bloodier) battles yet to come. Even a casual reader of Civil War history knows this. Grant's statement simply makes no sense, and its especially damning to an author known for his objective eye. Also odd was Grant's carping about how the Confederates in general low balled the number of troops engaged, as well at the casualties suffered (Grant insists that twice the number of Confederates died than has been reported). As far as I can tell, history records that the Union lost slightly more men than the Confederates. But the Union also won the battle, so why the hyper sensitivity? 

At this point, I started noticing Grant's fixation on the numbers. How this plays out over the course of both volumes, I can only guess (from what I understand, he was no fan of Lee). But I'm left with the impression that the specter of "Grant the butcher" (of his own men) haunted the general. What follows, other than some smaller battles and maneuvering, is the Vicksburg campaign. I've read Shelby Foote's take on the campaign, and in his capable hands it's nearly impossible to follow. Grant's take is no better. You would need detailed maps of the day to make any sense of what Grant is (no doubt accurately) describing. Here's a taste:

"The 9th, McPherson moved to a point within a few miles of Utica; McClernand and Sherman remained where they were. On the 10th McPherson moved to Utica, Sherman to Big Sandy; McClernand was still at Big Sandy. The 11th, McClernand was at Five Mile Creek; Sherman at Auburn; McPherson five miles advanced from Utica. May 12, McClernand was at Fourteen Mile Creek; McPherson at Raymond after a battle."

Man, that's some numbing stuff, and hardly memorable literature. The point, I gather, is the slow strangulation of Vicksburg. It is this "battle" that stands as Grant's great achievement. But it seems, at least in part, an engineer's achievement. The terrain, a swampy impossibility, was the main opponent. Grant successfully coordinated a complicated land and water campaign, against a smaller sized opponent who got little help -- other than a piecemeal kind -- from other Confederate forces. Grant would indeed save the Union, but it would be on Virginia's bloody soil. A brutal campaign where numbers and time mattered, and not battle field finesse. One gets the sense that Grant resented that interpretation. Bitterly.