Rating: 4/5

Everyone knows Hulk Hogan. The icon of the professional wrestling scene in the 1980s through the late '90s, the Hulkster put both himself, his aura of "Hulkamania", and the WWF into the national mainstream for the first time. Even the younger generation of wrestling fans who grew up in the late 1990s and 2000s know of Hulk Hogan through his occasional appearances on WWE and reality TV shows (and sadly, in recent years, of his divorce, leaked sex tape, and racial controversy). However, reading this autobiography doesn't really give the average fan anything truly new or in-depth into either Hulk Hogan, or the man behind the character, Terry Bollea. 

As one of those '90s babies that I referenced to earlier, I grew up with Hulk Hogan, though usually seeing him live once in a blue moon at a Wrestlemania or in his last full year of active wrestling in 2003. Otherwise, I relied on what popular culture and WWE documentaries fed to me about Hulk Hogan. And I learned a lot. However, when I saw that Hogan had two autobiographies, I thought I would try expanding my understanding of this man a little bit more than just short videos. After reading this books' reviews, I knew to not expect a world-class, detailed autobiography. And for the most part, these limited expectations were met, if not exceeded. Hulk Hogan's life from childhood through the early 2000s is nicely laid out here, all in one place for a casual WWE fan to enjoy. I learned so much about Hogan's early years, both in the wrestling industry and his high school career. His two stints with the WWF and relationship with both Vince McMahon Sr. and Jr. are nicely highlighted. His reflection on his personal life and the toll the wresting profession has on a marriage is mentioned throughout, though he seemed a bit too hopeful considering his family soon came crashing down following his retirement. 

But even with my toned-down expectations, there were still disappointments. Once he began to write about his many years as a full-time wrestler, from regional promotions in the southeastern U.S. to Japan to WWF, he never really talked about any specific matches. You never hear what is was like to wrestle in that ring against other legends like Paul Orndorff, The Ultimate Warrior, or Randy Savage. Hogan is more likely to talk about one or two of his close friends outside the ring, notably Andre the Giant. And even then, he mentions time and again that the '80s blended together in his mind. Hogan can hardly recall the vaguest details... they are simply lost to time, now. His time with WCW is even more condensed. Besides his initial inclusion into the NWO, his long run in WWE's main competition is heavily ignored. As this book was published under the WWE label, I can understand that they wish the focus to be on his 10+ years in their promotion. But I didn't learn anything about Hogan's time in WCW. To get even a decent look at that perspective, you have to read Eric Bischoff's "Controversy for Cash" autobiography. That should not be the norm for your own autobiography, being forced to read somebody else's book just to learn about your life. 

I gave this autobiography 4 stars because yes, I indeed liked it enough that it wasn't just "okay / average" but it wasn't a MUST MUST MUST - READ. However, you must remember this: it's about and from the very MOUTH of Hulk Hogan, for Pete's Sake! So, yes, I would encourage all of you to read it, though check it out from your library rather than reluctantly purchasing it like I did. Also, his 2009 autobiography "My Life Outside the Ring," borrows PLENTY of the wrestling material while focusing his story around his family and the sad decline both he, his wife, and two kids suffered in the late 2000s. However, in this book which is not associated with WWE publishing, his outlook on life is incredible for a man in his state of mind. I highly recommend that you read that book, as well (though you could get away with JUST reading that book).