Rating: 5/5

This is, without a doubt, one of the most harrowing and detailed accounts of the Irish Hunger Strike of the early 1980's that I have read to date.

Hailing from a land similarly rife with sectarian divisions (South Africa), the author David Beresford, a writer for the Guardian newsletter, succeeds fully in squarely illustrating the complicated temperament of conflict that led ten men to willingly starve themselves to death in a prison protest. Not once does the discussion lapse into blunt politics, instead always taking the high ground and focusing on the more personal nature of the struggle and its larger overtones of humanity.

In a conflict so often characterized by political invective, Beresford masterfully weaves the story with almost unsettling frankness, and cuts through the public posturing and labeling used by both sides to present a ravaging portrait of ten fiercely dedicated men and their families. Interspersed between the author's narrative of the hunger strikers is a wealth of primary source material in the form of 'comms', small kite messages smuggled out of Long Kesh as the main mode of communications between the strikers and the larger movement leadership. Many of these written exchanges offer up a vision of the mentality of the radical element of republicanism at that time and also serve the reader some uniquely surprising revelations on the happenings within the Kesh (One set of messages sticks out in particular, in which Brendan McFarlane, the hunger strikers operational organizer, discusses his feelings on the Protestant prisoners in the jail in strangely unequivocal tones - "My feelings are not sectarian. Believe it or not, I never really was that way inclined...")

Also breaking up the narrative and the sourced material, Beresford includes small details of news and troubles outside the jail that appear virtually at random and strike home the greater implications of the strike on the country. These small bites, written in eerily measured tones, detail what appear like random deaths and community killings that are both chilling and without discrimination. This only augments the way in the which to book opts out of partisanship and instead becomes the chronicle of a singularly human tragedy - the 'terrible beauty' of Yeats' poem all those long years ago.

This is a most worthy read of any interested in understanding the history of the movement and its larger mentality.