Rating: 5/5

Dear James Carroll, 

Although you kindly gave me your email address, I purposely have not written you in the nearly seven years since meeting you at your 2011 lecture series at Emory University, and the reason I have not is that I hadn't read your work, any of it. Now I have! I've just completed Constantine's Sword. What's more, I've read it over a period of six months with a group that has been reading and studying it together, and, not only that, I put together our notes and study questions each month. So, yes, now I've indeed read Constantine's Sword.

But to which "you" am I writing? You published Constantine's Sword (which I'll now begin abbreviating as "CS") in 2001 as a journey of discovery, self-confrontation, atonement, and challenge, but you had reached that point on your journey ten years before I met you. By now you've undoubtedly gone on beyond where you were in 2011. So first of all, the you to whom I'm writing is the you with whom I've been in intimate conversation over the past six months, the you of CS.

At the outset I want to say that I consider you a hero. Adam Gopnik once wrote that at critical points the integrity of institutions depends on the integrity of individuals; the fragile integrity. He was talking about the courage of such individuals, of which I consider you one. That is important for me to say since I do have quibbles with the book, but that's what they are, quibbles, and do not take away from your monumental achievement.

In 2011 I asked you if you received pushback from your church (by which I meant the institution, not your local church), and you said no, but maybe I phrased my question wrong, since in the book you do mention that your witness sometimes has been questioned by those who might consider you just another anti-papal troublemaker. I don't doubt that you do have support, and you must have a strong internal support system too, for taking on an institution is not for the faint of heart. Or, rather, it's not about taking on an institution but about standing up to one, and when you're talking beyond Catholicism to Western Christianity, and, in a sense, Western civilization, you are brave and strong. Most of us can't stand up to our institutions. We think we could, but we don't.

Next, on to my quibbles. 

The first is the way you explain how the Christian New Testament became anti-Jewish. I resonated with your explanation of your family's misremembering of your uncle as a hero of Irish independence, when actually he died fighting for Britain in WWI--how with subsequent events Irish people no longer could imagine, much less remember, that not-so-distant ancestors had been British patriots. (I also groaned as you explained how the British "solved" their Irish problem in part by putting Irish soldiers on the front lines during that war.) I also think I understood John Dominic Crossan's "history remembered" vs. "prophecy historicized." I think, too, that this way of reaching your conclusion must have been acceptable to you, by which I mean compatible with your faith--important, since the need to rehearse it arose at a number of points throughout the book. And I certainly agree with the conclusion you reached, stated most strongly when you referred to the New Testament's pinning the death of Jesus on the Jews as the first blood libel. Yet I found your explanation labored and difficult to get my mind around. Your hands may have in part been tied by having to believe all the Gospel writers were Jews and therefore their anti-Jewish rhetoric takes on aspects of a family spat instead of something worse. Not all scholars accept that now, but even if they did, some people might say fights between family are the most terrible of all. And so, too, can be the attitude toward a group by those who have left it. Also, you may have been encumbered by your assumption that early Christians hated Rome as much as the Jews did, when they may have forgotten that hatred sooner rather than later. 

My other main quibble is with your treatment of Marx and his father. First, the father: how is becoming a lawyer instead of a rabbi an act of rebellion against his own father? Before Napoleon's impact, could he have even been a lawyer; wouldn't he have been tied to either trade or Talmud? You're so hard on him. Also, I read elsewhere, in Jerry Muller's The Mind and the Market: Capitalism in Western Thought (published two years after CS) that after the Rhineland came under Prussian auspices, the elder Marx tried to get grandfathered in to the practice of law while remaining a Jew, but he was turned down, and only then went to the baptismal font, as Heine might have said. I did not get the impression he jumped at conversion out of ambition, shrugging his Judaism off like an old coat. And if he had a family to feed, was keeping his profession simply a matter of ambition? Yes, I've felt sad about his peeling away from Judaism, but coping with a hostile majority culture is so hard that I'm reluctant to condemn people for their decisions, particularly in this case in which I haven't heard he was selling anyone down the river to save himself.

As to Karl Marx himself, his language evokes responses such as yours, leading to much confusion, so that various Europeans were (and are) trying to differentiate their capitalism from "heartless" or "exploitive" (reducing to "Jewish") capitalism. It may well be that his language was an unintended defense against the perceived scandal of his origins. However, I understand from Muller that Marx was playing on two words, first, Judentum, which in German could mean either "Jews," "Judaism," or "business" ("jewing"), and Schacher, which was used to mean either "huckstering" or "usury" and was associated primarily with Jews. What I understand is that Marx was saying that all capitalism, that is, all modernity with its market economy, is Jewdom and based on jewing, and that "the Jew" is emancipated in the sense that the entire world is now Jewdom. And so according to Marx all capitalism (all of modern society) is by definition bad. Despite his language, he is against, not Jews, but bourgeois society in its entirety. Thus, per Marx, modernity is untenable, and Marxism too (as you say about fascist and Catholic totalitarianism) harks backward toward a pre-modern ideal. 

Finally, you portray Marx as somehow the culmination of the Enlightenment: "...the secular Enlightenment, whose political champion (is) Karl Marx..." (p. 502 in the paperback), and that is a new one on me. While according to Marxism capitalism may culminate in Marxism, I can't see Marx representing the epitome of the Enlightenment.

Okay, so much for the quibbles. The appreciations could go on indefinitely. I'd have to rewrite the book here. So let me go with the appreciations that come up first for me, realizing they are not all and emphasizing the aspects that are new to me.

You say that even though the Christian scriptures do blame Jews for the death of Jesus, Jews only became central to the faith after the focus in the West shifted to the crucifixion and thus to the cross, which happened with Constantine. I think many people have heard that the early focus was on life and its symbols--the egg, the fish, for example, or the waters of baptism--and not on death, not on how that happened through the promulgation of Constantine's story and later his mother Helena's. You say the political implications of his conversion are known but that his impact on the religion and culture are not, since much of it is the way we think now, and therefore taken for granted. Constantine's legendary victory was in 312, his story as commonly told was generated by the bishop Eusebius originated in 325. You said he was no underdog, his conversion being "calculated and strategic." For Constantine, the rivalries in Christianity reflected those in the Empire (not to mention those in his family) and needed to be stamped out. He saw himself from the point of view of heaven as God's regent bringing order out of chaos, but the view on the ground was of a totalitarian. And so Eusebius' rendition, no objective biography, made Constantine a new Moses and celebrated "the divinely ordained union of the Church and the Empire" with the newly central cross, both as triumphal insignia and as means of salvation. You go so far as to say Constantine surpassed even the caesars in doing what they could not do and eliminating Jewish political autonomy. As Christianity's political star rose, the status of Jews correspondingly sank, essentially until 1948. Subsequently the bishop Ambrose used Helena's legend of finder of the True Cross to hammer the nail into the coffin. With the corresponding centrality of relics, every sliver of wood from the cross, every nail in it, could become another nail of proof against the alleged perpetrators and a triumphal sign of victory. And thus, the best defense being a good offense, did Christianity take arms against the conflict at its heart, that Judaism did not accept the "Jewish messiah" proclaimed by Christianity.

That reminds me that Amy-Jill Levine, the rock star of interfaith study and interaction, has told a story of how she used to resent the name Old Testament, that is, until she became old, and then it didn't sound so bad. Likewise, I had to laugh, when, while studying this stuff, I acquired a watch whose brand name is Relic. Well, now that I'm a relic, maybe relic doesn't sound so bad...

Oh, man, it's hard to do this without going into every detail, and then I don't know when I'll finish. Let me just say that, subsequently, Augustine countered the lethal consequences of Ambrose's and Chrysostom's ideology with a double-edged sword that saved Jews in their immediate situation but, as you're fond of saying, came with a fuse. He came up with the idea that Jews needed to be kept around in a denigrated state to prove they had "lost" and were despised by God, but at the same time, they shouldn't be killed or forcibly converted since they needed to be kept around as proof of the truth of Christianity. Oh, the rationales people come up with! Now that's a balancing act that's hard to maintain and explodes from time to time: preach hate and forbearance. Partly because of it there are thirteen or fourteen million Jews in the world rather than the hundred million or so that might be projected from their numbers in the Roman empire. But partly because of it there are some Jews in existence (as opposed to having been absorbed or eliminated).

And the part about the double standard on suffering: that when Christians suffer it's redemptive; while when Jews suffer it's reflecting God's curse.

And the urge among Christians to define Judaism so as to bolster conclusions already reached; how any Christian feels authorized to say what Judaism is.

It's a relief to have such perspectives out in the open.

I also appreciated your point that when the church is weak, vulnerable, and defensive, it's rough times ahead for the Jews. Which puts me in mind of taking karate when I was 29 and having as a sparring partner an "old" man in his late 50s. He couldn't kick all that high, and, God, were my shins bruised... I think it's in the context of a needy, power-seeking church that you're looking at the rise of ultramontanism--a good cocktail party word meaning power to the Pope--and the new doctrine of papal infallibility, subsequent to the advances of modernism and the Church's profound reduction in worldly power after the late 18th century--I should capitalize when it's about Roman Catholicism in particular that I'm talking. I also appreciated your pointing out the usefulness of fanning the flames of both piety and Jew-hatred for reconnecting with a disaffected populace. Somewhere you said faith becomes politics.

You also pointed out the unity inherent in Spinoza's thinking and Descartes' aim toward dualism and alienation.

You gave a new slant to the Dreyfus episode, the Church being another player besides those usually identified. You also identified the Dreyfus affair as the beginning of the end for Emancipation in Europe and how Theodor Herzl felt that in his bones and was galvanized. And who knew that as of 1994 the French army had never admitted its error?

I never before had heard of the medieval nature of the Church, beginning with Anselm's medieval theology--his Christology--of why Jesus had to die and why he had to be both man and God--the offended medieval lord who must be appeased. The envisioning of the Church's structure with the pope as medieval lord of the world also attended to the need in those medieval times to tame the wild, wild West, but done through unitary thinking and totalitarianism. That made sense, made some things fall into place, in particular, the rejection of modernity. Now I think that's what makes the Church, and maybe the church in general, sound "socialist" in its attitude toward modernity, when in actuality it's that medievalism. Do you remember that at one of your Emory lectures a young man railed at the fact that there was a flag in the sanctuary? He protested there should be no flag, only the cross. And that was in a Protestant, not a Catholic, setting. You said that ever since Pope John XXIII, those who have followed him have striven to undo his reforms. Of course, that's your word from 2001, but I think it's still the case.

I had thought no one could resist Hitler during his rise to power and the war years, but you pointed out that when there was the will, there was a way. The Nazis couldn't remove the crucifixes from the walls of Bavarian schools lest they lose the sympathies of the whole area, so they had to cease and desist. Also, the Bishop of Münster preached against the Nazi euthanasia program application to the local population; he called it murder; the Nazis had to call it off. Then, later, you also did describe the Catholics rising to the challenge to resist Bismarck, an attitude that wouldn't be recapitulated in Hitler's time since, at least early on, the Church in Germany made common cause with Nazism. It was to the wolves with Jews and even some Polish Catholics. You explained how it was that the view of Fascism was fuzzy while Communism was always the greatest foe and resisted with alacrity--meaning that at times the Church fell into bed with Fascism. And, too, not just Communism, but modernism in general was the foe of that basically medieval institution, so that at one point "Americanism" was a heresy. O the horror that people might look into their own consciences and think for themselves! You said that as recently as your own ordination in the '60s, you had to take an oath against Modernism. All of this has left its confusing stamp on the West!

Your explanation of why anti-Judaism and antisemitism don't add up to just another agenda item on the Catholic to-do list is crucial. That's the defense so often deployed on the Left--that it is just one wrong among others and one, it's often said, that has already received more than its share of attention. Not that Jewish suffering or loss of life is worse than the suffering or death of others; it is not. But that is not the point, which is that the Jewish question is the arrow aimed into the center of Christian theology, and, further, into the Western imagination, with its fantasy Jew and with "(a)ntisemitism ... a consistently exploited organizing principle, a pillar of Protestant and Catholic identity. Individual Jews and whole Jewish communities were periodically sacrificed to this principle" (p. 478). Your exploration of the Jewish question through history is what has led you to call for a new reformation, a reformare, in the Latin, meaning to shape something according to its own essential being." For you have said all along that antisemitism is not essential to Christianity, although you also said that not facing the theology behind the denigration of Jews is what has made it inevitable. It is a pattern that can't be deconstructed as long as it's still being exploited.

One of your central emphases is the cross at Auschwitz and although I can follow the theological objection, the clearer more immediate explanation is that the cross represents people who at the time were aligned with the perpetrators subsequently repositioning themselves as victims. Or, at least, people who didn't speak out because they were not a Jew, and saw no need to speak out for Jews, until eventually the Nazis did come for them as well, leading to the eventual repositioning as fellow-victims, at which point, after all, the facts on the ground had reversed.

Your emphasis on history (and that scripture isn't history) and on the question "What is truth?" is key. Back seven years ago I thought you were saying history = truth, which would not be consistent with your statements in CS. 

Thank you for being so articulate in recording your journey. Talking to you was not easy because I had so much to say. Possibly I strayed from the point too often, but also I elaborated; I was concerned to get what I said right since readers will think what I say does reflect what you intended. I hope I didn't mislead them too badly. In closing, let me say, James Carroll, that you have been a great help and inspiration.

With appreciation and affection,
Jan Rice

Questions for further thought:
Is it still anathema for Jews (and others) to be integrated into society without being converted? (the question of pluralism)

What makes this book difficult to read for many people--sheer length; the aspect of memoir; the painful subject matter?

Is Pope Francis another John XXIII?

Should Jews be allowed to read this book?