Rating: 5/5

It is little wonder Robert Remini had the title of official historian of the U.S. Congress. He not only was gifted at putting history into readable prose, but the depth of research he puts into his works is spectacular. The trilogy on Andrew Jackson's life he wrote in the 1980s was nothing short of stellar, and Henry Clay: Statesman for the Union is no exception.

This book details the life of The Great Compromiser, the man who was Speaker of the House for loner than anyone else. His time in the House and Senate saw tremendous change in the country; from the early to mid 1800s he served (with some brief intermissions) in one of the two branches of the legislature for Kentucky. Clay was defined early on by his opposition to what he called "Jacksonism" and the president he called King Andrew; he helped found the Whig party in opposition to Old Hickory. 

The book takes a deep look at this promotion of the The American System, whereby the federal government would fund massive projects to help bind the individual states into a strong union. He was committed to this idea throughout his numerous years in public service. Clay was somewhat sullied by his relationship with the Bank of the United States, and this coziness cost him credibility in his fight to have it rechartered in the 1830s. Clay was also rumored to be a womanizer and heavy gambler, although he frequently pushed back against such characterizations.

Clay did all he could in the twilight of his career to prevent the oncoming split of the Union he feared; not only did he help pass the Missouri Compromise in 1820 to avoid this, but the 1850 compromise was a last-ditch effort to appease both abolitionists in the North and disunionists in the South (he was disliked by both of these groups, and the feelings were apparently mutual). 

Remini ensures his readers finish this biography with a deep appreciation for the patriotism of Clay and for his desire to see the U.S. as a strong union instead of a collection of disparate states.

-Andrew Canfield Denver, Colorado