Rating: 4/5

It's from such a close position (her political consultant) that I won't give it 5 stars. Because the author being part and particle of the "works" from Arkansas and into the latter Bill Clinton presidency- I discern that the base information and the voice and "eyes" of the author himself to be "relative" to a facade of disingenuous behavior, as well. Others feel this makes Dick Morris the encyclopedia of Hillary, but I think it holds piles of baggage in itself. He does know the details of minutia place, times, purpose.

I have loathed her personality traits of assumptions from early, early days- so this was little surprise to me. But having the real history in particulars here from Dick Morris detailed as opposed to her "Living History" written "facts"? And yet how hard she tries, I'm sure that is actual and eternal. As is her greed and her duplicity to "facade" profile for the moment being constantly applied (and quickly too- she is a genus at this for "explanations"). But what is the most insidious to millions of us is her "eyes" reactions to the differences or opinions as "other" being not only wrong, or averse or opposite to her own "logic" but as evil. Morris describes how her psyche is founded in this belief/ feeling. So people are no longer opposed but evil entities in identity to/ as targets if they disagree with her. Redefining her roadblocks or opposition as not only wrong or bad but having base in an evil morality. It's practice in her role model of this "evil other" belief is now common. That's become her main legacy in progressive development, IMHO. As the progressive movement learned well from her examples of positing in this way as often as she does herself. Often. No other opinion being allowed as it is "evil" to not agree with the "we think" redefined terms (being one of victim, historic, or identity politics). The Nixon personality comparisons to "eyes" in this book was 5 star outstanding. So different from a Bill Clinton or JFK who could float opinions like waves in the sea- taking on new forms or directions at will in a "fellow well met and liked too" congeniality that leaves the majority in civil discourse or a good will intent ocean.

This is the best psychological description profile of Hillary's core perceptions that I've ever read. I've seen all the physical profile "forms" of changes myself with my own observant eyes over the years- and so guessed most of them were reason formed, but not to the marketing extent that they actually were as detailed here. Especially in her firing habits or how she posits/makes all of her own troubles or affronts in speech declaration as ones which "all women" suffer in a generic tribal sense of "we women". 

She was never going to adopt a baby. Nor did she ever clean out closets during the Paula Jones court case. On and on and on. And she has always, as long as I remember any speaking or apart from being "the couple" pose speech- consistently disdained "the others" or some generic deplorable "enemies list" to assault in generality. Or at times very specifically too.

Other books are more instructive to her later Presidential run. But this is the best book on her core flaws and "eyes" superior attributes. Both. And her will power and ability to morph. They have not changed since she was dark and curly haired with thick black glasses and no makeup.