Rating: 5/5

I’m always excited to return to Cornwall and immerse myself into the world of the Poldarks and the Warleggans to get an insider’s look at the drama and intrigue that comes with this saga. Book 7 is full of excitement, intensity, villainy, suspicion, and tragedy. Amid all of that, there is hope for the future for some of our beloved characters. 

Ross: ’…I have no idea at this moment whether we shall ever laugh together again – in that way. I want you, I want you, but there’s anger and jealousy in it still, and they die hard. I can’t say more. I can’t promise that tomorrow it will be like this between us or like that. Nor can you, I’m sure. You’re right in saying I’m a stranger. But I’m a stranger who knows every inch of your skin. We have to go on from there – in a sense to start again.’

Ross and Demelza have continued to hit a rough spot in their relationship. Coming off of the last installment, Ross is holding on to jealousy and not giving in to the forgiveness he needs to give to his dear Demelza. She is a continued helper for him in all ways as she has always been. Ross learns how to let his unresolved feelings go as a new villain is introduced in the name of Monk Adderley who has set his sights on Demelza. This storyline proves rather exciting and heart-palpitating. 

Tragedies abound as they always do in Cornwall. Deaths of several people as well as a mine tragedy are interspersed throughout. The pacing of the storytelling is perfect as we get every character’s story satisfyingly told. Drake is a successful blacksmith still mourning over Morwenna who has been married off to the horrid Vicar, Ossie Whitworth. His brother Sam is also unlucky in love. Dr. Ennis and Caroline suffer a loss. However, it is George Warleggan who suffers the most extreme loss. 

Ross: ’…But now and then you do not have all the control of your feelings that you should have – and then thoughts and feelings surge up in you like – like an angry tide. And it is hard, sometimes it is hard to control the tide.’

This installment is chock full of plot lines and incidents that will leave you breathless and in shock. It feels as if it is an ending of sorts for this generation of folks I have come to know so well. Loose ends seem to be tied up to ready for a newer century as this one ends in 1799 and the end of the French Revolution as Napoleon is coming to the front in France. The feuds of old remain but I look forward to seeing how the next chapter will play out as new challenges will ensue and new battles will be fought.