Rating: 5/5

This author is fast becoming one of my favorites. This is known when I finish a book and immediately start looking for his others. Likely I will consume his repertoire, starting at the beginning. This is the second I’ve read (after The Secret Scripture), both volumes bought at DuBray books on Graffton street in Dublin. I travel there every year or two for work and have fallen in love with the city, the people, Ireland and the whole experience. It is a city of authors, if you’ve never been, and a walkable, small city with enormous charm. We have so many immigrants in American (including some of my far back relatives), that our country’s kinship has always felt tight, especially here in the Midwest where we are known to be friendly, working class, and industrious. I’ve been fascinated with the “troubles” of Ireland since a boy, and there is a vast (and brilliant) literature. The verbal and literary dexterity of the Irish, like their musical talents, I find thrilling. 

This book for me contained all the elements of greatness: Authenticity, historical accuracy, an interesting narrative, a real time and place, and great dialogue. The protagonist, Eneas, was so dear to me that I felt his joys, his pains, his regret and (ultimately) his redemption. Like Faulkner, the author has created a world in a time and place, the port city of Sligo. I’m assuming this because both of his books that I’ve read were set there. Both also span a lifetime or two, and the issues in Ireland are neatly explained in a way that history books could not. (my friends tire of my sermon that great fiction is a superior way to really learn history) We find Eneas as a happy, carefree and modestly poor lad. The first child of his parents (his mother of dubious origin – we find later she was orphaned by her father after her mother died – oddly that was shameful in those times), Eneas enjoys the attention and is a dutiful son. He encounters a real orphan, the troubled but interesting Jonno, as they steal apples from the rector’s orchard. Soon other siblings come along, and a young man’s wanderlust and the crowding of home life, lead Eneas to join the british army with stationing in Galveston’s harbor in the US. His eyes are opened to the sailor life and its follies, and he enjoys this new freedom. But it turns out to have been a fateful, perhaps foolish, decision – since this is in the early 20th century and the first big war is upon the world, coincidentally with a ferment of revolt of Irish independence. By joining the “royal” or british fleet, he as shown fealty to the crown, and the Irish revolutionaries will never let him forget it, including his friend Jonno, who by now is active. Returning after WWI, the jobs in Ireland are few and he joins the Irish police force in a small town just to draw a paycheck, another fateful decision because he is now marked by the revolutionaries as truly disloyal – plus he sees the nightly nightmarish aftermath of reprisal and reprisals (I myself finally understand the “black and tans”). Ultimately he is a marked man and must leave Sligo, even Ireland, upon penalty of death. His friendship with his best pal Jonno is shattered, and he begins his wandering. Eventually he joins the English army and finds himself on the beach at Dunkirk and is destroyed by what we now know is PTSD. He tries to return home, is turned out, threatened, and wanders again. Ireland has finally achieved independence but he is a man without a country.

The story is tragic, I have rarely felt such sympathy for a character, who’s few loves were taken from him. The author writes beautifully of the land and the weather and the emotional toil that animates our protagonist. Eventually he finds himself with spade in hand digging a canal in the desert of Nigeria. There he finds a fellow traveler, Harcourt, a black man with English training, and they become lifelong friends. Eventually they are both driven out of Lagos, due to yet more revolutionaries throwing off British rule. They find themselves on the lonely Isle of Dogs where old broken down sailors go to retire in a bleak landscape. Eneas finds a measure of serenity there, and his demons bubble up less often. He is a kind man, and good to his friends and family, but he is totally consumed with regret and overwhelming memories of his family and home. By a stroke of luck he discovers he has a back pension from his war service, and this keeps him and his companion (Harcourt) alive. The end of the story was not perfect, but I this is a new favorite because of the certainty I have that this is true to history and Ireland. Mostly, though, the lilting dialogue and unique turns of phrase are brilliant and true as iron.

Here are some snippets, but I suggest you just read it;

p. 58: “They are half nightmare themselves, in their uniforms patched together from army and Ric stores, some of them handsome and elegant men, with shining accents, some terrible dark boys from the worse and drear back-alleys of England, but all with the blank light of dead and drear unimportance of being alive in their eyes. As ancient as old stories. And every auxiliary has the strength of four ordinary men you would think, as if death and fearlessness were an elixir.”

p. 71: “He doesn’t know if anyone has succeeded, before execution, in being taken off a black list, but then the history of Sligo is not the history of great escapes. They are more doomed and fixed in their courses, the men of Sligo, it seems to him, than those bewildered and doomed Greeks of old that the master used to relish.”

p. 178: “The room is peculiarly bare like a policeman’s, with a desk frothing with wooden carvings at the edges, and a veritable heap of papers and dossiers and files and pens and calendars quite neatly stacked and arranged. Behind the mound of important work sits his little brother, a red faced person with a lot of healthy looking fat on his face and hands. The backs of his hands are like a turkey’s legs. The hair is black as an octopus’ ink and in the black suit his brother Tom seems compact and perfect, like a painted advertisement in the station. He looks like he owns a brushed hat and a new hat anyway, he looks like he knows his way about the alleys and lanes of official things, content, secure, with a gold watch on top everything, solid on his thick wrist. He gives a huge impression of likeability and humanity, and indeed he gets up from his labours and floods about the big table and just embraces Eneas like the brother he is.”

p. 224: “The days of letters are well gone now, and the only touch he has now against his mother must be in dreams, and truth to tell his dreams are poor things really and he has a contempt for them. But now and then some nights she flits through in strange guises, whether as the avenging crone of old dreams, or the bright flame of an aisling that he has no need of, and rises unbidden from the paltry bog of his sleeping brain. He knows that she and all her world will die, and her secrets too, and he knows that all traces of even his own days will be pulled from the streets of Sligo, and the names of the shops will change again, and someone’s premises here and others there will suffer the great iron ball, and he knows that in that sense he is already dead, that time has already taken care of him. There is the living breathing world of Ireland with De Valera and the sons of powerful men taking power as they come to age. Its all the old story over again except this time the rich man is themselves in a motorcar and a house on a respectable road. Well, he must not worry about politics, he’s beyond them now. He has never been for politics, only the flotsam of its minor storms.”

p. 228: “Fear afflicts him, silence abets the fear. Sometimes he lays down his spade and shivers in the lengthening ditch, he shivers like an auge like malaria, but it isn’t so simple. It isn’t mosquitos are ruining Eneas, but the pressing down and piercing up of a life. He’s being run through from many an angle. Sometimes he years for the refuge of an English madhouse, for the refuge of youth even, of a fresh start. He is mortally exhausted sometimes by being this Eneas McNulty. The wicked idea strikes him that his would be murderers- would be in the right, that there’s nothing to recommend him, that his life has been ill led, that he deserves tremendous and afflicting punishment. When he thinks this he trembles worse. He’s lost in a childhood state and he fears the displeasure of god the king of good and the demon of evil. He lies fast in the bed of himself with the starched sheets binding his legs, and the ministers of god approach the bedroom of himself and will be in the window like a fiery bold to accuse and torment him and he feels it will be well merited. 

The discovery of this author for me, was from a proprietor of the little store in Dublin. Simply asking for a ‘serious’ less-known author from Ireland yielded me this amazing author. Thank you, Sebastian Barry, for enriching my life and providing profound and life-changing entertainment. For me, that’s art.