Rating: 5/5

Heaven's Command: An Imperial Progress is the first volume of Jan Morris' trilogy on the British Empire. Oddly, to me at least, he begins his recounting of the Empire in 1837 thus ignoring the fact that England began collecting other countries through either invasion and conquest or chartered trade companies from the 12th century on. In this first volume, the New World is pretty much left out of it except for Canada, Bermuda and Jamaica and China is only mentioned twice, by name only: Hong Kong and the burning of the Summer Palace in quoting a General who thought it was a good insult. Actually, I guess you have to limit the story somehow and encompassing this first volume within Queen Victoria's reign is a good way to do it.

Within this volume are the outstanding names of British Imperialism: Benjamin Disraeli, William Gladstone, Charles "Chinese" Gordon, Henry Stanley and Dr. Livingston, Cecil Rhodes, Richard Burton, Charles Stewart Parnell, and even H.Rider Haggard. The list is unending. So are the famous events, the failures as well as the victories. Morris makes the argument that the British Empire in this period came into being and even expanded because of an evangelistic zeal that had developed among the populace by the time of Victoria's coronation. They were led by a desire to spread God's word among the less developed peoples of the world and bring the benefits of civilization. According to Morris, "...the British as a nation were not conscious expansionists. Power for power's sake had not yet seized the public imagination." Maybe so, but they didn't give up any piece of it and repeatedly fought to keep their "reluctant" empire. By the end of Victoria's reign, they had come full circle and were again gaining colonies by invasion and conquest and were granting charters to trade companies to operate as had the East India Company and the Hudson Bay Company - as pseudo-private countries.

This first volume is excellent history and I expect no less from the next two. Some of the argument offered to justify the acquiring of the empire and the actions against the local inhabitants was weak. Still, I don't expect to judge the past by views held in the present and many of the contemporary citizens had strong views against the idea of Empire building as well. Especially enjoyable was the poetry scattered throughout by the likes of Tennyson, Kipling, Milton, and a wide variety of English poets.