Rating: 4/5

In my most humble opinion everybody should be always (I mean in each moment of a human being life) reading at least: one spiritual book, a (maybe non) fiction book and one written by Terry Pratchett. Now, you may get a wrong idea of what is going on up here, but in a near future I will write something about the first two “must be reading”. Now you are here to read about the third one.

If you ever read a book by Terry Pratchett you may have noticed a feeling of “okeyness” within your day to day life. For instance, I am thinking in the Discworld books. There you can read such things that whatever you are going through it may not be such a big deal. It makes you widen your focus, see your issues from different points of view, and there are moments when you stop seeing them. Definitely they are essential books for these stressful days.

Let me go for the one I chose for this occasion: “The Dark Side of The Sun”. I bought this book three or four moths ago, when I was two thousand miles from home (yes, I just have searched in google miles vs km). I was on Erasmus doing a thesis about let's say “amazing stuff”. In one of those moments when I felt somehow homesick I read that Pratchett had passed out. That made me feel the urgency to go and buy one of his books. I did so. However I did not read it until a month ago, when I was looking for some “stress cure”, nonsense therapy, or... have some fun. Not only I found the dose of whatever I was looking for, I also found a really well built world in a quite short book. I found a bit of Asimov. I found Gods. I found perfectly illogical things. I found puppies raining from the sky. I found a book to read again.

I picked this particular book because I was looking for a book not related with the Discworld series. However it was somehow related. To avoid saying too much about it I will say that I had the feeling that “The Dark Side of The Sun” is strongly related with the book “Small Gods” (I did not read this last one). 

Terry Pratchett builds a world (in fact a whole universe) with more than fifty races, including robots, humans and big guys (lakes, planets, puppies...). Some time paradoxes, conspiracies and the most tasty ingredient; a prophecy. In fact, in the world everything is already written down, everything happens because it has to happen. It has been already calculated. Among those calculations there is one that will change everything. 

You may agree that in our world, chaos is something relative, unpredictable and... chaotic. However in a world where the future can be computed it has a complete different roll. It is not so relative, not so unpredictable and... not so chaotic. In fact in a world like this, prophecies are more than prophecies. We are dealing with Prophecies. At this point I would like to remind you that we are dealing with Terry Pratchett. It happens to be that some predicted actions do not evolve as expected (as predicted), what leads us to some chaos. And just to put the lid on it, some predictions around the “Prophecy” fail.

Conclusion: chaos. If you want something that makes you smile, something that deals with flying shoes, magic swords, chaos and randomness, get some Terry Pratchett book. I am sorry, I am biased, I do not think I can say anything negative about his books (maybe too chaotic but even though you get used to it).

Highly recommended.