Rating: 4/5

I have decided to embark on a mission to read a number of books on subjects that will be of great importance to the upcoming 2020 US Presidential Election. Many of these will focus on actors intricately involved in the process, in hopes that I can understand them better and, perhaps, educate others with the power to cast a ballot. I am, as always, open to serious recommendations from anyone who has a book I might like to include in the process. 

This is Book #14 in my 2020 US Election Preparation Challenge.

At a time when politics is up in the air and no one seems to know who’s in which column, Richard Condon presents this riveting political thriller that has all the key elements to the early Cold War years. Somewhat satirical in its delivery, it may leave some scratching their heads as to what this has to do with anything. There is an element of brilliance in the concept that a ‘sleeper’ could be put into the American political system with the sole purpose of bringing the country to its knees. As apt today as at first publication, Condon gives readers something about which to think, much as Trump does today.

While serving in the Korean War, Sergeant Raymond Shaw is one of a number of America soldiers who are captured by the Chinese. During their incarceration, they are brainwashed and Shaw is utilised as a ‘sleeper agent’ to wreak havoc back home. After creating a narrative whereby Sergeant Shaw saved his fellow G.I.s, he is sent back stateside and wins the Medal of Honor. Shaw rides the high of this while America is in the height of its anti-communist crusade. 

A fiery Senator John Iselin is ready to destroy anyone he deems even partially left-leaning, which adds another layer to the Cold War drama. Alongside his wife, deemed by some to be the most loathsome villain of the time, Iselin begins outing anyone he can, which fuels communist sentiment on the other side of the world. The Russians see their chance to being knocking over the dominoes, with the US president in the crosshairs.

While America ramps up its communist hatred, a single call turns Shaw from a passive man into a deadly killer, and no one is the wiser. There’s no time like the present to strike, leaving the world to watch a country fall from grace, its leader gunned down by a man everyone called a hero.

Despite being written long ago, this book packs as much punch today as it did in the 1950s. Condon uses a vast array of characters and personalities to tell his tale, pushing the reader to think hard about what they see develop before their eyes. Raymond Shaw remains at the centre of the story throughout, the unwitting soldier of the communist movement, used to strike the first major blow in the Cold War. His heroism is what wins him over with everyone, yet there is little doubt that he is the most intense of all the characters who grace the pages of this book. 

The selection of many other characters not only add depth to the story, but they represent the vying factions of the day, where America was hell-bent on washing itself clean of having any ‘red’ amongst the populace. This comes across clearly to the attentive reader. While the sentiments may have differed into the 21st century, there is surely a strong anti-Russia feeling amongst those who are not sycophants in the Oval Office. 

The book is not overly long, allowing many to enjoy it in short order. However, there is a great deal packed into its pages and the reader will not able to easily divorce themselves from the themes as they emerge. Most chapters clip along and keep the reader wanting more, though there are parts dripping with detail and begging for deeper analysis. While I have not read anything else by Richard Condon, I can only wonder if he handles other political situations with such aplomb.

Some will ask why I chose to add this, a piece of fiction, amongst my election preparation books heading into November 2020. It has become apparent to me that there is some form of sleeper cell that has infiltrated its way into American politics, whereby a foreign power appears to be calling the shots, if not pulling the strings. While no US president is about to be killed, America faces assassination of its autonomy, something that cannot be rectified with a single trip to the ballot box. It is high time to end the madness, exterminate the sycophantic attitude that has Russia using America as its plaything. Then again, maybe you see things in another context. I’m eager to hear those views as well!

Kudos, Mr. Condon, for allowing me to think a little as I projected your 1950s thriller into the present time. The more things change, the more they stay the same!

This book fulfils the October 2020 requirements of the Mind the Bookshelf Gap reading challenge.

Love/hate the review? An ever-growing collection of others appears at: 
http://pecheyponderings.wordpress.com/

A Book for All Seasons, a different sort of Book Challenge: https://www.goodreads.com/group/show/...