Rating: 5/5

Christmas won’t be a real Christmas without rewatching Die Hard and retreading A Christmas Carol. 

 Some classics magically make you feel better when you read them over and over again. Especially when we’re getting through one of the most tragic, compelling, challenging years of our lives, the kind of amazing classics help us remember what is really important in our lives: importance of family, intimacy, happiness, kindness and sharing. 

 I felt like Ebenezer Scrooge at this special day, but instead of ghost coworker of mine, my old self revisited me ( nope, thankfully I’m not delusional and I didn’t start drinking in the morning. ) it was more like walking through memory lane of your life. I think with the inspirational light shone through this story, we all rethink our lives, rethink the times we got bittersweet, tasteless, unhappy, grumpy just like Mr. Scrooge did all the time. It was like walking in the dark without hope, till we raise our heads and realize there are still stars shining to light our path! 

 This meaningful, poignant, powerful has unique magic to warm our hearts and whisper to our ears : everything will be all right!

I want to share my favorite quotes of this one of my all time favorite reads: 
“There is nothing in the world so irresistibly contagious as laughter and good humor.”

“I will honour Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year. I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future. The Spirits of all Three shall strive within me. I will not shut out the lessons that they teach.”

“There are some upon this earth of yours who lay claim to know us, and who do their deeds of passion, pride, ill-will, hatred, envy, bigotry, and selfishness in our name; who are as strange to us and all our kith and kin, as if they had never lived. Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us.”

“You fear the world too much,' she answered gently. 'All your other hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its sordid reproach. I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off, one by one, until the master passion, Gain, engrosses you. Have I not?”

“I don't know what to do!" cried Scrooge, laughing and crying in the same breath; and making a perfect Laocoön of himself with his stockings. "I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I am as merry as a school-boy. I am as giddy as a drunken man. A merry Christmas to every-body! A happy New Year to all the world! Hallo here! Whoop! Hallo!”