Rating: 4/5

Having read and loved Ibbotson's The Great Ghost Rescue, I had high hopes for my journey to the Island of the Aunts. And I must now consider myself an Ibbotson fan! I love her style. For me, it is the closet thing to JK Rowling's that I've found in terms of characterization and humor and blending magic with "the real world" but Ibbotson also has her own flare and it just makes me smile to read her work.

That said, I must say I was a little disappointed with "Island of the Aunts" Maybe my expectations were too high, as I know it's one of her most popular titles, but I finished the book feeling a bit unfulfilled. I felt it walked the line between being a book about fantastical creatures and being a book about the real-world problems faced by the characters and I'm not sure either was fully developed in consequence. It's fun to meet all the "magical creatures" on the island and I love the idea of taking care of them but again there wasn't too much focus on that. I also think it's important to show a story where children don't have a happy family life but somehow find fulfillment through the natural world, through other people who care about them, and through becoming more aware of their own potential and worth--which Ibbotson does. But I also didn't feel that the children grow as much as they could have. And there were some plot threads that never quite cleared up what is "right" and "wrong"--not that I think all kids' books should be clearly black and white, but again I think stories like Harry Potter do a wonderful job of showing the variations in people (such as Dumbledore not always being "perfect" but ultimately choosing to do right) while still allowing that there are universal truths, "good" and "bad" ways (if we must label them) of dealing with situations and I felt that was lacking in "Island of the Aunts" I was left a bit unsure of how I was supposed to feel; again, I appreciate a story that doesn't put a neat little bow on a Hallmark card moral-of-the-story, but, I just felt it could have been a bit stronger since it seemed to be a book with a "message."

Complaints aside, this is still a charmingly written, humorous story that should appeal to both boys and girls. There is an underlying message of caring for the natural world, and especially its creatures, and this is a great novel if you are looking for books with an environmental theme. And, oh how I wish that the Kraken could swim past our shores these days, spreading his message of peace and harmony!