Rating: 4/5

“Oleander, jacaranda, oleander, jacaranda, oleander…”, a young Penelope murmuring to herself, peering out the window from the back seat of the car as the alternating trees whip past like so many telephone poles. Reminds me of my young self, back seat riding, being ever on the lookout for Burma Shave signs. Only I wasn’t living in Egypt of the 1930s and ‘40s. “Oleander, Jacaranda” is a pleasantly paced book, introspective, at times bewilderingly so, which is, most likely, just a difference of opinion.
Early on, (the book is only 133 pages – enough of a taste of Penelope for me to order an old copy of “Moon Tiger”) - I encounter the best new word – “gamoose”. Otherwise known as the water buffalo. A huge beast that terrified a very young Penelope. Beware the gamoose!
We get a few pages of Penelope questioning, how exactly is childhood recalled? Why do certain jpgs or brief gifs from our early years float to the top of our consciousness? A difficult question and PL offers no answer, only her ruminations. That bit I found it a tad tedious. PL is an author for children's literature which makes her troubled mind about memory understandable. For me, her actual memories give the book its interest. Not that I haven’t wondered myself why it is that certain odd bits of my life as a very small person are the ones that I remember. It’s all beyond my ken so I leave it at that and just enjoy the memories. 
Most mirthful moment – I shared Penelope’s love for playing, “The Teddy Bear’s Picnic”, over and over. Unlike PL, I didn’t play my 78 on a gramophone. I gave it a rest when I played, “The Chocolate Cowboy” (“my hideout’s a chocolate bar”, by Roy Rogers. Until this moment, I did not know that my favorite cowboy was the singer). That record was a little yellow 45. Got to love YouTube for letting me hear those two records for the first time in over sixty-five years. That is the only “downside” to “Oleander, Jacacranda”; getting lost in one’s own childhood memories.
From page 66, a choice excerpt, “Every Christmas there was a carol service at the cathedral which was known as the Toy Service. The point of it was that all attending children should donate a toy, which would be given to the families of poor Copts…You could not give any old toy; it had to be something you were especially fond of…It was the element of sacrifice that mattered. And so, every year, I stumped sullenly up the aisle clutching some beloved hairless teddy or wall-eyed doll. I like to think that my present agnosticism is the product of informed and intelligent reflection, but I suspect that the seeds may have been sown back then, when I was coerced annually into irrational sacrifice to the strains of, “Away in a Manger.”
Around page seventy, I became enamored of “Oleander, Jacaranda”. The book is very much in tune with my own perception of being a kid. Here, I feel I must type out a paragraph from page seventy-two, “We (Penelope and her nanny, governess and de facto mother, Lucy) read the Bible from end to end. Well, not quite. Lucy had her own ideas about what was appropriate, so we skipped Leviticus and Numbers and Chronicles and indeed much of the Old Testament. Formally, at any rate – but I certainly dipped into it on my own, partly in search of that stuff about issues of blood and nakedness that had Lucy running for cover but also because I liked all those catalogues of names, those sonorous injunctions, that language. When I look at the King James Version now, it is resonantly familiar. Those rhythms and cadences are ingrained somewhere deep within me. By the time I was in my early twenties, I knew that I was an agnostic, which presumably – and ironically – stemmed at least in part from that early emphasis in training for responsibility in the acceptance or rejection of ideas. Intensive exposure to the King James Version did not make me a Christian, but it gave me a grounding in the English language for which I am profoundly grateful. And when I see the pallid replacements favoured by the Church of England today – the New International Bible and the deplorable Good News Bible – I am amazed and saddened.” Well said, Penelope, well said. I was steeped in the teachings of the Lutheran Church but after being graduated from Sunday School, at age eighteen, I never went back. The kicker was when my namesake Thomas was chewed out for doubting that Jesus was indeed the real Jesus, and this after his being warned about the need to beware of false prophets! Good grief. That and as a young lad listening to the, “be fruitful and multiply” only to be admonished for having lust in my heart! Say what? Now there’s a neat trick if you can pull it off. And that’s just for starters. Occam’s razor has it right, “Among competing hypotheses, the one with the fewest assumptions should be selected.” All the Abrahamic religions have assumptions piled on top of assumptions. However, I always did like the King James Bible and was quite offended when the new, teeth grinding version found its way into the American Lutheran Church service. A facepalm moment for all-time.
Oleander, Jacaranda - It was all great stuff and left me wanting more – Curious to see how PL’s fiction turns out. Finding a good book is a happy event – finding a good author is even better.
COMIC CODA: from page 81 “…at some point (I) came across cartoon strips in newspapers or magazines and was hooked though also baffled by the evident sophistication. Popeye was an especial challenge: I couldn’t understand the running joke about spinach, which we did not have. And then there was Jane, the peroxide blonde with gargantuan bust and cleavage; I thought her immensely appealing but could not work out why.” Who was “Jane”? It took a bit of googling but I finally found her http://lewstringer.blogspot.com/2009/... (this is but one reference). Ah, the girly comics, how well I remember them. How old was I? I’m not sure. Seven? Eight? Ten? Whatever age I was, I suffered no such confusion. I loved them. With the Sunday comics spread out on the floor I carefully read all the funnies. The Sunday comics were the apogee of the week. I especially loved the girly drawings. Alas, they have not been seen in the popular comics for many years. The drawings were of a type like LI’L ABNER, the Daisy Maes and Moonbeams, buxom and curvaceous, appeared in three or four strips. I’ve searched but cannot find them. Even then I was amazed at how powerfully such images could capture my young mind. Funny now, when I think of it. Later, during my teens, girls would frighten the daylights out of me. Then, I was sadly baffled and confounded.