Rating: 5/5

The comedy novel, it seems to me, did not exist in its well-known form before P.G Wodehouse turned it into a whole genre of its own. Surely, laughter did feature prominently in English literature in the satirical works of Jonathan Swift, in the voluminous novels of Fielding, Sterne and Dickens and we can also say that the short fiction of Kipling and Munro and the plays of Oscar Wilde and George Bernard Shaw have created a lasting style of British humour that has endured in public imagination for years. But it was Wodehouse who reinvented the art of comedic writing, crammed it with pratfalls from one cover to another. His novels are essentially very simple, and even predictable, stories - a gaggle of idiosyncratic characters thrown together to drive the perennially hapless Bertie Wooster at his wit's end until his trusted butler Jeeves steps in to save the day with a stiff-upper-lipped solution. 

Well, to be honest, "Jeeves In The Offing" takes a detour from this template. It does not really feature Jeeves in most of the proceedings; the said self-assured butler is on a holiday in Herne Bay, judging a competition of bathing belles (what exactly is Jeeves up to in his hours of leisure lets the mind wander in most interesting directions). And as for Wooster, that specimen of his race, he finds himself again in his aged relative Mrs. Travers' residence, already crowded with unwelcome guests, like the carrot-topped Jezebel Roberta Wickham and Aubrey Upjohn, the terror of Malvern At Sea, who again finds new reasons to give his former pupil something akin to six of the juiciest from a cane. 

And indeed, that is all there is to the frothy plot - kleptomaniacs hiding in plain sight, cow-creamers disappearing mysteriously and mistaken identity and romantic entanglements that become even more tangled - and this is the truly unique quality of Wodehouse - in how amusingly and refreshingly enjoyable this lark feels to the point of even skilfully deceiving us so that some of the comedic twists and turns are unforeseeable, indeed. We never are able to guess just how Bertie Wooster will be able to escape these shenanigans but more crucially, Wodehouse also makes us root for the other characters immersed in the soup along with him. Despite their idiosyncratic ways, even those slippery and clumsy friends and lovers earn our sympathy and the comedic twists and turns even acquire a shade of absurd suspense till the end. 

All this would have seemed bordering on despair had it not been for its author's uncanny talent for putting everything together, these gags and guffaws, with such inimitable style and enthusiasm. This is a deliriously plotted comedy of manners but the writing, that fruity, frolicsome prose style, laden with inventive slang and embellished with precise comic timing, makes us lap the audacious plot and whimsical characters whole-heartedly, 

Contrary to expectations, Jeeves' absence does not dampen the anarchic spirit of the novel. Rather, it gives us a chance to dive headfirst into a thick soup of complicated imbroglios and also to know Bertie Wooster a little better. Left to his own devices and tossed to and fro between characters, smarter and shrewder, than him, Wooster emerges also as a memorable narrator taking us through these madcap proceedings with an enjoyable sense of predicament. The top prize among all the characters however must be reserved for Roberta "Bobbie" Wickham - that carrot-topped Jezebel who drives everyone nearly to their wits' end with her inexorable capacity of mischief, especially Wooster himself. A fine specimen of the fairer sex, indeed.