Rating: 5/5

The era of counterculture of the 1960s is long gone. The time of the hippie movement and advocating for its ideals, the struggle for democracy, freedom of speech, the fight against corporatism and consumerism, the struggle for human rights, and the fight against needless wars has passed. It was replaced by the 80s, and we all know how that turned out. No more rock 'n' roll music in its pure, uncorrupted form. It has been replaced by glam rock, crazy hairstyles, and synth-pop. 
Sandy Blair, once an avid radical hippie and journalist for the famous Hedgehog, a magazine dedicated to the time of the '60s and those failed ideals, is now a frustrated writer who is stuck on page 37 of his latest novel with the deadline for handing over manuscript around the corner. He now lives a serious life. He has a Mazda RX-7, a beautiful and successful wife, and money, but he still lacks something. When he gets a call from Jarred Patterson, one of the people from his past, telling him he has an offer, Sandy wholeheartedly accepts it despite the opposition of his girlfriend and his agent. The thing is that Jamie Lynch was murdered, brutally. Someone took out his heart and left his body on his desk, lying on a poster of a Nazgûl West Mesa concert. The Nazgûl album, Music to Wake the Dead, was playing in the background.
All these things, Jamie Lynch, the West Mesa concert, and Nazgûl, are things from Sandy's past and as Sandy unravels the case more, he becomes more entangled in the past. Jamie Lynch was the manager of Nazgûl, a legendary rock band from the 1960s, one of the pioneers of the hard rock, whose career ended abruptly in 1971. at a concert in West Mesa, when a sniper shot in the head their singer, Patrick Henry Hobbins, better known as the Hobbit. After that concert, the Nazgûl never played again because of Lynch's games, but now that he's gone and not standing in their way, will they play again? Will they take the stage again and play their Armageddon song and thus herald the arrival of a new age and something ominous with it? Who will take Hobbit’s place? It's up to Sandy to reveal, but the price could be too great.
The Armageddon Rag could be called a novel about music, a crime novel, a fantasy and horror novel, a psychological novel, a road novel, an autobiographical novel, a historical novel, a melancholy recollection of forgotten ideals and forgotten times, a novel about criticism of the 80s. Whichever you pick you won't go wrong because it is all that. Although Martin experimented a bit here, stepping out of his comfort zone, this is a brilliantly written novel, where Sandy's character was masterfully done, although Martin always knew how to write interesting characters.
Perhaps Sandy is persuasive because Martin himself can be easily found in it, which becomes clear after a few pages. Also, the Nazgûl and the West Mesa concert seem so real that you'll reach the internet in search of details. 
So why did Martin fail so much after this novel that he gave up writing all the way to A Song of Ice and Fire? There are two reasons. The novel is difficult to classify into a particular genre, at least three genres are intertwined in it. The second reason is the motif of the novel, forgotten ideals that in the 80s, in an era when looking at some other things, simply did not sit well with people. Those who pursued and stood up for these ideals in the 1960s were "adults" and engaged in "serious" things, and the younger generations did not care about it. Does that make The Armageddon Rag a bad novel? Not a bit. The Armageddon Rag is an excellent novel, just hard to described. A dose of psychological plunge into the madness of Lovecraft's characters, a bit of '60s rock 'n' roll, sprinkled with a bit of Tolkien and a touch of crime novel in crazy mushroom sauce and heavy LSD.