Rating: 5/5

Bernard Fall knew how to write an excellent history book, even if it was basically a current events book at the time. In analyzing the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu, he perfectly balances the strategic, tactical, and personal stories of the siege. The strategic aspect is the most important for voters, as it is the one we are most likely to have an influence upon. I could easily imagine the tactical considerations important for study by anyone going into combat. The personal facet is perhaps the least likely to improve us as informed citizens, but it is paradoxically the most important part of Fall's (or any historian's) work: it reminds us that these we honest to God people who paid the price for all of the decisions made at all levels. 

And the personal stories are harrowing. One factor I had not considered, nor apparently had the French High Command, was that Dien Bien Phu, like most of Asia, was subject to monsoons. Placing a base in the middle of a valley during monsoon season meant the soldiers and civilians (including brothel workers who somehow endured this 56 day siege) lived in a veritable quagmire. One fought, ate, slept, performed surgery, and died in the mud, where, with some luck, one might receive a proper burial if one's body could be retrieved. Many were not that fortunate, and combined with a second meteorological factor, the heat, thousands of bodies that were churned into the mud by over 200,000 artillery shells began to rot, producing plagues of maggots that seeped into the French dugouts, nearly all of which were converted into makeshift hospitals. 

Both sides displayed incredible feats of bravery and endurance, and I was genuinely shocked at how well the French forces held up and that the Viet Minh forces, despite constantly outnumbering an enemy whose perimeter was always shrinking, nearly broke first due to their excessive casualties. Even to the end, French commanders within the base carried out counterattacks of incredible savagery and decimated enemy infantry with artillery. 

But here is another paradox: the French, Algerian, African, Vietnamese, and Foreign Legion fighters put up an outstanding defense in the cause of an industrial European power but were ultimately wiped out by a colonial resistance group. How was this possible? 

Fall correctly states that Dien Bien Phu was not lost in the valley bordering Laos, but in the colonial capital of Hanoi, in Paris, and in Washington, D.C. Paratroopers began landing in Dien Bien Phu before an adequate reason was stated for their being there; the leading Generals, Navarre (commanding all of Vietnam) and Cogny (commanding the forces in North Vietnam) were at odds as to the purpose of the base. Worse yet, the government was uncertain what they wanted the base to be, ultimately telling Navarre it need not "close the door" to Laos weeks after the base was already constructed. Perhaps most amazingly, the operation of unclear objectives was approved with the proviso that the forces required may not be available. 

This conflicted leadership led to a conflicted use of Dien Bien Phu. On the one hand, it was seen as a base to launch attacks into the enemies rear areas; as such, it was not prepared with adequate defense measures for a siege. This alone all but doomed the base when it was, indeed, besieged. On the other hand, the base was seen as an opportunity to be a juicy bait to draw the enemy out into the open and away from the more populated Red River Delta. Once in the open, air and artillery could be used to devastating impact. 

That is, if there was an air force. Which, for all practical purposes, there wasn't. The French actually had more planes than they did trained pilots. This base, located in the depths of the jungle hundreds of kilometers away, could only be supplied by air, tying up a huge percentage of France's available airpower throughout the region. The one type of plane that could have saved them, the heavy bomber, was the one type France lacked, largely because their role in NATO left the heavy bombing to the Brits and the Americans. 

So before the shooting even began, the base lacked proper defense structures, was located in a bog, breathed through an easily severed windepipe, and predicated its defense on an air wing that wasn't there. Their saving grace was their artillery and the belief that the Viet Minh could never haul so many guns and sufficient ammunition through the jungle without being destroyed by French aircraft or jungle conditions. 

They were unhappily surprised by the determination of General Vo Nguyen Giap, who brought more guns to the party than the French. And not just artillery to blast the base, but antiaircraft guns, enough to make WWII veterans swear Dien Bien Phu was better defended than many Nazi cities. 

Perhaps the most frustrating thing reading the book is that the French intelligence, as Fall stresses, did not fail. They knew the guns existed; they knew the enemy divisions were surrounding the base; they must have known their own inability to supply such a far away base surrounded by heavy flak. But the generals never really put the pieces together until it was way too late. 

After that, France was limited to hoping geopolitical forces would come to the rescue in a way reminiscent of the Confederacy's strategic goals during our Civil War. If DBP could hold out until the Geneva Conference began, perhaps a cease-fire could be declared. If the United States would come in with air forces alone, they could bomb the concentrated Viet Minh forces back to the stone age. And that was a very real possibility during the month of April. But for a variety of reasons, we didn't come in. 

The most obvious impact of this battle was the division of Vietnam into a now victorious North and a weak South which the United States would come to defend ten years later. The implications were wider, however. France, after being basically betrayed by the Allies in WWII and really again here, began to distrust the United States and push for an independent foreign policy that has impacted our policy to the modern day. And France would be rocked by another colonial war far closer to home in Algeria just as the Indochina conflict came to an end. Many of the foreign fighters would join the Algerians against France, while many French soldiers (including a former Commander in Chief of Indochina, Salan), disgusted by having lost a second war due to their politicians, would participate in a putsch against their own civilian government.

An outstanding book, dense in wisdom. Bernard's style was particularly good. The man builds a story of incredible detail but always manages to close in a small concluding chapter with the force and clarity of a lawyer, leaving no room for doubt as to the certitude of his well-stated conclusions. The interaction of the strategic, tactical, and personal is on display here better than any book of theory ever could present it.