Rating: 4/5

I have loved Alistair MacLean's work ever since I first discovered it in junior high. I'm a girl who loves suspense and action/adventure, but am conservative enough not to appreciate the hardcore profanity and sex scenes found in novels like Robert Ludlum's thrillers. MacLean's works, written mostly in the 1950s and 60s, are consistently clean and classy. There is romance in every one of his novels except for Ice Station Zebra, but not so much that it slows the pacing of the plot. MacLean has one character type, and he does that type extremely well. He and Byron no doubt had a great deal in common: MacLean’s hero in every novel is the Byronic man engaged in a struggle against evil, fighting to retrieve the treasure and rescue the innocent, while coolly attracting the girl in the process. MacLean follows this formula and this plot in every novel, with only two or three exceptions. He even gives several of his protagonists the same name--“John Smith”--in many of his works. The MacLean hero is almost always in both physical and emotional pain, but he doesn’t feel sorry for himself and is always braver, kinder, and more ruthless than all the other good guys. He is consistently able to do what no one else can: save the innocent people who are somehow terribly threatened, incapacitate the villain, and retrieve the missing plans, kidnapped family or scientist, stolen narcotics or virus, or buried treasure. But if, like me, you love action/adventure/suspense thrillers and Byronic heroes, the formula works pretty much every time. 

MacLean is such an extraordinary storyteller that he makes ludicrous plots seem terrifyingly believable. Of COURSE the villains stole a small nuclear bomb to blow up the gold-transport ship so that none of the innocent millionaires aboard could ever tell the world about how the villain stole all the gold from the ship. HOW ELSE could the villain have achieved his plans? OF COURSE the hero, John Carter, achieves nearly impossible climbing and killing feats after having been shot in the leg three times the night before. WHAT ELSE would you expect from a MacLean hero? This is the plot of The Golden Rendezvous, and in MacLean’s capable hands, the reader doesn’t even question its plausibility, because he is too delighted by the thrilling action scenes. And this novel is full of non-stop action. That’s rather a cliché nowadays, but in the case of this book, it’s actually mostly true. MacLean’s writing is characterized by taut suspense combined with outstanding subject-matter expertise and wry Scottish humor. His books are set on ships, trains, oil rigs, and other exotic locales around the world. The Golden Rendezvous, is one of his better works: a few of his works like Partisans, and Caravan to Vaccares, devolve into the mire of villainous political philosophy ad nauseum, or contain genuine tragedies at the end (real tragedies are only allowed offstage before the book begins) like Fear is the Key, in which the girl goes off with someone else or—horror of horrors—actually dies in The Black Shrike, but otherwise, MacLean writes winners nearly every time. The fact that more than seven of his novels have been made into movies with stars like Clint Eastwood and Harrison Ford speaks for itself. Pick up a copy of The Golden Rendezvous today and see for yourself!