Rating: 4/5

I appreciated this as a window on the famous 1815 battle, with Sharpe a Zellig-like figure at key turning points. However, I missed Sharpe’s personal story as the main focus of the narrative rather than getting a sense of him being used as a tool to illustrate historical events. 

If you have read any of the Sharpe series on the British army during the Napoleanic Wars, you will want to read this out for a sense of completion, with this being the penultimate volume. He still thinks of himself as a rifleman, but his capacity to lead men leads him to advance to become a competent officer. In the brief peace he has taken up the life of a country farmer with a French woman in Normandy and is now a father, leaving his wife back in England to squander his modest estate and pursue her own lovers. As the book opens, his need for money has led him to assume a post as a brevet colonel in the Dutch forces led by of the young, inexperienced Prince of Orange. Along with their allies in the so-called Seventh Coalition, the Prussians and Wellington’s international army are defending Dutch Belgium against a likely incursion by Bonaparte. In the three months since escaping Elba, he has won over the French army and state, and Sharpe is a witness of the advance dragoon scouts leading the invasion by an army of 125,000. His skills in combat by gun and sword are rusty, but he still has the right stuff in mano-a-mano action.

Sharpe has been dreading the fulfillment of orders from the Prince to show up at a grand ball in Brussells, so it’s perfect for him to show up all grotty and bloody. The plan of Napolean to divide the forces of Wellington and the Prussians is close to being completed, and the warnings Sharpe tried to send did not reach the allied command. Rallying to the defense of a key crossroads becomes an emergency objective for the allies. Sharpe’s old sergeant, the Irishman Harper, is now a bar owner and dealer of stolen horses, but chooses to join him on location, despite lack of a commission. There they learn what a dangerous, pompous idiot the Prince is, ordering his men to deploy in lines for musketry attacks and leaving them vulnerable to decimation by the cavalry. As we learn later, the formation of battalions into squares with a wall of bayonets protecting concentrated firepower was the critical strategy to defeat cavalry charges. Harper pegs the Prince as a “silk stocking full of shit”, and discussion of fragging him becomes a serious topic.

 
Illustration of a British deployment in the square formation at the battle of the Quatre Bras crossroads.
Because his scattered forces have not had time to coalesce, Wellington is forced into a strategic retreat. His choice of a site for consolidation and defense, a ridge near Waterloo flanked by a solid farm house and a chateau, was critical to his success. Yet he counted on the Prussian army joining the fray, and they were very late in arriving after their bludgeoning at Ligny. Sharpe and Harper get to play a role in a miraculous beating off a nearly successful takeover of the farmhouse fortress. From this point on, Cornwell’s version of the battle gives emphasis to mistakes made by the French. Their poor coordination between infantry, artillery, and cavalry is covered. The French sending a huge cavalry force about a dozen times alone against the allies in square formation is a big focus of the narrative. Later, when the superior numbers of the French seems to have prevailed, Napolean sends the glorious, undefeated Imperial Guards, all dressed to the hilt in frippery, to deliver an expected final blow. But their keeping to orderly columns diminished their firepower. It was cool to get to experience Sharpe and Harper rallying the ragged and nearly officerless forces of their old regiment, the Prince of Wales’ Own Volunteers, to outflank and rout the Guards. (It should be noted that this regiment is fictional with a home base in South Essex instead of South Lancashire for the historical regiment).

The British Recoats fighting at the gate to the strategic farmhouse redoubt at the beginning of the Waterloo battle.

 
Map of action showing the French in blue dividing the Anglo-Dutch (red) and Prussians (black), defeating the latter at Ligny and the former at the crossroads of Quatre Bras, then facing Wellington near Waterloo, 10 miles south of Brussels.
 
As usual, Cornwell walks the line between showing the brutal and tragic realities of war and the uncaring, blind ambitions of most commanding officers while at the same time revealing the heroism and resourcefulness of many common soldiers and lesser officers. Again, Sharpe wins our hearts with his balance of irreverent cynicism and brilliant actions on behalf of the success of his fellow soldiers. If you have not read Sharpe tales, you would do best not start to with this one. But if you want to read it for a gritty, bloody profile of this critical battle, that would work fine. Cornell’s afterward makes it clear that the history of the battle suffers from very limited accounts from Wellington and likely bias from versions told from the French perspective.

When I read the excellent Wikipedia account, I learned how the engagement by the Prussians under Blücher near the end is considered another critical factor for the outcome. Cornwell takes pains to present evidence that Blücher delayed his arrival on purpose, so I don’t blame him for putting the British directed actions on center stage. Regardless, this definitive defeat of Napolean’s dream of empire was achieved though the highest butcher’s bill in history at the time: about 15,000 dead or wounded for Wellington’s army, 8,000 Blücher, and 25,000 for Napolean. It would be another 50 years for the Battle of Gettysburg to supersede that level of slaughter and another 50 years for the Battle of the Somme to supersede that.