Rating: 5/5

This was a difficult novel to read because it documents another shameful chapter in the U.S. Government’s brutal treatment of Native Americans who were desperately attempting to preserve their way of life. As Mari Sandoz writes in the preface of her novel, “Of all heroic attempts to preserve their people from starvation and disease, none outshines the 1,500-mile flight of the Northern Cheyennes from Indian Territory back to the Yellowstone country, through settled regions netted with telegraph, across three railroads, and straight through the United States Army,”

While the book is a novel, it’s based on extensive research using source materials, archival documents and interviews that tell the harrowing story of that journey during the winter of 1878-1879. It’s a story full of broken promises and unspeakable cruelty as the U.S government broke one treaty agreement after another, determined to round up the fleeing Indians and force them to surrender. But it’s also a story of unflagging courage and resiliency on the part of the Indians who were willing to put up with unspeakably harsh conditions in their desperate attempt to return to their homeland.

How they managed to elude the pursuing army as long as they did in sub-zero, blizzardy weather without adequate food, clothing or shelter is truly amazing and made for fascinating reading. “Some of the men had butchered the dead soldiers’ horses, and the weary women moved about the fires roasting the meat for the hungry. The rest was stripped and hung on brush over the coals to dry for the carrying. The skins were dried too, some stretched over fire pits to harden for quick-made moccasin soles. Other Indians tried to ease the hurt and the frozen ones as well as it might be done.” 

The book was fascinating to read for another reason as well because of the way it was written since Sandoz tried to capture aspects of the Cheyenne language. “It’s the story of a people with much that is difficult to say in white-man-words,” Sandoz explains, adding that she has tried to use a simple vocabulary as well as phrases and sentences drawn from Cheyenne life.

As heartbreaking as it is to read this book, I feel it should be required reading for anyone looking to understand the great cost in human life and misery that took place as the United States pursued its course of Manifest Destiny.