Rating: 4/5

Everybody knows about this fabulous writer of historical cozy mysteries, murders and crimes, so what can I add? Just that, don't read the first of the Brother Cadfael series and think, that isn't SO impressive, and stop there! This was better than A Morbid Taste for Bones, the very first in the series. I am no fan of mysteries, be they cozy or not, but the characters in this series draw you in. You cannot help but enjoy learning a spot of history among these good-souled people. Being in their company is comforting. You sigh with relief - there are nice people out there! What I particularly like is how it is not the historical events themselves that are stressed, but rather how these events play out in the lives of normal people. This is what draws me into reading about history, not the titles and dates and battle skirmishes. No, it is how life was for ordinary people living at the time. I like that the mystery itself is clearly explained. Brother Cadfael and Hugh Beringar explain how they reason, how they have come to their conclusions. Others may find this repetitive, but I love it. I hate tricky mysteries where I do not totally understand what is going on! Oh, and thirdly, the description of medieval life is superb!

Wow, a mystery novel series that I will be returning to. My dear GR friends have explained it is not necessary to read them in order. I loved listening to the audiobook, and given the generosity of Audible (see below), I will very soon continue with The Leper of Saint Giles and then The Sanctuary Sparrow and then Monk's Hood. What next? I guess Dead Man's Ransom or An Excellent Mystery, but the last is not set in lovely Shrewsburg! I would choose One Corpse Too Many, the second in the series, IF it were available. That is where you are first introduced to Hugh Beringar! Thanks, Gundula, for persistently stating that this series is wonderful. I must thank both Gundula and Shomeret for guiding me toward the next choices!

THIS IS IMPORTANT: I purchased from Audible the audiobook format of this book. It had release date: 010197. Narrator Johanna Ward. This version had a different cover. The recording was bad, although I could hear it. There was a background rumble and sometimes you heard an echo where there should be silence. You heard voices in the background. So I complained. Audible has another audiobook (release date 070510). It costs the same, has the same length and narrator, but the cover looks like the one above. I suggested to Audible that they exchange the two. First they offered to repay what I had paid for the book, but because I had bought it on sale the reimbursement would not cover the price of the other version since the sale is now over. What did they do? They gave me a credit to buy the other version AND repaid what I spent AND gave me a 30USD coupon! Now tell me if Audible isn't fantastic!!!! I love working with Audible. I want people to know how wonderful they are.

So, if you get this as an audiobook, buy the one that has release date 071510! IMPORTANT.

BTW - this is good! I love the description of the medieval times. I am not fussing about all the details, just enjoying the story. I am not going to get all stressed up and worry about the incriminating evidence. I am doing exactly as Gundula has advised me. You know what? I actually understand everything anyway! So far at least! This mystery is in fact very, very good. Thank you, Gundula, for recommending this one of the series! It is my third.