Rating: 5/5

I loved this book. Yes, it’s old fashioned and short and ends abruptly, but none of that is a problem for me. I loved both the main characters, the villainy was unexpectedly believable and the plot just rolled along seamlessly, without a single jarring moment. I’m on something of a binge-read with this author. She’s no longer around so the catalogue is limited, but I’m delighted that her family is making them available again for those of us who appreciate the traditional Regency style.

Here’s the premise: Diana Chalfont and her mother have been left almost destitute after Diana’s father, Sir Peter Chalfont, gambled away most of his fortune. Only the estate remains, and the dilapidated manor house, Chesdene Manor. The ladies live in the more modern wing, still reasonably habitable, while the main part of the house slowly decays. The new owner, Sir Sidney Chalfont, is a distant cousin, since the only other male heir, Robert, was drowned on a voyage to India many years ago. He’s a gambler, too, and has no interest in the estate, allowing the ladies to stay on there, and even giving permission for them to find a tenant for the dilapidated part of the building.

Astonishingly, one day a stranger turns up wanting to rent it, and even sets about repairing it. Christopher Richmond is an odd, uncommunicative man, but Diana’s not inclined to turn away anyone who’ll pay rent. He goes up to London while the repairs are under way, and by the sort of strange coincidence with which Regencies are littered, Diana is also going there with a friend, and there is much riding in Hyde Park, a ball or two, and an outing to Richmond. No, this book is not exactly treading new ground, but it’s none the worse for that.

There really isn’t much more to say about this. The mystery of Mr Richmond was blindingly obvious from about page 3, Sir Sidney’s activities were easily understood, and there were two side romances which were uncomplicated and (frankly) rather forgettable. I was a bit puzzled by why there was no mention of the income from the Chesdene estate - there should have been tenant farmers and the like providing some income for Sir Sidney. I also wasn’t sure why he was awarded his baronetcy when there was still a remote possibility an heir with a better claim might yet turn up. The powers that be in these cases generally wait a long time before they pass over ‘missing’ heirs. He might have gained control of the estate, but certainly not the title. But it’s a trivial point.

I have to say that part of the reason I enjoyed this book so much is because of the two main characters. Mr Richmond is the strong, silent type, who’s also extremely competent in business, and even a little domineering (which was the norm for books of this age). He also has a rather quirky sense of humour, which I loved. I think he was meant to be slightly spooky in a sort of Gothic way, but Diana doesn’t see him that way, and neither did I. As for Diana, she works rather well for modern audiences, I think. She’s feisty and independent-minded, good at everything and kind to everyone - that makes her sound like a bit of a Mary Sue, but she has a lot of self-deprecating charm. As for Sir Sidney - yes, he’s a bit of a buffoon, but he’s foolish rather than wicked, and I like to think that he’ll reform and live a blameless life henceforth.

This is a short and sweet read, clearly influenced by Georgette Heyer but none the worse for that. A lovely, easy read with a pleasant hero and heroine. I’d have liked a bit more emphasis on the romance, but it’s typical of the era, so I won’t criticise it for that. Five stars.