Rating: 5/5

Absolutely amazing! A must, must read!

I took out these notes from my listening and I read them every morning, as soon as I wake up.

~The quality of my life is the quality of how I talk to myself.

~The quality of your life is the quality of how you communicate with yourself and with others.

~Communication:
7% is words
55% is physiology (Facial expressions, body postures, breathing patterns, etc.)
38% is tonality (the tone of voice that a person uses)

~Lessons from Jim Rohn:
No matter what happens to you in your life, it's not what happens that makes the difference in the quality of your life, but rather what you do with what happens.
For things to get better for me, I'd have to get better.
For things to change in my life, I'd have to change.

~Personal power means the ability to act, the ability to take action.

~Key to power points:
Energy
Skills (a. The skill/ability to specifically define exactly what it is that you want | b. The skill/ability to specifically define exactly what others want and then fill other's needs quickly and elegantly.)

~Keys to duplicate success of someone else, model their:
Beliefs
Mental syntax (In what order/sequence they use their five senses)
Physiology (Facial expressions, body postures, breathing patterns, etc.)

~Disciplines of success:
I always act from personal power --» I realise that there are no failures, there are only results/outcomes. You always succeed in producing a result/outcome. Now, it may not be the one that you intended but that is okay because now you know how you produced that result and then, you can make a subtle change and produce a new result
I am totally responsible for my life and my world + I am in charge of my life and my world + I create my life and my world --» Because if you're not, then who is?
I am always stretching --» If you can't, you must! If you want to develop a skill, you don't need talent or tremendous amounts of study, you just need the willingness to stretch yourself on a consistent basis
Model someone who is already producing the result that you want --» Follow this model and when you don't know what to do, act as if you do (that is, if I did know, what would I do?)
I am committed to unconscious competence rather than cognitive understanding --» You do not have to understand everything! Unconscious competence is when you don't have to think about things, they just flow and you just produce the results. Cognitive understanding is when you understand all the details and you understand why things work and so forth
I always act from personal integrity --» Integrity means wholeness/being true to yourself. Integrity is a set of specific beliefs about how you operate in your world. You can not go out in the world and impose your beliefs on someone who has different set of beliefs and then say, you're out of integrity. However, what you can say is that your integrity is different than mine. Always remind yourself this in a human conflict, "No matter how thin you slice it, there will always be two sides." ― Baruch Spinoza
I always lie with integrity --» My beliefs are only just my own and that they maybe inaccurate (a lie) even though I believe them to be true and by saying them to be a lie, I'm reminding myself that these beliefs are just beliefs, they're not written in stone and someday I might change them if I found something bigger or better or something that empowers me and others in a better way. As long as my beliefs are true, I need to make sure that my daily actions match my beliefs.
The meaning of communication is the response that you get --» A lot of people have been taught that if you communicate with somebody and they don't get your communication, then that's their stuff! This is not true as it doesn't enhance your relationship with them at all. What you need to understand and remember is that the result that you've produced is because of how you used your physiology, tonality and words. So, what you want to be, is committed to producing results in your communications that work and not about making somebody wrong because they have different associations to those physiology, tonality and words. So, if you want to produce a different result, then all you need to do is just change your approach of communication. You keep changing your approach of communication until you get communication that works. A lot of people say that intention means everything, that is also not true! Intention means nothing, all intention does is provide a direction, results means everything.
I'm committed to do WEIT (whatever it takes) to succeed without harming another person --» Commitment to this is like a glue that holds the rest of the commitments together. Commitment is the most powerful tool that you have as a human being. Once you become committed to something, you will produce that result and that's the bottom line!

~The key to success in life is to go from interest to commitment.

~Seven traits that are required to be successful and that all successful people have:
Passion --» An obsessive reason/purpose that drives you, gets you out of the bed in the morning and makes you want to not go to the bed at night
Belief --» Have supportive belief systems and believe in your ability to achieve
Strategies --» Organise the way you do things and the way you communicate. Develop a way of approaching the use of your skills that consistently produces the results that you desire
Values --» Be really clear about what's most important in your life. Part of you wants to be work selfishly and part of you wants to be of a really huge help to your family. Discover a way to balance your values, so that all of the values are being developed, so that all of the values are working together, so that no internal battle is going on. So, look at your values and look at the ways in which you can have your values working together rather than fighting each other.
Energy --» Learn how to eat and exercise in a way that will maximise your day-to-day energy levels.
Bonding Power --» In order to really be happy in our lives, we need to feel connected to others. If you get to the top of the mountain of success by yourself alone, you'll probably jump off.
Communication Skills --» Develop your communication skills of how to communicate with yourself and with others. Remember, it's not what happens that makes the difference, but rather how we communicate to ourselves about what's happened that makes the difference.