Rating: 4/5

In vino veritas

According to roman historian Tacitus some Germanic peoples counseled only while drinking wine, because they believed that the drunk always speak true.

Wine is no longer necessary to loosen one's tongue since Leo Kall developed the drug called Kallocain. Kall is a chemist and the narrator of (t)his story. He is living in Chem(istry)town #4 in a nation called Worldstate. Like everyone else he is a fellow soldier and his work and after hours are filled with duties for the state. He is married with three children and they are living in a small apartment. Camera and microphones (called police eyes and ears) are installed in every room. Kall is actually a rather mediocre citizen until he finds the formula for this new drug. When administered, Kallocain forces people to answer each question truthfully, and to reveal their feelings and thoughts to the interrogators. This comes in quite handy for the state because: From thoughts and feelings words and actions are born. How is it possible that thoughts and feelings are the private property of the individual? Does not the whole fellow soldier belong to the state? To whom do his thoughts and feelings belong if not the state? Until today there was just no way to control them – but now the agent is found.
(translated by me) The dystopian world (or utopian, depending from where you look at it) is impressively portrayed. The author was clever enough not to overload the story with too much technical stuff that is either incomprehensible, or has become outdated already. The story focuses on the main character, his psyche, and its immediate surroundings. From the first page the reader knows that Kall is serving a long sentence and he tells his story from prison. One of the questions is why. The answer is not revealed until the very end and it was not what I thought it was. And then there is some kind of afterword that gives the book an additional and unexpected twist. This finally gave the book its fourth star.

The book was written in 1940, so it lies right in the middle between Huxley's Brave new world and Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four. I would argue that Kallocain is neither much better or worse than these two works. The reason this book is not so well known is probably because a) it's from a Swedish author, and b) it's from a female author. Both of these reasons are no reason at all to avoid the book. I admit I had some problems with the prose. Some parts in the middle seem a little rigidly and awkward. But that's probably just the German translation I read. Recommended!