Rating: 3/5

This book inspired one of the greatest head-scratchers in the history of film adaptations when Hollywood decided that Burglar would feature Whoopi Goldberg playing a white male and Bobcat Goldthwait would be perfect as a lesbian dog groomer.

I got to meet Lawrence Block while he was on a book tour for Hope to Die, and I asked him if he knew what prompted the movie producers to have Whoopi play Bernie. Even though it was obvious that he’d answered this about a million times before Block patiently explained that he had no input on the film version, and that the story he heard was that initially Bruce Willis was supposed to be Bernie and Whoopi was cast as Carol. However, Willis bowed out, and some genius got the brilliant idea to have her play Bernie which then led to gender swapping Carol into Bobcat Goldthwait. And thus cinema history was made….

Professional burglar Bernie Rhodenbarr just wanted to get his teeth cleaned, but his dentist Carl Sheldrake has a proposal for him. Sheldrake’s ex-wife Crystal reamed him in their divorce settlement, and he’d like to get some payback by having Bernie steal her large collection of valuable jewelry. Bernie could use the cash so he agrees to what seems like an easy payday. 

However, after he’s broken into her apartment and collected the jewels, Crystal returns unexpectedly with a gentleman friend, and Bernie has to hide in a closet while the two make with the bow-chick-a-bow-wow. Before he can escape, Crystal winds up murdered and adding insult to injury the killer stole the briefcase full of loot that Bernie had collected. 

Bernie is determined to recover the jewels he stole fair and square so he plays amateur sleuth with the help of Sheldrake’s pretty dental hygienist. However, he soon finds himself the primary suspect when the cops learn that he was in the apartment.

This is the second book featuring Bernie, and Block delivers a witty and off-beat mystery with the morally challenged burglar. Like most of Block’s stuff there’s a lot of fun conversations that veer off into unexpected directions, and there’s an interesting solution to who killed Crystal and why. My only gripe was that despite what the presence of Bobcat in the movie would lead you to believe, this early in the series Bernie hasn’t met his best friend Carol yet so I missed their goofy interactions.