Rating: 5/5

On Mark Twain: Only the Half of It!

"It was a ripping distance from one end of that man's head to t'other."

In sharing this quote of the Undertaker about his corpse, I feel as though I were digging through Twain's entire oeuvre, exhuming the whole of the man's bones to take the measure of his genius. It was indeed a ripping distance from one end of his work to the other. And, this is not even the half of the library that is Mark Twain's creation. 

As I mentioned in my review of The Gilded Age, which was cowritten by Charles Warner and Mark Twain, I ordered this two volume hardback set of Twain's Unabridged works hoping that first novel was included. But, it is not in either volume. So I ordered that separately, and finished The Gilded Age in April, since it wasn't included here. I started this in May, so it has taken some two months to read. Volume One contains not only five full-length novels and travelogues, but numerous short stories and humorous sketches, a witty review of James Fenimore Cooper's books, and Opening Remarks, by Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. It also gives publication info before each work in the volume. I am listing below the complete Table of Contents for this book. 

This is an astounding collection of Twain's work, and both of the two volumes are huge to hold. You will need a reading table, or desk to handle this collection... certainly not a portable work. But, the binding is nice and it should last through many readings and years on the shelf. Of course, I'll be the first to confess that I am impressed by the cover and the heft of this tome. It looks great, and even has the gilt page edges. The print is normal sized as well, so the almost 1300 pages per volume were put to good use. 

It would be difficult for me to choose between Twain's novels, because I have loved them all since early childhood. The Connecticut Yankee, The Prince and the Pauper, Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn all peopled my imagination, written indelibly on my heart. Pudd'nhead Wilson is in the next volume, but I already met him in a recent collection of sixteen short stories. Twain's intuitive recognition of the nature of humans of all races is present in most of his work, but Pudd'nhead Wilson is possibly the best on that front. As this collection shows, though, this great American wrote across several genres. And, who can but love all his characters?! Even the great Ernest Hemingway and Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. loved Twain's characters. 

Whether he is writing about a recherche donkey and a rebel gang in the Civil War, or what would be today a $25,000 Grand Tour of Europe, or disobedient boys and fussing Aunts; Twain will have your attention with the scenes and the sinners and saints of his boyhood in Nineteenth Century America. Of course, Tom and Huck were written from life. Huck was modeled from a boy the author knew growing up, and Tom was a composite of four boys, who was named after a fireman Clemens met in San Francisco. I planned to take a break before digging into volume 2, but I don't imagine I would be able to wait to read all that is to come. But, remember that word Unabridged only stretches so far in the book industry. There are more works by Twain that are not included here. But, they are out there to be had.

TOC of this Volume 1: 
The Weather in This Book
Opening Remarks, by Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. 
A Short Note From the Editor 
"After" Jenkins
The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County 
The Innocents Abroad 
The Undertaker's Chat 
The Danger of Lying in Bed 
Lionizing Murderers
A True Story Repeated Word for Word as I Heard It
An Encounter with an Interviewer 
About Barbers
The Facts Concerning the Recent Carnival of Crime in Connecticut 
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer 
The Journals of Germany 
The Prince and the Pauper 
On the Decay of the Art of Lying 
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn 
A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court 
The Private History of a Campaign That Failed 
The 41,000,000 Bank Note 
Playing Courier 
Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offenses 
The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg