Rating: 4/5

Emily Eden's two best known short novels, THE SEMI-ATTACHED COUPLE and THE SEMI-DETACHED HOUSE, have often led the author to comparisons with Jane Austen. This is a little unfair to Miss Austen, whose novels are more finely nuanced. Here are some of the ways Emily Eden's two best-known novels differ from those of Jane Austen: 

 ~ They were written about a generation later, ca. 1830, and published two generations later, ca. 1860. 

 ~ They are set, specifically, in the newly suburbanizing Victorian milieu of row houses. The settings are quite specific, in fact. While I think of the typical Austen novel as involving a squire with a large house in the country admired by a young woman with not enough money settled on her per annum, Eden's novels talk specifically of the new suburban settings, method of construction, look of the houses (which one can see even today, run to the similar), and of course the socio-economic place of people who inhabit them. Austen's novels are therefore a bit "grander" in locale but Eden's have a great deal of historical and sociological specificity. 

 ~ I can't quantify this, but it seems to me that typically Austen's "Me so witty" lines come from one person arguing with another, typically across a gender divide; while Eden's "Me so witty" lines more often come from the author who is directly satirizing a specific lifestyle. 

 ~ Both Austen's and Eden's novels depend a great deal on stock characters: in both you'll find the virtuous young woman, the well-set-up young man inclined to sloth or cynicism (whom marriage may or may not 'improve'); the overtalkative auntie or other interfering sort; and a cast of supporting friends and relatives whose job it is largely to reflect credit on the virtuous heroine. In fact, characterizations are probably the greatest area of similarity between Austen's and Eden's novels. 

 ~ Both sets of novels have a great deal of humor; Austen's tend toward the warmly philosophical and Eden's to the more overtly funny (a by-product of her satire). 

 ~ Eden's novels are easier to read; or so it seems to me. Austen fans may reply that "easy to read" equates to "facile" in Eden's novels, but even hardcore Janites won't know what they're missing if they don't try, will they? 

The take-with on SEMI-ATTACHED and SEMI-DETACHED are that people read them having read Austen's novels several times. That will work, of course, but they are fun all on their own. 
.