Rating: 5/5

This book has been on my radar for years, ever since it was cited by Jeffery R. Holland in an important address given some time ago. I wish I had read it earlier. I wish everyone would read it. Each time I hear of another couple with children breaking up, I can't help but feel sorrow for the short-sighted decisions of one (or two) adults who are all too willing to disrupt their children's well being for a lifetime because of their own wants and needs.

In sobering detail, David Blankenhorn documents the undoing of the time-honored role of fathers in contemporary society to the point where "experts" now advocate for other models of fatherhood, and even redefining the term father itself. What a legacy the feminist movement and its resulting divorce culture have left us with families and society increasingly in shambles. 

In a very calm tone, the author methodically cites study after study demonstrating statistically worse outcomes for children raised in fatherless homes, particularly those whose mothers are divorced, living with boyfriends, or who have chosen motherhood absent any father at all (through artificial insemination, one-night-stands, single-parent adoption, etc.). And he does so by quoting the outlandish ideas and philosophies of "leading experts," people with PhDs who believe that their learning also makes them wise, who advocate for "mix 'n max parenthood," androgynous parenting (men becoming more like women and vice versa), and otherwise demonizing and relegating masculinity and manhood to the bygone ages of barbarism. Hollywood and contemporary culture celebrate the "modern family" and for decades now society's focus has been on improving methods for getting out of marriage ("better divorce"), not preserving it, and we place a premium on child-support payments and alternative father figures while ignoring that what children really want and need are their fathers.

The author offers interesting perspective about this phenomenon being deeply rooted in the core ideals of America at its foundation, which itself was a divorce from Great Britain and monarchical rule. The American ideal prizes the rights and freedoms of the individual. But like anything taken to an excess, idolizing the power of one, unfettered, can leave many more damaged in the wake.

In an age where we worship individualism and the right of two spouses (even now "mix 'n match" spouses where mothers and fathers are both expendable) to part paths and "find happiness again" and fulfillment in new relationships, in an age where we value emasculated men and "empowered" women who deny the undeniable reality of complementarity that each sex brings to relationships and parenting, too often we do so at the expense of children, and at our own peril. 

Children do not need more nurturing, school curriculums, books and other media affirming their plight as children without parentage, teaching them that they have "many fathers," or that some families don't have fathers at all, and telling them "they are all right," and that it's all okay. The author clearly points out that such wishful thinking does nothing more than impose adult fantasy on children and minimize the child's reality which does not change. This book is a sad reminder that now, 18 years after it was written, we live in an even braver new world where the adult's wants are valued far above what is best for children, and where the prevailing message is that "it's all good" despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. What children really want is their fathers. What children really need is their fathers.