Rating: 3/5

“It was Christmas Eve. Big snowflakes fluttered slowly through the air like white feathers and made all of the Heavenly Valley smooth and white and quiet and beautiful.” 

This was how young Betty MacDonald began the bedtime stories she shared with her sister about two orphans, Nancy (age 10) and Plum (age 8), who spent Christmas Eve in a barn (much like the baby Jesus). MacDonald never forgot those stories, and many years and books later, she wrote a version that is a delightful classic for children called Nancy and Plum.

The story has the right ingredients that make for a pleasing tale. There is a pair of orphaned sisters rejected by their only relative, a wealthy uncle who would not suffer children. They are starved and ill-treated by an evil matron (Mrs. Monday) of a Boarding House (ironically) in Happy Valley where they lodged. (The standard horrors reminiscent of those doled out by a wicked stepmother include: prunes and burnt oatmeal for food; clothes and shoes long outworn; no supper for imagined wrongdoing; no picnic or school program to guarantee a childhood as joyless as possible; a favored niece of Mrs. Monday who is a spiteful tattle-tale). However, Nancy and Plum are spunky and resourceful children who make the best of their appalling living conditions. They are subjected to gross injustice and unfairness, and our hearts bleed for them. Fortunately, kindly teachers (Miss Waverly and Miss Appleby) and compassionate neighbors (the Campbell couple and old Tom) root for the oppressed children. Of course, parts of Nancy and Plum’s flight from Happy Valley strain credulity. Yet this is a story where the implausible is permissible because there must be a brighter Christmas Eve for two children who deserve better. The story closes with the same lines that open this book but with a Christmas Eve for Nancy and Plum that will make your heart sing.

First published in 1952, Nancy and Plum is a comic, light-hearted and nostalgic children’s book. I love it that the girls found comfort, courage and hope in the books read to them on library visits. That they gained “wisdom, understanding and humor way beyond their years” from literature will endear this book to the Goodreads community.