Rating: 2/5

All of this is just my personal opinion about a book of entirely fictional characters. 

I found this to be one of the more dismal historical romances churned out by the prolific Marion Chesney. This one felt to me completely recycled, and chock full of sometimes nasty cliches, endless "misunderstandings", and often repeated Gothic plots. As a little hint, whenever one of Chesney's characters in any of her b0oks express a longing to go out sailing in a boat, or swimming, you can bet your boots there will be a failed murder attempt on the heroine. 

We are introduced to Kitty, a typical young Middle Class daughter of a "Cit", living a miserable home life. Out of the blue she magically has her prayers answered when a fabulously wealthy and handsome aristocratic Hero asks her to marry him, upon first sight. He needs her money, and she wants to leapfrog a few levels of class to become a titled Lady. 

She should be grateful and eternally happy, right? Wrong.

As is usually the case, the previously unhappy Heroine quickly forgets what a miserable life she had been living, and sets out to punish and spurn her new husband for (quite naturally) not being deeply in love with the gauche young total stranger he had wed. 

Kitty is fortunately saved from a bizarre enforced social life of cruel society acquaintances who ridicule her as a "Shop Girl" by a Lady who patiently tries to train her to grow up and stop acting like a spoiled brat, but Jennie ignores most advice and relentlessly flirts with anything in a pair of trousers, just to punish her husband, and also because she is "sick of old people". This leads to a pattern of routine disillusionment because her schemes end disastrously and not the way she had planned; always followed by a flood of tears. She's not quick on the uptake, so she keeps picking herself up, dusting herself off and throwing herself into one bad plan after another. 

 One bit of advice Kitty does follow, which is to be even ruder to people than they have been to her. This is successful, so she gets carried away and becomes even more obnoxious than her tormentors. 

Enter a jealous, evil Mistress of her husband who sets out in a fit of Gothic drama to try and have Kitty murdered. After 
  endless
 tedious failed attempts, I found myself becoming disappointed that none of them had been successful.

Yes, of course Kitty finds happiness at the end (this is a Historical Romance, after all), but I don't personally give that marriage much of a vote of confidence.

Chesney was capable of greatness as a writer, but churned out such a plethora of books that in my opinion some of her books were woefully substandard.