Rating: 4/5

3.5 out of 5 for this reader folks

Border Bride by Amanda Scott is a historical romance set in the 16th century when Mary Queen of Scots was being er "housed" at the Tower or London by her cousin Queen Elizabeth. i always love a HR that centers around real historical facts and that is exactly what this novel was.

Our leading Lady Mary Kate has enjoyed the life as a lady living with her father in the highlands. While visiting other family close to the Borders of Scotland/England, Mary Kate is somewhat captivated by the glare of a gentleman and begins to "flirt" .. well little did she know that flirting means a whole something else to this gentleman. After a rather uncomfortable situation, Mary Kate is thankful she'll never have to see this man again and begins her journey home back to the highlands.

Little does she realize, Mary Kate has caught the fancy of Sir Adam Douglas, servant and close friend to King James, loyal soldier and all around loyal man. Off Sir Adam goes to speak with Mary Kate's father. much to Mary Kate's dismay, Adam wants her as his wife.

After some discord, they are married (although Mary Kate refuses to lower her highland sassy pride and fall in love and Adam is too set in his ways to realize that a woman is not a pet to obey him) and are on their journey to the border together.

I loved the push and pull we got from each character. One minute I found myself agreeing with Adam and wish that MK would smarten up, and then other times I would feel bad for MK and wish that Adam would get his head out of his butt! They are an endearing couple and to see them find their way to each other was a pleasure to read!

I do wish there was more action with regards to the story. The location of this book was set at such a volatile location at such a volatile time that there could of been non-stop action in the midst of the relationship building. Don;t get me wrong, there was action but I am such a history lover that I wish we would of had more! LOL

Overall, as my first read of Amanda Scott, I will say that I will continue reading her books. She has a comfortable style that drew me in and tells a lovely romantic tale!

HAPPY READING! :)

ARC provided by netgalley for an honest review.