Rating: 5/5

I loved the Trixie Belden series as a young teenager. The tales of her sleuthing with help from her brothers and friends were my favorites for years. The final books in the series published in the early 1980s were the first books I ever pre-ordered. I babysat my spoiled nephew to earn the cash to buy those books. At one time I had the entire set. All matching. Before I went to college, I sold the whole set to a 12-year old. I hope she loved them as much as I did! This year I decided to revisit the Bob-Whites of the Glen and Sleepyside, NY out of nostalgia. I have been working my way through this series a little bit at a time and enjoying every minute! Some of the books were re-released in new editions, but most are long out of print. Luckily, it is easy to find used copies cheaply. 

The Mystery on Cobbett's Island is the 13th book in the series. There are 39 books in total. I enjoyed this sailing and treasure hunt themed story. The kids go on vacation to Cobbett's Island. Trixie finds an old letter hidden in a book, sending the kids on a treasure hunt for hidden money. The story is entertaining and the mystery is light, but interesting. Totally age appropriate for middle grade kids. The series is definitely dated, but still fun to read. 

I love the book lists in the back of these old paperbacks...in the back of the old copy of Mystery at Cobbett's Island that I have it lists "The Meg Mysteries'' as a recommended series. I did a little bit of research....the Meg Mysteries is a series with a middle grade age amateur sleuth written in the late 60s. Sounds like a good series to try when I'm done re-visiting Trixie! 

The first six books of the Trixie Belden series were written by Julie Campbell. The rest of the series was published under the pen-name Kathryn Kenny. The books were written by various authors all using this same pseudonym. It's very similar to how the Nancy Drew books were published. I wish I knew the names of the actual writers who penned the various books..... I never knew that Kathryn Kenny wasn't a real person until I was an adult. I hope all the writers who anonymously penned these great books for kids realized how much enjoyment they brought to all of us who read their work!