Rating: 4/5

This is among the most comprehensive introductions to magickal theory ever written. Caveat emptor, Crowley makes it quite easy to spiral into his system, Thelema, at the exclusion of the traditional Western paths, i.e. the Golden Dawn, (from which Crowley emerged). It’s good to read other authors along with Crowley to gain a holistic understanding of the Western paradigm. That being said, this book in conjunction with Magick Without Tears, is a pretty thorough introduction to the principles of ceremonial magick. If one is willing to make the investment, Liber ABA is a large hadcover which contains the two books of Book Four, Magick in Theory and Practice, and an explaination of Thelema. Crowley was a genius, and regardless of what one feels about his dark delivery, personal bigotries, or ego-maniacal nature, his works stand alone in quality, quantity and scope. 

Book 4 is a must read for any pursuing the Western Hermetic path. The first part of Book 4 deals with the Eastern practices for discipline of the mind and body. Yoga, Asana and Pranayama are among those discussed. Crowley was among the first Westerners to spend time in India studying these practices, and then introduce them to the West. What is unique about Crowley's presentation is he demystifies them and tells the practitioner exactly what purpose they serve and what goal the practitioner is hoping to achieve.

The second part of Book 4 deals with the Temple, Altar, robe and working tools of the magician, how these should be thought of, approached and constructed. This is the philosophy of the external accoutrements of the ceremonial magician, which are, to an extent, extensions of the magician him/herself. Liber ABA in conjunction with Magick Without Tears, offer a fairly comprehensive introduction to the principles of practical, ceremonial magick. 

However, before one could even think about Practical Qabalah, they should have at least a cursory understanding of Qabalistic theory, and the Tarot. For an introduction to the Qabalah, The Mystical Qabalah, by Dion Fortune is a great start. For the Tarot, The Book of Thoth , by Aleister Crowley, is the best, but like Book Four, or Magick Without Tears, may be a bit advanced. The Qabalistic Tarot, by Robert Wang, is a great place to start. By comparing four different decks including the Thoth Deck, it also provides the reader with the changes Crowley made to the traditional attributions and the reasoning behind them. The Book of Tokens, by Paul Foster Case, may also be of assistance.

An online version of Book 4, part one, can be found here, and part two can be found here.
An online version of Magick Without Tears can be found here.