Rating: 5/5

The Chinese Maze Murders is my absolute favourite in the Judge Dee series, which spans 17 books in all - including Van Gulik's original translation of Dee Gong An and two short story-collections. Some of these (short) stories were reworked into graphic novels by Van Gulik and graphic artist Frits Kloezeman, to be published in Het Utrechtsch Nieuwsblad and other Dutch papers from 1964-1985.

I have been reading and re-reading these books since I was about ten years of age. History, fiction and mystery are neatly combined into detective stories that follow the typical pattern in Chinese detective fiction of the Magistrate solving various cases - which may be interconnected, but not always are - simultaneously. In the Maze Murders, tying in character background with the plot (specifically, one of Dee's lieutenants, Chiao Tai) makes for a very compelling read. 
The case of the murder in the locked room is a classic, often used in detective fiction, and given a fresh spin (if one can speak of "fresh" in the case of a book written in 1950!) by the presence of two murder weapons. It ties in so very beautifully to the case of the hidden testament and that of the missing girl, interconnecting the three through circumstance rather than by design.

The writing is practical and unpretentious, and though it may not hold against today's expectations of prose, I personally have always liked Van Gulik's mix of humour and gravity.

The historicity of the book (and the rest of the series) is interesting: though it takes place during the T'ang dynasty, around 670 AD, the description is of Ming dynasty life. This is in keeping with the Chinese author's penchant for casting a story that takes place in the past in contemporary terms. 
Invariably, the five books in the "main" series (The Chinese Gold, Lake, Bell, Maze and Nail Murders), are preceded by a chapter written from the viewpoint of a Ming dynasty official, merchant, or other personage, who, following a ghostly encounter of some sort, recounts one of the specific Judge Dee mysteries. 

A definite recommendation for anyone who enjoys either ancient China, detective novels, or both!