Rating: 5/5

May 27, 1991: Memorial Day and that means one thing. Our community pool is open for the summer. Usually Memorial Day in Chicago means snow and the cancellation of baseball and barbecues. One year my softball game got snowed out, and another year (later on) my parents had had enough and we went to a local resort hotel with an indoor pool for the entire weekend. There was no snow on tap in Chicago’s forecast in 1991, only basketball, which left me with a huge dilemma. To this day, I pine for time in water, but for the first time our Bulls were about to sweep Detroit’s Bad Boy Pistons out of the playoffs en route to the finals. What is a 11 1/2 year old supposed to do? Easy. Listen to the Bulls game from the pool loudspeakers and bask in the joy of radio broadcaster Johnny “Red” Kerr announcing that the Bulls had vanquished the Pistons once and for all. The Bulls ascendancy, and with it the next eight years of my teen years experiencing the thrills of them winning six times, had begun. All of us at the pool cheered and the party began, mirroring the globalization of American culture throughout the decade. The age of Michael Jordan as an international superstar had arrived, and as a young person living in the Chicago area, I was lucky, fortunate, privileged to be along for the ride. 

I read David Halberstam’s Playing for Keeps as soon as he published it in 1999. I had recently turned twenty but was old enough to be jaded by the Bulls’ breakup because I followed their every move in the newspapers. As soon as the team completed their Last Dance championship in 1998, management ran champion caliber players and their coach out of town. In hindsight I am convinced that in the shortened 1999 season, Jordan could have won again, but that is a debate for another time and place. The 1999 Chicago sports scene was dismal: the Cubs, Bears, Blackhawks, and now Bulls competed for a place in the second division. Meanwhile a college quarterback named Tom Brady was making a name for himself, but no one at the time knew that he would surpass Jordan in championships won. In 1999 any book allowing me to relive the Bulls championship glory was a must read. The last events had only occurred a year earlier, but basketball was not the same for me, and still isn’t. When Jordan once approached Halberstam about collaborating on a biography with him, the author noted that he should wait until he had been retired for at least ten years, then they could talk. At that point, Jordan had elevated himself as a businessman and team owner, and Halberstam had tragically been killed in a car accident, so this dream team partnership never came to fruition. Years have passed, and I still watch Jordan highlights on YouTube. I also decided to make David Halberstam one of my featured authors this year, and a quarter century later, it was more than time to reread this gem. While Halberstam was most notably a historian and journalist, he loved sports and wrote several sports books. After twenty five years, I could through adult eyes appreciate the scope of Jordan’s career and take a trip down memory lane of my youth. 

Michael Jordan’s career arc mirrors my childhood perfectly: he joined the Bulls as a legend in the making the year I started kindergarten and won his last championship following my freshman year of college. In essence, Michael Jordan was my childhood. David Halberstam did not set out to write a new biography of Air Jordan. By 1998, many books had already been written about him, my favorite being Hang Time by Bob Greene, and he had even starred in Space Jam with Bugs Bunny. What Halberstam set out to do was to tell the story of Michael Jordan as a cultural icon. In the 1990s, he was the most famous American in the world, rivaled only by Princess Diana. He grew the NBA from a fledgling league to a multibillion dollar conglomerate, coming of age when cable emerged on the airwaves. Before joining the Bulls, Jordan also signed a deal with Nike, which lead to endorsement deals with notable American brands across the advertising spectrum. I still remember his classic Big Mac commercial with Larry Bird and Charles Barkley as well as his ads for Wheaties, Hanes, and Coke. His Be Like Mike jingo for Gatorade has remained so popular that it still surfaces on the air from time to time. Between the emergence of cable and the branding of America in the 1980s, Jordan came of age as a professional athlete at a perfect time to market himself. His international fame continued to grow as he continued to win, and kids today still wear his gear. This humble man from Wilmington, North Carolina had no idea what he was about to create by signing on with Nike. With that partnership, he allowed the ad men on Madison Avenue to be race blind and took his first step toward becoming the international star that he is today. 

Although Halberstam told Jordan’s story from the angle of how he changed the cultural outlook of sports during his career, he still told the story of Jordan’s career as well. Every key moment is here from being cut from his high school team, to his days at North Carolina, to his Bulls’ career, with chapters thrown in on the Dream Team and his hiatus as a minor league baseball player. Jordan did not grant interviews but did allow Halberstam access to many of his close friends, which gave the book an extra layer of introspection that many Jordan biographies do not have. All the key players, both teammates and rivals, are here. Halberstam details how the Bulls’ management took credit for the championships even though they never stepped on the court, leading to a feud of epic proportions between the players and coach with the front office. In my house, we referred to them as the two evil Jerrys, who were not actually evil, just an egomaniac desiring more credit than he actually deserved. Coach Jackson, Pippen, Rodman, the Pistons, the Lakers, the Jazz. The entire career arc is here, expertly crafted by Halberstam, who allowed me to relive all the happy events that I got to experience growing up in Chicago. Even though I am a walking sports encyclopedia, I still savored every moment, desiring to know how the games played themselves out, even though they all happened more than twenty five years ago. From this well crafted homage to the greatest to lace them up, it shows just how special he was of all these years later if I felt more than just nostalgia reading about them. This is the effect that Halberstam desired: that Jordan was more than a balletic, game changing player, he was a cultural icon, and still is, who changed the way people viewed the modern athlete. Since his retirement from the Bulls, kids today still wear his gear and want to be like Mike. 

June 14, 1998: I’m home from my first year of college, where I managed to watch the opening rounds of the playoffs. I knew it would be the last one, and I wanted to savor each and every game. It is Sunday night, and the game is in prime time. If Jordan plays, the NBA on NBC is an event, and my family, at least the sports loving members of it, are locked in. My adrenaline is flowing, as it still does for big sporting events. I know that the Bulls are going to win, and sure enough they do, Jordan hitting the shot for the ages to win 87-86, willing his team to victory. Six championships in eight years, a feat unprecedented in this modern age of player movement. Not many champions could have scripted a perfect ending, but his Royal Airness did, his years with the Wizards not withstanding; however, he was the ultimate wizard on the court, Larry Bird once proclaiming that he is G-D disguised as Michael Jordan. The Bulls last dance is over; twenty two years later cable superstation ESPN would retell the season as a documentary. At age 18 1/2, a key facet of my childhood is over. I savored every moment, being fortunate to watch most Bulls games on television. All these years later, I rarely watch basketball although a young woman from my alma mater is bringing me back to the game. Kids might have grown up wanting to be like Mike, but they don’t play defense, desiring the highlights to put them on television. There will never be another person who comes along at a perfect time to market himself as a cultural superstar. David Halberstam was also one of the best and brightest in his field. I thank him for allowing me to relive all of these memories. 

5 🏀 stars