Rating: 2/5

The other day I read a really short children's book called FELITA by Nicholasa Mohr, published in 1979. It was strange how current one of the story's main plotlines was, considering the times we're living in now, with all the hate crimes accumulating and things don't seem to be getting better by getting "back to normal" As Gore Vidal said this country is the United States of Amnesia. We have yet to actually fix much in the way of hate and violence. It's about a girl named Felita whose Puerto Rician family decides to move to a better neighborhood, to start a new life. But things go quickly south when Felita is harassed by other girls, girls who don't look like her. She's called the N-word and told to "go back to her country." Sound familiar? Things get worse when her brother is beaten up for no reason and her mother is the victim of a prank that could be deadly. I really started to get angry reading this. Knowing very well that these racists are alive and well, even today. It made me upset because I wish I could understand people's fears and ignorance more. But even if I understood them, I don't think I'd like them any better. I'm against hate, but if you chose to hate, live in fear, and remain ignorant to life that happens around you, that's your choice, but the fact that you have to harass and beat up and resort to violence is on a totally different level that I will never really understand. SPOILER ALERT! What upset me about this book is the fact that the family moved back to their old neighborhood. That they were forced to evacuate this new life. That there wasn't a solution. I think it upset me because I don't know what the solution would have been for myself. It was upsetting to see the parallels of today, forty-something years later, and we're either right where we started, or worse, further back. END OF SPOILER! I do wish the book had spent more time on this issue, but after they move back, things got more back to friendships and changes within themselves. I would have liked a little more time on the racism, but as I said, in that time, what were they to do. This book was selected as a notable children's book in the field of social studies and is definitely a hard book to read and would be a wonderful book to teach. It's real and these kinds of stories need to be read and taught more in schools. I think the only way we're ever going to get out of this predicament is through educating, but it's hard to educate when so many people want to cut certain types of the curriculum from being taught. We're seeing an increase in hate crimes and violence. We all want things to go back to normal, but the normal wasn't any better. So when are we going to grow and overcome these things that keep holding us back? I don't have an answer, I just keep wondering. Anyway, a good, realistic book for children to read. Yes, there are moments you may not think it's appropriate to read, but you should. People of color actually have to deal with these kinds of issues on a daily basis. It should be important, if not easy, to teach your child that this kind of behavior is wrong and it's happening. Educate them. Stop keeping them in their own little corner of the world. The world will keep on being a dangerous place if you don't start educating people! Because it's not the people of color that are dangerous. It's the others that live in fear and ignorance that are the ones to fear. Because they sadly are the future. Very good book, but I did only give it three stars because I really was hoping for either more on the subject of the new neighborhood or some sort of solution to the problem. But again, it was the times and sadly those times have not really changed. Good book. Definitely worth the read.