Rating: 4/5

ENGAGING, ENTERTAINING, ENLIGHTENING AND POIGNANT.

“For them that will do ‘half’ when ‘all’ is called for; for them that will slip and slide through life at the edge of their minds, never once pushing into the interior to see what wonders are hiding there—content to drift along on whatever gets them by, ‘cheating’ themselves, ‘cheating’ the world, ‘cheating’ Nature! That is what “C” means, my dear child—”—page 44

“Eventually it comes to you: the thing that makes you exceptional, if you are at all, is inevitably that which must also make you lonely…”—page 137

Has it really been almost fifty-two years since ‘A Raisin in the Sun’ was first produced on the stage?

‘To Be Young, Gifted and Black: Lorraine Hansberry In Her Own Words,’ adapted by Robert Nemiroff, is a different reading experience. It is a montage of journals, letters, articles, talks, interviews, musings and creative output of a gifted and eloquent mind that somehow works to tell her story.

Recommendation: As much as I’m loath to leave my eReader on the shelf, ‘To Be Young, Gifted and Black’ is one dead-tree-book for which sacrificing the forest was worth it. It might, however, be dated material. I’m not sure whether or not Ms. Hansberry’s life, and times, and wisdom will resonate with today’s young and gifted. I’d hope that they might.

A word and a warning about the Vantage Book edition: Although it is of a nice, compact, size for carrying about; unless you have exceptionally good eyesight, and have an affinity for reading incredibly tiny, tiny, tiny print, I’d suggest you avoid this edition. 

Some more quotes from the book: 

“I wish to live because life has within it that which is good, that which is beautiful, and that which is love.”—page 11

“The only sinful people in the world were dull people.”—page 18

 “…the world will go on thinking and doing as it wants regardless. Who’s counting. Who even cares?”—page 171

“In life, adequate respect must be paid to the tenacity of the absurd in both human and natural affairs.”—page 176

“The acceptance of our present condition is the only form of extremism which discredits us before our children.”—page 213

Vantage Books, A Division of Random House, hardcover edition, 261 pages