Rating: 4/5

I admit I bought the book when my son was 9 months old (he's now 2), and never read it. I was sure it was going to tell me to let him "cry it out," and I didn't want to hear it. But I reached a breaking point with my 7 month old daughter this week and decided that I Had to give it a try, or quietly (?) go nuts. Sure enough, it does tell you to let 'em cry it out, but it backs up this advice so well - and allows enough flexibility - that I actually feel pretty good about it. In fact, as much as I hate the buzz word, I feel "Empowered" by it. 
So, five stars for the content; but only three for the presentation. Average is four, so that's what I rated it! 

Cliffs Notes I wrote for this book, plus some personal advice from getting three children through infancy. 

What I like about the content: there's a lot of solid scientific data underlying it. It's not based on a single doctor's observations or even a single study, but rather a fairly good set of studies on a variety of interconnected subjects. The advice is solid, practical, and - if you're patient - reasonably unambiguous, without feeling stuffy or inflexible. It's neither emotional nor judgmental. after reading (most) of it, I feel considerably more educated about sleep and sleep problems, and have a renewed commitment to helping my kids achieve healthy patterns. 

What I dislike about the presentation: It is Long, repetitive, and disorganized in a way that prevents you from simply scanning through the repeated advice to get to the new nuggets. I feel that a good editor could reduce this 450 page monster to 250 pages, and that's being generous. In fact, you could probably read any given chapter and get about 70-80% of the content right there, but the other unarguably important parts are scattered throughout. 
Especially in the first few "introductory" chapters, statements are made about childrens' sleep needs without specifying these childrens' ages - and everyone knows there's a vast difference between a 5 month old and a 15 month old! Some of the advice is even apparently contradictory: the tip "Never wake a sleeping child" is printed in bold within a few pages of two mentions of instances where you might need to wake a sleeping child. 100 pages later the contradiction is resolved by explaining that you should never wake a sleeping child unless it is specifically to help adjust their sleep schedule to a healthy norm. Ack! 
In fact, the whole first 150+ pages are essentially introductory, constantly hinting at things that will be covered in the following chapters, but leaving you afraid to simply quit and skip ahead lest you miss something foundational. 
In summary, what this book needs is some good Cliff Notes. I may write them myself if I don't find someone else has saved me the trouble!