Rating: 4/5

Trying to cash in on the rising popularity of home computers, 1985 gave birth to the successful franchise of WHERE IN THE WORLD IS CARMEN SANDIEGO? as an adventure game for the Apple II and Commodore 64 systems, among others. While less venturesome but with a much longer history and mostly for the fearless, Halloween, or All Hallows' Eve, also offered something for the adventurous. First practiced as 'souling' in England, begging the rich for soul cakes in exchange for praying for the souls of the givers and their friends, before crossing the Atlantic and thence turning into 'guising', trick or treating on Halloween didn't become all the rage in America until the mid- to late 1930s. Converting October 31st into a horror fest and tribute to the ghoulish probably took off with John Carpenter's HALLOWEEN in 1978. Thus, ruminating in the pit of hell that is the confection-driven holiday, THE ANIMAL HOUR treads into the frenzy that is ghouls, goblins, and snack-sized Goobers to find a savage killer in the City.

Somewhere shy of 240,000 miles from the moon, New York City is a moonscape. Gray; the people are gray, inside and out. None more so than Nancy Kincaid, who's also not sure who she is, where she's been, or where she's going. But she's been told not to forget eight o'clock, that's THE ANIMAL HOUR. Wandering about before the festivities start, Nancy Kincaid just received a big SHOCK TO THE SYSTEM, prompting thoughts of 'who in the world is Nancy Kincaid?' This, incidentally, would've been a good alternative title as it keeps the pages turning and minds wondering. Additionally, THE ANIMAL HOUR is also a frightening take on how easy it is to lose your anchor in society. That warm, comfy place where you "belong", and how difficult it is to subsist when you have nothing and you're all of a sudden no longer the person you used to be.

Emerging from the pages, it is said that God closed a door, but he opens a window. That window into Nancy's soul is dark, and she's trying to overcome the deep black fear within her. A woman who doesn't know herself, a poet with a younger photographer brother and his gf, a fed named Gus Stallone, and a severed head in a toilet. How they all fit together will be revealed in due time--until then, you don't know what it all means or adds up to, but you'd rather be in Philadelphia. Actually, it's a weird cornucopia of brutality, horror, and violence; the kind that perfectly illustrates New York City politics and the pathway to Gracie Mansion and Albany. One thing is for sure: NYC politicians will screw anybody.

When non-linear editing is done right, e.g., PULP FICTION, it's perfection. THE ANIMAL HOUR--not so much. It has a weird feel. Nonetheless, there are riveting ideas proffered--a serial killer hoping and praying to God in times of trouble, concepts such as floating the balloon, bad mayo, retro paternalistic modes, and lipstickhenge. Also making the cut is an interrogation that has an eerie Cohen Brothers, FARGO vibe. Eventually, it all comes down to how far does $25,000 take you to get clear of everyone and what are you willing to do for it. The heroine Kincaid, she's gotta kill someone at THE ANIMAL HOUR, 8pm; she just doesn't know where, or who. For that, she'll have to turn into Bad Nancy. Whether it's the cops, feds, poets, journalists, politicos, or just the crazy or insane, the clock's ticking and the beast is hungry on Halloween. In a race against time, it comes down to who's got the edge and who'll be left standing at THE ANIMAL HOUR.