Rating: 1/5

There are few more notorious films made in the last 50 years than ‘Caligula’. Originally developed by the American author Gore Vidal, then produced as a bizarre pornographic ‘epic’ by Penthouse Magazine’s Bob Guccione and sort of directed by Tinto Brass, it is legendary as a terrible movie that has offended most who have seen it. However, it has also aroused the curiosity of many who have seen it, or are at least familiar with the film’s history, or indeed those who are interested in the infamous Caligula himself. As one who has seen the movie and is definitely intrigued by all that comes with it, it seemed right to tackle the film’s novelisation.

Sadly, this book is a fairly substandard work of hack-writing that revels in poor prose, swathes of pornographic text and an occasional nod to the ancient sources for Caligula’s life. One thing is for sure, whilst the title refers to Gore Vidal there is no literary connection between that great writer and William Howard (the nom de plume of this book’s true author, William Johnston). Vidal understood how to write evocatively of a specific historical period or character, whereas Johnston is at best a copyist and worst just an average pornographer. Additionally Vidal knew how to structure and pace his novels’ plots, whereas this effort dawdles for the first half before sprinting to its resolution. Howard/Johnston is no Vidal, no Robert Graves. He is a pulp novelist who has churned out a film tie-in that makes an adequate connection to its cinematic basis.

If there is one redeemable aspect of ‘Gore Vidal’s Caligula’ it is that Howard/Johnston has more than a nodding acquaintance with the ancient literary sources. I was particularly taken by his discussion of how his version of Caligula understood the differences between each of the three types of marriage legally established in ancient Roman society. Also, and this is less secure but still interesting, in this novelisation it is Caesonia who removes Drusilla’s influence on her brother by poisoning Caligula’s incestuous lover. This is a different take than others I have encountered.

Would I recommend ‘Gore Vidal’s Caligula’? No. However, it is like the film it novelises; it is a curiosity that in its own way recreates and re-represents Ancient Rome and one of its most infamous emperors. On these grounds this book does bear consideration.