Rating: 5/5

"Leonard and I were about as far from sleuths as you could get. We didn't know much besides instinct, and so far that had gotten our asses whipped, got us half drowned, shot at, in trouble with the law."

  Initial Thoughts 

I've read a number of books now by the superb Joe R Lansdale and although I'm not quite a die hard fan, I'm certainly getting there. I don't know any other author with his darkly outrageous sense of humour that has me rolling around on the floor wetting myself. And his Hap and Leonard series takes it to a whole new level. It is without doubt one of the best reading experiences I've come across in terms of pure fun and entertainment. And isn't that what reading fiction is all about? This is the kind of books I needed way back in senior school, instead of bloody Shakespeare and Chaucer!

Two Bear Mambo is the third novel in the continuing saga of Hap Collins and Leonard Pine and takes of right off after the events of Mucho Mojo. We have an aging ex-hippy in Hap and a snarky Vietnam War vet in Leonard. An odd couple for sure, but these two go together like Netflix and chill. Watching them land in a whole load of trouble and battle their way out of it has become the highlight of my week.

   ""You see, your manhood is tied up in your weapons, Hap. The revolver is a phallic symbol for your repressed manhood. Your impotence."

In the first novel, Savage Season, we followed the pair on a get-rich-quick scheme gone horribly wrong and in Mucho Mojo we had a murder mystery. I went into Two Bear Mambo expecting another piece of hot and sweaty crime noir but, as I've come to expect from Lansdale, I got a little bit more than I bargained for.

  The Story 

The story once again kicks off in 1980s East Texas on Christmas Eve, where once again Leonard is burning down the abode of the local drug pusher. Merry Christmas you filthy animal!

Police Lt. Marve Hanson, who was a key character in the second installment, agrees to forget the duo's role in the arson on one condition. There's always a catch and we then get the story of L.C. Soothe, a blues musician who makes a deal with the devil so he can play the guitar like an absolute hero.

See Florida Grange, the latest love of Hap's life, was investigating the sudden death in police custody of Soothe's son when she disappeared off the face of the earth. And with Hanson and Florida having a thing together, the proposition involves the two heading to Grovestown to find her. The only problem being that this backwater town is a hotbed for the KKK and just about anyone whose violently hostile toward black people. And with Leonard Pine being a person of colour, this is certain to cause the tension to rise past boiling point.

  The Writing 

"Champion" Joe Lansdale is just the type of writer I like. A consummate storyteller. His prose are full of strong language, that packs a brutal punch when it's not got you in hysterics. They're definitely not for the faint of heart, containing a lot of sexual references and violent racism. But he has a fantastic style with subtle lyricism and a real ear for dialogue that just flows. 

   "When I was a kid, I read a book like this, I became the main character, and the characters I liked were big and strong and fearless and always got the babe. I thought my life would go that way when I grew up."

Lansdale's brand is multifaceted and he intersperses some horrific moments with hilarious anecdotes. It's what makes this series tick. And tick it does, with things happening very quickly as he grabs his reader by the short and curlies and shuttles them along at a fantastic pace. In fact the quality of the writing may have been my favourite aspect of Two Bear Mambo if it wasn't for...

  The Characters 

Lansdale's series is all about the two main characters. That's Hap Collins and Leonard Pine for you that are still not in the know. Their friendship, their chemistry, their non-stop, back and forth banter is what keeps me coming back to this series. The depth of characterisation that the author has layered in at this point, portraying each as very macho men, tough as nails but with vulnerable qualities is absolutely first class. And in Two Bear Mambo were going to see a new side to our heroes as they face adversity like never before. 

The thing with these two is that the level of writing is so damn good that you can almost believe they're real. They're two guys that go through the same relationship problems as you and me. Well at least me anyway! Despite being rough around the edges, they're very believable and the kind of guys I'd love to go for a drink with and shoot a few rounds of pool.

Lansdale extends this level of detail to all his characters and it's without doubt a highlight. Grovestown is a living breathing entity, full of lively and colourful individuals, akin to a pit of snakes. Pick of the bunch for me is Chief Cantuck. Really difficult to work out and absolutely hilarious at times. The way he interacts with Hap is a key part of this one and I hope to see him again.

  Final Thoughts

So was Two Bear Mambo as good as it sounds? Most definitely. Was it the best so far in the Hap/Leonard saga. I have to say "YES!" It really does keep getting better and better. This has to be one of the premier reading experiences that I've encountered and something I really look forward to. I'm already salivating over the prospect of tearing into the next installment, Bad Chilli.

I rated the last book 4.5 stars and this one is slightly better. So 4.75 stars. Almost a perfect reading experience for yours truly. It really is just my type of book. I can't give it a better recommendation than that. So if brilliant characters, belly splitting humour and intense action is your bag jump on board the Hap/Leonard express. Choo Choo!

Thanks for reading. Cheer!