Rating: 3/5

A couple of these, I'd read as a teenager, so I thought it was about time I re-read them, to see if there was a different perspective as an adult. About all of the stories, I have to say that I was disappointed in the endings. I like for a story to actually be wrapped up at the end. I'm not a big fan of cliffhangers or endings where the reader is left to imagine what may have happened, unless there's a sequel. It's almost as if each story was ended mid-sentence! The stories themselves were great.

"The Grapes of Wrath" was much more difficult to read than I'd originally remembered (maybe I skimmed as a teen?). The thing I found the hardest to interpret was the dialect ... a southern, hillbilly-ish slang mixed with some old English. I'm sure it was perfectly natural back when the book was written, but it frustrated me a bit. The story itself was funny, insightful and heartbreaking. I found I could clearly see and feel the trials and tribulations of the Joad family as they made their way west. Each character was beautifully drawn out, and easy to picture in my mind. Even the scenery was vivid in my imagination, although at times it was a bit boring to read about. Of the 5 stories in the book, this was my favorite.

"The Moon is Down" was my least favorite. I don't generally like war stories, or stories about politics, so my opinion here is a bit biased. There were so many characters in this story, and none of them given an ample amount of description, and it made it very difficult to keep track of who was who, with the exception of the Mayor, his servants and one or two others. My favorite part of this story was the parachutes.

"Cannery Row" had me laughing from beginning to end. The trouble those guys would get themselves in was hilarious! Again, the characters were fleshed out very nicely. 

"East of Eden" was an incredible story that seemed to go on forever. The first half of the story was a bit confusing, jumping back and forth from character to character, with no obvious connection between them. But once the connection was made, it flowed seemlessly. I loved every character, no matter if they were dull and lifeless in personality or if they were lively or evil. This is a story that would relate well in any time period. Everyone wants better for themselves and their children, and are willing to do just about anything for it. This is a must read story!

"Of Mice and Men" is a story like no other. I remember reading this in school, but I don't remember being as moved by it as I am now. George is a caring and selfless protector for Lenny. He is the type of man that all men should want to be. The story is a sad one, make no mistakes. The stable buck, Candy, Curly's wife ... they all share the same problem: lonliness. I felt the raw pain of each one of them. The story's ending broke my heart over and over again.