Rating: 1/5

I loved McCaffrey's Pern series, but this little collection of middle-grade short stories are nothing short of terrible. There are four stories in all, first two were a'ight. The third is where it gets truly awful. It's about a pretty Runner girl. A runner being a delivery messenger who runs from one location to the next, and let me recount to you most of the times the word pretty is used in this story. Not all, just most.

“Running with a pretty girl’s not hard to do,” he told her when they took one brief pause.

“Not when I’d a chance to run with such a pretty girl,” Mallum said.

“New one, too, at that, for all you look familiar to me. A pretty face is a great sight on a fine morning.”

“You’d better tell him. Maybe a pretty runner’ll get it through his thick skull because the odd crack or two hasn’t.”

She felt redeemed. Though she couldn’t see why being pretty would be an advantage if you were giving someone what-for.

“Like that in a young runner. Shows you’re not just a pretty face."

“Pretty runner girl, you are."

“And why is ‘pretty’ a help?”
“Haligon likes pretty girls.”

“You’re prettier than she was and she was some pretty woman.”

“Even if they weren’t as pretty as you are."

“You’re a very pretty girl. Blue becomes you.”

“And he said how pretty you are, so that helped, you know. Haligon likes his girls pretty. So does Lord Groghe but he only looks.”

“It’s sure true that a pretty girl gets more attention than a plain one like me.”

“Pretty girl’s always heard, ya know.”

Holy fuck. The story itself was pointless too. Girl falls into a bush, vows to get even with the guy who accidentally knocks her into it. Ends up falling in love with said guy.

Final story: also terrible. Boy/girl twin, boy twin wants to be a dragonrider, but the dragon chooses the girl twin instead. Girl twin does everything she can to make sure her twin brother wins. Now there's a lesson for the ages. Not.

If you must read YA Anne McCaffrey, the Harper Hall trilogy is far better.