Rating: 5/5

It's a common understanding in this society that men have more power than women. Feminism went on to show all the ways men use this power to oppress women. But a common approach is to resent men, rather than understand them, what about our culture makes the sexes interact as they do, or all the ways that men are powerless. Only by understanding this can feminism truly succeed in its mission of promoting gender equity. We must all work together to overcome the tyranny of gender roles, for both sexes. That's what this book sets out to do.

Thanks to feminism, women's complaints have become much better articulated. But, as author Warren Farrell says at the very beginning of the book, "men's questions about women are at the pre-articulation stage: they feel that something's happening that's unfair, but can't quite put their finger on it. Nor do they try very hard to put their finger on it--they're more focused on proving themselves. Yet men seem to feel they're living in an era when women want to 'have their cake and eat it too.' For many men, the age-old Freud-attributed question, 'What do women really want?' is still without a clear answer. And the fear of being accused of being a male chauvinist has made them afraid to ask the questions necessary to get the answers."

From the very beginning, page after page, this book uncovered all of my unarticulated fears, shames, and feelings of powerlessness that come with being male in this society. It explained what about our culture causes this. I was amazed and grateful to finally give voice to these frustrations. It answers questions like, "women have changed--why aren't men changing too?" "Why are men so preoccupied with sex and success?" "Why can't men listen?" "Why are men so afraid of commitment?" "Why do men have fragile egos?" "How can I change a man?" "How can I get him to express feelings?" He answers these questions very specifically, but in a way that honors the frustrations of both sexes. The advice he gives is very sound, and helpful.

This book draws mainly on popular culture and his experiences leading men's groups, which is anecdotal. So it's not very scientifically rigorous. It's also a little outdated, written in 1988. 20 years has brought many changes to our culture that this book leaves out. But nothing in this book has been made irrelevant. In some ways, the issues this book addresses are even worse than they were 20 years ago.

I highly recommend this book to anyone, male or female, who wants to understand gender roles better, and wants a better relationship with people of both genders.