Rating: 4/5

White Fire is a stand alone novel by Cassie Edwards. 

When Flame was 10 years old, she was a rebellious child who already knew what she wanted. One of the things she wanted was to be known as Flame, not her given name. What she also wanted was to marry the 'breed - White Fire. She knew from the moment she saw him, and after only saying a couple of words to him, that he was the man for her. He was only there in passing, and moved on to Minnesota. The next 8 years Flame never forgot him. Even after her 'come out' at 18 she only socialised for fun, knowing that she would never want to marry any of the men she met because she was determined White Fire was for her. With that in mind, when the opportunity arose to join her father at his army fort in Minnesota she jumps at the chance. Oh she knows the likelihood of seeing White Fire is slim, but just the thought that he might be there is enough for her. That and knowing she would be in for the adventure of a life time living somewhere so beautiful where she can ride her horse daily and be around so many new things and people.

White Fire is a Chippewa warrior, and in the 8 years since Flame saw him he spent a year discovering his roots and learning how to be an Indian, then found work making the roads, hired by the army from the fort. He also met and married a woman who bore him a son. 3 years into his marriage, he finds himself kidnapped by the Sioux Indians. Three years of captivity later and he is finally rescued by none other than Chief Grey Feather, the man who took him in when he first arrived on the Frontier and taught him the way of the Indian. White Fire's first port of call after recuperating on the reservation, was home. He needed to see his wife and child who by now would have thought him dead. When he reaches his old cabin he finds it empty. He has no idea what has happened, but figures if he makes his way to the fort he should be able to find out where his family is. 

He arrives there the very same day that Flame does, and as she disembarks from the steamboat that brought her there, she can't believe that after her wishing and hoping, White Fire IS there. He sees her and from a distance he realises who she must be, especially knowing her father is the commandant of the Fort. He doesn't give it another thought though as his first priority is finding his wife and son. He is told that his wife has passed away and that his son has been adopted out to a nice 'white' family. He is also told by Flame's father that he should leave his son with them because he will be better off being brought up with nobody knowing that his father is a 'breed! He is very much a racist against Indians.

White Fire refuses to listen to the man and the story continues on to tell us how and if he can get his son away from the 'white' people. We also see Flame and him reunite, with Flame letting him know from the get go that she is more than interested than him. White Fire, despite losing his wife recently, can appreciate the attraction he feels to Flame, and the pull she has on his heart. Can he have a relationship with her knowing her father would kill him rather than let them be a couple? Can he even ask her to think of a life with him knowing she is so much younger than him and she would be taking on both him and hopefully his son?

Alongside the romance aspect of this story and the need for White Fire to claim back his son, there is also the war between the Indian tribes with the Sioux being the Indians known for kidnapping people and causing problems, and the Chippewa being a more gentle Indian. We have some skulduggery afoot at the fort involving Flame's father. We even have a ghost sighting or two. There is a lot of action and adventure going on in this story to keep you wanting to read the book as quickly as possible to see how everything ends.

I love how the author so obviously knows her stuff when it comes to Indians and their way of life, including their language which she uses in the book on occasion. I love the idea of Flame and White Fire being soul mates. There is only one thing that I didn't like, and that is that because there is so much going on in the book, at times it seemed very rushed. The romance happened too quickly considering our hero only just found out his wife died. The custody of his son one minute seemed impossible, and the next probable and sometimes it seemed that White Fire wasn't trying his hardest to get his son back. It just seemed a little implausible at times. That said, when the book was good it was great, it's just a shame it wasn't longer so that the story's plot could be more fully developed.

I voluntarily reviewed an Advanced Readers' Copy of this book.