Rating: 2/5

I've read books by Madeline Baker before, and, for the most part, liked them well enough. However, Forbidden Fires was one of those books I just couldn't seem to find much at all to like. Some of her books take a bit of a stretch of the imagination to believe. This one requires so much of a stretch it could span the Grand Canyon. Often enough with the Romance genre as a whole, the "hero" will start out being rather unlikable and then come around. In this case, the hero was fine from the start. It was the heroine I had trouble with liking - and she never warmed up into someone I could respect.

The heroine is too focused on what other people will think of her (especially since she only sees those who live in town once every-other month or so). She was selfish, unthinking, and egocentric - often only thinking of how things affected her instead of thinking of what others were going through (when some of the things the others were enduring were much more severe than anything she’d ever lived through). She says she always tried to do what was expected of her, what was proper, yet she wore pants and rode a horse astride??? She snuck off to go chasing wild horses and insisted on going on a cattle drive. How is that "proper" for a woman of good name and family in the American West in the 19th century? Many women DID dress that way and attend to "manly" pursuits, but it was certainly never considered proper.
The heroine was also a bigot. She despised ALL Native Americans regardless of which tribe they belonged to, or what they may or may not have done in the past (including half-breeds who might have just as easily not had anything to do with that half of their ancestry after conception). 
She also irritated me when she would bemoan her misery at events in her life when the majority of time they were her own fault (the best example of which would be the wedding night).
She was little better than the other women from Rafe's past who wanted to bed him but still were ashamed of his Indian blood.
Caitlyn’s thinking is illogical, immature, and nonsensical. She is whiny (even if only her thoughts), petulant, rebellious (never considering how her behavior puts others at risk when they have to protect her after she does as she pleases). She is more believable as a 12 year old girl than an adult woman.
Rafe, the hero, was a more likable character, but even he had some faults (without going into detail, the whole experience in the Indian village had me mumbling about his stupidity and lack of consideration for his wife).
I also had difficulty believing they would try to go on a cattle drive with over 800 head of cattle with only 6 hands (most of which were inexperienced). At least one of the men WAS experienced with cattle drives, and surely would have told them they needed more than just 6 men. They had relied on this man's advice in other aspects of driving cattle, so I had difficulty believing he wouldn't have advised against their traveling with so little hired help. And, given Rafe's background, he would have certainly known he needed more protection…especially since he knew they would be traveling through lands where Indian encounters would be likely and how dangerous they could be (having first hand knowledge of the feelings of many of the tribes towards the white settlers at the time). 

Other than characters I could not at all relate to, I also found an utter lack of historical accuracy many times. For instance, the author makes a comment about the lack of availability of young, marriageable men. Really? In the western territories during the 19th Century the men vastly outnumbered the women, yet Caitlyn apparently happens to live in the one place where there are few men available??? That’s a bit far-fetched! There were other examples like how fast they were able to travel across a certain amount of miles on horseback (for Caitlyn &amp; two others, they apparently traveled 30 miles in under six hours with at least half of that being after dark; yet Rafe, traveling the same distance and the same route - in daylight and good weather - takes from dawn til dusk!). I could go on and on because there were so many times I stopped and shook my head while reading wondering how in the world the author thought the reader was ever supposed to believe any of it.

Needless to say, I would not recommend the book. Even though Goodreads says 2 stars means "it was ok" and 1 star is supposed to mean "did not like it" - I tend to leave the 1 star ratings for the books that are so bad I can't even finish them. So, even though I did not like this book, I gave it 2 stars - I was able to finish it - eventually (no problems at all tearing myself away from this one).