Rating: 1/5

"Kiss me back, you little bitch, or I'll take you here and now."

That little gem is just one of the many heart warming things the "hero" says to the heroine. The book starts out fine, I was into the whole guardian/ward thing. I could even overlook his whole 'loveless' marriage excuse for infidelity....but then Justin took a turn for the worse. Justin got rapey. Sure Megan could get annoying...BECAUSE SHE WAS 17!!!! I'm down with age differences by the way, just not when the man is an enormous asstard. 

The real drama and Justin's sociopathic unveiling comes when Megan finds ut that Justin is married. She freaks out. I can't really blame her...but....how the fuck are we supposed to believe that she had no clue her ENTIRE life that her guardian was married. It was too unbelievable. She gives Justin the cold shoulder which throws him into a spiral of rage and jealousy. He demeans her, belittles her, calls her a bitch etc. She goes out of her way to flirt with other men, bad men she is told. Justin saves her from getting raped...only to basically rape her himself. How romantic. 

She ends up pregnant, of course she would. She decides to marry someone else so the baby isn't a bastard. Justin won't have that so he kidnaps her, has a couple more rapey interludes, and then abandons her in some creepy mansion. Oh and she gets to spend the rest of her pregnancy alone. He comes back, marries her and then bitch slaps her. She tries to run away from him, falls off a fucking cliff and their baby dies. WHAT KIND OF FUCKERY IS THIS??? I signed up for a fluffy romance novel. Of course she forgives....the end. Happily ever after. 

On that note, here are some romantic quotes to end my review with:

"I could kill you," he said. "I could do it so easily. If you weren't carrying my child, I think I would."

"You vicious, immoral little slut!"

"God, if you do I think I'll strangle you." (this was supposed to be a cute joke in the middle of foreplay, but after his previous treatment of her I fail to see the humor)

"That's a filthy whore's trick!" (she tried to give him a blowjob)

I need to throw bleach in my eyes now.