Rating: 4/5

While on a whirlwind road trip to D.C, we stopped at the Gettysburg outlet mall, and in the Book Warehouse I saw a book by one of my all-time favourites. Ray Manzarek! Right there on the shelves, cut price. I had never heard of this autobiography so naturally I grabbed it.

For the uninitiated, Manzarek was a product of his times; son of Polish immigrants in south-side Chicago, luckily learning the piano instead of the accordion, and those skills came into use once he went to UCLA and met other musicians, and eventually Jim Morrison, Robby Krieger and John Densmore. There he was, front row centre in the counter-culture vortex of Southern California, us against them, the hippies vs. the "fascists" and so on. Such were his politics, a product of that time.

The Doors were a collective, no one-man band by any means. But Ray shows how the somewhat shy Jim Morrison came into his own once they developed the idea of a band unlike any other. Those heady days on Venice Beach where Ray and Jim dared to dream big is a wonderful part of the book.

Forward it goes; to success despite so many rejections at first. The book mostly centres on the early days, how the Doors made it against all odds. And listen along to Robby Krieger's greatest composition "Light My Fire" as Ray details all the chord changes in the intro. Nice little music class for the layman reader. 

It's a rise and fall. Jim Morrison started hanging around with the wrong people, and abused his body with drink and drugs. Eventually a whole chapter about Jim's Miami bust. Ray writes about Jim the shaman dreamer, and his dark alter-ego "Jimbo", who Ray portrayed as a vicious redneck when he had alcohol in him. 

There's nothing here about Manzarek's post-Morrison career, how the Doors soldiered on as a threesome for two albums, or his support of young L.A. bands later on. A lot seems missing so it's more of a memoir than a straight autobiography. But for those who've read bios of the Doors and especially Oliver Stone's movie, Ray sets the record straight. (clue-he was not a fan of the movie at all!)

For the Doors fan, but also a good look at growing up in post-WW2 America. Ray passed away a few years ago, so enjoy these words from someone who was THERE, and lived the life, and fuelled us with his inspired Vox keyboard playing.