Rating: 4/5

Wow, what a story. Hard to read but important, I am not a huge fan on dwelling on humanity’s cruelness but during those times, so much goodness shines through as well. The author did a great job of writing it in a compelling story. 
Only 4 stars because the verb tense seemed weird to me, it was hard to put a finger on it; also since it is a novel about a real person and events, I kept wondering if this or that really happened. I looked up several things to confirm. 
Bonhoeffer is a modern saint but this story did a great job of showing his human side and his weaknesses.
After reading six books this year about black Americans (two women’s story, slave fiction, Civil Rights true stories and more) I thought I was going was to be reading about a different topic, but a huge hole in my knowledge about DB was that he traveled and studied in America and the black church really influenced him and his stance on prejudice, rights and social justice!
One of my favorite characters (and real person) is British Bell. His speech to his fellow countrymen and leaders about area bombing was amazing and I love that is he had to do it as a Christian (p 374). Sometimes I think that WWII was the last ‘just’ war but even in it, things happened on the Allied side that were unjust. 
Just as Bell considered himself a patriot as well as a follower of Jesus, DB maintained his love of his country, calling it out on wrongs because of that love. I think we can view our country (and our children) in two ways. 1. That we love them so much, we can’t imagine them doing anything wrong and will justify instead of speak up if they do or 2. that we love them so much that we lovingly confront any wrong in order to help it stay aligned with its values and to help it be even better. I think that is a lot of our current nation’s division problem, two groups having two different takes on that.
Which of course leads to our current president in the US, Trump. When I first began this book, I thought-yeah most comparisons of Trump to Hitler falls short as Trump isn’t making opponents disappear or be killed. Though the resistors of our day are often brought to mind while reading such as this conversation.
DB: what do we accomplish by treating him as if he were legitimate?
N: Damn it, man, he is legitimate. He’s running the country, in you’ve forgotten!
While reading, the Anne Frank Center for Mutual Respect issued a statement comparing the two including “creates his own media; exploits youth at a rally; endorses police brutality; demonizes people who believe, look or love differently; strips vulnerable people of their families, jobs and ability to live; and believes Congress should change its rules to give him more power.”
Wow, ok, I’ll just leave that there. 
Which of course leads us to the question of when it is ok to kill? In war? I have heard people give DB as an example of why it might be okay to kill abortion doctors!
I do think these things should be discussed. I think in American, especially in the church we have gotten lazy. We now longer discuss pacifism (as DB was) and just war, we are just okay with preemptive strikes and torture.
No easy answers.