Rating: 1/5

This novel is set in a near-future dystopia where the earth is suffering from an energy shortage so severe that the world government has attempted to slow population growth -- and thus slow the rate of energy consumption -- by passing laws forbidding procreation between members of the same race. In order to marry someone of your own race, you must agree to undergo voluntary sterilization. The protagonist's backstory is fueled by the painful loss of his fiance who chose to commit suicide rather than leave him to have a family. (Apparently, adoption isn't an option in this society.)

The protagonist, Shetland, a Commander in the Space Service, is suddenly promoted to Captain and given orders to fly a Timeship, the Meg II, to the ends of the known universe to find the Meg I, which failed to return from its mission to fly millions of years into the future to find an energy source to resolve the shortage on Earth. 

Although the above synopsis may seem like the solid start to a science fiction novel, Anthony's story fails on so many levels that I simply can't recommend this book. The other negative reviews address most of the plot failures including, as one reviewer put it, that the novel reads like the sexual fantasies of a dirty old man.

That said, my biggest complaint is the author's treatment of women. The book opens with the Commander ogling the woman who is preparing him for his mandatory shore leave to Earth. He reflects on the Space Code which requires any woman in space to happily perform sexual acts on any man who requests such service. Quite far into the novel, we learn that the requirement is reciprocal, but because all but one of the women in the novel is young and slim and beautiful (unlike the men, who are up to 20 years older, balding, weak-chinned, etc.) it's perhaps more of a perk than a burden for the men. (One wonders whether the Code is limited to male/female service or whether men could also proposition other men, which might add some balance.)

Captain Shetland later reflects on women being addressed by their first names while men are addressed by their last names. The author suggests this is because women are more familiar while men are distant, but I believe it's quite well understood that using a surname is a sign of respect, and I would say that women receive none of that in this novel. In fact, there are no women at all in this novel as they are all referred to as "girls" regardless of their age or role on the ship.

I suppose I should also mention that the women in this novel who are either described as being highly intelligent (dead finance) or who have any notable education (the incredibly sexy, 18-year old Physo-chemist), both commit suicide. The one woman who is not a sex object, because she is moderately overweight and 35 and, therefore, not at all attractive, is the ship's cook. 

***** SPOILER ALERT ***** After thoroughly shaming this woman for her sin of gluttony in a horrifically detailed scene where she vomits so much that the room she is in becomes knee deep in the stuff, she is ultimately redeemed when the protagonist realizes that his emotional feelings for her are sufficient to overcome her obvious physical defects (i.e. advanced age - she is 35 and he is 38 - and her weight issue, which is described as "not obese" and "moderately overweight").

I suppose this book might be titillating to pre-adolescent males, but any mature person of the 21st century looking for quality science fiction should pass this by. It's not worth your time.