(отзиви на български)

Notes in progress:

~ For this partner read with Ani, I'm coming back to the series that has touched and shaped me the most as a human being. What will I see twenty years later? How will it touch and shape me now?

I've seldom felt so thrilled.

~ So ...

Set into the snow around a large circle were wooden stakes. Each stake was topped with the skull of a different animal. There were a hundred different skulls: the great, tusked skull of Tuwa, the mammoth; the skulls of Nunki and long, pointed skulls of the snow fox and wolf; there were many, many smaller skulls, those of the birds, Ayeye, the thallow, and Gunda and Rakri, and Ahira, the snowy owl. Danlo had never seen such a sight in all of his life, for the boys of the tribe were not allowed to approach Winter Pock. In the twilight, the circle of greyish–white skulls looked ominous and terrifying. Danlo knew that each man, after his cutting, would look up at the skulls to find his doffel, his other–self, the one special animal he would never again hunt. His doffel would guide him into the dreamtime, and later, through all the days of his life.

... my journey into shamanism actually started twenty years ago. Well, well. :)

Other than that, Danlo's coming-of-age rite was as harrowing and visceral as I remembered it; but now I can grasp more of its symbolic meaning (e.g. shedding the foreskin is shedding the sheltered nature of childhood).

The metric prose is still mesmerizing.

~ Whew ... we're finally past the journey across the ice: the slowest and probably most gruesome part of the book. How many readers have left their bones in the blizzard, only a few pages away from the City of Light and wonders and growing up?

~ Chapter 3, "The Glavering," was my first introduction to ahimsa ("Never killing or hurting another, not even in your thoughts"), glavering (or its pithier version), angslan (causing others psychic anguish, "the pain that comes from higher understanding"), the hidden power(lessness) of words ("That which is made with words, with words can be unmade), saying "yes" to all truths--and ultimately this:

‘Did you know that laughing at oneself is the key to escaping the glavering?’
Which has defined my core for as long as I have been able to look at myself.

All that in a single chapter. Well.

~ I never knew how much foreshadowing there was in these early chapters. In little thoughts and larger scenes, they basically hint at all the major events that are about to unfold--even the end of the trilogy.

Chapter 4, "Shih," has been another cornerstone in the foundations of my worldview. It introduced me to the fluid nature of reality, made me question certain verbs as well as all pronouns and nouns, and showed me shibui, the beauty that comes with age.

It's aged beautifully. :)

~ Chapter 5, "The Returnists," enthralled the young me with the notion of simplex/complex/multiplex/omniplex perception of the world; and the pitfalls of guruism. Ever since (and likely before that, on a vaguer level), my life has flowed toward the asarya and away from the guru.

And I've never stopped wondering in which shell of reality I'm currently locked. ;)

~ Chapter 8, "The Doctrine of Ahimsa," shows how ahimsa and angslan can be compatible:
Ahimsa, as he understood it, required only that he never harm another’s body or spirit. To inflict mind pain on another in order to provoke understanding was a Fravashi tradition that he cherished.

~ In Chapter 10, "Multiplication by Zero," we see Hanuman's transhumanist beliefs for the first time--along with the accompanying pain.

We also see a societal view that makes my kindred spirit Atanas P. Slavov rabid every time:
Danlo (...) looked at Hanuman and asked, ‘Do you think we are so different from others?’

‘You know that we are.’

‘But Hanu, we are still people.’

‘There are people,’ Hanuman said, ‘and there are people.’

‘The blessed … people. All people are blessed.’

‘But few are chosen,’ Hanuman said. ‘All through history, there have always been a few people destined to be something more.’

‘More … than what?’

‘More than they are. More than anybody is.’

Danlo smiled at this and said, ‘I think you are a natural aristocrat.’

‘How not? It’s only we, aristocrats in our souls, who can know what is possible.’

‘But what about the others?’

‘Others are other. You mustn’t think about them too much. All human society is a hierarchy. All life, this living pyramid. It’s only natural that a few human beings should stand at the top.’

‘You mean, stand on top of others.’

‘I didn’t make the universe,’ Hanuman said. ‘I just live in it.’

Danlo knelt in the snow, listening to the wind fall off the Hill of Sorrows and the icy mountains above. ‘But it is hard to live … with the boots of others kicking at your face.’

~ Chapter 15, "The Return of a Pilot," gives us an idea why we can happily ignore the tumults of our childhood--and a taste of how I've felt ever since I left the United World College of the Adriatic:
To a young man, even a student of the most fabulous and powerful school on the Civilized Worlds, the times during which he comes to maturity always seem normal no matter how extraordinary, how turbulent with change they really are. Imminent change and danger act as drugs upon the human brain, or rather, as rich foods that nourish the urge toward more life. And how easily one becomes used to such nourishment. Those who survive the signal events of history—the wars, plagues, alien contacts, vastenings, speciations and religious awakenings—develop a taste for ferment and evolution next to which all the moments of ‘normal’ existence will seem dull, flat, meaningless.

And another glimpse into Danlo's zen-like impuls:
Entering into the passion and beliefs of any particular religion was like viewing reality through a crystal lens. Always, like a child’s prism held up to one’s eye, the lens of ritual and belief distorted reality and coloured it in strange (and sometimes beautiful) ways. But in each religion, cult, or faith, Danlo hoped to find a universal centre, a jewel of truth as pure and clear as a diamond. It was his task and destiny, as he conceived it, to grasp each religion he could find, to apprehend the world through its beliefs, and with the hammerstone of his will, to shatter the lens. Only then might the diamond centre be revealed; only then could he see things clearly. And someday he might look at the universe through his own eyes only, free of even diamond lenses, free to behold the infinite stellar fires and humanity’s burning pain through the consciousness of his deepest self. 

And an extensive example of a pitfall I've been warning all my friends about: our inclination to embrace new worldviews without exploring their limitations. (Even holism, yes.)