Rating: 4/5

Mervyn Peake would probably have enjoyed "The Boarding House". Maybe he did - Peake was still alive when it was published. William Trevor has constructed his own miniature Gormenghast: a petty little surreal kingdom where a bunch of misfit inadequates squabble and bicker, and carve out their own niches.

Set in London SW17 in 1964, the boarding house of the title is the type of institution that already - as Trevor notes - is going out of fashion in favour of the bed sitting room, an arrangement that promotes even deeper isolation and where residents are not required to 'get along' with each other. The boarding house is a mixture of the bedsitter - where residents have their own rooms, their little fiefdoms where they can stamp their individuality - and the B&amp;B, where there is a communal living room with TV, and meals are provided by live-in staff.

However, surely no boarding house was ever like this one. Its creator dies at the very beginning of the novel, a William Wagner Bird, who over time has sought out the lonely and the inadequate and found them places in his house. At first this might seem to be a benevolent act, the motive of human kindness, but as time passes, and we become privy to his Notes on Residents, we see that Bird is playing some kind of sinister game, pitting distinct types of personalities against each other. This becomes most evident when his will is read, and it's discovered to the amazement, consternation and fury of the other residents that he has left the house to the two most opposed residents, whose mutual hatred is never far below the surface. 

The residents play out their frustrations and antipathies, trapped in this new world of its original creator's making, while the tension slowly but inexorably builds to ... well, I won't give a spoiler.

What is Trevor creating in this book? The clue - I believe - is in his use of names. The residents and staff : Nurse Clock (control freak), Studdy (petty blackmailer), Major Eele (strip club habitué), Mr Scribbin (railway recording enthusiast), Venables (anxious, with a bad stomach), Mr Obd (African full of unrequited love), Miss Clericott (will she ever be safe from men?), Rose Cave, Mrs Slape and Gallelty, are never referred to other than by these names. We never know Nurse Clock's first name, nor Major Eele's, and though we know the Nigerian Mr Obd's first name is 'Tome', this is only from relayed correspondence, or the memories of Mr Bird's cryptic "Alas, Tome Obd" whenever the two passed on the stair.

Yet the 'creator' is by turns Bird, Mr Bird, William Bird, and William Wagner Bird. This, even though he is dead by page 1! So we have a closed world, where the characters - the players - are restricted to the name they are introduced by, but the 'creator' is privileged to be known by several names. One could read into this that the Boarding House is a kind of allegory, a depiction of the modern human condition, where our whole identity is tied into our name and character, and where God ("God of a thousand names") has died. This is perhaps reinforced by Bird's supposed appearance in the kitchen one time after his death, and the "vision" of Bird appearing to Mr Obd as first a mere mark on the ceiling, then gradually in his mind transforming into a complete heavenly vision of golden throne and celestial trumpets.

It's a very good novel. But one needs to read 'below the surface' or it might simply be written off as a piece of great eccentricity, enjoyable to read but leaving too many question marks as to "what it all means".