Rating: 5/5

I'd heard good things about this book and duly sought it out like a sort of bibliophilic blood hound. When I say I'd heard good things I didn't actually know anything about it; the title and the inclusion of the word Camomile immediately planted seeds of ideas including tameness, anodine blandness and a sort of natural flavour which isn't necessarily to everyone's taste. 

Bam! Wrong!

This book is World War II with sexy edges and a sexual liberation that people rightly or wrongly do not ever associate with a time which was so fraught with danger, deprivation and uncertainty. I'm not saying that London during the Blitz was the place where the entire populace took advantage of all those black-out curtains and darkened corners for a quick knee trembler with a squaddie they'd picked up on the streets right before the siren sounded. Just that things were not quite so buttoned up, or buttoned down as one might have initially been led to believe.

The tale of beautiful Calypso, shy orphaned Sophy, Oliver, Polly and Walter, bosom teenage buddies and later kissing cousins spans 50 years from 1939 to 1989. Separated after the war, they are reunited at the funeral of a Max, the famous musician and Jewish refugee who arrived along with much controversy and his wife in Cornwall during that last heady summer of the Camomile Lawn - the last summer before the theatre of war fractured the cousins quite privileged upper middle class existence . As it turns out Max was a bit of a lothario and a dab hand at playing the ladies as well, although the elder Max and Uncle Richard are both dangerously close to creepy old man territory... actually what am I saying, they both fully breach that territory and make few excuses.

The convoluted relationships in this long spun-out coming of age tale are complex, comedic and well written and I'll never think about my Nana and Grandpa during the war years in the same way again (FYI my mother was conceived in the dying days of WWII - nuff said). 

This book is what happened to Enid Blyton's Famous Five when they got older and got laid. I highly recommend it.