Rating: 3/5

Spy Line (SL) is the middle book of the second Bernard Samson trilogy. I took a break after reading the previous book, Spy Hook (SH), because the story was somewhat underwhelming and the characters were getting annoying, apart from Samson that is. Since I’m watching a spy-themed show at the moment I thought I’d jump back into the series; for some reason once you get into the spy world you want to stay there a while. The good news is that SL is much better than its predecessor IMHO, and the overarching plot was finally revealed, which is… largely the same as the previous trilogy.

SL began by immediately undoing the tension from the cliffhanger ending of SH, returning everything to the status quo within the first chapter. Bernard is then sent on another mission the very next day! All this happens before he gets debriefed about his absence, or even partially briefed on the new mission itself. Eventually we learn what all the backroom conversations in this entire series have been about, and it made me roll my eyes a little. I’m trying to avoid spoilers, so I’ll simply say it would’ve been more interesting to me if this series suddenly became episodic with Samson doing some typical espionage work for a while rather than being led around by the nose so often, but maybe that’s just me.

Having said all that, we get some of the best character development for Bernard in the five books thus far. There’s always been at least some breadcrumbing of details regarding his background in every book, but at around the two-thirds point in this story the floodgates are opened, and we learn some things that’s been haunting Samson for a while. Unfortunately, pretty much everything else is interpersonal fluff that has no bearing on the plot. In fact, I’d say this entire story could’ve fit into three, maybe even two, chapters out of the twenty we're given. 

I predicted in my review of Spy Hook that the first two books of this trilogy could be combined into one novel of the same size. Now I’m thinking all three books could’ve probably been consolidated without being much longer than SH or SL. It doesn’t make this series bad by any means, just nowhere near as good as the first trilogy. If you’ve been reading this far into the world of Bernard Samson and enjoying it, I see no reason you should stop now. However, since Spy Line had a fairly conclusive ending, with only a few modest details to work through, I am comfortable to let Bernd out into the cold. Cheers