Rating: 5/5

My first time reading Robert.E.Howard stories. These tales had so much passion and energy. I was totally enamored.

The stories switch back and forth in time. Some of them have Conan as a King while in others he is a travelling mercenary for hire or a pirate. 

Howard is not too big on plotting. But the descriptions of spectacular cities, palaces, jungles, islands, other worldly beings, violent battles and passionate men and women are what makes these stories worthwhile.

There is a marked attempt to transcend the ordinary, the mundane and the civilized in Howard's writing. This is a man who is only interested in the strong and the decisive. He has no time for bookworms and the brooding kind of men. Even though his biography suggests he himself was a scholar. 

Howard also has an obsession with other worldly beings, especially 40 to 80 foot tall serpents. A lot of the thrills take place in horrifying secret corridors, chambers and dungeons which are populated by serpents and other strange creatures. 

My favorite stories in the collection:

The Phoenix on the Sword: Conan, the King is about to be usurped by his enemies lead by Ascalante, wannabe king of Aquilonia. But Conan is paid a visit in his dreams by Epemitrius, the sage and his sword is blessed with a phoenix. This helps him fight his enemies, both human and otherworldly, better. I think Hollywood has not been able to capture the truly grotesque and cosmic horror of fantasy novels. My first Conan story by Robert. E. Howard.

The Tower of the Elephant: Conan and Taurus of Nemedia, the Prince of Thieves, gang up to rob the Elephant Tower of its jewels and pearls. This is a great action adventure story with men climbing up tall towers using ropes and entering secret chambers where other worldly creatures lay await for them. This story was used in Conan the Barbarian, the Milius movie. But there is no spider in the movie. Or the elephant headed man (inspired by the Hindu god Ganesha, perhaps?), like in this book.

Queen of the Black Coast: A rip-roaring passionate erotic nautical action adventure from Robert. E. Howard. Conan becomes King to Belit, a female pirate with whom he makes passionate and violent love on their ship, the Queen of the Black Coast. An expedition up a strange river leads to them discovering vast treasures. But they also run into other worldly creatures who cuts short not just Conan's life as a pirate, but also his love life.