Rating: 3/5

This particular work seems to defy classification. It is often listed among Dashiell Hammett’s novels, perhaps because it is subtitled “A Novel of Dangerous Romance.” Originally published in three parts in Liberty magazine in 1933, in my copy (Vintage Crime, 1989) and presumably in the Hardcover that preceded it, the publishers did everything possible to create a more substantial-looking book. There are generous bottom and right-side margins and the title of each of the three parts has its own title page, and a matching blank page. Add an introduction by Robert B. Parker--with its own title and blank page too--and you get a story that concludes on page 78. A novel it ain't.

Personal classification is also an issue. I can’t group it with lesser works like The Dain Curse. Neither is it a masterpiece like The Maltese Falcon. Nor does it contain the layers of The Thin Man. Red Harvest comes closest with its one man (for the most part) and his attempt to bring down a corrupt town.

But in Woman in the Dark the male protagonist is not an investigator. Brazil (no first name mentioned) is an ex-can, and his trouble with the power structure is forced upon him when he comes to the defense of the Luise Fisher, for whom the book is titled. They end up on the run; Brazil from the law, Luise from a man who thinks he owns her. But there’s a reason I say “male protagonist.” About halfway through the book, when Brazil is rendered ineffective, Luise becomes the story’s lead. New to this country by a couple of weeks, at first she is confused and helpless. But once the confrontations move into arenas with which she has some familiarity, Luise stands tall. In a stark world where bad guys are good, good guys are bad, and the rich and powerful blatantly use and abuse the system, she strides toward reuniting with Brazil in such a way that they are both free from pursuit.

If the ending comes off as a tad convenient by today’s standards, remember that it conforms to the storytelling norms of the day. Besides, it’s Hammett. Even his lesser work is interesting. And while Woman in the Dark is far from his best, it is also far from his worst.