Rating: 4/5

A good bunch of loosely interconnected short stories.

Poirot grows a wild hair and decides he wants to retire after completing his own version of The Labors of Hercules. He is well aware that you'd have to squint a bit to see the correlation between his tasks and that of his namesake, but there you go.
We all do our best with what we have.

Foreword
Now, this is listed as a story in some of the Hercule Poirot sets but it isn't, as far as I have been able to find, a short that you can read on its own. But for the sake of completionists out there (I feel you!) I'm adding it in here.
Poirot meets up with an old friend who comments on how his Christian name, Hercule, is a take on the dude who did the 12 labors in the Illiad. He also makes a joke about Poirot and Sherlock Holmes' moms sitting around trying to come up with baby names. &lt;-ha!
Anyway. That's what gets the little Belgian detective thinking about his last 12 cases matching up with the Labors of Hercules. 

The Nemean Lion
A yappy Pekinese dog, who stands in for the lion, has been kidnapped, ransomed, and returned safely. But the husband of the dog's owner wants his money back and sends Poirot on the trail of the dognapper. Along the way, Poirot meets Amy Carnaby, who shows up in another story, and stops a poisoner.

 The Lernaean Hydra 
In this case, gossip is the Hydra and Poirot has to find a murderer in order to save the innocent from a life of suspicion.

The Arcadian Deer
Poirot's car breaks down and he ends up in the garage. Here is where he meets a handsome young god mechanic. Said mechanic begs Poirot to find the lady's maid of a famous dancer who stole the heart and then disappeared. 

The Erymanthian Boar
After solving his last case, Poirot remains in Switzerland and decides to take in the sights. He ends up snowed in on a mountaintop hotel with several other guests, including a mobster, several of his thugs, and an undercover police officer. 
Hijinks ensue.

The Augean Stables
Poirot agrees to help a decent politician escape being tarnished via association with his crooked father-in-law. His wife secretly agrees to help, in a very ingenious way, stop the tabloid newspaper that wants to smear him.

The Stymphalean Birds
While on vacation, Harold meets a very nice mother and daughter. He feels protective of the young woman when he finds out that she's trapped in an abusive marriage. And when he witnesses firsthand how awful her husband can be, he agrees to help finance the coverup when his new friend accidentally kills her husband in self-defense. 
But someone saw what happened and now all three of them are being blackmailed.
Can Poirot save the day?

The Cretan Bull
After he calls off the engagement for her own safety, a young lady wants Poirot's help in convincing her fiancee that he isn't crazy. Is there a dangerous strain of mental illness running through his family tree, or is something else driving this young man mad?

The Horses of Diomedes
*cue Miami Vice theme song*
Poirot and his friend bust up a drug ring. Crocket and Tubbs would be proud.

The Girdle of Hyppolita
How are art thieves connected with a schoolgirl that goes missing for a few hours on a field trip?
Poirot will find out.

The Flock of Geryon
Also found in The Last Séance: Tales of the Supernatural
An acquaintance of Poirot's goes undercover as the newest member of a cult to save her friend.
This is one I'd read before, but it was good to finally find out who Amy Carnaby was and why Poirot liked her so much. She's the chick from the first story, btw.

The Apples of the Hesperides
Poirot tracks down a stolen goblet with a dark history.

The Capture of Cerberus
Countess Vera Rossakoff, who is both an illicit mastermind and the woman of Poirot's dreams is running a very profitable club that allows the rich and famous to mingle with dangerous criminals. But even Rossakoff may be unaware of the evil that lurks in her swanky saloon.
Drugs are bad, kids.
And now Poirot is ready to retire and grow his vegetable marrows.

A must read for fans of Poirot.