Rating: 5/5

Gallipoli is a little known battle in a poorly understood war and yet it holds a fascination for historians and students of the Great War, for it was on these beaches that Australia is said to have earned its nationhood and against its rocks that Winston Churchill’s career almost floundered. 

“Gallipoli”, is a reprint of Alan Morehead’s 1956 classic that brings order and perspective to its subject for the novice and World War I student alike. The battle of Gallipoli was the 1915 Allied attack on the Dardanelles and Gallipoli peninsula of Turkey intended to seize Constantinople and force the Ottoman Empire from the war. Often characterized as Churchill’s first adventure in the “soft underbelly” of Britain’s German dominated opponents, it is here shown as having a deeper purpose and greater potential than the sad disaster that is commonly depicted. Aimed to draw Turkish troops from the Russian Caucasus front and open the Dardanelles to the export of Russian grain and the inflow of Western aid, it was the largest amphibious attack up to its time.

The initial phase of the offensive was an attempt by old ships of the Royal Navy to force the Dardanelles. When that failed the task was assigned to armies as the British landed at Suvla Bay and Cape Helles, the ANZACS, Australian New Zealand Army Corps, at what has since been known as Anzac Cove and French troops across the water at Kum Kale on the Asia side of the Continental divide. Failure resulted from a combination of dogged defense, lapses in coordination and execution, lost opportunities and, even to the end, indecision as to the commitment to the project: how much, how long, whether to withdraw. At the conclusion the shortcomings of the invasion were left behind as a flawless, virtually bloodless evacuation withdrew virtually the whole force with negligible casualties, except of course lo the unlucky few to be personally involved.

I am very glad that I read this book. I know relatively little about World War I and my familiarity with British military figures is sparse. During some early chapters I felt that I was missing something while trying to follow the generals mentioned. As I progressed and the campaign took shape I developed an appreciation for the battle not dependent on identities of individual actors. At its end I had a much greater understanding of how the story played out. I enjoyed the glimpses of humanity amidst death and destruction as the Australian and Turkish troops traded courtesies and gifts, reminiscent of the Christmas Truce on the Western Front a few months before. I am left with a sense of loss, of lives spent for no gain, and all the what might have beens. With more resources, which were available, perhaps the invasion would have reached its goals, the separate German-Russian peace unnecessary and, a revolution avoided and the history of the balance of the Twentieth Century immeasurably altered. We will never know but “Gallipoli” challenges us to appreciate, to analyze and to read more. For this it is a excellent tome.

I did receive a free copy of this book in the hopes, but without the obligation, to write a review.