Rating: 4/5

The setting is 1941, NYC. A woman is shot dead answering the doorbell. Is this woman who we think she is, and who has killed her? Several are implicated—a former lover, the fiancé, ……. To say more about the plot is unnecessary.

Why four stars? Even if this is a who dunnit, to figure this out it is necessary to understand the characters well. We are given not only a who dunnit mystery to solve but also in-depth character studies. I enjoy analyzing characters, studying motivations, how people act when they are under stress, how past events shape a person and what tips a person from behaving sanely to insanity and criminal behavior. This book kept my interest all the way through!

This is the first who dunnit mystery to have ever pulled me in! I had to figure out what has made this book different. I need well executed character studies--that's the difference. This is what the others lacked. To further clarify--I do not feel for the characters; I never became emotionally attached to them. However, I couldn’t close the book until I understood them.

The story is a set of first person narratives. Each person explains what they know and how they view the events that unfold. Nobody says, “I did it!” but one of them has! The reader must question all that one is told. The story is very cleverly done. That the author has pulled this off is an accomplishment!

The audiobook is narrated by L.J. Ganser, Christian Rummel, Eileen Stevens and Oliver Wyman. I do not know which narrator read each particular part. I have a word of warning—the first character disgusted me. Instinctively, he gave me the creeps. There is nothing wrong with the narration, it is the personality of the character that repulses me. I hated listening so much that I considered giving up on the book! When the character speaking changed, I realized that all of a sudden, I wanted to continue, I was no longer repulsed! An immense sense of relief rushed over me. I know this sounds crazy, but I really sink into books. When I read / listen to a book, I am swallowed up by it. If the reading experience is good, I am happy, I am content. If it is bad, I struggle, I suffer, I’m miserable. My point is, if you react as I do, don’t discard the book at the start, continue at least until the character speaking has changed. The female narrator pleased me least, but the entire narration experience was very good. It is easy to hear the words spoken and the intonations fit the respective characters well. The narration performance I have given four stars. 

What have I learned from reading this book? Any book providing in-depth character studies may work for me, even a who dunnit mystery! I am surprised!