Rating: 5/5

Jessica Mitford (1917-1996) began writing articles when she was 40; this engaging collection has several must-reads, as well as some fizz for contrast. Each concludes with a COMMENT section in which she discusses the development, research, writing of the accompanying piece, her satisfaction with the edit and, where necessary, how she might have improved it -- all modestly presented. In sum, it's a very good course in journalism 101 unto itself.

The gem herein is her exposure in 197o of a highly publicized group called "The Famous Writers School," which - for a fee - would like to help you find out if you could be a successful writer. Bennett Cerf, head of Random House, a columnist and TV panelist said in ads that he and his colleagues, which included Faith Baldwin, Clifton Fadiman, and Phyllis McGinley, among others, would be right there as mentors. A 72 year-old widow put down her entire bank account for the course, then decided she really needed to eat and asked for her money back. The School refused...Mitford heard about it, got on the case and : look out, soon, with Mitford's scrupulous investigation, The School was exposed as a fraud and went out of business. Most embarrassed of all was the toothy a/hole Bennett Cerf who got the piece cancelled from McCalls Magazine, but Jessica later published it in The Atlantic where it provoked a sold-out issue. "I've nothing to do with how the school is run," Cerf said and then, asked why he lent his name, added, "I'm an awful ham -- I love to see my name in the papers!" (In 1969, tuition revenue for The School zoomed to $48m). Cheers for Jessica Mitford--. Bennett Cerf died a year after the article was published. Good career move, and, oh yes, his name was in the papers.

Another fine piece, from 1965, explains how the TV producer-writer of an NBC medic show, "Mr Novak" wanted to do 2 episodes on the dangers of syphilis, aimed at schoolkids, parents, teachers. Just before the shoot was to start, NBC cancelled the project. The subject was deemed too clinical. Mitford went on an unsuccessful search for those the program would offend. You'll also be entertained by her short life as Distinguished Professor at San Jose State University (Ca) where she was up against deplorable academic bureaucracy.

One night, 1977, she took a NYC friend as guest to the now-closed Sign of the Dove (over-priced) restaurant on the Upper East Side. She didnt have enough cash and carried no credit card, so wrote out a check. The management wouldn't accept it. A burpy operetta ensued. What happened? You'll have to read the book.