Rating: 4/5

This is the 12th book in the Cadfael series and the 12th Cadfael I have read. While the plot in this book is relatively simple, I thoroughly enjoyed reading the book. It made for a rewarding escape read in the Christmas holidays. 
The story involves the death of the new priest, Father Ailnoth who is sent to take over at the local parish. He is strict and relatively heartless in his administration, quickly becoming unpopular with his parishioners, So, when his body is discovered drowned and with a blow to the head indicating murder, there are several possible suspects. The suspects include both parishioners badly impacted by Allnoth’s ruthless actions, and Ailnoth’s two aides he brought with him to Foregate: his housekeeper and her “nephew” Benet. Politics is involved as Stephen is on the rise having recently resumed his reign and Maud is out but looking to get back in.
Benet is an active Maud supporter and is a natural suspect. Due to his skills, Benet is assigned to Cadfael to help him in his gardening and herbal medicinal work, Cadfael soon becomes quite fond of the spunky yet hardworking and truthful Benet. When Benet becomes one of the chief suspects in the Allnoth ‘murder,’ Cadfael has an additional motive, besides his natural penchant, to investigate who is the culprit. 
What results in a fairly straightforward murder mystery with well-defined suspects with rationale motives. Other characters and their relationships are well-drawn too. I enjoyed getting a look at the personality of the townspeople and their relationship to the religious hierarchy. The book also manages to have good scenes and further insight into some series regulars such as Abbot Radulfus and Sheriff Hugh, and even some fun with Brother Jerome’s anal activities.
I thought the character of Benet was especially well-drawn, with the depiction of his political background, his romance, his motives to kill and his relationship with Cadfael. Benet’s romance was pleasantly clear, relatively undramatic and only a side plot that never interfered with the general intrigue. The Cadfael/Benet relationship was another in the series’ depictions of Cadfael as mentor, a series I will call ‘Cadfael and the Younger Generation’, to paraphrase a Rumpole short story. This was a high quality one of the series’ portrayals.
This book has a straightforward murder mystery, easy to visualize setting, good and rational suspects and well-developed characters and relationships. While not spectacular it was entertaining and very satisfying. It was also the right book at the right time. A 4+ star read for me.