Rating: 5/5

Eric Hoffer’s True Believer (written in 1951) withstands time for its relevance and significance in deciphering the essence of mass movements. I ve tried to summarize below some key concepts of this dense document: 

The core of this treatise is that all mass movements generate in their adherents a readiness to die and a proclivity for united action; all of them irrespective of the doctrine they preach and the program they project, breed fanaticism, enthusiasm, fervent hope, hatred , intolerance; all of them are capable a powerful flow of activity in certain departments of life; all of them demand a blind faith and singlehearted allegiance. Key to any mass movement is “Religiofication” - the art of turning practical purposes into holy causes.

Hoffer analyses the appeal mass movements and focusing on the desire for change . The men who rush into undertaking of vast change usually they feel they are in possession of some irresistible power with joined faith in the future and without reverence for the present. A mass movement appeals not to those intent on reinforcing and advancing a valued self, but to those who crave to get rid of an unwanted self ( exchanging a self-centered for a selfless life we gain enormously in self-esteem ). The less satisfaction we derive from being ourselves, the greater is our desire to be like others. A mass movement is pioneered by man of words (“intellectuals”), materialized by fanatics and consolidated by men of action. 

At the epicenter of all mass movements is the  True Believer – man of fanatical faith, frustrated who is ready to sacrifice his life for the holy cause. The loyalty of the true believer is to the whole and not to his fellow true believer. A rising mass movement attracts and holds a believer not by its doctrine and promises but by the refuge it offers from the anxieties, unfruitfulness and purposelessness of an individual existence. The passion of the frustrated is to “belong”. The believers can find salvation only in complete separation from the self; and they usually find by losing themselves in the compact collectivity of a mass movement. Among believers discontent is likely to be highest when misery is bearable; when condition have improved that an ideal state seems almost within reach. Then a collective spirit creates a responsiveness to the appeal of mass movements: equality without freedom creates a more stable social pattern than freedom without equality. The fanatic is perpetually incomplete and insecure; he embraces the cause not because of its justness and holiness but because of his desperate need for something to hold on to.

There is a certain uniformity in all types of dedication, of faith, of pursuit of power, of unity an self-sacrifice. Faith, doctrine, propaganda , leadership, ruthlessness and so on, are instruments of unification.  Unification is more a process of diminution than of addition. In order to be assimilated into a collective medium a person has to be stripped of his individual distinctness. He has to be deprived of free choice and independent judgement. 

Hoffer emphasizes that in times of peace and prosperity, a democratic nation is an institutionalized association of more or less free individuals. On the other hand, in time of crisis, when the nation’s existence is threatened, and it tries to reinforce its unity and generate in its people a readiness for self-sacrifice, it almost always assumes in some degree the character of mass movement. At its inception a mass movement seems to champion the present against the past, to breed contempt for the present. Glorification of the past can serve as a means of belittle of the present.  There is no more potent dwarfing of the present than by viewing it as a mere link between a glorious past and a glorious future.  The tangibility of a pleasant and secure existence is such that it makes other realities, however imminent, seem vague and visionary; it blind us to the possibilities of drastic change. For when we fail in attempting the possible, the blame is solely ours; but when we fail in attempting the impossible, we are justified in attributing it to the magnitude of the task. There is less risk in being discredited when trying the impossible than when trying the possible. – We are less ready to die for what we have or are than for what we wish to have or be. 

Hoffer highlights  “hatred” as the most accessible and comprehensive of all unifying agents. We do not look for allies when we love, but we always look for allies when we hate. Hatred springs from self-contempt than from legitimate grievance. Passionate hatred can give meaning and purpose to an empty life. All our enthusiasms, devotions, passions and hopes, when they decompose, release hatred. On the other hand is possible to synthesize enthusiasm, a devotion and a hope by activating hatred. 

Hoffer assumes that  in order to be effective a doctrine must not be understood , but rather has to be believed. The certitude of the infallible doctrine insulates the individual from his self and the world as it is. The effectiveness of the doctrine doesn’t come from its meaning but from its certitude. Mass movements can rise and spread without believe in God, but never without belief in the devil. The practice of terror serves the true believer not only to intimidate and crush his opponents but also to invigorate ad intensify his own faith.

 Some concepts in the book like the heterogenicity fostering mass movements and the benefits of collectivization of homogenous population appear rather dated. His notion that “ if immigrants who came to the US been superior people – the cream of countries they came from – there would have been not one US but a mosaic of lingual and cultural groups” seems unjustifiable at present. 

 Strength of faith manifest itself not in moving mountains but in not seeing mountains to move. “Vanity” said Napoleon, “made the revolution; liberty was only a pretext.” 

PS. The family "likeness" of mass movements, uses the word family in a taxonomical sense: “The tomato and the nightshade are of the same family, the Solanaceae. Thought the one is nutritious and the other is poisonous, they have many morphological, anatomical and physiological traits that is common so that even the non-botanist senses a family likeness. The assumption that mass movements have many traits in common does not imply that all movements are equally beneficent or poisonous.”