Rating: 4/5

60th book of 2021. Artist for this review is French painter Pierre-Auguste Renoir. 

  He saw society as an ocean of mire into which one had only to dip a toe to be buried in it up to the neck.

My first Balzac, and I am left impressed. Starting it, I wondered if this would be those fairly short novels that feel 100 pages longer, but that fear quickly disappeared. It does begin with a lengthy (in true 19thC fashion) description of a boarding-house and its inhabitants, which makes for slow progress, especially attempting to commit the French names to memory, but as soon as the story begins, the narrative becomes readable and enjoyable. Balzac (or rather, Krailsheimer) surprised me with its readability. Set in 1819, just three years after the Battle of Waterloo, the backdrop to Balzac's novel is a Paris in love with money, affluence and social status. 

"Pont Neuf"—1872

The titular Père Goriot doesn't hold down the narrative in the beginning, instead we follow Eugène de Rastignac, a law student. Rastignac is in the boarding-house with Goriot though, and the mysterious ex-convict Vautrin. Père Goriot is book 23 of his 89 (give or take, depending) book/story multi-volume collection, La Comédie humaine. Balzac divided the novels into subcatergories, so to speak, within the collection. He first placed Père Goriot into "Scènes de la vie parisienne" [Scenes of Life in Paris, one translation says], but later moved it, perhaps more aptly I would agree into, "Scènes de la vie privée" [Scenes of private life]. Above all, this is a personal novel about Goriot and his daughters, in true Lear fashion. 

Goriot is an old man, the butt of many jokes, mocked and ridiculed, and misunderstood. He appears to be obsessed with two young and beautiful women who walk in the high social classes of Parisian life, but of course, they are his daughters. Where they are rich, finely-dressed, respected members of society, Goriot lives in the dilapidated boarding-house with no curtains over his windows. His obsessive love for them has led him to financial and personal ruin. In a Paris that is drawn by Balzac as caring only for money, status, Goriot stands alone. Rastignac attempts to enter the social-circles of Paris to win one of Goriot's daughters and all the while the mysterious Vautrin lurks on the fringe. 

Vautrin's character was one of the highlights of the novel and his long monologue to Rastignac in the second part, "Entry on the Social Scene" was the best part of the novel. Being a French realist work, similar to that of Les Misérables (I'll come back to this point in a moment), I actually found Balzac's work better, at times. Vaurtin's speech is brilliant. I wish I could transcribe the lot. 

  'Fifty thousand young men in the same position as you are all trying to solve the problem of how to get rich quick. You are just one of all that number. Imagine the efforts that will demand and how bitter the struggle will be. You'll have to devour each other like crabs in a pot, since there aren't fifty thousand jobs going. Do you know the way to get on here? Through brilliant intelligence or skilful corruption. Either plough into the mass of mankind like a cannonball, or infiltrate them like a plague. It's no good being honest. Men yield to the power of intelligence, though they hate it and try to decry it, because it takes but does not share. But they yield if it is persistent. In a word they kneel before it in worship once they have failed to bury it in mud. Corruption thrives, talent is rare, so corruption is the weapon of mediocre majority, and you will feel it pricking you wherever you go. You will see women whose husbands earn sixty thousand francs all told spending more than ten thousand on clothes. You will see clerks on twelve hundred a year buying land. You will see women selling themselves so that they can ride in a carriage with the son of a peer of the realm and go bowling off to Longchamp down the middle of the road. You have seen that poor old ninny Père Goriot obliged to pay off the bill of exchange endorsed by his daughter, whose husband has an income of fifty thousand a year. I defy you to go two steps in Paris without running across some diabolical fiddle.'

"Le Pont des Arts"—1867

Eventually the novel comes around to Goriot, and we see his misfortune played out, or, his sacrifice. His selflessness almost appears ridiculous. The final chapter is quite slow, after the climax of Vautrin's role in the narrative. Which is where, I would like to mention something else. I want to avoid using the dreaded spoiler-tag, but I do think there are huge similarities between this novel and Hugo's Les Misérables. I'll keep it fairly vague but Goriot reminded me slightly of Jean Valjean when he is the subject of great intrigue for a town, walking around, the mysterious old man, with seemingly a lot of money. And Vautrin is an ex-convict, just like Jean Valjean, and there is a scene in the middle of Père Goriot that is so similar to a scene in Les Misérables that I was getting my wires crossed. Père Goriot was published thirty years prior and Jean Valjean seemed to me like a combination of both Goriot's and Vautrin's character.

I will read more Balzac in the coming years. If I could have a whole novel of Vautrin's speeches then I would probably read it. Brilliant. I cared less about the sentimentality of Goriot, but that's because I'm an unromantic cynic myself. It can't be helped.