Rating: 2/5

This was kind of a weird introduction to Jamaica Kincaid. She was on my mental list of authors to try, so when I saw this book at a church book sale, I picked it up. It's very rambly; by the end of a sentence you often have no idea what or whom Kincaid was talking about at the beginning and have to backtrack. She also has no issue speaking ill of the dead, and of the living. It's a bitterly frank memoir about her brother who was dying (and eventually died) of AIDS, but mostly the book is about Kincaid's feelings toward her mother. I'd estimate the book is about 75% invective. I was expecting the book to be a little more about her brother (inferring from the title), but, as I suppose a grief memoir should be, it was primarily about the author herself and her anger at her family (or as she puts it, "the people I am from," as she reserves the word "family" for her then husband and her children).

The two moments that moved me the most were these: 1) when Kincaid meets a woman from home (Antigua) at a book signing and, for the first time, feels able to talk about her brother's death; and 2) her description of her brother's dead body. 

I found it interesting that she rarely referred to other people by their names, instead referring to them by their relationship to her. She has three brothers, and goes to lengths not to refer to them by name. She is not hiding their names from us, as she does name them each at least once in the book, but she does prefer to call them "my brother who ___" most of the time. Kincaid often passes possession of her mother to her brothers, referring to her mother as "his mother," explaining that she was not on speaking terms with her mother at the time. She also has complex workarounds for referring to her birth father and her step-father. 

At the time she wrote this book, she was married to Allen Shawn, son of Kincaid's mentor William Shawn (and, more interestingly to me, brother of Wallace Shawn who played Vizzini in The Princess Bride and Grand Nagus Zek on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine). She refers, at separate times, to her husband's father and to the man who reads what she writes. She names the latter "William Shawn," but does not reveal that the former and the latter are the same person.