" If I would had a choice between searching for the truth, and finding it, I would rather searching for it. " ( G.E.Lessing )

I must admit that the title of this book was the only factor that determined me in the decision to read it. I didn't know anything about the author, and I have a reluctance to read authors whose names are unfamiliar to me. In the end, however, I can only enjoy the discovery of thoughts that overlapped with my thoughts, even from the first pages, a predominantly reading study in fact, of literature, I would say, a side that defines me since the beginning of my reader status. 
 
Balzac used to say that the writer who is informed about the history of his country can credibly reconstruct the events of those times. But no one asks a writer for evidence. And, as an example, we have one of Shakespeare's famous passages from Anthony and Cleopatra, where Cleopatra receives a jewel from Anthony, as a gift, but she asks the messenger Alexas if Anthony was happy or sad, when he was given this gift. 
 It is obvious that Shakespeare invents this detail in order to give reality to his character as such. But the detail is plausible. It is not a truth, neither lie, though. It's a fiction that gives the character an increased percentage of truthfulness, makes it real. 
 Vargas manages to convince me that everything that matters is true, at least as long as the act of reading lasts, he reveals to me that a fiction is not the opposite of the truth, but on the contrary, the best way to reach it. Neither Don Quixote, nor Romeo and Juliet, nor captain Ahab, Rastignac, Jean Valjean or Oliver Twist existed, these people never stepped on the earth we stepp on. And yet, they exist to an immense extent. We just have to flip through a few pages for all of them to bring back to life. 
 On the other hand, I'd say that if reality is sometimes improbable, literature cannot afford it, it must give that impression of unity which the real world will never have. Art, in all its fields, is bound to be credible precisely for to produce a truth, the truth of its coherence and deep articulation of its structure, a quality that reality does not have. Life is only rarely a good artist.