Rating: 3/5

I liked this one, even if both the H and h got on my nerves at times. This really was a case of the h being too young and immature for marriage at the start. (She was 20, but a bit entitled and spoiled by her parents. Also, her mom gave her bad advice, didn't like or trust the H, and contributed to their marriage troubles.)

The h was too insecure (aren't they all?) to realize that the H had serious business troubles to contend with, she just assumed he put his career ahead of her. She was restless and bored, and started spending more time with her trust fund baby friends, who were all too self-centered and immature for the H and he tried to avoid socializing with them.

For her part, she was too demanding, too quick to jump to conclusions, and too fast to make remarks she later regretted. For his part, he expected a bit too much from her too soon, like wanting to start a family right away. He was in his 30's, so that was understandable for him, but she was only 20, so that's rushing it for her. He also never told her about his business troubles, which would have explained his frequent absences and cancelling plans at the last minute.

They go their separate ways after a big argument, when he gets home late, forgetting about the party they were invited to; one thing leads to another and the accusations fly (she's also been jealous of his PA, the OW in the story), she says she resents his wanting to tie her down with a baby, and he ends up saying they should have just had an affair rather than get married, since sex is all they have in common. What a mess!!

Five years later, her father's dead, her mother's ill, there's no money, and a more mature and subdued h needs the H's help. Neither has moved on, though there was the OM she was going to start dating, and the H never exactly says there was no one else, but if there was, it definitely wasn't the OW, who still works for him and still wants him.

The h's mother - who at first glance seems to be manipulating her daughter into caring for her to the exclusion of having her own life - really turns out to be ill, and has a change of attitude for the better, admitting that she was wrong to talk against the H the way she did. (Probably not surprising, since his money was being spent on getting her well.) But there are too many misunderstandings, unspoken feelings, etc. until the h is ready to leave again for good, thinking it's what the H wants, only to find him ready to fall apart at the thought of never seeing her again!

There were good moments, but it could have been better, with more focus on their marriage, and both making more of an effort. Still, it's not a bad read.