Rating: 2/5

Although Rubin places way to much stock on trying to explain biological process through the psychology of social constructs in gender, she comes away with the same conclusion that women have a maternal instinct while men like to compete in more of the global outside world. Her whole argument behind gender roles stems from the primary caretaker being women. Men are more independent b/c they were rejected by their mothers when they were small as being targeted as the other while women tend to be more relationship oriented b/c the lines between them and their mothers are blurred. I will give this book a 2.5.

Rubin is writing in age at the cusp of social societal change from the ideal of family life of 1950's today's world where both men and women work in order to keep pace with the ever increase in the standard of living. She tells of the increase effects of serial monogamy that people undergo now. She cites the fact that people are living longer and birth control as factors that have changed how we plan for our lives and the dissolution of the necessity of living in a nuclear family from teenage yrs to now. With it, adulthood has transformed from a destination to a process. Although I agree with her main thesis that family life is a dynamic process and each one is individualistic, I disagree with her conclusion that most gender roles are by their nature psychological. She stress the family as the main determinants of what shape us and how we look at gender roles. Rubin saw couples who did not know why they wanted to marry just that it seemed like the next step in their journey in life. She states that people are discontented only when they see that their lives do not necessarily have to be the way it is. She says she was surprised by the way she did not like working in her "dream job" when she was thrust in the unfamiliar role as the primary bread winner instead of simply helping out. In the '80's, masculinity was defined as being independent and taking care of himself and his family. From the book, I realize how women pioneers really have to work against the grain in order to push boundaries from their current status quo. The book talks about the age in which rapidly changing gender roles is rocking the culture and how the culture is still stuck in an age in which inequality in gender pay is still the norm.

Rubin states that the childhood impulse for both separation and unity will continue through out his life playing out in relationships in being wanting to be with the lover and independent from her. "We long for closeness and connection with another, and that we feel unaccountably uncomfortable when we get it---that, without warning, we begin to feel anxious in some ill-defined and indefinable way." She states that gender identification starts early as mothers teach their male kids that they are male and therefore the other while girls are united in their gender to their mothers so feel more secured with being taken cared of my their mothers. She says this explains men's violence towards their women and their taken in their sense of independence earlier on while girls develop a sense of self later in life b/c they relate to their mother more and thus she will have more empathy since she sees a continuation b/w her and her mother. She also says the early "abandoning" of the mother of his male child explains the male jealousy when he has a child and the woman wants to mother the new child @ the exclusion of the husband. The difference of how mothers treat their male and female children shows why male's have traditionally had the difficulty in wanting to be unified by a female b/c the mother pushes him away early on in life while a female has difficulty remaining independent b/c of her deep identification with her mother.

"Intimacy. we hunger for it, but we also fear it. We come close to a loved one, then we back off." She terms this the approach-avoidance dance. She defines intimacy as having someone one can take off ones social mask off with but she also states an anger rails up when this happens b/c the person reflects a mirror of our weakness. She describes a typical man's situation in that he is very reticent to share his thoughts and feelings b/c when asked he more likely doesn't have any. She states that men are trained to camouflage their feelings under cover of an exterior of calm, strength, and rationality; thus causing a huge communication gap b/w men and women. I think this book is dated as men today except the fact they have to open up to their loved ones. She states that while women need men to express their feeling through talking, men only need proximity to his beloved to feel emotionally secure. She says that a conversation for adults involves intimacy---the wish to know another's persons inner life along with the ability to share one's own. It is the expression of sadness, his fear, his dependency the fact his exposing his own vulnerability that makes a man close up and shut down. She says that while nurturing personality can hinder intimacy when a person hides behind being nurturing in order to avoid bearing ones soul in an intimate relationship. For women, Rubin states b/c a woman has a continuous relationship with her mother, her issue in intimacy is setting boundaries between her and the beloved. In this, a friendship is better than a marriage b/c physical and psychological distance is sometimes required whereas in a marriage the spatial boundaries disappear. 

Rubin says that sexuality b/w the sexes gets complicated b/c whereas men need sex to feel an emotional connection, women need intimacy via conversation in order to feel emotional enough to have sex. A general rule is women need face to face contact in order to feel close, men need the action of comradeship to feel close to someone. She again goes back to maternal attachment b/w boys and girls to show the difference in sex drive. For boys, she states b/c they are encourage to separate themselves from a maternal bond, then they have suppress emotions while for girls the emotional bonds are intact while the erotic is suppressed so that she can have attraction to men. Furthermore, she says the reason men masturbate more than women is due to the suppression of the erotic life or it can be explained via testosterone in men vs women. The men she talks to are afraid of sex b/c it brings into their life an uncontrollable intimacy that they fear. She attributes this fear of intimacy b/c the mother dissed him @ an early age by saying that they are different. She says that sex for women is based on emotional needs even for women who are sexually promiscuous they hunger emotionally. Sex for women are frought with the need to establish boundaries; thereby sex dropping off as the marriage progresses b/c they need to establish a strong sense of self. Furthermore, Rubin states that women need an emotional connection to orgasm. She also states that women get a high when they feel sexual control over the man.

Whereas in the '80's independence had a negative connotation for women of a lonely divorce women, now it means freedom just like it does for men. The idea of independence for men is dangerous since they will not want help when they need it. Rubin says the reason why men think of independence as good is that they think about it in terms of how they see themselves in relation to the world and their vision of themselves in it whereas for women they think of independence in terms of relationship thus they are more ambivalent towards the word. Although men do not think of independence in terms of relationships, they would marry again quickly after they lose their wife b/c for them relationships confer significant advantages while for women they would not want to marry again b/c they felt that their were significant costs associated with it in terms of losing themselves to being a house wife. For men, they wanted co-habitation over marriage b/c they wanted the togetherness minus the financial responsibility besides the fact that they have more independence in cohabitation relationship rather than a marriage.

Rubin states that "the economic independence of men has been mistaken for their emotional independence, while women's economic dependency has been taken to signify their emotional dependence". B/c of significant friendships, women who become a widow are not affected by it while windowerhood effects men unless they immediately marry again. Rubin confirms Cole's class that men have less of an emotional support system than women b/c while men have friends to do things with they usually reserve the deep emotional feelings for their wife while women like talking to each other about their feelings. That is why, I usually have a close male friend like Jaydeep whom I did stuff with but @ the same time bounced ideas off while reserving my deep emotional life with Renita. The issue here is how does a married man share his feelings with other women that is not his wife without the potential attending consequence of cheating on her? Men want a relationship with his woman to fulfill all his emotional needs while most women do not need their men to fulfill most of her needs. She states that while men experience bonding with each other, they experience intimacy with women. 

Letting their guard down is more difficult for a man than a woman, b/c they are judged by the woman by how independent he is thus disincentivising his desire to be vulnerable towards her. I need a wife who will allow me to be completely vulnerable to her so I can be strong towards the world. She states that the economic dependency of a woman's life leads to emotional dependency so a woman is treated like a child. She states that little girls relationship with their father gives them a sense of independence b/c she sees him as the other. While emotional attachment means 2 people are attached to each other, she states that it is different from the financial dependency that women have on men. She believes that men want women to be independent and women to be dependent on them so that the men would not have to feel the dependency they felt when their mother's rejected them. Rubin states that men fear that their women's independence might grow so much that they no longer need him but paradoxically it is that independent spark that initially attracted him to her. 

In the '80's, a man's identity revolves around what he does for work, and a women's identity when she has a relationship revolves around being a wife and mother. I guess this is the reason why men die after they retire b/c they lose their sense of identity unless they can transfer their identity into a new source. Rubin shows a biological imperative in women to care what is going on with the kids while men simply tune out. Although some couples yearn for the wistful years where traditional roles of marriage were in enforced, they do not like how things turned out for their parents in which the man had nothing to do with family life while the wife only stays at home and seemed empty in terms of personal responsibility. Rubin says that the pluses of this way of the world is that men get to raise their children @ the same time she decries the lack of paternity leave that blocks social and structural change in the workforce. I would be more apt to support equal work for equal salary pay if their was a generous paternity leave that matches maternity leave. Women worry of the prestige that their man would lose if they succumb to her desire to have a family life at the expense of a greater professional visibility. Men compare themselves with other professionals so they feel bad when they do not make as much as their friends so women worry too b/c a man self-esteem will indirectly effect their relationship. While men will choose work over love when they have to choose, women will choose love over work.

Rubin believes that the mother-infant bond is a pure ideological psychology not based on scientific facts. One only needs to look @ nature of mammals to know it is in fact a biological imperative for moms to take care of their young not the fathers. A remedy she proposes to fix this is to have flex time for both men and women so both with be involved in parental care. While women have conflicts about the division of time b/w working and parenting, a man has no such quandaries. For him, parenting enhances his quality of life in relation to his worklife. Whereas men compete in their worklife, women compete for the affection of their children. Again, Rubin places to much stock on psychological process to explain biological phenomenon of women wanting to be the primary caretaker for their children.

She believes to have lasting change the personal belief should line up with institutional change or else the personal change will not truly change the global thinking. She says one of the ways this new way of thinking helps people today is that men no longer take for granted what women do at home. She also states for an idea to become reality: the idea must be first into common discourse as words without action, only when the idea becomes commonly accepted can the next step in the movement begin. Although she believes the psychological underpinnings of gender behavior has at its root a sociological structure, I believe it is evolutionary biology that underlies the psychology of gender.