Rating: 2/5

Not what I expected for this genre - it ended up with the two main characters focusing on the political feud of their king &amp; queen, rather than just on the couple themselves.

SUMMARY:

Hillary Astaire lost her mother at a young age, and as she spent her youth caring for her ill father in the countryside, she doesn't have any friends or sophisticated airs. Her father, desperate to ensure her security once he died, ended up signing an agreement with Lord Wolverton - a philandering, heartless aristocrat who barely looked her way upon first meeting. 

Determined to take charge of her life, Hillary manages to win Wolf's governess over and they head to Italy (her mother's dear friend, a Lady Gardener, would introduce her to England's exiled Princess Caroline and her court there). Hillary sends a letter, declaring she is breaking off the engagement, and is immediately embraced by Caroline and her entourage. Italy is beautiful, and Hillary starts to blossom with all the loving care from three motherlike figures (the governess, the "aunt," and the princess). Hillary also has fun learning how to flirt a little with a few male admirers. 

She is so transformed, in fact, that Lord Wolverton doesn't even recognize her when he arrives in Italy, to spy for the prince. (The prince had been trying for YEARS to get a divorce from the princess, openly flaunting his mistresses and "commonlaw wife," even going so far as to claim Caroline was the one having an affair.) The court referes to Hillary as "Angelica," and she does not correct them, just waiting to see how long it will take Wolf to figure out her identity. He tags along on all their little outings, trying to woo her with quite indecent moves and rude speech when he assumes she isn't a true lady. She doesn't give in, though - she knows he is simply using the same moves he's employed to woo many other women; he is a collector, a conqueror - not a true lover. 

An earthquake hits while they are up in the mountains on a narrow road, and when Hillary falls off the edge, Wolf realizes he loves her. He manages a daring rescue, as she had managed to grab a bush and not fall to her death, and while Hillary convalesces, she gets to see a gentler side of the Wolf. Still, the couple continue to quarrel over the Princess's plight, as news reaches them that the King has died, and the prince-now-king announces his refusal to recognize Caroline as queen. This means she won't be allowed to be buried next to their daughter - so Caroline decides to take the fight back to England and participate in a sham trial. Hillary and Wolf officially break things off when Wolf refuses to testify for the queen; he knows Caroline has never cheated on her husband. 

However, when the court decides to put Hillary on the stand, ruining her reputation with their lewd line of questioning (in an attempt to say Caroline was a bad influence on Hillary and thus capable of having an affair), Wolf has had enough. He shouts his intentions to testify for the queen and against the king - and the trial is dropped! Hillary sees the final proof of Wolf's true love for her, and they live happily ever after.

REVIEW:

Like I said initially, I was surprised that this book became so political, and I was surprised with how little physical romance there was in it. It really isn't a bad book, it's just a bit boring. Possibly because there was a lot of "telling" and not a lot of "showing," as well as I couldn't get a "good read" on a lot of the characters. The depiction of the local Italians was a bit odd, for one, as was a lot of their behavior.