Rating: 4/5

This is a reread for me, but I first read this series over ten years ago. I've knocked a star off my earlier review, mainly because I'm a little bit more critical as a reader now. It's still a great immersive read.

Pyanfar Chanur is the captain of The Pride of Chanur, an interstellar trading ship of the hani, a leonine species. While at Meetpoint station a strange creature attempts to board The Pride, clearly fleeing from kif, a sinister species also docked at Meetpoint. Pyanfar's snap decision to shelter this strange-looking human creature, Tully, has immediate and far-reaching consequences as the kif attack with the lethal force and set off in pursuit of The Pride. Running for their lives, the hani ship encounter the bizarre methane-breathing knnn and mahendo'sat, allies with ulterior motives, and soon find themselves at the center of a major political incident that threatens the whole of the multi-species Compact. All of that on top of the domestic political and familial events triggered by the situation.

Cherryh's Compact Space is an adjunct of her Alliance-Union series in a different part of space. That's not immediately apparent from this first book, but there are more tie-ins in later books and space travel works the same in both series. It feels a bit dated now, over 35 years after first publication, particularly in the lack of ubiquitous computing and communications access, but even so the series remains an absolute classic of space opera.

The rich characterization of each of the alien species and the characters are typical of Cherryh's books, as is the almost claustrophobic closeness of the intense third person narrative from Pyanfar's point of view. She is a proud and cranky character prone to impulsive actions, but is deeply caring and protective of the people she considers her own. Many of the criticisms that her fellow hani and bystander aliens are completely valid, but Pyanfar goes to a lot of trouble to do the right thing despite there being are far easier and much less moral way of resolving the situation.

Two final points: 

The Pride of Chanur is full of a defining feature I find in nearly all of Cherryh's writing. Like in real life, important pivot points are often over before you even realize it, with consequences and implications to be sorted over for ages afterwards. What this translates to in terms of a reader is that you need to read this stuff carefully because key points may be as simple as a sentence in the middle of action.

Lastly, while this is the first book of a series, it's actually a standalone and can be read as such. The next three book form a trilogy followed by another standalone for a total of five books.