Rating: 4/5

Perhaps the best memoir I've read. The writing is clean, graceful, blunt, and lucid. While reading it, I kept thinking that the North may have won the war because Grant was such a good writer. What I mean is that the clarity of his prose shines through so brightly, and it does the same even in his orders during the war. Of course, it is not enough for orders to be clear, they must also be effective. But if the orders are sloppy, it doesn't much matter what was intended in the first place. I wish I had come across this book thirty years ago, so that I could have studied it as an example of simple, concise and powerful writing.

At the same time, this is one of the least personal of memoirs that I have read. The material covered is basically Grant the soldier and general. There is a short preamble about his family and roots, and a passing nod to his wife. Otherwise, this book covers his time at West Point, in the Mexican War, and then in the Civil War. Thankfully, for me at least, those are all good enough subjects. From its contents, the main thing I took away from this book is how little a general thinks about fighting itself. Instead, thoughts go towards troop disposition, morale, and above all, supplies. The details of fighting, I'm led to believe, rests with the lower commanders. As a result, the commanding generals almost necessarily think of their units as pieces, and to a certain extent stop thinking of them as men. I think this habit of thinking simply goes with the territory, and I also think it probably makes possible the incredibly horrible decisions that the generals must make.

Grant struck me as being considerably more humble than I would have thought possible in a general. His praise for Sherman seems unbounded, and Sheridan gets only slightly less effusive treatment. For the most part, he does not brag about his own accomplishments. Rather, he is quick to give credit to his underlings, but always in a way that seems fair and well considered.

The one person to whom Grant seems incapable of being generous is Lee. For years, I'm sure Grant lived at least partly aware of the conventional wisdom that Lee was the unparalleled genius, while Grant was a drunken butcher who had the advantage of far superior numbers. He debunks the numbers. At several points, he notes how Lee must have been deceived. He rarely gives Lee credit for any fine military move. And there is one anecdote that seems to make Lee seem like an unfeeling bastard. After a particularly bloody fight, the no-man's land was filled with wounded from both sides, and the camps could hear their pitiful screaming and moaning. Grant wrote Lee proposing a temporary truce to allow both sides to collect their wounded and dead. Lee haggled over the terms of the truce for a few days. In the meantime, the wounded basically all bled out, and by the time they had arrived at terms, both sides could only go out to collect their dead. He didn't say it, but this anecdote clearly raises the question: Who was the heartless butcher?

The book is packed with very detailed descriptions of campaigns and troop movements. For me, there were too many. I'm sure these are invaluable to students of history. And I completely understand why they are there. But for my purposes, the detail was a bit excessive (and this is my failing, not the book's). My Library of America edition also has perhaps the most useless maps. They might just as well have put a map of the U.S. at every one of these pages, and it would have been just as much help. 

I highly recommend this book if you have any interest in the Civil War, or American History, or even if you just want to see the difference between the clarity of thinking at that time and what passes for thought among politicians today.