Rating: 5/5

I loved this book as a child, and probably much of this review will be my childhood experience of reading it. I've looked through some other reviews and been interested to see the viewpoints of those who don't like the book. There are certainly some race and gender reps that seem dated or not PC now, but I wonder how a child of 10 or 12 (my age when I first read it) would perceive it.

For myself, reading it about 1978 or 1980, it was an eye-opening experience. First, one thing I like about L'engle's writing is that she isn't afraid to work more adult themes into her work. Time travel, the past affecting (even erasing) the future, possible sexual abuse, it's there, but not wallowed in. But they are interesting, challenging concepts upon which to ruminate. Next, I grew up in an evangelical household, with a very authoritative view Christianity, with parents who were sexist and bigoted. Reading about a woman who could be a scientist ( I know, she works from home) and about Indians who were more mature than the white colonists who feared them were both totally new perspectives. As was L'engle's philosophy, always gently there, of a kind and loving deity who makes beautiful music, in addition to her portraying those with belief as actually open-minded, likeable people (again, a first in my experience). Her philosophy of trying to be part of a greater pattern is not confrontational. There is no epic battle in this book. Charles Wallace saves the world by helping someone be with the person they love, at the expense of himself, but it's done without fireworks, hardly even acknowledged by anyone. There's no hero fantasy being played out here. Isn't that kind of an interesting idea? Meg saves him by asking for help instead of strapping on a sword and fighting for him- isn't the idea of asking for help instead of being entirely self-sufficient against the standard tropes of fantasy? There's no sidekick-hero dynamic here. Everyone does what they can do, and the least appealing character in the book is ultimately the one who placed herself, before anyone even knew what she was doing, between her family and the powers of darkness. 

I'm not a Christian myself, but have more respect for this sort of philosophy than fire and brimstone. And maybe submission is an awkward trope to wrap one's head around, but you certainly don't read much like it in these days of spunky, sassy heroines who are simultaneously totally sexy and totally virginal in the popular teen books. I don't advocate submission as the answer to everything, but maybe butt-kicking isn't the answer to everything either. 

Don't get me wrong, sometimes a good sassy butt-kicking is what I like to read about. But reading about community, hope and harmony again was a refreshing change.