Rating: 5/5

__________________________   
“Herodotus says, "Very few things happen at the right time, and the rest do not happen at all: the conscientious historian will correct these defects.” ––Mark Twain  

[Revised review]

The Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court is one of the first time-travel novels and [next to  Llama Llama Red Pajama] the book I have read the most times in the last 60 years or so. 

It begins when Hank Morgan, all around mechanical savant, social philosopher, factory manager, and part-time brawler, gets into a dispute with one of his employees. 

It was during a misunderstanding conducted with crowbars with a fellow we used to call Hercules. He laid me out with a crusher alongside the head that made everything crack, and seemed to spring every joint in my skull and made it overlap its neighbor. Then the world went out in darkness, and I didn't feel anything more, and didn't know anything at all —at least for a while. 

Though he doesn’t know it yet, he has traveled back in time to a meadow in the 6th century CE and from Connecticut to King Arthur’s England.  Note: As a mode of time travel, getting hit in the head with a crowbar has some obvious drawbacks, but it was all that was available in the 1880s, I suppose. 

So, Hank was still recovering in the meadow, puffing on his meerschaum pipe, when a knight rides by, notices that Hank is breathing smoke, and concludes that Hank must be either a demon or a dragon. He then “arrests” Hank for the crime of breathing smoke, and drags him back to Camelot, where Hank is condemned to be burnt at the stake.  Note: Yes, burning someone at the stake for smoking does seem to be somewhat ironic. 

This brings up one of the stupidest plot gimmicks in all of literature:  Hank just happens to remember that a total eclipse of the sun occurred in England in his vicinity on the very day and minute that he will be basted and roasted in the year A.D. 528. Clever Hank declares himself to be a powerful wizard who will destroy the sun if he isn’t freed.  Note: On second thought this is not as outlandish as it sounds, I, myself, knew that a total eclipse of the sun would occur in medieval city of Muncie, Indiana, on April 8, 2024 at 3:06. And I knew it years ahead of time. So I must be a wizard, too.  People of Muncie, I am a great and powerful Wizard. Drop the matches and pay me homage . . .. and money. 

After he saves the world, everyone is convinced of Hank’s magical powers, and as it implies in the quote at the top of the page, he sets out to correct the defects he sees in history. Hilarious adventures ensue as “The Boss,” as he now calls himself, attempts to remedy the world’s ills. Many of these adventures are satires of problems that still existed in Twain’s 19th century––slavery, lynchings, social castes, unfair draconian laws, and Jim Crow like restrictions among them.  So was the need for soap. 

★★★★★  Warning:  Some of the people I have recommended Connecticut Yankee to previously have not fully agreed with my 5 star recommendation. You can find the survivors sitting on lily pads in my backyard koi pond–– catching flies for their luncheon. Beware of the Wizard of Muncie, for he is “subtle and quick to anger”.