Rating: 2/5

What a disappointment! I do realize this was Pratchett's first proper novel, even though he, for example, wrote the childrens' book The Carpet People (I liked this one, see my review here) before this one. Afterwards came Strata, which was a try-out for his Discworld series. To be honest, despite the problems Strata had, it was better written and more consistent than The Dark Side of the Sun.

In his first novel, Pratchett tried his luck with a Sci-Fi story, the effort itself commendable. But even if this is a quick read, it's hard - except for certain moments - to put your mind to it, to picture the different characters, events, and so on. At least, I had problems with this little novel. 

Sure, there are fragments and signs of Pratchett's humour and beliefs, which are expressed better and more coherent in the later Discworld novels. Here, I found, the humour and some setting elements were comparable to Douglas Adams's famous The Ultimate Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy series, which came out later and were better worked out (in my opinion).

The Dark Side of the Sun is about a character, Dom, who's about to rise in function, is on a quest to find Jokers World, but encounters several problems to prevent him from succeeding. Even from his relatives he's not to expect much help (that's what I understood). Robots, eh, humanoids, are also part of the story.

Of course there's probably some thought behind this story, be it philosophical, satirical, a parody on the typical space-based Sci-Fi stories (?), ... In any case, Pratchett used many difficult words, but also wasn't consistent when letting the Phnobic do the word: the creature is supposed to lisp, hence double s in most words, but not everywhere. There were also some comma's missing (hello, clarity?) and a few conjugations were incorrect (like he forgot to edit the phrases, or maybe his editor forgot).

On several occasions the story swerved off topic: Dom (and his friends) are doing something, the next instant they're elsewhere already. Bridging events could have been better. There were moments I wanted to throw the book away.

In short: not a recommended read at all, unless you're a tr00 die-hard fan of Terry Pratchett and are desperate to read anything he has written.