Rating: 3/5

I was so sure I would love this book, that I would love John Muir. After all, the book's editor, Edwin Way Teale, seems to love John Muir, and I am a great fan of Edwin Way Teale.

Was Muir a bit odd? Is "odd" an understatement? Not that he didn't have every right to be, abused and tortured as he was throughout his boyhood and teens by his Bible-thumping religious nutcase of a father. 

If ever there was an argument against religion--I confess to speaking as a gnostic atheist here--John Muir's brutal upbringing is the perfect illustration. And then this victim of religion grew up to become the country's leading naturalist and a groundbreaking conservationist whose life's work involved the sciences. 

If Teale's selections from Muir's body of literary work is a comprehensive sample, Muir himself was inexplicably and unnaturally goddy throughout his life--despite his upbringing--attributing the natural wonders that he studied and celebrated to the cleverness of God. 

He seemed to know no fear. He may have been, like George Armstrong Custer, unable to conceive of his own demise. More likely he was a fatalist. He would live till he died, and his god having already determined the time and manner of his death left him free to tempt fate to his heart's content.

He frequently and casually risked life and limb and the lives and limbs of his companions, were they human, equine or canine (specifically, Jerome Fay, a human; Brownie the mule, an equine; Stickeen, a canine), in order to perform his "work," the work to which he often refers. I suppose he was measuring and charting and drawing and observing, but concerning the specific nature of this work I am still unclear.

He was apt to park himself in the midst of a forest fire for the sake of said work. He set off across glaciers in furious gales for the sake of this work. He broiled himself, he froze himself, he navigated cliffs in the Sierra and leapt glacial crevasses in Alaska, all for this work, whatever it was.

Today we would probably call him an adrenaline junky. He hoped to die a glorious death at the foot of a cliff he'd underestimated, or perhaps beneath a mighty tree blown over in a mountain gale. And it is surprising that the elements did not claim him at last, considering the risks he took. Instead he died as an old man, in bed, of pneumonia.

Notes:

p 40-41 Little wood ducks are not carried to water or to the ground by their mother. They jump. It is too bad that there were no game cams in those days.

p 87 It is evident that both Edwin Way Teale and John Muir fell victim to post-war (the Civil War) claims made by former Confederates, who were eager to justify their violence against the formerly enslaved Black population, that "dangerous bands of marauding Negroes" were victimizing the white population.

p 123 Making Dutch oven bread over a fire: "...the weight of the oven is a serious objection." Shortly after reading this, I was allowed to lift one of these Dutch ovens at the Farmers/Fenimore Village Museum in Cooperstown, NY. 

p 212 Are root-bowls cradle knolls?

p 216 "In this glorious forest the mill was busy, forming a sore, sad center of destruction, though small as yet, so immensely heavy was the growth. Only the smaller and most accessible of the trees were being cut. The logs, from three to ten or twelve feet in diameter, were dragged or rolled with long strings of oxen into a chute and sent flying down the steep mountain-side to the mill flat, where the largest of them were blasted into manageable dimensions for the saws. And as the timber is very brash, by this blasting and careless felling on uneven round, half or three fourths of the timber was wasted."

(I remember reading in previous pages that some of the trees were so large that rather than felling them with sawing, dynamite was used, causing massive waste of timber. elc)

p 220 "My own ways are easily easily made in any direction, but Brownie, though one of the toughest and most skillful of his race, was oftentimes discouraged for want of hands, and caused endless work." 

p 276 A bole is a tree trunk and a boss is a burl, so presumably his "bossy boles" are trees covered with burls.