Rating: 3/5

3 stars 

Is there such a thing as conjoined triplets? That's what this final novel in the fabulous Martin Beck series reminds me of. Three separate drafts of novels that came out as a single unit, all attached to each other in awkward and painful-looking ways. 

Let's look:

The plot strand that's best developed is the one concerning Gunvald Larsson hunting a cell of free-lance international terrorists who have come to Sweden to kill a visiting American senator. So far, so good. 

The two lesser developed plot strands: 

1) an 'innocent' young girl (Rousseau's idea of the 'nature child') is falsely accused of attempted bank robbery. She is poor and uneducated...and therefore the perfect victim of a lying state that claims to have its people's best interests at heart, but really only cares about protecting money and privilege. (One of this author duo's main topics) 

This strand attempts some odd -- and oddly placed -- humour around the character of "Braket" that makes it read like a court satire over longer stretches. It sticks out like a sore thumb from the tone of the rest of the work.

2) the quickly-solved murder of an erotic film producer who had the habit of getting young girls hooked on drugs in order to convince them to sleep with him and perform in his films. Again, the topic is the brutal exploitation of innocence for profit and privilege. 

In need of a serious edit:
Information and character descriptions are repeated in several places throughout the text with almost the exact same words, there are pages and pages of in-depth, irrelevant description and as discussed above, under-developed, awkwardly attached "subplots". 

But we can't really blame the authors for that. Wahlöö was dying of cancer and Sjöwall obviously didn't want to take the red pen to her partner's last words. Who can blame her?

With more time, thought and editing"Terroristerna" could have been a magnificent crowning finale to the series (and perhaps have spawned 2 other Wahlöö novels). As it is, it's an unfinished draft and should be read as such, rather like F. Scott Fitzgerald's final work in which you can see the brilliant potential it had if only the author had lived to complete it. 

Unfortunately, due to that, I personally found this last instalment largely boring and a real chore to slog through in parts-- a new experience for me with Martin Beck-- and can't rate it any higher than a 3 due to that. As much as I'd like to.

The series as a whole, however, gets an unabashed 5 stars. 

PS: if you ever get a chance to read these in the original Swedish, DO SO! It really opens your eyes to why this series was, and is, considered to be an absolute masterpiece. The plots and writing style seem to grow organically from the Swedish language, its rhythm and vocabulary. Something that gets more than lost in translation but it truly stunning to see in the original.