Rating: 4/5

Wanted: Someone Innocent
Miss Gillian Brayton, an orphan, goes to a school reunion and meets an old acquaintance Mrs Rita Fayre. Rita and Gillian were never friends and in fact there is an age gap between them but Rita pretends an old friendship and then asks Gillie to come work for her. As soon as they arrive at the country house Rita goes off with her artistic friends and leaves Gillie to get used to her new surroundings. On a walk around, Gillie comes upon a room with a piano which she enters and meets Ritas' husband Julian, an injured war hero, who it turns out Gillie has been employed to look after. However the servants treat her with distrust which Gillie cannot understand but she soon makes them come around when they realise she is oblivious to the real reason she is in the house. 
Gillie's main job is to serve coffee to Julian every night with his medication. Then after a few weeks Gillie hands in her notice and the next day Rita is discovered dead and suspicion falls on Rita. Even the servants suspect her though no-one blames her for it as Rita was disliked by all the servants. There is a large cast of servants and hangers on of Rita, particularly her business partner Henri Phoebus who seems to be constantly at the house.
 It was a very enjoyable short story from Margery Allingham. I had guessed part of the plot and who was responsible for the murder but Allingham still threw in a few twists. Well worth a read.

Last Act
Madame Mathilde Zoffany (Zoff) is an aging French actress living free gratis in an old house in England once belonging to Sir Christopher Perrins (Kit) but now owned by his son who is coming back to England with his family after the war. The war in Europe is also why Zoff arrived with her aging servants and her ward Margot Rob in England. Margot Rob is following in both her deceased mother and Zoffs footsteps by becoming an actress. 
Zoff has two grandsons, Viktor and Denis. Something happened a long time ago with Denis's mother and so he is the blacksheep of the family. Viktor is the preferred grandson and at a young age was betrothed to Margot but due to the war they have not married yet. In French succession law both grandsons are entitled to 1/3 each of Zoffs considerable estate (properties all over Europe) and she intends Margot to have the other 1/3. 
In the very first chapter we see how demanding and inconsiderate Zoff can be. She constantly calls the police for stolen jewellery and is accusing someone of trying to kill her. Dr Phillip Ledbury is her new physician of three months and he pulls Margot aside and tells her to keep Denis away from his grandmother as the last two times he was there Zoff had had a turn. 
The first inkling we have that someone indeed does have bad intentions towards Zoff is when Kit and Margot discover a favoured clock of Zoffs has been vandalised. The next day Zoff is dead and Dr Ledbury accuses Denis of killing his grandmother and stealing her jewels. Margot, who is in love with Denis, refuses to believe this to be true but someone in the inner circle did kill Madame Zoffany so who could it be? The police believe it to be an inside job so everyone is brought together so as to corroborate statements and find out who the killer is. 
The story is well constructed and once I got over the confusion of the first two chapters and got my head around who is who and how confusing Zoff can be I enjoyed the book and enjoyed how the killer was denounced. Without trying to give anything away it all hinges on French succession law. The main problem with the story is that as a short story there is very little room for character development and there is a big cast of characters. I definitely preferred the first short story as it was easier to follow but there are similarities in them both and they are well written by a master story teller.