Rating: 4/5

Hillerman without Navajo Nation

I am not a fan of mystery novels. Sherlock Holmes, Nero Wolfe, Hercule Poirot and Miss Marple, and even the Continental Op annoy me. Mystery novels are like sonnets. Sonnets are a type of poetry, but in addition to being a poem, a sonnet is required to adhere to a bunch of weird arbitrary conventions: 14 rhymed lines of iambic pentameter. Still, working within constraints can leave an artist with a paradoxical kind of freedom, and some poets somehow manage to produce utterly brilliant poetry in the form of sonnets: William Shakespeare, Edna St. Vincent Millay, ... Likewise, the mystery novel is an artistic form that is more or less required to follow a bunch of weird arbitrary conventions. Nevertheless, some novelists manage to produce great novels in the form of mysteries. 

For me, Tony Hillerman is the dean of these novelists who write mysteries. Hillerman works within his own constraints. Most of his novels (all but two, unless I missed some) are mysteries whose main characters belong to the Navajo Nation. I have read all Tony Hillerman's Navajo mysteries (and also the first of his daughter Anne Hillerman's continuation of the series, which I can recommend).

What are these two exceptions I mentioned? There is a later novel Finding Moon set in Southeast Asia, and also this one, The Fly on the Wall, Hillerman's second-published novel. Its hero John Cotton is a reporter who sounds a lot like Hillerman himself. As the publisher's blurb informs us, Cotton stumbles on dangerous secrets and struggles to stay ahead of those who want him dead.

Although Hillerman had not yet quite found his Navajo mystery formula when he wrote The Fly on the Wall, he had found his voice. Although I read The Fly on the Wall after reading a bunch of Hillerman's mysteries, I was not very disoriented by the lack of familiar characters. The country in which the story takes place is familiar, and Cotton is an engaging character. It definitely felt like Tony Hillerman to me. I enjoyed it.