Rating: 5/5

A fascinating inquiry into the 1908 Tunguska "event", informative, readable and entertaining. The Tungus region, even today, is remote, harsh and difficult to reach. The authors devote a chapter each to different aspects of the event, providing historical, cultural and geological background, offering eye-witness accounts, presenting the evidence and evaluating the theories propounded over the ensuing decades, sometimes taking fascinating detours into other areas. The chapter entitled "The Fire Came By" is probably the best example of this. 

We also meet some of the scientists and writers who played an important part in gathering evidence and advancing theories. I especially enjoyed reading about Leonid Kulik (the leader of the first expeditions to the region, starting some 20 years after the event) and Soviet Science Fiction writer Alexander Kazantsev, who presented his theories in fictional form. Brief but beautifully chosen excerpts from books by other authors, including Carl Sagan and Loren Eiseley, enliven the discussions and help fire the imagination, although the authors are more than capable in this department. 

Perhaps the most intriguing quality of the book is that none of the "standard" theories fits all the evidence or eye-witness testimony, which must have been maddeningly frustrating to the various parties involved. Whether you agree with the authors' conclusions or not, this is a fine example of popular science writing... one that I finished much too quickly. 

The book also has an Introduction by Isaac Asimov, as well as 2 Appendices by Russian scientists (one by Leonid Kulik himself), so you can't go wrong there. Finally, a Bibliography of both English and Russian publications is provided. 

I can't end this review without mentioning the center section of photos and illustrations as well as the maps accompanying some of the chapters. They are carefully chosen and beautifully enhance the text. The captions are an education in themselves, so I recommend reading them as you make your way through the book.