Rating: 5/5

In this 7th novel (of a 12-book series), I was pleasantly surprised to find that the fast pace and high energy of this series has not flagged one iota. I found myself thoroughly involved in this portion of the Poldark saga.

This novel takes place in 1798-1799 in Cornwall 14 years after Ross and Demelza were married. Their quality of life, despite its two steps forward and one back pattern, is inching toward more prosperity and they never take it for granted. They also give back in any way they can and are heavily involved in improving the prospects of the poor. Yet progress in that mission also seems abysmally slow. Ross takes on an added responsibility with the hope of making faster, wider-spread change, but for the most part Ross and Demelza do what they can . . . one or two persons at a time.

I thoroughly enjoyed the historical details woven throughout this story. England and France at war, and a trip to London for Ross and Demelza where we encounter many other contrasts between the dreary and ridiculously wealthy – with only a scrawny, short middle path between the two extremes. There are also many other details of lifestyles and fashion – even of progress and invention. Here is one entertaining example:

[Ross speaking to Demelza of the “loo”]: ‘No doubt you found last night that there is always a bucket of water too in the Jericho down the passage. As well as one of sand. It’s the best indoor system I have come across.’

And the title is apt in so many ways. In this conversation between Ross and his cousin Verity, Ross is defending his propensity for hot-headed feelings that lead to irreversible actions: ’But now and then you do not have all the control of your feelings you should have – and then thoughts and feelings surge up in you like – like an angry tide. And it is hard, sometimes it is hard to control the tide.’

There are more births, deaths, re-unions, and permanent departures from conciliation in the novel. All of them, in one way or another, are directly or indirectly linked to both the Poldark family and the Warleggan family. George Warleggan maneuvers his way into ever more wealth and power, and in a dramatic ending we discover that the most potent force tempering the worst of his greed for vengeance on the Poldarks is dissolved forever.

I am completely on pins and needles – anxious to discover where this saga will carry me next.