Rating: 3/5

So much melodrama!
The story follows a redheaded, one-armed orphan boy who gets hired by a noble lumber baron to make sure no one steals his trees before he chops them down. Orphan boy is noble and good, falls in love with an equally noble girl, and nobly guards the trees through hell or high water. 
The book was written in 1904 and the date obviously shines through. I've been trying to place the genre. It isn't women's fiction...the noble, male hero is clearly intended to inspire male readers. It somewhat reminds me of old fashion romances like Ivanhoe or Captain Blood but at the same time, feels too tame for that. Maybe Little Lord Fauntleroy feels like the best example, though clearly a lot changed in the 18 years separating the two books. 
I understand why many enjoy this work, especially for those who grew up with it. I found many elements of it satisfying, particularly the author's clear passion for nature and the delightful writing style. 
But I really, really disliked the heroine of the piece: Angel. She's a strong character, but also too good and perfect and noble. In her defense, she doesn't necessarily present herself this way (and a less loving narrator would easily call her spoiled), but Freckles - the titular hero - adores her. Like, kisses-her-footprints-in-the-mud adores her. He thinks her vastly above him and yet dwells on her perfections constantly. 
For all the reader knows, this is the first female he has ever met, so I found his insta-adoration (can you even call it insta-love?) rather unlikely and boring. But what I most found distressing about their romance is that throughout, the distinction is clearly made that Freckles is a Man and Angel is still a Girl. An impetuous, playful Girl. I never felt like her transition to "Woman" made sense. (If she even had a transition.) 
Generally, a 4 star read up until the last third, which ended up being so dramatic and unlikely I had to force myself to finish. 

As a side note, I tried imagining reading this book to my nephew some day and it just made me laugh to think about. Even if he turns into the redheaded poet we all imagine he might, I wouldn't put him through this!

I almost wish Freckles had died. I think I would have given it 4 stars. Melodramatic and noble and utterly stupid? Oh yes, without a doubt. But better than this nonsense about Angel saving his life again and again.