Rating: 2/5

The November 2024 #TBRChallenge is "It Came from the 1990s!" Believe it or not, I have a dearth of 90s books on Mount TBR. The vast majority or either older or were published in the 2000s. I went looking through my Signets, hoping against hope that there was at least one not published in 198-, and lucked upon this one. 

Lady Chloe Maitland has been left to her grandmother’s care during the Season, as her own mother has just married (for the second time) and is off to the Continent for her honeymoon. Unfortunately, Chloe’s grandmother is a well-known dragon of a dowager, and she has her heart set on betrothing her granddaughter to Lord Twisdale. Twisdale is more of age with the grandmother than young Chloe, and she not only finds him repulsive as a human being, she is also deathly allergic to whatever scent he wears – anytime he comes near, she sneezes quite violently.

She is at the Purcell ball when she first notices Lord St Aubyn (Julian to his friends), a notorious rake and scoundrel. He happens to be talking to Chloe’s aunt, Elinor Hadlow, herself a young widow on the prowl for a rich second husband. She’s set her sites on St Aubyn, and has gone so far as to buy the townhouse opposite the street from his in an exclusive neighborhood.

St Aubyn has no desire to wed the delectable Elinor. He is getting pressure from his father to marry someone respectable and set up his nursery, but like many rakes before and after him, he just Doesn’t Want To. Still sowing his wild oats, to a degree. He’s intrigued by the widow Hadlow, but not enough to make her his mistress, much less his wife.

Lady Chloe escapes from the ballroom after a particularly odious encounter with her elders, and runs smack into St Aubyn. She’s flustered to be face to face with such a notorious man, but because she knows she hasn’t chance of impressing him, talks rather frankly to him. They exchange dilemmas and realize that they might just be able to help each other out. Grandmama has clothed Lily basically in dowdy half-mourning, but St Aubyn is willing to feign some interest in her to stir up the interest of other, more eligible, bachelors, in hopes of thwarting Twisdale’s suit. Spending time with her will also deter Elinor, or so St Aubyn hopes. 

They don’t quite realize what they’ve gotten themselves into, and just what formidable forces they are up against. Grandmama is unyielding; Twisdale and Elinor begin plotting together to separate their quarry and trap them if necessary. 

Chloe releases some of her pent-up frustration in the form of wicked caricatures of the ton’s elite, drawing certain people as the animals that best suit them. Grandmama is a dragon; Twisdale is a serpent; St Aubyn, a lion rampart. Elinor steals Chloe’s drawings and has them displayed at a ton party, much to Chloe’s humiliation, but St Aubyn swoops in and lavishes his approval on them. He also happens to be friends with Beau Brommel, and gets the Beau on his side of matters. Chloe becomes a minor sensation for her drawings, much to Elinor’s irritation.

Chloe has basically one friend in Town, Laura Spayne, who is quite eager to help her avoid the noose Twisdale is dangling. St Aubyn and Theo Purcell (son of the original party hostess) also team up to assist the girls, and it seems to be working – until one fateful evening, when a trap goes utterly wrong: instead of compromising her hated niece with Twisdale, Elinor storms into the library to find Chloe and St Aubyn together in a passionate embrace! St Aubyn immediately asks Grandmama for Chloe’s hand.

So far, so good: a fairly traditional Regency romance setup, and our hero and heroine are ‘compromised’ into a convenient marriage. They independently decide that they love each other, too. Chloe, however, harkens back to her very first conversation with him and is convinced that St Aubyn doesn’t want to marry anyone, let alone her, and suddenly the clever girl lauded for her caricatures becomes the living embodiment of TSTL. She is so bound and determined to find a way to “free” Julian from this unwanted obligation, apparently so obtuse that she is unaware that he is not exactly fighting this twist of fate. 

She comes up with a hairbrained idea of how they can go through with their marriage and yet have it annulled later; Julian humors her for about a split second before reminding her that an annulment will socially ruin her, a consequence that of course she gave no thought to. She’s so headstrong and heartstricken, however, that she continues to search for a way to break their marital bond.

Meanwhile, now that Chloe is off the market, Twisdale has turns his sights to Laura. He’s desperate for a spirited young wife because he relishes the idea of breaking her like a wild animal. His first wife died under mysterious circumstances, and Chloe decides that if she can just prove that Twisdale murdered wife #1, he will be ostracized from Society and Laura will be safe from him.

So Chloe and St Aubyn spend their honeymoon at St Aubyn’s country estate, located conveniently next door to Twisdale’s estate, and decide to go detecting. The resolution of this last-minute third act mystery is laughably simple and easily solved, especially once revealed that Julian is Lord Lieutenant of the shire and thus, can bring private justice against Twisdale if necessary.

Chloe runs away in the final chapter and of course St Aubyn chases her, and they have a Huge Romance Moment at the end where they finally consummate their relationship. Because TSTL wins out in the end, I suppose.

I really enjoyed the first third to half of this book. The writing is smooth and adroit, the characters are fun, the antagonists scheming each in their own way. I started having reservations shortly before the big Compromising Scene at the ball, and Chloe’s 180 degree shift in personality just threw me completely. Shove in an unnecessary mystery and a really stupid ending, and this book just sorta came to a whimpering end, to me. Still, I enjoyed this author enough that I will read more of her work, which is a good thing, considering I already have several books (including the second in this duet) on Mount TBR.

Find more reviews at The Vintage Romance Reader