Rating: 3/5

Years ago, I wanted to lose some weight, and I started a 60-day challenge. When I was at work, I was sure to tell a certain co-worker my goal. Why? Was he my friend? No way. I detested this guy. He was so disrespectful, talked over me, and lied. But I used that to my advantage. Because once I told this gentleman my goal there was no chance that I was going to let him see me fail.

Oh to have a great enemy! 

The Art of War has several different translations. Some of them are better than others. Originally, I checked one out of the library (the Peter Harris translation), but I couldn’t get an audiobook to match that particular text. I ended up buying a copy from Amazon (the Lionel Giles translation) and an audiobook. However, I liked the original version from the library better.

This book offers 13 lessons for war. However, most of them are extremely repetitive. They usually boil down to some version of attack your enemy by surprise and think before acting. 

The Poppy War seemed to have a better and more engaging discussion of strategy.

This book is a bit outdated because so much has changed since 5th century BC. 

For example….

Once upon a time, there was a library called the Troy Public Library. During the recession, the city didn’t have enough money to keep the library running so it asked for a very slight tax increase. However, one political group went into overtime about taxes, taxes, taxes. The conversation became all about taxes and not about the library or reading. 

The sweet, kind, loving, intelligent, and gentle library lovers had to come up with a plan to save the library. And quick. They made up a campaign, “Vote To Close Troy Library August 2nd Book Burning Party August 5th” Now, this enraged the Trojans, and the campaign reached the national level. 

People turned out to vote 342% greater than projected, and the library was saved. 

That’s how we do it in Troy. 

2025 Reading Schedule
Jan	A Town Like Alice
Feb	Birdsong
Mar	Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere
Apr	War and Peace
May	The Woman in White
Jun	Atonement
Jul	The Shadow of the Wind
Aug	Jude the Obscure
Sep	Ulysses
Oct	Vanity Fair
Nov	A Fine Balance
Dec	Germinal

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Insta My Bookstore at Pango