Rating: 4/5

“There's a bad time coming, boys, there's a bad time coming! If things go on as they are, there's nothing lies in the future but death and destruction, for these industrial masses.”

I first read Lady Chatterley’s Lover when I was 14, in 1967. I felt I had to hide it well from my mother, so kept it between my mattresses. It was the first book I read with explicit sexual passages, and the first time I had read words no one in my house or neighborhood yet used, visceral words used proudly and unashamedly to describe what were for Lawrence holy acts and body parts. But the first third of it is not focused on sex; much of it describes conversations among characters about politics, art, class, and sure, sex. Lawrence connected the dots between industrialization, certain aspects of masculinity we now call "toxic", class, war, in conflict with and shaping the arts, love, relationships, and sex. This guy the literary establishment now largely dismisses for various reasons may still remind us of where we went wrong. First published privately in 1928, it was banned in many countries. In 1960 there was an obscenity trial with this book at the center, and the publisher, Penguin, won their case, after which it sold 3 million copies in the first year. 

Sexual intercourse began
In nineteen sixty-three
(which was rather late for me) -
Between the end of the "Chatterley" ban
And the Beatles’ first LP—Philip Larkin

Lady Chatterley was born Connie Reid, raised as an upper-middle class bohemian, familiar early on with free love/affairs and a generally liberal approach to politics and social ideas. In 1917 (with WWI still on), she marries Clifford Chatterley, an aristocrat who goes to war one month after they are married, and is paralyzed from the waist down, impotent. He becomes a successful writer, he becomes a coal baron, and drifts apart from Connie, who hates her husband’s writing, and the coal industry, especially what owners do to workers. She has a short, unsatisfying affair with Michaelis, a playwright, but finds her ideal physical and spiritual man in Oliver Mellors, the gamekeeper on Chatterley's estate, also newly returned from serving in the army. 

Mellors was well-educated, but he came back from the war to separate from an unsatisfactory relationship with his wife Bertha, and live alone—without women, but also outside of society and its empty materialism. He chooses to live as a working-class man, and to speak in the manner of his Darby upbringing and to be honest about his preference for the body and nature over the life of the mind and society. He and Connie choose each other, and begin an affair that is still well known in literary fiction for good reason. Sexual healing! And in a hut, not a mansion! Better?! Obviously! 

Roughly 100 years later we are aware of some of his ideas as not quite up to contemporary feminist standards, but Connie chooses him because he is tender-hearted as lover and generally as a man. And socialist, anti-materialist; oh, and the kind of lover she is looking for. The original title of the book was Tenderness, and this is the central theme of the novel for relationships and society, the feeling of complete yielding and sensitivity to each other that can happen in a tender-hearted relationship.

So what does the roughly cynical and somewhat callous Mellors believe, finally?

“I believe in that little flame between us.” This “flame” was created by mutually satisfying sex and nurtured through “tenderness.”

Mellors is initially skeptical that a woman with as much money as Connie could ultimately give it all up for him, but in time they both see that their passionate relationship can set them apart from society and feed each other’s needs. Sex is seen as pure creativity, as a kind of sacrament.

Some other themes that are familiar in Lawrence here: Body is better than mind; nature is better than machines; materialism, money, and the greed of the upper classes are destroying the planet. How to regenerate? Good democratic relationships, integrity, wholeness. Anarchism, socialism, communism as alternatives to capitalism. Class issues are addressed throughout. Lawrence sides with the working class, for sure.

“Their whole life depends on spending money, and now they’ve got none to spend. That’s our civilization and our education: bring up the masses to depend entirely on spending money, and then the money gives out.”
 
“If you could only tell them that living and spending isn't the same thing! But it's no good. If only they were educated to live instead of earn and spend, they could manage very happily. . .” 

Obscenity? Two, to my mind even better Lawrence books, The Rainbow and Women in Love also were seen as pornographic. So at one point Mellors redefines obscenity in his own terms in this book:

“Obscenity only comes in when the mind despises and fears the body, and the body hates and resists the mind.”

After being accused of writing pornography in those earlier books, D. H. Lawrence defiantly makes his most explicit book. Lady Chatterley was inspired by Frieda von Richthofen, who left her husband to marry Lawrence. But it’s less romance than a commentary on contemporary society in case you wanted more of a steamy romance. Lots of social criticism undermine that buzz, sorry.

“There, in the world of the mechanical greedy, greedy mechanism and mechanized greed, sparkling with lights and gushing hot metal and roaring with traffic, there lay the vast evil thing, ready to destroy whatever did not conform. Soon it would destroy the wood, and the bluebells would spring no more. All vulnerable things must perish under the rolling and running of iron.”

I think The Rainbow and Women in Love are better books, but I still think this is a great book. It introduced me, as a young teen, looking for obscenity, to, well, that, for sure, but also to a world of ideas perfect for growing up in the sixties with its exploration of alternatives to racism and materialism and war. Make love, not war, was the sixties cry, back to nature, and this book was an anthem to those cries. Love one another? Lawrence saw it would save us all from war and the alienation of civilization. Huh! Maybe he had something, there.

So why the very low Goodreads rating average? I think it might be that people here this is a "hot" sex book, and are disappointed it is so socio-political. You have to wait half the book to get to the sex, and some people critique the early twentieth century sexual relations in it? Not sure. I still like it, and there are good film versions.