Rating: 1/5

This is the second of Ms. Hess's books I've read, and since it's an early one, I won't just the rest by this novel's early HR tropes. It was written in the late 70's, so there's the usual over-the-top misunderstandings, angry words and temper tantrums, sex with other people (on the H's part, though it was part of a role he was playing as a spy) and too little time spent in each other's company. When they are together, it's either a bad fight, or a good f---, or both. Never enough communication, never any attempts to see the other's side and get past their own my-way-or-the-highway attitude. Of course, if Caleb had told Roxanne about the real reason he was with Nell (who happened to be the sister of Seth, the man who wanted to marry Roxanne), it would have saved a lot of bother, but no one wants to try honesty for a change. Certainly not Roxanne, who forgets all about Caleb saving her from a band of Natives by claiming her as his wife, and keeps trying to convince him (and herself) that she hates him, by acting like a snarky bitch, and flashing her boob at her cousin! (In that family, incestuous behavior is a way of life, as are other disgusting habits, like her uncle having sex with his woman while Roxy's in the room, YUCK!!!) As if that's not bad enough, when Caleb discovers she's pregnant, Roxy tells him it's Seth's baby. Then, she says to herself, that if only Caleb would tell her he loved her! Sure, after all, she's made herself so loveable!! A big NO to that!! And also to Caleb's hitting Roxanne, and all the promiscuity among the other characters, and an unnecessary description of what one of the characters, Lettie, endured in her younger days, including rape by her uncle. (The uncles in this book sure have a thing for their nieces! Then again, in real life, there were members of nobility who thought nothing of uncle/niece marriages. Barf bag, anyone?)

There was just too much in this book that could have been done without. Maybe she shouldn't have written it at all.