Rating: 3/5

When Viscount Pamyngton returns home, he is a bit astonished to learn that his mother, the Countess of Nevern, is setting him up to get married. She and her friend Lady Denham think that he'd do well to marry one of the many daughters of Lady Denham. I mean, five girls still unattached call for desperate measures, don't they? And the same counts for an unmarried son of 30 who shows no intention of changing his marital status, obviously, at least according to his mother. That's why the poor daughters of Lady Denham are not allowed to go to Brighton as promised.

 

Now we come to said desperate measures again because not all of the young ladies are content to sit around and wait for a certain Viscount instead of going to Brighton. So that's how Catherine Denham ends up being rescued by Viscount Pamyngton when she tries to travel on her own to Brighton. Due to this rescue those two get to know each other rather well - and, well, let's say that at least one (or maybe even both) of them wouldn't mind to deepen this relationship but alas...nothing is ever that easy, is it?

I really loved the well developed characters in this book, especially Catherine, the second eldest of the "available" daughters who cares for each and every one, gets upset very easily but gets over it just as easily either. Her spirited and forgiving nature paired with her natural wit turned her very quickly into my favorite characters but her elder sister Louisa was very sweet as well - and I must admit that I was a bit upset to see how she was suffering because she is not allowed to be with the one man she really loves. Viscount Pamyngton was also a very charming and nice character whom I liked a lot. 

The story itself is reliable and apart from some twists foreseeable but in a good way. It is not just another one of "those stories" with exchangeable characters but you get the kind of story you expect and it is the characters and the wonderful telling of the story that make the difference and turn it in an interesting reading experience that you'll enjoy and cherish, at least that's what I did.