Rating: 1/5

I don't know why I persevered with this until the end.

Well, I thought that there was a story within it, and I thought that if I got to the end, all the hints and clues would coalesce into a 'whodunnit'.

But no. There was a twist. I'm going to have to go spoiler alert  A possible suspicious death occurred. First of all, despite evidence to the contrary, the police jumped tot he conclusion it was suicide. But then, when someone else takes his life, it is immediately assumed all round that he was the murderer. And then, at the end, it was "X did it", even though there had been no foreshadowing, the stated motive was verging on implausible, and in any case we quickly moved onto peripheral matters. I've never met a 'murder' mystery where so little attention was paid to the denouement, the who-or-why-dunnit. 

I felt by the end the author herself had become bored of the story, which was unsurprising, because the book was very boring. Cliched characters who were only ever revealed in very superficial ways,and carried no contradictions. We had hours and hours of extraneous detail - the event in Cambridge could have been conveyed in several thousand fewer chapters, and the dinner party at oh got whatever her name was the ghastly caricature Tory wife. 

I couldn't really work out why the core female characters were friends with each other, given that the only thing they had in common was being parents at the same school. 

As for the main character...her role made no sense. DEployed by the police to offer counselling to people in the village. That isn't the police's role. And if they had ulterior motive - they sort of did, they wanted her to be a grass - they wouldn't have picked someone who was friends with the core characters. Just didn't ring true.

I could write for ages about various plot devices that were in effect implausible - they could have happened within the laws of of physics, but really not within the patterns of sociology, psychology, criminology etc. 

And I didn't like the writing style. Too many excursions into (attempts at) lyrical writing, which jarred with the genre. To many attempts at lame metaphors, and, just when I was getting really annoyed - train doors slamming. I also thought it had a poor sense of time, difficult to judge how much time was elapsing or what season it was set in.

I've just looked at other books by this author. I thought I had read one previously. Turns out that I did, less than 18 months ago - and this is actually the follow up to that, basically the second in a series. And I DIDN'T RECOGNISE a single recurring character, or anything from that book which was alluded to in this. I gave that 2 stars so heaven only knows why I even bothered with this one.