Rating: 5/5

This is an excellent biography of Dr. Judah Folkman, one of the early pioneers in research into the connections between angiogenesis (the growth of blood vessels) and cancer.

Judah Folkman was a surgeon, to begin with. The son of a rabbi, he was raised to work hard, ask questions, and think. Also, his father urged him to be a credit to his people. He started working in the medical area even before he was out of high school and was assisting with surgeries on dogs used for lab work while he was still an undergraduate in college. By the time he was done with his residency, he was an excellent surgeon. In the middle of his training, he had to spend two years doing medical research for the navy. And eventually, he was appointed chief of surgery at Children’s Hospital in Boston.

While he was in the navy, Folkman and some of his fellow researchers encountered some interesting things while doing research on cancerous tumor growths – things involving blood vessel growth associated with these tumors. This led him to wonder if there was some way in which the tumors were influencing the growth of blood vessels to support themselves. Later, while he was at Children’s Hospital, he began to investigate this idea. For a long time, he was unable to prove anything definite about tumors and blood vessel growth except that it happened.

This biography is unusual in that a very large part of it concerns the stories of Dr. Folkman’s colleagues in his research. While he was chief of surgery, he was unable to do much actual research himself. But the lab he ran hosted a large number of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows who researched various aspects of angiogenesis, and many of them were eventually successful in isolating various chemicals that either encouraged the growth of blood vessels or discouraged this growth. Dr. Folkman’s primary contribution was in finding the right people, organizing their research, and helping them to get funding for what they were doing (an ongoing problem for all medical researchers).

For a lot of years, most of the rest of the medical community laughed at Folkman’s ideas and actively lobbied against giving him any money for researching angiogenesis. You would think scientists, after the entire history of science since forever has consisted of people persistently working on various problems only to eventually discover things that people used to say were impossible, would know better, but evidently not. Anyway, after years of not being able to make any headway in discovering the chemical growth factors they were after, Dr. Folkman and his associates eventually were able to isolate several chemicals. Some of these encouraged the growth of blood vessels, while others inhibited the growth of blood vessels. As of the time of the writing of this book, these chemicals were being tested for uses related to stopping the growth of cancerous tumors and other medical applications.

This was a library book.