Rating: 5/5

Loved this book! I am certainly Western, and yet... there are aspects of my thinking that conform to Eastern trends and sometimes make me feel out of place, but I couldn't have quite put into words what was going on.

For example, I am probably somewhat more holistic than the average Westerner - I do tend to think that many theories are hopelessly oversimplified. Is this because I was a statistics minor, and have developed an interest in complexity? I also am deeply ambivalent about intuitive notions of causality - is this because of my readings on quantum physics (and Gödel!)? Or was I that way before college(the fact that I am asking this suggest some immunity to hindsight bias - something Easterners are more susceptible to)? Is it because I'm female (We are generally considered more empathetic, like Easterners)? Is it because I did not have a standardized public-school primary education (Though not public or standardized, I still think it was Western!)? Could I have a more right-brained orientation than many Westerners (*Is* Western thinking more "left-brained"?)? I also wonder if position in the social hierarchy could affect one's cognitive orientation (Sapolsky?)? Have my years of marriage to an Eastern European had an impact on my thinking (I'd be shocked if they didn't - but he is quite conscious of having become very much more Westernized since moving here and prefers it)? Some books leave you with more questions than answers. These are the thought-provoking books that I enjoy!

Some of the reviews of this book have questioned whether or not the research in the book was done in a valid manner. I am not enough of a social scientist to know, but even if it wasn't, even if there is no such thing as s "Western mind" or "Eastern mind", or if the characteristics discussed in this book poorly capture the differences... I find it truly fascinating to consider the potential perspectives that were presented in this book.

Favorite passage (He is discussing how rule-based categorisation is foundational to Western thought patterns, but not to Eastern):
Jorge Luis Borges, the Argentine writer, tells us that there is an ancient Chinese encyclopedia entitled Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge in which the following classification of animals appears: “(a) those that belong to the emperor, (b) embalmed ones, (c) those that are trained, (d) suckling pigs, (e) mermaids, (f) fabulous ones, (g) stray dogs, (h) those that are included in this classification, (i) those that tremble as if they were mad, (j) innumerable ones, (k) those drawn with a very fine camel's hair brush, l.) others, m.) those that have just broken a flower vase, n.) those that resemble flies from a distance.