Rating: 5/5

Some say the story of Cleoptra IX and Marc Anthony is one of the greatest love stories ever told. I agree, especially since it's one of the few true stories.

This is the second book by this author and the second time she's taken me on an adventure in Egypt. The first time, we were there during the first Crusades when the country was under Muslim rule. This time, she's taken me way back to the last of the great pharaohs. I LOVE ancient Egypt, though usually even farther back in time than Cleopatra IX's rule, so this was a special treat for me. And the way the author invoked the colourful temples but also described everyday life was utterly fascinating.

We get the signature conflict between the Roman Empire and Ancient Egypt what with the Caesars considering Egypt a province like any other. The two empires were quite different: Rome being the super organized mega structure while Egypt is this mystically wild place (or maybe it's just in my imagination?). 
Thus, the two cultures collide and we get a fiery queen fighting to ensure her people's survival while also falling in love with the enemy - at first with Julius Caesar as a political ploy, then with Marc Anthony (apparently) out of true love that ends in the famous disaster.
The interesting thing for me about this story, among other things, is the political background: we get the Roman Empire while it was still mighty whereas Egypt had its best times behind it - but then, due to a Caesar being willing to sacrifice everthing for love, Rome also struggled and stumbled. 

There is the political aspect - Rome's economical as well as military power, Egypt's earthly riches - but none of it mattered too much in the end. Just like duty didn't matter in the end. 

Like I said, this author has a unique way to transport you to the setting of her novels. Egypt lends itself fantastically as a setting in general, but even so, it's not always easy bringing it to life properly. Judith Tarr writes about it as if she had been there, which is why I thoroughly enjoyed the book. Moreover, despite knowing the historical cornerstones and how it would all end, I was sitting on the edge of my seat, shared in the characters' excitement and heartship.

A wonderful adventure and one of the most inspiring (true) love stories.