Rating: 2/5

Very little here to recommend... do NOT start here if you're not already a diehard Niven fan.

Contents of this book worth rating:

"The Woman in Del Rey Crater", a Gil Hamilton story (available elsewhere in the collection Flatlander). A great story!
4 stars

"Procrustes", a Beowulf Shaeffer story (available elsewhere in the collection Crashlander). Very good, but seems out of context here.
3.5 stars

There's a neat little story called "Loki", originally from Analog magazine but unavailable elsewhere.
3 stars

"Ice and Mirrors", a short story written in collaboration with Brenda Cooper. Originally published in Asimov's magazine, and not available elsewhere. This is probably the highlight of the book, and the notes included might have helped the reader enjoy the story (but they're a bit random).
4.5 stars

"Smut Talk", a short story in the Draco Tavern series. Unavailable anywhere else. Not his best Draco Tavern story, however.
3 stars

That's it... not much is it? Five lousy stories. Oh... but you get excerpts of books. Isn't that great (sarcasm mode)? No, they're a complete waste of time. Don't bother reading the excerpts... if you want to enjoy them, and not just have them annoy you, then you'll need to buy the books anyways, and read the entire thing. Much better than the stupid excerpts.

Contents of this book not worth rating:

"Destiny's Road" (excerpt)
"The Ringworld Throne" (excerpt)
"The Burning City" (excerpt)
"Saturn's Race" (excerpt)
0.5 stars for the collective bunch!

Oh... and there's a whole bunch of random articles, as well. You know, the kind of stuff that you can read for FREE on other SF author's blogs? Where the free excerpts could go, also....

So, thanks to Larry Niven for sharing these articles, but no thanks for not just making up a blog and letting us read them for free. I've spent time reading Frederik Pohl's blog, so I know that oldtimers can do it if they want to.

"Various essays in Scatterbrain"
0.5 stars for the collective bunch!

So... is it fair to do an arithmetic mean to arrive at a score? Or should I take the median score? Really, only a completist needs this, and it's likely a disservice to any casual Niven fan who comes across this and then never reads another Niven book for the rest of his life.

I'll be generous and give this book 2 stars overall. And I'll have something in common with those of you who read it and enjoy it. But I'll also have warned some others who might otherwise hate it (so find some other Niven books, because there are some great ones out there).