Rating: 4/5

In the introductory note in my edition a Mr. Crofts mentions that the play "is notorious for its racy, almost pornographic humor". I'd say that this seems to be a bit of an overstatement. 

Surely it is not that much more racy than say a William Shakespeare play or for that matter The Arabian Nights: Tales from a Thousand and One Nights? It is really all talk and no action. Surely we as modern readers can handle that? (And would anyone living in 1994, the date of this edition, really consider this pornographic?)

As for the drawings of Aubrey Beardsley (NSFW link), though they are lovely, they are also a bit... besides the point? I mean there's not actually any enormous penises running around in the play. At the most there's some naked wrinkly old men (ok, all men deciding to never read this play at this point, come back! It is a really fun play, you learn about Greek history and feel smart, yey!). 

I'm not saying that there's not a fair amount of sexual innuendo in the play, how much seems to depend a bit on which translation you have. The Beardsley drawings are clearly a rather unsubtle hint on someone being a cock-tease. It's just that... there so many other cool things going on as well. 

The feminist-conspiracy-theorist part of my brain starts to wonder if all this talk about “oh, lordy lord women mentioning sex”  is simply there to distract me from what the women are actually talking about: taking the power away from men. 

Not only taking away the power, but claiming to be better at using is than the men. In this rendition the women are super clever pacifists, who'd make sure there be no war. 

To be fair, women are not portrayed as through and through good. Lysistrata berate the other women throughout the play as being lazy drunkards who can't give up sex even for even a week. She starts of by saying that women will gather for festivities celebrating Bacchus (Dionysus), Pan or Aphrodite (which the translator notes illustrates their taste for “wanton pleasures”), but not for discussing serious matters. She then sees her neighbour and this happens: 

“Lysistrata: Oh, Calonicé, my heart is on fire; I blush for our sex. Men will have it we are tricky and sly...

Calonicé: And they are quite right, upon my word!

Lysistrata: Yet, look you, when the women are summoned to meet for a matter of the last importance, they lie abed instead of coming.

Calonicé: Oh, they will come, my dear; but 'tis not easy you know, for a woman to leave the house. One is busy pottering about her husband; another is getting the servant up; a third is putting her child asleep or washing the brat or feeding it.”

This! This is exactly what feminists keep talking about, the difficulty of uniting women for a cause, the difficulty of combining sisterhood with family, and this was written around 2400 years ago! 

When the women from near and afar are finally gathered and Lystratia lays forward her plan about depriving men of sex, the women instantly turn around and start to walk away. Give up sex? What nonsense!  It is only after some persistent persuasion that Lysistrata manages the women to concur with her plan. The women lock themselves in the treasury of Athen and the old men of the town, and eventually the magistrate, gather to persuade them differently. 

The perhaps best part is when one of the husbands arrives sex-crazed and sex-starved from a house in disarray to implore his wife to return back home. This scene gives a whole new dimension to the word tease.

Although the women of this book might have taken the moral high-ground, opposing war, it's obvious that Aristophanes uses the women as a group to represent the opposition that questions the status-quo, rather than saying than saying that all women are perfect (plus it doesn't hurt that it makes a good foundation for some good-ol' sex jokes).

There are some real gems in here about pacifism, feminism and gender roles: 

“Lysistrata: To seize the treasury; no more money, no more war.”

then

“Magistrate: What do you propose to do then, pray?

Lysistrata: You ask me that! Why, we propose to administer the treasury ourselves

Magistrate: You do?

Lysistrata: What is there in that a surprise to you? Do we not administer the budget of household expenses?

Magistrate: But that is not the same thing.

Lysistrata: How so – not the same thing?

Magistrate: It is the treasury supplies the expenses of the War.

Lysistrata: That's our first principle – no War!”

or

“Magistrate: May I die a thousand deaths ere I obey one who wears a veil!

Lysistrata: If that's all that troubles you, here take my veil, wrap it round your head, and hold your tounge. Then take this basket; put on a girdle, card wool, munch beans. The War shall be women's business.

Chorus of women: […] Oh! my good, gallant Lysistrata, and all my friends, be ever like a bundle of nettles; never let you anger slacken; the wind of fortune blown our way.”

or

“Chorus of old men: How true the saying: 'Tis impossible to live with the baggages, impossible to live without 'em.”

or

“Chorus of old men: If we give them the least hold over us, 'tis all up! their audacity will know no bounds! We shall see them building ships, and fighting sea-fights like Artemisia*; nay if they want to mount and ride as cavalry, we had best cashier the knights, for indeed women excel in riding, and have a fine, firm seat for the gallop. Just think of all those squadrons of Amazons Micon has painted for us engaged in hand-to-hand combat with men.”

(*a queen who fought alongside with the Persian king Xerxes at sea)

or

“Lysistrata: Silence then! Now - 'Whenas the swallows, fleeing before the hoopoes, shall have all flocked together in one place, and shall refrain them from all amorous commerce, then will be the end of all the ills of life; yea, and Zeus, which doth thunder in the skies, shall set above what was once below...

Chorus of women: What! shall the men be underneath?

But if dissension do arise among the swallows, and they take wing from the holy Temple, 'twill be said there is never more wanton bird in all the world.'”

Again this excellent theme of the importance of women's unity. Sisterhood. Ah, how wonderful. 

Oh, and of course we really like our men too. We don't actually want to take away all of you power, we'd just like to share it equally and discuss a thing our two. Like this thing with war...