Rating: 5/5

I have been a compulsive reader all my adult years - I always read because I was DRIVEN to see how a book ENDS. That is wrong-headed - as any Narnian will tell you. We must read DEVOTEDLY - purely out of Love!

But know what? I'm now an old senior who, as T.S. Eliot says, has been "driven inland by the Trades." For the endless manoeuvring of buying and selling - and by extension treating your life as if it were a means to satisfying ends and nothing else (it's everywhere now) - has driven me deeply back into my soul: yes, even as far as Narnia!

So here I am once again, as I was when I was five and reading picture books - reading DEVOTEDLY. 

With Love. It feels SO good.

Now, the first time I reviewed this book I was not ready to read with Love. The storm of agnostic protest my review elicited (as you can see below) "bashed my head in" - as Sylvester always wanted to do to Tweety - and forced my hand.

And my hand had nary a Trump card. What can I say? Politics is not my cuppa.

So here I was, at the start of this July 4th weekend (fast upon our Canada Day) wanting to GO BACK TO MY DREAMS.

And Dream is what I did - gulping down this book in two days.

You know, we Christians LIVE in Narnia. But those folks who carry agendas toil for the White Queen - as does all of Organization Man (a title that hits the nail in the head). You know 'em - the Movers &amp; the Shakers: the Armies of the Night, as Mailer said in 1968.

My friends who first commented below form the political opposition to those Armies, bless 'em all. But my more apolitical friends ignore the melee and keep reading. Devotedly. And they're right...

I plan to join their ranks now, dreaming, like them, my own way to the Wild Blue Yonder: 

Narnia, I'm coming back.

You know, when Lewis Carroll's Alice saw THROUGH the Trump cards' wicked hand, she simply shouted, "Why, you're all NOTHING but a pack of cards!" and they all scattered to the four winds, all form without substance.

Let them go.

Enough is enough.

Let's all, gentle readers, abandon the sad sights of the blind leading the blind for the Real world of Narnia, once again.

Let's go back to reading Devotedly...

And LOVING it!