Heyer's novels are the only ones I'd initially given five stars, but daren't now (all re-reads). Bath Tangle is one of the more obvious romances, and it's still not obvious at all, he and she still seem apart more than together and there is never a word of "love" spoken - just ingeniusly shown whenever either of them meets others how they fit, and how they care for each other, and what makes them special and likable.

But i_f's comments about Charise made me dislike Serena for the first time, where previously I thought the only Heyer heroine I didn't like was Judith - and I had actually thought only Judith was a diamond of the first water, but like Charise, Serena is also considered genuinely beautiful. Only it's just mentioned from time to time without going into her perfect body and soft skin and all that crap, and never ever by him, who calls her a magpie when others flatter (just like Charise or the other "older" heroine Abigail, called a candle rather than a diamond).

So it was rather hard for me to feel ok with Serena who was a politicial hostess, someone needing space and influence and money - but how well done that is most readers today won't appreciate, because just like her step mother Fanny tries to tell others, we have to see how good natured Serena is, how genuinely she cares for Fanny and others. Her attitude to Mrs. F is in no way faked or powered by curiosity, and Ivo's secret wish to appeal to Mrs. F in the end is one of the nicest little paragraphs (I try to think of something to pick out these days, but too often forget Heyer's unique dialogues, sadly, while visuals stay with me).

They appear hard and harsh, her more so these days (perhaps aggravated by my Emb. situation, but even in the past I had started to fear Heyer's heroes wouldn't like me) than him, who I remembered more dashing but with so few words and such economy and lack of repetition is appealing; whom we see to be maligned when really he likes to secretly pay for people who openly abuse him. Ivo sounded less attractive in English with his deep chest and massive thighs, but his eyes and hands are still there.
And the second most memorable moment to pick out was the (forgotten, unlike other details) drama of Serena with the thorny flowers, frozen in the living room upon hearing of Ivo's betrothal, her "What have I done" multipurpose yet telling. This scene, just like her long and real grief about the loss of her father, needs to be carefully read to be fully appreciated.

There are no superfluous words, and there is nothing boring. Even if the tiny moments of intimacy feel unreal now because I try to slow down to savour them but then they seem even less substantial, all that pleasure gone with childhood, the rest now shows itself all the more brilliantly crafted.

And while Emily is more stupid and annyoing than any of her ilk from the last novels I reread, Mr. Goring is such a great character in the background there, and now I notice that nobody ever mentions he'll marry her even though I even remembered that would happen.

Once again the humour is also gone for me; I know how I smiled for chapters in the past, while now I can only watch Major Kirkby bond with Rotherham about how Ivo had dealt with his silly ward.

The most memorably things always seem the most disappointing. It's so much easier to remember the bad, so when good memories are thus demolished, everything seems even worse - for that reason I can't post my new notes on Heyer because it would be too much like all the modern readers calling her boring or cliche, when she remains the only one that is not.