Rating: 3/5

*** Same Nancy I Remembered From 1-56 ***

As an 11-12 year old, somewhere along that time frame, I discovered Nancy Drew at my library. I latched on (for some reason, the Hardy Boys never did catch on with me, maybe bc I thought Nancy was cute) and read, hmm, maybe 30-40 of the original series. LOVED THE BOOKS. Rarely was I disappointed. The convention of ending each chapter with a cliffhanger punctuated by an exclamation point was brilliant.

So now I'm 52 and why am I starting Nancy Drew again? Well, we all get a bit nostalgic as we age, don't we? Most of us, I suspect. I really did not know the story of the post-original 56 Nancy Drew books, so it was fascinating to read on the Wiki. I also did not realize that as I was reading them in the mid-late 70s, the original 56 were still being published, though near the end of their run. The series always seemed set in the 30's to me, and I don't think the Keene writer(s) tried to modernize it, until we get to post-56, the first 8 or so of which I believe were written by the same person(s) as the originals, just under a different publisher and format, which is significant to us who grew up with the little yellow-accented hardbacks.

I would prefer to read the post-56 in order, even though there is not much if any continuity, because, well, that is how I roll. I like to read in order even if it doesn't matter. LOL. It does make it easier to remember what one has read.

So I started with the first one that was available at a good Kindle discount, this #62. I was pleasantly surprised. Yes, this book was clearly advanced in time from the originals, but the same basic style, settings and people were there, mostly as I remembered them. Nancy, Bess and George, all hopping on a plane with one day's notice (gosh, the tickets had to be exorbitant, no?), working on a mystery together. Bess' food addiction seemed a bit overplayed compared to what I remember -- there must have been 5-6 references -- but generally it was a quick and fun read.

Is it too simplistic for an adult? Beauty is in the eyes of the beholder, no? I enjoy an occasional escape, a reversion to childhood, and even as a somewhat plodding reader, I can knock these out in 90 minutes or so. And I learn something. One interesting thing about these books is that they are surprisingly packed with little tidbits of history, place, culture, etc. That is not to be overlooked.

Enjoy.