Rating: 3/5

Hartnett Sonya This is a book about the myriad of ways people are lost, disconnected and ultimately - disappear.

The news story of the three children who disappeared haunts the central story and main character, Adrian, who has experienced incredible loss and disconnection in his short life. 

His family are all lost souls themselves - his mother is lost to drugs or alcohol, his father lost to the pursuit of pleasure, his ghost-like uncle disconnected from the world due to guilt, his selfish aunt trying to lose herself in a new life and his grandmother, who - in caring for her dying husband - suffers from compassion fatigue which translates into a loss of her ability to feel tenderness and love.

His fear of quicksand and self-immolation are both childish and symbolic - his mother's experience incorporated elements of both burning herself up and out and sinking below the surface of her addiction. His uncle is a burnt out shell of a person sinking below the surface of his guilt.

At school, there are the disconnected children who aren't popular and some who are orphaned or abandoned. The abandoned ones live in a home nearby where it is rumored most of them have lost not only their families, but their minds. One stand out of these children is a girl who has clearly lost her mind and her identity. When she becomes a problem to the community, this lost girl is made to "disappear". 

It is little wonder then that when Adrian overhears a conversation between his aunt, uncle and grandmother about what a burden he is to them that he decides to disappear on his own terms.

Tragically, in submersing his better sense to a friend obsessed with finding the lost children of the news story - Adrian is given an opportunity to permanently lose himself - and does so.

While well written, I have a bit of a problem with a tragedy that no one is able to learn from. The guilt that is in store for the grandmother (and perhaps the uncle) is going to be crushing. There is no redemption in this story and when Adrian and his friend are finally found - it will only be the discovery of deep loss.