Rating: 4/5

I thought that this was written superbly neat.

Really, this is a good polished book. A character study of an aging father (okay, like me). Then the women (thus, the title and of course with Ireland in the 60's as a setting, the man prays the rosary) around him. Michael Moran served as a guerrilla in an Ireland War of Independence and he is proud of it. Now that this glory days are gone, he is left in his old house with his second wife and his three daughters visit him occasionally. His two sons are distant from him, literally and figuratively. 

Halfway in my reading, I thought that I was not relating to Moran. He is a soldier (I am not), he has sons (I don't have), he works in the field (I don't) but oh, the way he retreats to himself when faced with issues that he, for whatever reason, cannot confront. Honestly, I do that. Then I realized, looking back, some scenes just came rushing back to my mind... my father used to do that too. And my wife's father, and my friend's father. It's different when at work that you are compelled to face all the issues because that is your job like my job as a manager in the office. But not when things are personal and you don't have that wall to protect yourselves from pain or possibly for giving pain especially to your loved ones.

I like this kind of book. That when you are reading, it is as if you are not just holding a book but a mirror as well. Books that can make you realize who you are and how you sometimes behave that hurt other people. Moran in the story thinks that by retreating, issues are solved since people are unhurt. However, he (and me sometimes) is not aware that silence is also a statement. Silence does not always translate to tranquility. Silence or stillness can also mean turbulence.

That's what makes this book, unique. It's a simple book but it speaks to me personally as a man, as a father, as a friend.

Well done, McGahern. I will surely pick another book by you if I see one in our bookstores. Darn, why did I only know you now?