Rating: 2/5

Sociology and sexuality fascinate me endlessly. I adore analyses of human nature unbuttoned, unrehearsed, unrefined. I love learning about and reflecting upon the tensions between our civil and animal sides and so I was eager, at long last, to dive into Ms. Fisher's analysis.

The book seemed promising for the first 100 or so pages, during which it dealt with, well, evidence -- or at least robust data. Then, for purposes that elude me, the text careened into a tautological, evolutionary fantasy land.

The main character of these flights of fancy is Lucy, aka "several hundred pieces of fossilized bone" which large parts of the scientific community, and then the world, have decided to classify as an individual, representative example of a whole class of progenitors of humanity.

For our convenience, this person has been photographed: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Re...
as have all of her notable relatives (aka several skulls, a knee joint, a shard of mandible, and some footprints): https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austral...

Now, on the strength of these collected shards of bone, Ms. Fisher decided to imagine (at length) what social and sexual life might have been like for Lucy australopithecus. Dozens and dozens of pages are positively stuffed with statements like "perhaps" Lucy this, and "maybe" Lucy felt that, and phrases in the vein of we can only imagine that Lucy was motivated by X. When, at long last, all this insubstantial conjecture finally seemed to be drawing to a close, it was then used as evidence for why people are the way they are now, a la, "In the 2000's, then, we see men acting like P and women acting like Q, which makes perfect sense considering what we fantasized know that Lucy did."

This does not constitute natural history. Or, giving the author the greatest benefit of the doubt, the book mutates into a religious or mythic text for any reader who does not have the level of training that I imagine it requires to see proof in its arguments. Part of what drives me mad about the implicit attitude of a book like this is that it seems to assume either

A) that the average reader already knows all the information that is missing from the book, and which would be required for this to be a fully-functioning argument

or

B) that the average reader is too simple-minded, and will have to take on faith that the author is not crazy or playing an elaborate prank on them

or

C) that whether the average reader knows the information or not, and whether that reader can learn the information or not, the priors of the position are too plainly evident to waste valuable page space in laying them out.

I suppose this whole grievance of mine falls under the umbrella of epistemological problems. I wonder if the dilemma is that knowledge has so completely outstripped the sense-making capacity of the average individual (or maybe it's just me) that almost every category of knowledge must look like magic or mumbo jumbo to the layperson, and the layperson must take 99% of the information they encounter on faith, or if the dilemma is a meta problem: that power brokers have convinced everyone that knowledge has completely outstripped the average person. One way or another, societies seem to have absorbed the belief (whether promoted by establishment types or adopted organically in an Overton Window manner) that any information that seems confusing or obscure must be responded to in one of two ways:

1) It is a malicious lie by my enemies, and I'd better get with the program of rejecting it, lest I look like a fool
or
2) It is self-evident to everyone else, and I'd better get with the program of accepting it, lest I look like a fool

Sadly, in all cases, faith in nominal experts (whether positive or negative faith) and ignorant acceptance/rejection of incomplete arguments seems to be the primary path. Or, again, maybe it's just me.

Shall I get back to the book?

I would like to believe that no rationally-thinking person would be convinced by a lawyer who argued, "your honor, today my client is on trial for murder, but please bear in mind exhibit A, a picture of a bow tie that I have reason to believe my client once wore, and permit me to elaborate for you, in great detail, an imaginary story about how she obtained that tie which, I'm sure you'll agree with me, proves that she is not guilty of anything." Yet this is just how a significant portion of this book is composed.

A friend of mine recently entertained me with a teleological test which I believe he called, "the 1860 question." He takes issue with a lot of what passes for research and scholarship, and says that whenever he reads anything with a historical dimension, he observes writers contorting information to make the story conclude with today. As an antidote, he asks himself, "how would someone in 1860 have told this story?"

In short, my friend was talking about recency bias. There is probably no way that Ms. Fisher's book (or any book, or any person) could have avoided recency bias altogether, but it feels particularly painful to read fictional accounts of australopithecene society, concocted by a human who is a product of and participant in the 2010s, which are then used to explain how everything in human sexual history was leading up to the 2010s.

In shorter short, I grew too exasperated with this book to continue, so about halfway through, I quit. Why couldn't it just have been a book about documented human history, with recency bias?

Postscript
Because I digressed into fulminations about evolution, I'd like to give a full disclosure: I grew up in an ultraconservative environment, and in my high school biology class I was treated to a 6-week section the theme of which was, "how to debunk evolution." During and since that time, I have been extremely skeptical of many features of what I was taught, but damned if the scientific and educational communities -- not to mention our toxic, shaming culture-at-large -- make it hard to undo that conditioning.

This book is not an outlier. In print, in TV, in museums, evolution and plenty of other subjects are not explained, they are simply presented as self-evident. This leaves consumers in the awkward position of asking, "why do I feel like I'm being told and not taught? Am I the only one this doesn't make sense to? Do I need to go to college (again)?"

So, there you have it. I didn't like this book, and I don't get evolution (even though I want to believe it)!