Rating: 1/5

I hated this book. It took me so long to read this 150 page book because how horrible it is. CW: drug use, sexual assault, rape, homophobia, overdose, questionable mental health representation, graphic descriptions of sex trafficking.

Go Ask Alice is a classic 1970s YA book that centers on the "problems" teens would have faced during that time. At its core it's a scare tactic to discourage teens from using drugs. It follows a main character who consumes LSD by accident after her drink was laced at a party. From their she embarks on a downward spiral of drug use. 

What Worked: Nothing.

What Didn't Work: Everything. This book is so problematic. I mean every single page was full of crap. Granted, I understand that these books were typical for their time, but it's an entire lie crafted by Beatrice Sparks to help her rise to critical acclaim while providing inaccurate and harmful information about the impact of drug use amongst teens. I'm still confused as to how the main character tried all the drugs in the world, but only ever became addicted to acid. Then there was this messaging that once teens try drugs they slip into a life of prostitution. While this is a possibility, Sparks works in a series of absolutes that feel not only inaccurate, but extreme. There was a moment when the main character does make it back to her parents after ending up homeless, but her parents do NOTHING to help her. In fact, when she gets home no one suggests therapy or a course of action to help with her addiction. This completely BLEW MY MIND considering that Sparks is A DAMN THERAPIST. Instead, her parents encourage her to date, give her no expectations, and have little to no conversations about what she experienced while be homeless. She's threatened and bullied by other students when she refuses to continue doing drugs. Instead of her parents doing any sort of intervention to protect their child, they brush it off as a scare tactic. She ends up eating laced peanuts while babysitting (I can't even begin to explain how this part made NO DAMN SENSE), and her parents are forced to place her in a psychiatic facility after she has a bad trip. The decriptions of other teens that are in this facility ARE DISGUSTING. The complete disregard for the journey of others especially minors disturbed me on a different level. I'm still blown away by the fact that the main character still doesn't really receive help while she's there. Instead when she gets home her parents pretend everything is okay, invite a boy over that they want her to date and move on with their lives until they come home one day to find her dad. The final line in this book is particularly disgusting as Sparks reiterates that it doesn't matter if the main character died from an overdose on purpose or on accident because she's just another victim of drug use. DISGUSTING. THIS BOOK IS A CRIME AGAINST HUMANITY AND SPARKS SHOULD BE LOCKED UP FOR HER CRIMES. 

Honestly, I could never ever recommend this book in good faith. I would give it zero stars if possible. If you're looking for books that address drug use related to teens, I highly recommend Heroine by Mindy McGinnis who handles the topic in a very real way, but with grace, compassion, and understanding.