Rating: 4/5

On Becoming A Leader is a phenomenal book on leadership. I have read many books discussing leadership, and this is one of the better ones. Bennis’s work is an easy read and provides simple truths without being overly dull or basic. Many of his thoughts I have had at one time or another, such as allowing room for dissenters and the need for candor. Bennis begins with mastering the context, which means not being a prisoner of the rules, habits, and practices of an institution. While a leader has regard for these, he/she does not allow them to stifle their creativity. Continuing, he addresses the basics, something that is lost in much of society today. We believe we “graduate” and the basics are forgotten. The basics are the foundation, and without them, our house of leadership will surely collapse. Bennis addresses both internal and external factors, knowing ourselves and knowing the world. Leadership is not a selfish endeavor. It is both inward and outwardly focused, involving both yourself and others. The rise of organizational men has leaders focused on the organization, forsaking themselves in the process. This stifles creativity and innovation. It leaves the institution and every member traveling the road we know as “status quo.” Leaders need room for growth and development and for the free expression of themselves. If a leader is not true to themselves, it can be difficult, if not impossible, to get others to follow them. Without followers, a leader is not a true leader. Additionally, solo undertakings of large projects become impossible. Bennis alludes to a shift in leadership, one he believes is in the works. This shift requires leaders to speak hard truths and to be heroes no matter the cost. This becomes easier when organizations are open to negative feedback. All too often, this is discouraged because it points to something wrong. This means that changes have to be made, and change is not something well-received. The comfort of the status quo is easier than the hard work of change. The only downsides were that some of the examples were a little long-winded. Brief examples permeated most of the text; however, there were a few occasions where the example belabored the point. Bennis also ventures dangerously close to being political, especially in the epilogue. While it is understandable why he chose the presidency to discuss, as it is the highest form of leadership in the United States, it almost felt as if he was alluding to a particular affiliation without saying it. Additionally, the epilogue dragged on longer than it should have. A more succinct epilogue with a greater focus on leadership would have served the text better. With that aside, the text will be referred to in the future, potentially even read again. Bennis has put together an amazing schematic for leaders to follow, which means everyone should read this spectacular work.