Rating: 1/5

What a bizarre book. I'll summarize. 

The hero and heroine were once engaged to be married and the love between them seemed unbreakable. But the hero is not rich, as an archeologist he must rely on the money of others to fund his research and the heroine has 2 sisters to provide for. So, she breaks off their engagement and marries an Earl who can afford to have her and her sister live a comfortable like. Now, 10 years later, they are destined to meet again. 

The hero is dreading his visit, knowing she has married another man, slept with him and perhaps even loves him. He tries to tell himself that he'll be cool and distant, to keep hidden the pain and love that still burns inside. But at that first awkward meeting where he is stunned by her beauty once again and she is stunned by his presence which she wasn't expecting, temper flare and old bitterness come forth. He mocks her, insults her integrity by pointing out her successful ambition and life of luxury. 

The heroine is turn is hurt by his cruel words and aware more deeply than ever before the love she gave up for a life of luxury but cold detachment. Married 6 months and her husband can't bring himself to consummate their marriage. He tries, and when he fails it infuriates him and makes her feel unwanted and useless as a wife and as a woman. She knows she made the right choice, that her sisters can have a proper education and marry well because of it but there's the consequence of a cold marriage to live with and it's no comfort when in the hero's presence. Life with him in the house is torture, his words, when he can bring himself to even speak to her, are harsh and mean. She can't wait until he's gone so she can try once again to forget him-though she knows he'll always be a part of her. 

When he leaves, she is brokenhearted but relieved in a way as well because not life can return to normal-such as it is. But her husband surprises her with an impromptu trip to Egypt and soon she once again finds herself face to face with the man that haunts her dreams and holds her heart. The hero in the meantime is closer to discovering the lost temple to the goddess Iris and coping with the disturbing mirror he found and the visions of death that lay within. He is stunned to once again have the heroine near but this time it's too hard to keep his desire at bay. Especially when she informs him of her cold and loveless marriage. But when the truth and the dark secrets come to light, he'll kill to see her safe.

Like I said, weird. There's a magical mirror that shows previous lives and the hero actually sees the heroine murdered within the glass-her throat slit. This object however has very little to do with the overall book so I thought its inclusion was odd. There's also a disturbing secret of incest and baby theft involving the heroine’s husband and her sister in law. The husband is unable to consummate his marriage because he's in love with his own sister. The heroine meanwhile is confused by his inability to desire her sexually and worries that she'll never provide the heir he needs. Little does she know her husband and step sister are plotting to have the hero and heroine sleep together to produce a child and have that child raised as the heir to the title. There was very little to no scene time that shows the hero and heroine together. And what little there was, had them fighting. It's hard to believe their love survived 10 years apart and now because they don't even speak to each other. It felt more like lust and forbidden desire than anything. As such, it lacked what I am looking for. Plus, the storyline was just strange and disturbing. 

I am a little disappointed because I was expecting something else when I bought this book. I don't imagine what but it defiantly wasn't this. I'm not saying it was a 'bad' story as it wasn't horribly written or wasteful, it just wasn't for me.