Rating: 4/5

I read In Hidding in The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume Two. Since the first chapter is from 1948 it is apparently this is the first use of super mutation (from radiation) in science fiction.. I really liked In Hidding and wanted to know what happened next.

There are 5 stories. The original ”In Hiding” is the first followed by Opening Doors; New Foundations; Problems and Children of the Atom.

Opening Doors is OK, a bit naive, built after that the quality declines to 2-3-star level. Maybe I am prejudging people with a IQ over 160, but I would guess most of them would be open minded about things they did not have definitive data about:

"Some of them may not believe in God," said Welles. "Many people don't."
Elsie turned on him swiftly and snapped: "I don't know how to talk about people like that if I can't say either 'stupid' or 'crazy.'" Nahhh,....

From “New Foundations” onward we get some really long discussions on -I guess- the authors pet pocket philosophies. 

 You can not imagine what you have not first seen, but you can combine different images into one. … a man born blind can't imagine red or blue," said Tim. Try imagining a new color. Go on, try."

An atom? A black hole? Both was imagined many years before the first images/photos.

In sections “Problems”: People who valued only the intellect made the atom bomb and turned it loose upon the world, not knowing or caring what might be done with it. Someone clearly did not know the history of the Manhattan Project. Oppenheimer said: “We knew the world would not be the same. A few people laughed, a few people cried. Most people were silent. I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad Gita, ‘Now I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds’. I suppose we all thought that, one way or another.” 

Also… what on earth is up with that stupid title? Giving away a major twist of the first fifth of the book in the title. You are meant to have read the first story before even picking up the book.

All in all ”In Hiding” was more convincing as a stand alone. Most of the rest of the book fails in convincing me about the high IQ of these people. They neither speak nor act like 120+ Letting loose the pets, boiling the research egg as a joke? That in plain unintelligent.