Rating: 4/5

Loving older Trads as I do, this was a treat. The writing, the language used, the transportation to another era that newer HRs can never achieve completely. I haven't read these authors before (or don't think I have) as their e-books are not available*. I see other reviews are not as charitable but I enjoyed this anthology. 

Rutherford's return by Alana Clayton - 3.25*
Probably the weakest plot wise as it turns an angsty story into a whodunnit. The book opens at a cyprians ball where the h has gone to find a protector and the H gets himself shot by an unknown person. The H has a near death experience after this shooting where a 'voice' tells him to mend his ways and there's a specific place/person he has to begin with. The h has been ruined by rumors few years ago when her name was joined with the H's, quite unbeknownst to him. He leaves the country and the h struggles to make ends meet. Now, to solve the mystery of his shooting, he tries to find the woman who had called for help on finding unconscious in the garden and left her mask before disappearing. They haven't actually met by this time. As they meet, he learns of his hand in her ruin and tries to solve these two mysteries - of who shot him and who spread the rumors that destroyed her life. So, it was quite slow moving from here till the inevitable hea.
 
The Rake objects? by Cindy Holbrook - 4 *
It seems Cindy Holbrook is a master of writing hot alpha rakes - confident, charming, tortured yet with a conscience. Also add egalitarian to the mix.  The story opens with the H waking up in bed with a tavern wench (a well pleasured and happy one) and then rushing to stop the h's wedding. The opening scene might put off some people but then this is who he is. And it proves a foil for how he treats the h (after knowing her better i.e.) Anyways, the 'speak now or' scene is hilarious, if tad cruel on his part. What I objected to (more than the opening scene) was his kissing and more the h a little later. All I could think of was - he has not washed after waking up, has he? Happily, the next time they meet is a month later as he continues to try to convince her to marry him but she refuses.  A sweet story with a very likable and true rogue and an ice princess. 

The Notorious Mr Freemont by Martha Kirkland - 3.75*
This story has the most archaic language and behavior from the characters. A true traditional. A black-sheep H and a parson's sister who believes her conduct must always be above reproach - 'like Caesar's wife'. She accompanies a friend (an older to her lady, we are not told how they became friends) to her wealthy uncle's place where all the relatives are gathering for what they hope is a will reading/making. The h is hopeful to get a job as a memoir writer with the old man who is an archaeologist and an acquaintance of her late father's. I love how the h/H meet in the arbor where she's conversing with the cuckoo and calling him a handsome fellow. Of course, the H is present and teasingly thanks her for the compliment. The h couldn't help but be attracted to this man every one looks down upon as having a dark soul but she sees him as fulfillment of all her girlish and romantic dreams. The chemistry and attraction is mutual and instant. She tries to resist but not much. There's no conflict apart for her hesitation and ends sweetly.  I enjoyed how his travels through Egypt, Spain etc are mentioned without overwhelming. Also, the pre-historic chalk horse on his estate. All manna for the bluestocking h. 

A Halo for Mr. Devlin by Marcy Stewart - 4.5*
Best of the lot. Sweet, funny, poignant, heartwarming and heartbreaking all in equal measures. The H is a bastard son of an earl and has spent all his life being belittled and put down - as part of a world that always told him that he doesn't really belong. Now, he lives on his wits, gambling and relieving people of their money and estates. They meet when he's escaping a mistaken but murderous husband and she's run from her own wedding and is posing (quite unsuccessfully) as a missionary. He sees a poster from her father promising a reward and latches on to her while she's equally charmed and appalled by his easy lying ways. It's a short road romance that's quite hilarious and somewhat angsty in turns. We learn that the h is not only running away from a wedding but to a wedding as well - to her erstwhile gardener! Some more drama and rescuing ensues before the ending.  She's a sweet, naive girl who matures almost overnight in the story. 
Highly recommended.

*Just checked. Marcy Stewart's books are available digitally.