Rating: 5/5

this book is incredible. i am gripped from beginning to end, experiencing the quiet despair of a child as anxious as adrian. it hit so close to home, the irrational fears, the loneliness, the powerlessness. hartnett has perfectly encapsulated what it feels like to be 9 years old and drowning in your own thoughts. a slinky is priceless, friends approval is necessary for survival, being in trouble feels like the end of the world. her words sing and i am able to catch every image and feeling she details. here’s one that struck me today: 

“Adrian does not budge, determined to seem unafraid; then he ducks back into the blackness, which takes him whole. Rory hears him shuffling down the hall, his fingers ticking blindly along the wood panel-ing, the soles of his naked feet tacking, with each step, to the polish of the floor.”

“Adrian has not taken his eyes from the bird. Its head has sunk, the beak sliding between his fingers. It has flown away, leaving feathers and bones in his hands. He thinks it is amazing that it should die so gently, without a sound. A bird is noise, until the end. The girl is still smudging tears from her face, and he doesn't want to tell her. He lowers the creature carefully among the weeds, and its head sags to one side. He tries to straighten it with a finger, but the girl has already seen. "Oh," she says,
"it's died."
"Maybe it's sleeping ..."
"No, it's dead. Poor little thing."
Together they consider the corpse.”

like LISTEN to that!!!! i’ve never read writing like that!

every character is so haunted by their own past, their tragedies and losses, that none of them are able to connect. it’s so so sad. 

it’s flowery in a way that gives the entire book a specific dark feeling, a hostile, prickly world seen through the eyes of a kid. i think sonya hartnett is my favorite author with just this book. i am so endeared to Adrian, he feels like me. 

that last poem really fucked me up. it felt dismissive yet peaceful. the ending has haunted me since i read it 10 years ago.

my friends pls read this challenge so we can talk abt it!!!