Rating: 5/5

Initial thoughts straight after reading this book: This book is absolutely incredible. Gah. I have no words. It's so beautiful, and heart-wrenching, and challenging and awe-inspiring. It makes me realise just how blessed I am to live in a country with very little persecution, and it made me long for heaven. Our God is powerful and mighty and so very loving above all else and he will return for his people! Come quickly Lord Jesus, come quickly...

Updated official review on the 17/02/18: This book. Gah… I almost have no words to describe how good it is. Though since it’s been about 6 weeks since I finished it, I’ve had some time to try and gather my thoughts. But still… just wow. 

In simple terms, this book is about persecuted Christians. In complex terms… where do I even begin? I guess I’ll just share a few thoughts I came away with after reading it… 

1. - Christians in the West have no idea how good we’ve got it. Seriously. We can go to church openly, pray openly, teach our children about God openly, own a Bible openly. We can practice our faith openly and without fear that authorities are going to come crashing in and kill us all because it is against the law to believe as we do. This freedom we have is not a reality for the majority of Christians around the world. And boy, do we need to remember that. This book gives such a clear picture of what life is like as a persecuted Christian – a picture that is shocking and oh so saddening. I have thousands, perhaps millions of Christian brothers and sisters around the world that live in fear 24/7 that they are going to be caught for owning a Bible. Hundreds of Christians die every day because they are willing to risk all for the sake of Jesus. And I let my Bible collect dust on the shelf because I’m too easily distracted by YouTube. Ouch. It kind of puts things into perspective, doesn’t it? I came away from this book feeling incredibly blessed with the religious freedom I have, but also very aware that 1. Many Christians do not experience this freedom, and 2. This freedom could be very easily snatched away. I pray that Christians in the West will be wise stewards of the freedom we still have and use it to magnify the name of our wonderful God. 

2. - We have such a small view on what Heaven is going to be like. Guys, how many times have we been told that Heaven is going to be amazing, and we’re just like “Yeah I know Jesus is going to be there and it’s going to be wonderful” and then just go on with our daily routine like it’s no big deal. Guys. Jesus is going to be there. We are going to be with Jesus. WITH Jesus! And that’s no big deal?! That’s seriously the biggest deal we will ever face. Literally. One day we will see him face to face – God become flesh, the greatest sacrifice. And he will hold out his nail-scarred hands and welcome us into his arms with a smile. Our Saviour, our God, our brother, our friend, the one that satisfies all longings – he will welcome you into heaven with a smile and a hug. Let me tell you, Heaven is going to be AMAZING. There will be boundless realms to explore and millions of people to meet. All the beauty and goodness we have in this world will be there, magnified by eternity, with no sin or death to mar it. And we will be with our God, as we were created to be, for the rest of eternity. That my friends, is a reality worth dying for, and a reality that we should be incredibly excited for. And too often I’m ambivalent about it. This book opened my eyes to see just how blind we humans can be when faced with the reality of Heaven (and the reality of hell for that matter, but that is another topic for another day). Heaven is not going to be a boring place for all eternity. It is going to be the more wonderful than our humans hearts can conceive, and we will be worshiping our God for all eternity. Now that is something to get excited about!

In the end, Safely Home opened my eyes to see how blessed I am have religious freedom, and how staggeringly horrific the persecution of Christians around the world is. It also reminded me about just how wonderful the prospect of Heaven really is. This was one of the first books I read this year, and I’m pretty sure it will remain one of the best books I’ve read this year. When I finished the book, my heart’s cry was ‘Come, Lord Jesus, come!’ And when a book does that to you, you know it is a good one! I’m giving Safely Home 5* out of 5 and recommending it for ages 15 up because of intense and sometimes graphic (details about the torture Christians go through) content.

* I know I didn’t really explain properly what this book is about. Sorry, it’s kind of hard… Just go and read it and you’ll understand. I highly, highly recommend it!