Rating: 1/5

There is a lot that Mr. Johnston misses. I am not Catholic, not even a Christian actually. When I was a Christian, I always viewed the Genesis story as a story aimed at an ancient illiterate agrarian society, not history. I was always in trouble with clergy for having this attitude - "What do you do? Pick and choose from His word what you want to believe? It's all true or none of it's true." They convinced me on the second point.

The book is already 25 years old and in a scientific discussion that can be a real decisive point against you. He cites "scientists" who have since been discredited as using flawed methodologies and using poor arguments. He cites lack of transitional fossils when anyone who is even remotely involved in this field has heard on at least a couple of well documented transitional species that have been discovered within the last 10 years or so. These two points stood out to me, but one that I couldn't get past was his continual reference to Darwin and not to a modern interpretation of evolution. Additionally, he complains about how flawed Darwin's explanation of how life got started is so inadequate. Other than one short off-hand remark Darwin made no effort to explain how life started, just how it changes.

Another odd characteristic of Mr. Johnston is that he complains about the scientific community starting off with the idea that everything should be explained by way of some naturalistic means and not have to refer to some supernatural force. He is frustrated that scientists are now meddling in philosophy which is not their purview. But in the next breath he will seem to think that since we have not been able to create life artificially, then we need to accept that some sort of Prime Mover, or God must have started life. He says it is important to not resort to a God of the gaps argument, but he does this before the horses are even out of the gate. He is all philosophy and no science, in my humble opinion.

Anyone familiar with both sides of the evolution/creationism discussion will not be persuaded buy his weak, outdated, and frankly, laughable arguments. Other than being a good mental exercise this book was a waste of time. I'm glad I only paid $1.00 for it at a thrift store.