Rating: 4/5

I vacillated between rating this book three stars at around the beginning, five stars towards the middle, and then finally settled on four stars at the end.

At its core, Life 101 is a great primer for people who haven't done much reading in the self-improvement section. It gives you a taste of every topic, with loads of quotes sprinkled in throughout the very short chapters. For me, since I have done my fair share of reading in the self-help section, it was nice to have short little reminders about all of the things I know that I know about life, money, depression, acceptance, perseverance, and letting go... but had forgotten in the day-to-day that is Life.

For newer or younger readers, it gives a great jumping-off point for further inquiries into any of these multitude of various topics. It was disappointing but understandable that the topics were so lightly touched on, but when you're writing a book on life, you gotta draw the line somewhere or you'll be writing forever.

The author does his best to stay neutral when it comes to spirituality, but a little bit of his Christianity seeps through as he discusses some of the more difficult chapters, which is understandable. It's not too distracting and is on topic. Also, the author tries his best to be funny and entertaining, and the book does a good job at staying light-hearted, but the jokes he makes remind me of the kind of things that some imagined uncle you never talk to would say and thinks are just hilarious. His sense of humor feels dated and a bit too mass-appeal slash skewed for older (read: silver-haired) audiences. It feels closer to something you'd find in an old reader's digest.

But if you can get past the Christian undertones (which some may enjoy) and the at-times-geriatric sense of humor, you'll find some excellent wisdom in these pages. So much is covered here that I'm certain that if you go through the whole book, you will find some section or some chapter that really speaks to you. At the outset he does say that the book will be like a buffet, and it's true... while there were some things in it that I didn't care for (asking the white light to come into me and saying pseudo-prayers for the highest good of all, for instance) the overwhelmingly positive experience I had with the chapters that spoke to me made it all worthwhile.