Rating: 1/5

A weak effort.

There's little to redeem this book from its paltry and hyperbolic characters, boring and utterly predictable plot, and disjointed narration punctured by the occasional disgusting salacious scene that likely so tickled a lusting white man.

The characters, of course, are unsympathetic - they're supposed to be for Vidal to drive home his tedious point about how power corrupts the soul and principles of good people and attracts the least morally scrupulous among us. Blah blah blah. You've heard the same tired refrains a million times, and usually without the sheer indifference with which these characters and their themes have been penned. No person comes at all close to reflecting actual humans. But mirroring reality would necessarily detract from *the point*.

Nothing in the plot entertains, wows, or holds a reader's attention. It's entirely predictable: Old senator wants to be president and violates his morals for a snowball's chance in early winter; circumstance hinders old senator and torch gets passed to young sidekick; another old man who always wanted power but can't have it tries to control its assumption through the power of the purse (oh, and he might have romantic feelings for young sidekick, no one actually knows, though, but Vidal makes sure we don't forget this unnecessary complication through continued implication); people who get in the way are sidelined; media can create caricatures; honest press work ignored because it's not titillating. One great big yawn. 

Vidal likes to randomly jump between years because actual detail is boring and pedantic. Better to spend pages on trivial conversations or happenings (old senator goes to Manassas because _symbolism_ of a reactionary out of his time) and gross sexual content. Two people doing it in a pool house? Check. Husband finding his wife "douchbagging herself" in their bathtub? Check. Random and irrelevant pubescent homosexual experimentation that blurred the line between consent and sexual assault? Check. Substituting food for a voracious sexual appetite a brother feels for his sister? Check. A *big reveal* of young incest? Check.

Yeah, this is a bad book. You're better off spending your time elsewhere.