Rating: 5/5

One aspect of the novel that significantly stood out to me was the different pictures it painted of religion. Similar to many young people, LaVaughn is on a quest for truth. She questions the idea of God and religion, but nobody is there to accurately answer the questions she has. She asks why prayer is significant, why bad things happen, why God let her father die, and various others. This stood out to me in the novel because how people struggle with these kind of questions, but have nobody to look up to for biblical truth? I struggled reading about Myrtle and Annie and the religious club that they were apart of., specifically the part where they are telling her they are limited to how much time they can spend with non-christians. This was very difficult for me to read, because it is the opposite of what Jesus did. As christians, we are called to make disciples. How can this happen if we only spend time with other Christians, especially when their views are directly contradicting Christianity itself? It is not until the end of the novel where LaVaughn visits the church on the way home from the hospital where she finally receives a non-condemning view of what it means to follow Jesus.
 The idea of coping with loss is a reoccurring theme throughout the novel. LaVaughn subtly references her father’s death on many occasions, and it is very evident that his death is a burden she still carries around with her. She not only thinks about her father and attempts to live out his legacy, but she clearly recognizes the void in both her and her mother’s life since he was killed. In chapter 32, LaVaughn states, “I am loyal in loving my dad my whole life long” (103). Her father was killed when she was a small child, yet she is still so impacted by his absence in her life. Fortunately, I have never experienced the loss of a parent, but I lost both of my grandparents by the time I was seven years old. My grandmother passed away from breast cancer before I was born and my grandfather unexpectedly died from a heart attack when I was only in first grade. At that age, I had a difficult time wrapping my head around the concept of death, similar to any child. I miss my grandparents every day and do my best to live out their legacy, but it is in life’s most transitional, exciting seasons where their absence is most clear and painful. LaVaughn is unquestionably in a transitional time in her life.
As the novel progresses, I believe that she begins to cope with her father’s death in a healthier way. In the midst of the pain of missing her father, the pressure to go to do well in school, dealing with the news about Jody, and the violence she is surrounded by, peace and hope prevail at the end of the novel. In chapter 74, the pastor of the church LaVaughn visits tells her to “go in peace” when she leaves, and she responds by stating that nobody has ever said that to her before. I know from personal experience that when my life becomes chaotic and stressful, I long for consistency and comfort. It feels like LaVaughn is also searching for consistency and comfort throughout the novel, but she does not find glimpses of it until the end. Towards the end of the novel when she is working through the news with Jody, he mom consoles her and says:
“LaVaughn, I tell you. I don’t know	
how it feels 
down there in your heart
I never had that kind.
But you just sit here
and you cry
and I won’t go away” (232).
 This is a beautiful example of a loving parent, and the comfort every child wants to hear in times when they are experiencing pain.
 While the novel does not end with all loose ends tied up, it does provide a sense of hope. The last lines in the novel are giving tribute to her father, asking him what he thinks about his daughter being sixteen. These last lines acknowledge her father, but do not feel like she is weighed down by the burden of his death; hope and peace prevail in the midst of chaos.