Rating: 4/5

3.5

Hearing gossip that Justin, Earl of Chatham was about face their brother, Geoffrey, in a duel, Allison and Jon do their best to protect him by kidnapping Justin and holding him prisoner. Justin is not so appreciative of their efforts and after several days manages to get free. He takes Allison prisoner and ravishes her before she escapes him. He sets out to learn her identity so he can complete his revenge. When he learns that Allison is Geoffrey's sister, he decides that she meant to compromise herself and trap him into marriage. So when she seeks him out because his ravishment had consequences, Justin resents her all the more for being trapped, but relishes his chance to have his revenge by punishing her for a lifetime and showing her what it means to be his wife. But Allison isn't about to stay with a man who threatens her, bullies her and humiliates her. So she runs away. And he runs after her. Soon though, Justin realizes how he's been acting and that he'd rather have his wife's trust than her fear. Love ensues, but there is still an outside threat to deal with.

This is pretty much what you expect from a classic BR. Many cliches here, but they're all rather enjoyable. Justin is a decent hero - he's angry and brooding, seeking revenge but without actually hurting the heroine. He talks up how he's going to rape her since he thinks she's a whore, but then when it comes to it, I'd say it was forced seduction... Sure he's got a temper and he isn't above humiliating Allison, but once he realizes that she's afraid of him and she kind of sees him as a monster, he gets all angry with himself and gives some decent grovel. I appreciated the apology scene - that's highly unusual for this type of book. Now he wasn't debasing himself or anything - he still managed to maintain his alphaness, but it was refreshing. That being said, he was a bit of an idiot for thinking that he could act as ruthless as he did and then expect her to accept that he wouldn't hurt her. It baffled me that he kept getting on her case for running away before they could discover what a great marriage they could have when, in fact, he'd been planning to break her spirit and punish her through that marriage, so that made little sense. It really wasn't until he SAW that she was pregnant (and therefore fragile) that he began to see her as a decent person.

The heroine was also classic for a BR. She's feisty and innocent all in one. She falls into the forced seduction quite easily - initial struggles but before she knows it she's loving it. It was really a case of "it's-so-sinful-for-me-to-enjoy-this" kind of deal. She had the ability to charm the most hardened of rogues into following her lead - every male servant was pudding in her hands. And of course every man, no matter how selfish, became contrite and caring the moment they saw her pregnancy. That was interesting - anyone who wasn't profoundly evil was completely unwilling to put a pregnant woman to any discomfort. Which is why the villain of course was so willing to - he was ready to have her raped and hung while 9 months pregnant. So you know he was evil. 

As cliche and tropey as this story was, it was very enjoyable. I mean, I read many of these stories (BRs and HQNs) precisely for their cliches and tropes.