I don't really have any idea of what I just read.

(Which is why I'm not giving it a star rating--that wouldn't be fair.)

Chuang-Tzu is the lesser known Taoist writer--possibly as much of a legend as his more famous--and possible peer--Lao Tzu. This is a collection of his writings, not the entire surviving corpus.

Burton Watson, the translator, provides an excellent overview of the early history of Taoism and the place of these writings in it. Still, it was hard for me to make sense of. This is a book that requires serious study to make sense of--not just because it has become a religious text, but its antiquity and its context in a very long-ago and foreign culture, it reminded me of reading the old Testament.

Except there's even less of a story. What are provided here are fragments. They are grouped into chapters, but I wondered how these groupings were achieved in many cases. The last two, when the writer spoke most directly to the reader, were the most consistent and easy to understand. Otherwise, a lot of the time I was reading this I wondered if it could be classified as a book at all--indeed, it made me wonder how things get contained as and called a book.

Which, I suppose, is part of Chung-Tzu's point--though not one he was trying to make. Certainly he is at pains to question the very notion of categories--good, bad, etc. There's the famous part where he dreamed he was a butterfly and, upon waking, wondered if he wasn't a butterfly dreaming he was a man. And the other famous part wondering about how one can know what fish feel.

But lots of other parts are much more pedantic, about being the good kind of ruler, or the good kind of person, which has some relationship to the Tao, but, to me at least, this relationship was never clear.

Lao-Tzu can continue to be read because his best translators (re)create a lapidary language. The sections are free-form poetry; there is a philosophy developed, and consistent themes across them.

I could not see those here for being too confused by the details. Though Burton provides footnotes explaining who certain people are, it is still too distant, too intellectual an exercise. Besides, a bunch of the footnotes make clear that the original text is confusing even to Burton and other commentators, making meaning even that much more distant.