Rating: 5/5

2nd Review:
So, it's been 10 years, I think, since I last read this. Shame on me. This is one of my all time favorite plays. I love it. Still, haven't seen it live on stage. Another Shame on me.

So, reading this, I noticed something for the first time. Oberon is a horrible husband. Seriously. Titania has a young boy she keeps around her from an human friend and Oberon wants this boy to raise up as another servant. Titania flatly refuses him. This whole thing is set in motion basically because Oberon feels he is entitled to anything he wants. He has Puck get the flower for the love spell he puts on Titania. He humiliates his wife by having her fall in love with an ass. While she's in this sorry state, he gets the boy he wants to be his servant and then he is willing to lift the spell. 

Oberon is a complete jerk face. Titania deserves much better than him. He schemed and played dirty to get what he wanted. I'm so angry just thinking about it. I really don't like scheming. I get it's part of life for many people. Still. The fact that he gets away with it really irritates me. At the end, he has everything he wants and Titania seems happy as a goldfish with her 10 second memory and all's good.

Rant over. I love reading the language again. There is magic in the words. What a story. Is there anything else out there in this world like this story, not much really. 

I think I enjoy reading about tricksters as an archetype. Puck, Wei Wuxian and so on. 

Anyway, the one I feel most sorry for is Demetrius. He is the one who still has the love spell on him. It could be best for him, because the thing with Hermia wouldn't have worked out, but still, this wasn't his choice. That's gross. I mean good for Helena, but if that spell ever wears off, she will be in a rough spot and a loveless marriage. Love is a many splendid thing. Love lifts us up where we belong. And how horrible to marry someone that can't stand you. Anyway. 

So July has started out as the month of re-reads. So be it. 

1st Review
My Favorite Play!

After reading all Shakespeare plays, I wonder why schools focus so much on the tragedies and not so much on the comedies. We were never assigned a comedy to read in school, but to me, this is by far Shakes' best play, hands down. I'll take this over Hamlet, Macbeth or Romeo.

I love the Puck and he has so many great lines in the stories. This work gives me life. I have seen several movie versions of this, but I haven't seen the play in person - bucket list. 

One of my favorite quotes is, "I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me, to fright me if they could. But I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I will walk up and down here and I will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid."

It's a quote that really empowered me in a time in my life I grew into the person that sent me to acupuncture school. They shall hear I am not afraid by singing; it really meant so much to me and who I was. I use to say that to myself all the time. Somehow in the stress of school and doing all the hoops I had to jump through for school, I lost that and now, I am afraid of the world and sit in my house alone and this was before Covid-19. I have my family, yes, and I'm thankful for them, but it's important to have friends too. When I left home, I haven't totally replaced my community and it's all my own fault. I long to take back the power of those words and and not be afraid. I use to love what made me so unique and it's hard to get to, at the moment.

The fairy fantasy is sandwiched between a love story. The best part of the story is the love story part, but I love this whole thing: the words, the subject, the love story and the fairies. 

Someone made a modern movie based on this called, "Were the World Mine" and several of these quotes are set to music and I have listened to those powerful songs hundreds of times. I love it. It's a gay take on the play and it's hilarious. 

I would love to read this yearly and I just haven't. It is a goal to claim. To me, this is one of the most brilliant stories told anywhere. It rings at a deep level for me. It brings me life, joy and wonder. It has to be one of the top 3 books of all time for me. 

It doesn't get any better.