Rating: 5/5

Tamas is a novel on the Partition, that is partition with a capital P, an earth shattering event in the history of South Asia that laid the grounds for the division of a subcontinent into several parts: India, Pakistan and later, Bangladesh. Tamas is a novel about riots and in an easily accessible English translation by Daisy Rockwell, demolishes the notion that riots followed the event. This apparent chain of events, of causalities - that one follows the other, is not as easy to comprehend as is made out to be in various histories. In a spectacular piece of prose, Bhisham Sahni lays bare the million hidden layers of trust and animosities co-existing in the various communities within undivided India, jostling and cooperating in equal measure, side-by-side in a delicate yet dynamic balance. And all it takes is a spark, for a chain reaction to start. That spark is provided in the opening scene of the novel and is also alluded to in the book's blurb - the killing of a pig and dumping of its body in the front of a mosque. The tension then builds up, culminating into an orgy of violence and then suddenly, the violence stops and the communities bargain and argue over the aftermath.

Like a monochromatic tinged scene from noir movies, it feels that tamas or darkness and its twin, fear, are always present: the former lurking in the beginning, getting bigger and bigger with each turn of the page, while the latter drenches the entire narrative from the very start. There are multiple varieties of fear: of the neighbour, the unknown, losing faith, closely following the faith and so on. In fact, in the entire story or chain of stories the common thread is the riot. Riot is the main actor, the rest are side actors consigned to play certain spatial and temporal roles and then fade out. Like the light from the lighthouse, the narrative moves from one family to the other, affording each a limited time to play their role and then as soon as the reader starts warming to that story, the spotlight moves on to the next story. The central theme remains the riot, first as a distant murmur, then a loud klaxon and finally a receding echo - a devious reinterpretation of the Doppler's effect. 

Bhisham Sahni also comments on the absurdities embedded in the antagonistic relations. He frames the centuries old fight between the Turks and the Sikhs, chiding the Muslims and the Sikhs for having their feet in the 20th century but heads in the middle ages. He also takes a swipe at the British for their deviousness, and in a manner that reflects the 'invisible hand' of Adam Smith, how the riot is allowed to play out for four days before the government responding to it. 

The character's dialogues also reflect a sense of amateurishness - deliberately constructed by the author. There are no deep philosophical musings or soliloquies and the message is conveyed through the interactions of the players and the author's voice. Bhisham Sahni also takes a swipe at the nature of India's independence and through the mutterings of a subaltern, contends that there was a transfer of power but no social revolution either preceded or followed that transfer. 

Written in 1972 and followed an acclaimed mini-series by Govind Nihalani, this book remains a powerful reminder of the delicate balance between people, and how quickly faith and trust can be weaponised.