Rating: 4/5

This year I’ve decided to pick up more memoirs to read as it is not a genre I read very often. Celebrity memoir would be at the bottom of this category because the few I have indulged in have been less than impressive. However, the opportunity to read Michael J. Fox’s, Lucky Man presented itself and I am so very glad that I did. 

Fox presents his life in a way that you’d expect any young, aspiring, overconfident actor. I learned much about his early life in Canada and his beginnings in Hollywood before his rocket to fame with Family Ties and Back to the Future made him a household name and every young girl’s dream guy. Sadly, his lifestyle choices early on which were brought on and influenced by his new found fame, lead him into an addiction with alcohol, which was and wasn’t surprising. He takes us through many ups and downs, one of the ups being his marriage to his wife and fellow actress, Tracy Pollan. What an amazing woman she is for standing by him and getting him through so many tough times when he was dealing with his Parkinson’s Disease diagnosis. Spending 7 years in secret trying to hide his tremors and live a life that was normal (as if PD didn’t exist), allowed him to realize that he was only hurting his family and himself. Naturally, Fox went through the stages of grief that one goes through when faced with death. To him, his diagnosis was a death sentence to his career. But it was necessary for him to undergo the stages in order to get to the acceptance that he could live his life and be himself just with Parkinson’s. 

One particularly poignant moment he wrote about was seeing his son, Sam, willingly accept his condition in such a childlike way. Sam didn’t dwell on any of the bad stuff that came with the disease. I’d conditioned myself to relate to the symptoms of the disease strictly as evidence of loss, of facility and freedom being taken away, but Sam’s reaction suggested other possibilities. His curiosity awakened my own. If my condition could provide an opportunity to communicate so honestly and intimately with my son, what else might it bring?

What impressed me most about Michael J. Fox was his devotion to his family especially after his acceptance of help and realization that he could still be himself. He could continue to act and do his work he loved as well. He was experiencing much success with his tv sitcom, Spin City in the late 1990’s. It was during this time that Fox decided that it was time to let the world know about his illness. He was frightened about what the implications would be but found that much to his surprise, he was even more accepted and received in the public eye. What this confession did for his life and for the lives of the 1.5 million people (at the time) living with PD allowed them all to have a voice and be free to be accepted in the eyes of the world for their differences. This launched Fox’s advocacy for more federal funding for the research of a cure for PD. He has become the mouthpiece for people suffering with Parkinson’s Disease and considers himself to be a lucky man.

There was no question that some people would view the news of my disease as an ending, but I was starting to sense that in a much more profound way, it was really a beginning.