Rating: 4/5

After settling in Florence with her mother in 1910, British-American writer Iris Origo would go on to marry Antonio Origo, an aristocratic Italian landowner. During WW2 she was something of a legendary wartime figure around Tuscany, during the German military occupation of Italy, and as a humanitarian, her estate was used as a place of refuge for children, peasant families, partisans, escaped Allied airmen and pretty much anyone else who begged for help. Origo kept a diary, and recorded the day-to-day events between 1943 and up to when the Allies liberated her homeland in 1944. One thing that I found striking about her diary entries, considering battles were raging around her farmlands, is that she somehow managed to keep up the pretense of normalcy and decency while war rained down closeby. 

It begins as support for Mussolini was wavering, Italy's future was in the balance, and Iris was expecting a baby. The domestic life of La Foce, their Tuscan estate, had to be maintained for the sake of family and large numbers of dependents who stayed there. As Italy changed sides and the country found itself effectively at war on every front - bombed by the Allies, pillaged by the now-enemy Germans and driven apart by warring Italian factions - Iris and Antonio's helpless concern at the wider picture had to be set aside as they continually dealt with the more immediate problems at hand. Along with her own involvement, the wider events throughout Italy are also noted down, from radio broadcasts, and news from friends, partisan contacts and passing soldiers.

Although I didn't find this quite as hard-hitting as other WW2 books I have read, it does contains some truly terrible incidental details - the vindictiveness of local fascists, two-way reprisals between the opposing Italian factions, rapes of women and children by German and Moroccan soldiers, the shooting of partisans and of the innocent. It is a disturbing world being exposed. Despite the dark times though, the overriding impression that Origo puts across is of goodwill. Through quiet heroism, practical courage, and of people helping each other to survive by any means possible, so many lives were saved. It was also interesting to discover that many of the local German soldiers were far too relaxed and didn't follow Hitler's orders fully, allowing Italian civilians to go about their daily lives, which involved aiding Allied prisoners and their eventual escape. 

Elegantly written, this was a powerful and fascinating memoir that captured both the ferocity and the kindness of humanity.