Rating: 4/5

This book helped me think about how I need the Savior's Atonement in my life. It made me want to study and understand it much better. "The Broken Heart has a double meaning: first, the breaking of Christ's heart at the moment of his death on the cross, when he voluntarily gave up his life in the final act of the Atonement's drama; second, the broken heart and contrite spirit the Savior asks each of us to place before him on the altar of sacrifice (p. 27)."

I was surprised by an opening statement in the introduction of this book that refers to a 1980 Newsweek article where the writer shared his understanding of the Church's doctrine based on what he heard members of the Church describe and interpret as their traditions. Those "traditions" didn't seem to include a clear explanation of the Atonement, the foundation of our religion. "The Book of Mormon contains without question the most profound theological treatment of the Atonement found in any book now available on any shelf anywhere in the world. Despite this remarkable truth about the Book of Mormon, we Latter-day Saints are, for the most part, only superficially acquainted with our own doctrines of grace, mercy, justice, and the Atonement (p. 3)." 

I think that's an interesting and important statement and reminder of the importance of learning to understand the Atonement for ourselves and making that our center point and foundation. With that as our center point are motives and desires will be more pure and clear. We will have a humble, broken, teachable and new heart!

Here are a few other quotes I liked from the book:

"I once wondered if those who refuse to repent but who then satisfy the law of justice by paying for their own sins are then worthy to enter the celestial kingdom. The answer is no. The entrance requirements for celestial life are simply higher than merely satisfying the law of justice. For that reason, paying for our sins will not bear the same fruit as repenting of our sins (p. 7)."

"A sensible test for determining whether the Atonement applies might be the simple question of whether the experience in fact separates or estranges us from God. To make us "at-one" with God is, after all, the doctrine's purpose (p. 13)."

I love the translation of the German word Sehnsucht, meaning "a longing for home" as sung in O My Father (p. 87) and then the sweet prayer expressed on the next page "Please help us, Father. We want to come home (p. 88)."

"We can control the things that really matter: the righteousness of our desires, the purity of our motives, the wholeheartedness of our efforts to love God and keep his commandments, the genuineness of our interest in other people, and the extent to which our efforts reflect our inborn capacity. One way to distinguish what matters a great deal from what does not matter so much is to ask whether the subject is within our control. If it is, then it probably matters enough to merit our attention (p. 101)."

"Part of the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit is a willingness to sacrifice the love affair so many of us have with our own egos (p. 119)."