Rating: 3/5

The ninth chronicle of Brother Cadfael left me with mixed feelings. I enjoyed part of the story, but had certain concerns about the mystery plot. Again, this was another weak mystery. Like in the previous chronicle, here too, the motive for murder was far-fetched. Of course, murder was necessary for the plot development, since these are mystery novels, but they also need to be more convincing. That's my personal view, however, so I'll leave it at that.

What I really enjoyed in this novel is learning more about the Welsh laws and customs. Ellis Peters eloquently brings these out, offering a sharp contrast with their English counterpart. I was a little fascinated by the Welsh way of looking at justice. It wasn't as rigid and absolute as with English. Welshmen understood the difference between murder and manslaughter even in medieval times. They take a lot of mitigating circumstances into consideration before taking another's life as "blood price". As I always say, these historical adornments are what add so much weight and colour to these chronicles, and here in particular, saved the face of the story. 

Brother Cadfael plays a dominant role in this story, becoming an effective intermediary between English and Welsh. The political climate has changed, and both the English and Welsh find themselves on fragile grounds. New allies are formed between Hugh Beringar (now that Gilbert Prescott is gone) and Owain Gwynedd to protect their respective territories. Brother Cadfeal becomes almost a political emissary in bringing about peace between the neighbours. It was also nice to meet some of the recurring characters, although I didn't care much about the newcomers.

The mystery thread (though weak) flowed fairly well, given that the story was centered more on politics. I enjoyed the political part more than the mystery. Many reviews have expressed outrage at the murderer being "unpunished". But I looked at it as the criminal being left to Welsh justice. In any case, this isn't the first time that a murder was unpunished. Both in Monk's Hood and The Devil's Novice the criminals escape justice.
 
More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/