Rating: 3/5

I’m a big Kipling fan but this novel so far is my least favourite work of his.

“Captains Courageous”, opens with the spoilt callow school boy protagonist Harvey falling into the sea from an ocean liner off the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. He is rescued by a nearby dory from the cod fishing schooner, “We’re Here”. The captain employs him as the, “second boy” and he remains on board learning about the sea and fishing from the crew over the summer season.

Note the subtitle of the book - , “A Story of the Grand Banks”. The Banks are one of the world’s richest fishing grounds for species such as cod and haddock. The, “We’re Here’s”, home port is Gloucester that Kipling describes in his autobiography as the, “metropolis”, of cod fishing. In the final chapter Harvey proudly describes himself to his father as a, “Banker—full-blooded Banker”.

Kipling dedicates the novel to, “James Conland, M. D., Brattleboro, Vermont”. Kipling had lived in Brattleboro for four years and said he was, ”the best friend I made in New England.” According to Christopher Benfey who wrote, “If: The Untold Story of Kipling's American Years”, it was at Brattleboro that Kipling wrote some of his best works including “The Jungle Book” and “The Second Jungle Book”, “Captains Courageous,” and the first draft of “Kim.” 

Unlike some of his contemporaries - Herman Melville, Joseph Conrad and Jack London who had all also written famous seafaring adventures - Kipling had no first hand experience of the hardships of working for months at sea as a sailor. He had spent time at sea but only as a paid passenger on steamers and ocean liners. To address this gap he engaged the help of Conland who had worked as a cod fisher in his youth, see below from his autobiography -

“One thing leading to another, as happens in this world, I embarked on a little book which was called Captains Courageous. My part was the writing; his the details.”

However this resulted in some criticism that the book was a mere collection of facts keeping in mind Kipling’s background as a journalist. See below the following passage from his autobiography written nearly 40 years later where he addressed this issue -

“Yet the book was not all reportage. I wanted to see if I could catch and hold something of a rather beautiful localised American atmosphere that was already beginning to fade. Thanks to Conland I came near this.”

One of my problems with the book is Harvey’s rapid transformation in character. Once he was rescued he demanded to be taken back to New York, a 1,000 mile trip. This would have resulted in the loss of eight men’s wages for an entire fishing season. However all it took was one punch in the nose from the captain and Harvey decided to accept his offer of employment. From then on he worked hard to become a productive member of the crew. 

Another problem for me is the speed record breaking train trip that Harvey’s parents took across the US in order to meet him after he returned to shore. Kipling explains in his autobiography how he received help from a railway magnate in writing the passage. He then proudly goes on to say -

“..a real live railway magnate was so moved after reading the book that he called out his engines and called out his men, hitched up his own private car, and set himself to beat my time on paper over the identical route, and succeeded.”

Wikipedia described it, “as a classic of railway literature”. However I didn’t really understand the urgency given that Harvey was safe and well. The father was a multimillionaire who owned railways, and so the record was virtually a forgone conclusion.

Book recommendation - Cod: A biography of the Fish that Changed the World by Mark Kurlanksy