Rating: 4/5

VERY STRONG 4.5 STAR RATING!

I wish there were more female Christian writers that are cut from the same cloth as Elisabeth Elliot. 

She always says it like it is. She is not shy about holding to her traditional, biblical values - and she'll challenge you to do the same. She doesn't feel the need to be "politically correct" or overly accommodating in her thoughts. At times, she may even make you squirm. But you will forgive her, or at least I do because you know its coming from a place of personal experience. One knows that she's not asking you to walk where she hasn't herself walked. Plus, she just has a way about her...a way with her words that inspires respect while she's holding you to higher standards. Like a pithy, but very loving grandmother! :) 

I wrote more than 5 pages of notes and quotes from this book, and this was just from my first reading. She gives you a LOT to think about on the topic of loneliness. I finished the book feeling enlightened and content. 

Just SOME of the quotes that gave me food for thought: 

"Turn your loneliness into solitude and your solitude into prayer."

“Loneliness is a wilderness, but through receiving it as a gift, accepting it from the hand of God and offering it back to him with thanksgiving, it may become a pathway to holiness, to glory and to God himself.”

“God has promised to supply our needs. What we don’t have now we don’t need now.”

"Even loneliness may be a form of selfishness. One can reject friendship when it is not offered on the terms one chooses. One can reject the grace of God as Naaman the leper came perilously close to doing because it was not offered with the kind of ceremony he felt befitted his station. One can magnify his loneliness out of all proportion, as though he suffered something that is not common to man, forgetting that "this is life"- not more, not less. One can draw about himself a thick quilt of self- pity and isolate himself in other ways, but if one turns the loneliness into solitude and the solitude into prayer, there is release. "

"To walk with Him is to walk the Way of the Cross. If the cross we are asked to take up is not presented to us in the form of martyrdom, heroic action of some kind, dragons or labyrinths or even "ministry"---at least something that looks spiritual---are we to conclude that He has waived the requirement?

He never waives the requirement.

There is a pot of gold, there is a king's reward, but it comes at the end of the journey. Yet all along the way there are countless joys if only we will taste and see that the Lord is good."