Rating: 4/5

Heat of the Moment is the followup to Into the Fire. The hero -- Cort -- is JD's brother from Into the Fire and the heroine is Terri, JD's partner on the police force. This go round our hero is the sexy fire marshall and again Ms. Hall applies the rich boy / poor girl scenario that she is so gifted at applying. Again, there is plenty of sexual tension between Cort and Terri with one heck of an unloading of their pent up anxiety. I didn't think Ms. Hall could top the "Mardi Gras Float Scene" from Into the Fire but she sure did. I'll never look at a motorcycle as "purely a means of transportation again!" 

Both Cort and JD are strong alpha types which makes both stories wonderful. The heroines are equally strong and likeable, very independent and remain so throughout the book, however, they don't attempt to wear the pants with these two guys. I like the heroines to be all girly yet strong and NOT immasculate the hero but put him in his place when he goes overboard with his dominant nature and Ms. Hall accomplishes this. 

In this followup, some nutcase is torching pre-Katrinna New Orleans specifically going after women in playboy Cort's life. He and Terri hooked up briefly in Into the Fire and Heat of the Moment opens with the two leading seperate lives. Mainly because while Cort wants and is intrigue by Terri he is also pissed off that he is and has always been attractive to a woman that is totally different from the type of woman he envisioned as his "future". Needless to say he takes his frustration out on her but do not feel sorry for Terri. She keeps him in check and without meaning too, draws him even closer to her. The meddling Momma is back. She's a subtle meddler but one nonetheless. So Cort and Terri play this cat and mouse game as they work together to locate the nut. 

Ms. Hall has a way of putting everything together so that I was not diveded between the suspense of the story and the progression of Cort coming to terms with his love for Terri. Some romantic suspense are way long on suspense and forget the romance or vice versa. Jessica Hall does not fall into that trap like some writers (i.e. Lisa Jackson, Iris Johannsen, Lisa Gardner, etc.). Balancing the suspense and the romance makes this a very good read -- the catalyst that brought the two main characters together is never forgotten but it does not upstage the romance. The characters grow and cement their bond and take care of business. Both characters were strong and opposites which made the sparks between them all the better. 

Between Into the Fire and Heat of the Moment, I am torn as to which I liked better. The heroine in Into the Fire was a little more girly but I admired Terri so much more because she is so much more in your face than the more subltle seductive Isabelle. But then, Cort appreciates Terri's in your face behaviour and Isabelle stroked JD's ego with her "sexy yet badass I don't need you save me JD manner"

I wish Ms. Hall had more books like this. She works the formula rich boy / poor girl so well and she has that one great love scene that is off the chain, rivals Lora Leigh for steamy, but is still tasteful and not written just for the sake of having the "required" love scene. Ah, see unconsciously I wrote love scene ilo sex scene. Yes, authors, there is a difference (lol).