Rating: 3/5

The Raven of the Foregate, the 12th chronicle of Brother Cadfael, is another interesting installment of the series. Here, too, we find an instance of assumed identity (an element quite repeated), a mysterious death, and a romance. Ellis Peters seems to be enjoying her pattern. That works, apparently, since through various elements, often repeated, she caters to a wider audience. 

In The Raven in the Foregate, a young man with an assumed identity is placed in the hands of Brother Cadfael. As Hugh Beringar points out, Cadfael has a way of crossing paths with these aliases, protecting them from undue harm, and sometimes even helping them in their mission. The reason here is political. The young man is a stranded spy sent by FitzAlan. With the empress Maud falling out of favour, he is in danger of being captured. Brother Cadfael's sympathy falls naturally with this friendless man in peril. What's more, the young man also draws sympathy from Sheriff Beringar. He agrees to spare him as long as they don't openly cross paths.

The mystery here is a simple one. Ellis Peters executes it well. The victim priest has taken it upon himself to reform his parishioners with his rigid exercise of religious rules. Though his conduct is correct, his arrogance and inability to forgive make him thoroughly disliked. So when he dies, suspicion naturally falls on many who had grievances. Peters weaves these threads nicely, bringing out the diverse characteristics and unity of the ordinary people at a time of crisis. I enjoyed reading through the lines of investigation and the difficulty in finding the truth from a tight-lipped community. 

The romance here is spontaneous. In some of the installments, the romance felt forced, as if there was an obligation to include that element. By contrast, it felt natural and right in this installment, which I enjoyed. I also enjoyed the subtle humour. Some instances were outright hilarious. The plot twist was equally amusing. This is the funniest chronicle in the series, in my opinion. Cadfael, a newly introduced character, and Peters' writing generously contributed towards that.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/