Rating: 4/5

Well, this is certainly the longest book I've ever read in my entire life-time. It took me maybe a month or so to read, but boy was that a busy month, and one in which I had the luxury to devote nearly all my time to this book. That's right, roughly eight hours a day for 30 or so days. 

Going at a pace like this, I had the odd feeling of standing on the back of a colossal giant as we walked over the lands of Earth. I felt like a god watching from outer space as time sped up and the world changed. What I mean to say is, I gained a very good sense how poetry functioned over time as a living, breathing organism. I noticed with more specificity how the minutest changes in one century might ripple out in the next. What I mean to say is I gained enough understanding with English poetry to feel as though I could comfortably enter its world.

So this anthology was a wonderful experience, introducing me to enough poets to last a lifetime. But some poets, if the 6th Edition of the Norton Anthology of (english) Poetry had its way, would not be included in that life time. The back cover boasts "35 new contemporary poets from across the globe" and "10 new poets from the middle ages to the twentieth century," quietly sidestepping over the mountain of poets included in the 5th edition but excluded in the 6th (I have the complete list of these lost poets below.)

What does one notice about this list? In other words, could one deduce why the poets that were left out were left out and why others were let in? Well, time confirms a contemporary poet's status. An up-and-comer today may fizzle into nothing tomorrow. So today, his name is included in a poetry anthology, and tomorrow, his name isn't. But there are plenty of contemporary poets included in this newer volume who amount to very little--whose work is nauseatingly dull. And there are several exclusions from before 1900, so another explanation is wanted. By glancing at the names below, any half-wit can figure who was excluded and why--90% of the "lost poets" are white men. 

I understand there has been a recent effort to diversify and decolonize the canon, and in principle, I do not disagree. However, it is important to understand that for the majority of English poetry's lifespan, black people did not write poetry. During the middle-ages, there were hardly any African immigrants in England and her colonies. And for a long time after slavery, blacks were kept from attaining an education. Therefore the pool of "possible poets," that is, those with a decent education--has been severely limited. Sometimes a special sort of genius who happens to have lucked into an education will sneak through (eg. Phyllis Wheatley) but this is insurmountably rare. And women, like anybody else who was visibly different from the current King of England, were also discouraged from attaining the kind of education and knowledge needed to become a great poet. Ergo, we have less very good women-poets from before the 1700s. There are a few, but these few are very limited, and are rarely good enough to compete with the greatest male poet publishing at the time.

This is obviously tragic and has not been the case for 200 or so years. Education nowadays is accessible enough for blacks to allow for wonderful verses from Derek Walcott or Countee Cullen. And women have no problem attaining a very good education in English. In fact, today they make up the majority of English majors. 

But trading white men from 1600 with white women accomplishes very little. Those women, because of their circumstances, were almost always less accomplished. To include a less accomplished poet for the sake of diversity (something everybody should want) unfortunately does very little. If anything, it gives sexists and bigots the right to point to a female poet from 1500 and laugh at her poorly constructed verse, especially compared with Marlowe and Spenser. It would be most wise to offer readers only the best poetry, regardless of sex or gender. We can lament the lack of inclusion yesterday with inclusion today, but we cannot pretend that those excluded yesterday had the same opportunities as their progeny who are (more) included today.

To move on from that loooong digression, readers of the 5th edition will also notice that 2 lengthy and tremendously informative sections on Versification and Poetic Syntax have been replaced by a glossary and some new online materials. The loss is sad--nobody will read a glossary the same way they will read an engaging and informative piece of text, and because this book is aimed for novices in college courses, the information there was surely valuable.

There is also a new section called "American Song" which is pretty boring and has no place in a Poetry anthology. Lin Manuel Miranda is NOT a poet. Sorry. A poem is not a picture, a poem is not a short story in prose, and a poem certainly is not the lyrics to a song. There were so many important poets who were sacrificed in this newer edition and their sacrifice is in vain. No self-respecting reader can claim that a "poem" which is more than 50% improvised scatting has any place in this anthology. And yet, it "diversifies the canon" at the expense of the reader's enjoyment.

As far as diversifying the canon goes, there are some contemporary poets who I think SHOULD have been included and who DO fulfill the requisite of sparking some diversity like Maya Angelou, Mary Oliver, Jewel, and Rupi Kaur. (I may get some pushback on the last two, but sales numbers speak for themselves. It should not be the compilers job to spit in the face of the reading populace when their interest lies in something he or she dislikes.)

"Lost Poets":
Matthew Green
Oliver Wendell Homes
Jones Very
Sidney Lanier
Trumbull Stickney
Witter Bynner
Edwin Muir
Conrad Aiken
Edmund Blunden
Laura (Riding) Jackson
Roy Campbell
Earle Birney
Richard Eberhart
Malcolm Lowry
Robert Fitzgerald
Norman Nicholson
David Gascoyne
Charles Causley
George MacKay Brown
Sidney Keyes
John Ormond
Elizabeth Jennings
Peter Davison
Gregory Corso
Alan Brownjohn
Wole Soyinka
Daryl Hine
Michael Palmer
Kit Wright
Robyn Sarah
Charles Bernstein
Sean O'Brien
Vikram Seth
Brad Leithauser
Dioniso D. Martinez
 
Some others I think should have been included:
Thomas Moore
Dr. Seuss
Shel Silverstein
Oscar Wilde
Edward Young
Jack Gilbert
James MacPhereson
Campbell McGrath
Laurence Binyon
Robert Louis Stevenson
Robert Duncan
Frank Bidart
George Chapman
Sharon Olds