Rating: 3/5

I have a history of mixed feelings about this book. I’ve tried and wanted to read this for more than ten years. I got at least halfway in my at least three efforts to read it in the past. For some reason I could never bring myself to finish it, until now when I got the audio. So even now I’m a bit dissatisfied, wondering if I would have felt a 5-star feeling about this book if I’d put more effort in? I think one issue is that I’m no longer a newbie to CM philosophy, and this is no longer the best recommendation for newbies to CM. So I’m no longer the target audience, and secondly, I’m not sure anyone is because it’s a bit outdated now. 

So to the first issue, I’d recommend Karen Glass’s offerings now to understand CM philosophy, if you don’t want to simply read CM herself, try the book In Vital Harmony or Consider This. I haven’t read Minds More Awake, but that might be good too. This one is decent, for sure, and it deserves honor for its place in helping revive the philosophy of CM especially for homeschoolers; but it’s no longer the best option for an introductory book. 

One reason it’s no longer the best option is that other better books have been written, as I mentioned, in the last decade. But that’s just it, that one of the things that makes the newer ones better is that this book is a bit outdated. It’s a bit syrupy and idealistic in a 50s Swiss Mayberry sort of way. For example, I can’t imagine Schaeffer looking at the public schools today and saying it’s possible for Christian parents to put their kids in those high schools so long as the parents can talk with the kids at home. No, if she had to put warnings on public school teachings decades ago due to evolution, today it’s not an option. And many other little examples seem either outdated or unrealistic. 

Sometimes it feels idealistic or unrealistic, but I can’t always tell if it’s CM or if CM herself would have said, No, that’s Macaulay talking about her issues there, not me; I wouldn’t have said it that way…. So sometimes Macaulay gets into apologetics almost, and you’re not sure when you left CM ed philosophy and got into Christian apologetics. But so far, I haven’t read a satisfactory explanation, not even in Glass’s Vital Harmony which did the best attempt this far of any I’ve read, of CM’s principle that children aren’t born bad or good. Even putting the best spin on that possible, it’s an unfortunate choice of words. Macaulay, I think, should have put some disclaimers on that, but instead goes right along with it, not making enough allowances for the fallen nature of mankind, while emphasizing constantly the image of God, the personhood of mankind.

Anyway, there’s still lots of good stuff here; if you’re going to read ten books on CM, this can be somewhere between numbers 6-10.