Rating: 5/5

Review of George Bernard Shaw, The Doctor’s Dilemma (published 1911); the story takes place in 1903
Act I in which the English Doctors are introduced. The freshly knighted Sir Colenso Ridgeon claims to know how to ‘cure’ tuberculosis by ‘buttering’ bacteria with opsonin which makes immune cells eat, or phagocytose, tubercle bacilli. Ridgeon claims that his discovery of a cure for tuberculosis ranks a close second to William Harvey’s discovery of the circulation of blood. All the Doctors are quite full of themselves and too busy extolling their strengths and virtues to take much mind of each other. Walpole, the surgeon, ‘cures’ ‘blood poisoning’ by cutting out the patient's 'nucal sac' (an imaginary structure). Dr. Schutzmacher, a general practitioner has a sign that proudly states ‘Cure Guaranteed’. Sir Patrick (Paddy) Cullen extols science in generalities and stimulates immunity indiscriminately. Sir Ralph Bloomfield Bennington a tall, debonaire, and most ‘colossal humbug’ needs make no claim - his aura speaks for him.
Sir Patrick asks Ridgeon if he hears voices and Ridgeon replies that he does not. Cullen says that is a ‘good thing’ because anyone who hears voices And thinks that his work ranks with William Harvey’s, should be ‘locked up’. Additional lightness is brought to the scene by the medical student Redpenny who often fails to show the proper respect and Emmy the serving woman.
Act II in which Louis is presented by his ‘wife’ Mrs. Dubedat, to the Doctors, over dinner at a local pub. Judgments are passed on Louis: from a great artist based on his sketches; to a rake for trying to borrow money from each of the Doctors at different points; to an immoral ‘liar’ when his ‘real’ wife shows up with her marriage certificate; and as an object of envy for his artistic skills and the beauty of the woman Jenny, over whom he holds sway, married or not. Shaw makes it clear that Ridgeon has limited opsonin and can nary ‘cure’ one more tuberculous patient - choices will have to be made.
Act III in Louis Dubedat’s studio. Various hypocrisies are laid bare. Ridgeon can only ‘cure’ 10 people of their tuberculosis – he has carefully selected the most deserving – and now, there are two candidates for his final dose: Louis Dubedat, a rake and the supposed husband of a beautiful woman that all the Doctors desire; or Dr. Blenkinsop, a poor, fellow physician. The antics of Louis trying to ‘borrow’ money; obtain commissions for paintings he does not complete; and steal items such as lighters from the doctors - serve as sub-plots to the central conflict – who shall be cured? This is the literal Doctor’s Dilemma.
As additional sub-plots, Louis cheats poor Dr. Blenkinsop out of money; and Jenny Dubedat acknowledges that she is not Louis’s wife and she knows the maid, Minnie Tinwell, who is! Louis doubles down on his sins and failings, effectively dismissing the Doctor’s moralisms on social, legal, and ethical grounds. Louis does not appear to be bothered by the Doctor’s judgments, and their ‘wild card’ – Death - does not faze him. “We’re all going to die.” … “Not in 6 months”, the ever-practical surgeon Walpole replies. To which Louis responds, “How do you know?” 
Louis gives a soliloquy on the inartistic professions as he alone is the Artist: lawyers threaten with prison; parsons threaten with damnation; and Doctors threaten with Death. Now he has crossed the line, challenging the doctor’s professional identity! Louis's diagnoses are established, he is a scoundrel and a reptile. 
Louis unveils his ‘wild card’ – “I am a disciple of George Bernard Shaw!”
Sir Ralph Bloomfield Bennington replies, “When a man pretends to discuss science, morals, and religion, and then avows himself a follower of a notorious and avowed anti-vaccinationist, there is nothing more to be said.” 
Sir Patrick’s response, “George Bernard Shaw? Never heard of him. Methodist, I suppose.” Louis responds that Shaw is the most advanced man alive, and there is no such thing as sin…
The doctors then argue as to who among them will help Louis with his tuberculosis. Walpole offers to operate until Louis makes clear that he wants the surgeon to pay him for the privilege. Sir Patrick decides that ‘he is retired’ so one of the others must step up. Ridgeon settles on the more worthy (albeit poor as a church mouse) Dr. Blenkinsop. It is left to Sir Ralph Bloomfield Bennington, who continues to admire Mrs. Dubedat, and has decided that despite his imperfections, Louis’s dignity and self-possession suggest he ‘comes from a good family’. Sir Ralph Bloomfield Bennington will treat Louis ‘as if he were royalty’. The Act ends with Jenny’s rationalizations regarding all the things that make Louis appear to be a scoundrel, rake, and reptile, to the Doctors (Sir Ralph now excepted).
Act IV in which the Doctors reappear in Louis’s studio to conduct Louis’s pe-autopsy -before his death. The dying Louis makes a display of his love for Jenny telling her to honor him with her life and specifically to marry again, and be happy. Louis dies ‘splendidly’ leading Ridgeon to opine “I said the other day that the most tragic thing in the world is a sick doctor. I was wrong. The most tragic thing in the world is a man of genius who is not a man of honor.” 
As the others argue, Sir Patrick opines, “When you’re as old as I am, it matters very little how a man dies. What matters is how he lives… Don’t waste your time wrangling over him (the deceased Louis). A blackguard is a blackguard; an honest man is an honest man; and neither of them will be at a loss for religion or morality to prove that their ways are the right ways. It’s the same with nations, the same with professions, the same all over the world and always will be.”
Act V takes place in an art gallery where Louis’s work will be auctioned off. Among the items on display is Jenny Dubedat’s memoir of her late husband – ‘The Story of a King by His Wife’. Jennifer and Dr. Colenso Ridgeon finish the Play in verbal combat:
Jennifer begins by congratulating Ridgeon on his wonderful ‘cure’ of Dr. Blenkinsop. Ridgeon parries that Blenkinsop had been made Medical Officer of Health and that he (Blenkinsop) had in turn, ‘cured’ the Chairman of the Borough Council. Jenny returns fire, saying that Blenkinsop had told her “the private practice of medicine should be put down by law. … private doctors were licensed murderers.” Ridgeon replied that public doctors ‘always think that of private doctors’. 
Jenny asks how Ridgeon had the gall to permit Louis to die of tuberculosis that he might have cured, and then, come to see Louis’s work after his death? She answers her own question by alleging that Ridgeon only thought Louis was ‘a clever brute’. 
Jennifer goes on to say that 'you living things' (doctors?) have no souls. Ridgeon responds that he has never seen a 'soul' while doing anatomic dissections. Jenny asks, if you dissected me, could you find my conscience? Ridgeon says he has met people who appear to have no conscience. He goes on to say that although Jenny finds him cruel, she consulted Bloomfield Bennington and Walpole for some time. Neither of them admired Louis. Jenny declares that there are two kinds of Doctors – the naturally cruel and those who learn cruelty. Ridgeon declares that he made no mistake regarding the lack of character of Jenny’s late and alleged husband. When Ridgeon goes to inspect a piece of Louis’s art and states he has chosen 5 pieces for purchase, Jenny tells him to put it down. All of Louis’s works have been purchased – by Jenny’s next husband! The Play ends.
The Doctor’s Dilemma is harsh, satiric, and humorous. Those watching this play get a front-row seat on medical hypocrisy. The doctors revel in their pomposity and demonstrate a complete lack of self-insight. The hubris of thinking that each doctor knows how to cure (albeit each of the Doctors favors a different ‘cure’) is only exceeded by the pride implicit in thinking themselves worthy of judging who should be ‘cured’. 
George Bernard Shaw makes this attack on medical vanity 'work' by using two artifices of many accomplished comedy artists. He displays the pride of doctors in comparison with the pride of lawyers, pastors, and even artists. And he pokes fun at himself. These contrivances help readers and play-goers see the general humanity as if one were looking at a large and inclusive mirror. My father, the most important doctor in my life, would say The Doctor’s Dilemma teaches the most important lesson in medicine – humility.