Rating: 4/5

The work of Dr. Sarno has had a profound impact on my life. It has been sorcery, some real divine intervention shit. As many other people have experienced, learning about his work alone cured my chronic back and leg pain. This actually happened BEFORE I read this book, as I learned about this work through an amazing app called Curable, where people are continuing Dr.Sarnos legacy of curing chronic pain through mind body principles. 
Sure this book was dry in the middle, the cover looks like a dated soft porn novel you would find in the airport bookstore, and I often read it purposefully so I could fall asleep faster. But the work speaks for itself. (Although I probably recommend the app more, with a good thorough skim of this book.). Read on if you want to hear another cliché cure story.

I quite literally suffered for years with chronic back pain, which changed my life from joyful, active, strong, outgoing, athletic, ambitious, to a very depressed ball of sad pain. I couldn’t walk a flat quarter mile without fear, couldn’t sit at all, was told to not do yoga, swim using my legs (???), hike, bend over, etc (the list goes on from there) and pretty much thought my life was over at the ripe age of 22. I did every possible treatment under the sun (acupuncture, electric shock therapy, physical therapy for ages, ultrasound heat therapy, icing, heating, anti inflammatory medications, creams, balms, all the supplements, walking, massage, cupping, and more). Nothing helped and even when there was improvement, it was unstable and I always had FEAR. 

I found Curable while at a very low point, crying in bed thinking i was doomed forever, googling what if any yoga poses I could do. The app showed up and i started immediately. It was like a freaking light switched. As soon as I started the app program I was 100% better. Wtf. It has been about 4 months now and I have had almost no pain at all. The best part is I have had no FEAR (and i have fought hard to beat back the learned fear I’ve acquired). I have sat on 11 hour flights (thought impossible), washed my face leaning over sinks (! Big moves), I have hiked, swam, biked, gotten back into yoga, lifted heavy shit, washed dishes, gone skiing, and sat a lot! (Sitting is a lovely thing to be physically able to do again). I haven’t even been diligent about doing the apps mental exercises (which are great), it is just the initial knowledge of what is going on that has stopped my pain (like with many others). Get the app, read the book, have an open mind, help yourself