Rating: 5/5

This is a great book! It is all about this kid named Cloyd who believes a stone gives him strength and invulnerability. Cloyd, who is a teenager from White Mesa, Utah, has a rough time getting along with a guy named Walter, who is taking care of him since both his parents passed away. However, Cloyd eventually persuades Walter to take him into the mountains with and go up to the gold mine. Cloyd really wants to go up there to climb an ancient Ute pyramid, though, instead of mining for ore. They spend a couple days in the mine, and when they don't get a thing, Cloyd asks if he can go exploring. He goes to climb the pyramid and on the way back he sees a bear. He thinks it's a brown bear, but soon learns that there is no such thing. A bear hunter named Rusty hears of this encounter with the bear and decides to go after it, realizing it is really a grizzly bear. Cloyd has to try to stop him from killing the bear. If you are wondering what happens next, you will have to read the book on your own.

This is one of the best books I have ever read. I really like adventure books, and this author does a great job of making every event very clear. He does a great job of explaining the characters indirectly through other characters. This is known as indirect characterization. You learn a lot about Cloyd from Walter talking and vice versa. I could actually visualize the actions in this book as they happened. One of the most important things this book shows is that some things are best kept a secret. This book provides a great theme with a great hook that keeps you wanting to read more. Your feelings are always changing when this book is being read. The mood changes a lot. For example, when Cloyd and Walter are arguing in the beginning, you get a mad feeling, and when the bear is seen, you feel a bit frightened.

I would definitely recommend this book to any guy who likes action and adventure books. Without a doubt, this is one of the best books I have ever read. I would give it five stars because I thought it was awesome. The only bad thing about this book is the beginning is kind of slow. All the action is at the end. Overall, this is a great book.