Rating: 3/5

Directly after hearing that he must face vicious trials or die, Darren Shan takes on the Trials of Initiation in Trials of Death. The consequence for not passing the Trials is death by being dropped on spikes over and over until death takes you. The Trials are hard enough for adult full-vampires, so how will our half-vampire protagonist fare? One things for sure, if Darren passes the Trials he might have wished he didn’t in the end.

Plot

The plot in Trials of Death is all about Darren going through five Trials of Initiation to prove himself to be a good standing vampire. For some, the plot in this book may be a little dull. It all revolves around Darren training and completing the Trials. If you have a big interest in vampire society you might not be so bored. Along with the trials we get intimate details of vampire society in this universe and we get to see it in action. I’ve seen probably and equal amount of reviewers say that the book was either too fast or too slow. Personally, I don’t think it went fast at all. If you’re used to reading books that have slow, gradual development then Trials of Death may have been a little fast-paced. 

One thing that I did think was a little too fast was how quickly they started on the Trials. There is literally only one chapter between Darren hoping he doesn’t die in the Trials and him training for his first Trial. 

Writing

One thing I will say is that I like the way Shan wrote the action scenes and the scenes with the Trials. He describes them so well that I can easily picture Darren going about his challenges without struggling to imagine them. There’s no over-descriptiveness going on; it’s just the right amount of description to be able to imagine the Trials and not be bogged down with information.

The parts where there aren’t any Trials or action going on are pretty boring, though. The Festival of the Undead is an example of the boring parts of the book. While it was interesting to learn about the different aspects of vampire culture, it was still a little dull.

Characters

I still like Darren as our protagonist. He’s very realistic. He doesn’t just magically excel at things, even though he does have a few talents for certain things. His emotions are pretty real, too, like when someone makes a joke in a tense situation and he snaps at them. Mr. Crepsley is a character I want to like but just can’t because we still don’t know all that much about him. Darren spent most of his time with Vanez Blane in preparation for the Trials. There are moments where I can say I like him, like when he and Darren hug before Darren’s first Trials and Mr. Crepsley’s confidence in Darren. Besides that, and a few instances where we’re told Darren and Mr. Crepsley are close, I don’t feel any strong feelings towards Mr. Crepsley. 

The other vampires were developed a little more since the last book, but not too much. One has to remember that Trials of Death only spans across the course of not even two weeks at most. I feel like Darren should have been in the company of these other characters more so that certain character’s death is more meaningful.

Things I Didn't Like

Unfortunately one of the biggest negatives in books made into my Things I Didn’t Like section: plotholes. There are only two major plotholes that I could catch, but they’re pretty big. The first one is why the Council bent the rules to give Darren extra time after The Hall of Flames. Darren, Mr. Crepsley, and all other vampires have reminded the reader over and over again that vampires are honorable creatures. There are vampires that would, and have, died for honor. During Darren’s first trial, when he could have given himself a head start through The Aquatic Maze that he was so afraid at dying at, he didn’t. Nobody but Darren would have known that he’d cheated but he still didn’t because of honor and nearly died in the process. So why would these vampires bend the rules—that they are literally dead-set on—all of a sudden for a half-vampire? This is a gaping plothole. 

The other plothole was with regards to Darren and Kurda running away. Harkat wants to come with Darren but Kurda tells him that he’s too wide to fit through some of the tunnels. However, Gavner ends up going with them and I’m pretty sure that a vampire described as short but wide is probably wider than a Little Person. I know that Gavner needed to be the one with Kurda and Darren in the end to advance the plot, but this doesn’t make sense. Harkat could have fit and gone with them and the whole situation in the end of the book could have been avoided. There is no logical reason for Harkat not being able to come with Darren. Shan should have come up with a different reason as to why Harkat couldn’t join them.

Diversity

The diversity in Trials of Death is the same as in the last books. One woman, who gets beaten by a pacifist despite being the best, and a vampire with one eye. Sad to say that that’s the end of the list. 

Overall

I enjoyed Trials of Death. It gave the readers a better look into this vampire society, which the majority of vampire books rarely do. The Trials might be a little boring for some but I thought that they were very well written. The plot twist at the end was great, too. There are gaping plotholes that I don’t like, but what is one to do? The earlier books in the Cirque du Freak series are a little better than this one, even though the books are really moving forward. 

Here is a link to my notes.