Rating: 4/5

It turns out that there are so many ways one could deliberately lie with statistics, whilst simultaneously giving an air of credibility to whatever crap they are purporting. 

This book is both scary and highly entertaining. It's a quick but informative read based on real-life examples. 
Here's one that was particularly illuminating (emphasis mine): 

"Let us say that during a period in which race prejudice is growing you are employed to “prove” otherwise. It is not a difficult assignment. Set up a poll or, better yet, have the polling done for you by an organization of good reputation. Ask that usual cross section of the population if they think blacks have as good a chance as white people to get jobs. Repeat your polling at intervals so that you will have a trend to report.
Princeton’s Office of Public Opinion Research tested this question once. What turned up is interesting evidence that things, especially in opinion polls, are not always what they seem. Each person who was asked the question about jobs was also asked some questions designed to discover if he was strongly prejudiced against blacks. It turned out that people most strongly prejudiced were most likely to answer Yes to the question about job opportunities. (It worked out that about two-thirds of those who were sympathetic toward blacks did not think the black had as good a chance at a job as a white person did, and about two-thirds of those showing prejudice said that blacks were getting as good breaks as whites.) It was pretty evident that from this poll you would learn very little about employment conditions for blacks, although you might learn some interesting things about a man’s racial attitudes.

  You can see, then, that if prejudice is mounting during your polling period you will get an increasing number of answers to the effect that blacks have as good a chance at jobs as whites. So you announce your results: Your poll shows that blacks are getting a fairer shake all the time. 

The worse things get, the better your poll makes them look."