Rating: 5/5

This is, for me, a magnificent book. My wife (a retired USFS forester) first encountered it in a used book store this year. Neither of us had heard of it. Neither could believe how many ways it intersected our own interests and experiences.

I studied forestry and forest ecology in the 1980s and worked briefly in the field for a period after that. I remember reading descriptions of old growth forest in the east and saw pictures of it in the west. Like everyone, I suppose, I'd been aware of the sequoias and redwoods, but the ancient temperate rain forest of the Pacific Northwest was something new to me. Seeing pictures of Douglas-fir bark plates as wide as the man in the picture for scale was unimaginable to a Kentucky boy, as were the close spacing, heavy moss, and tall ferns. It staked a claim on some small place in my imagination. 

I always try to see examples of forest remnants that, for whatever reason, escaped logging. The first was at the head of a hollow in Red River Gorge where there was a stand of huge-to-me yellow-poplar and eastern hemlock. I visited Lilly Cornett Woods in KY, Joyce Kilmer in NC, and Heart's Content in PA. I wasn't sure I'd ever make it to the Pacific Northwest, but the trees in the pictures always stayed in my mind. I developed a preservationist mindset toward virgin forest; there was so little of it left. 

So, of course, I paid attention when the spotted owl exploded into national news at the end of G.H.W. Bush's and early in the Clinton administration. When my wife asked me to choose a destination (besides Yellowstone) for a vacation, I thought back to the big trees and we settled on the Olympic Peninsula and the Cascades. Just off the plane in Seattle, we drove to a campsite not far from the Hoh River and Forks, which became a base for exploring that corner of the Olympic. 

Forks! It made a huge impression on us. So to find this book and for it to bring such reason and compassion to an issue so ethically, economically, and socially complex felt something just a little short of miraculous. How did we never know of this book? It connects so many dots and fills in so much missing information for me about what was going on as the conflict between harvest and preservation developed and evolved in Washington and Oregon. I learned more about New Forestry from it than I did in forestry school, which in my particular case still emphasized traditional silviculture and timber management.

Further, I think William Dietrich is a great writer--in his structuring of the book, which alternates perspectives from industry to environmentalist while telling the chronological story of how the spotted owl controversy resulted in drawing no-cut lines around most of the remaining old growth, to the quality and clarity of his prose and thinking. His treatment is so nuanced that a reader can't identify villains just by which side of the issue they're on: There are sensitive, ethical people on both sides. While it's clear where Dietrich stands, he reaches beyond the issue of what's right in America's temperate rain forest, to imagining a "what's right" land use ethic that could have averted the crisis in the first place.