Rating: 4/5

I recently started working at a Catholic university, which amuses everyone, including myself, because I am in no way religious, let alone Catholic. Not that this should matter to them because I'm still a good kid and all.

As the weather turns a little cooler, and I've becoming alive in that way I only seem to do every October, I've been walking around the small (and it's very small) campus and finding nice little corners to sit in to read during my lunch and otherwise hide from everyone. This was the perfect book to take into one of those corners, and it has contributed to me looking carefully at the sisters on the campus because obviously there's some shady shit going down, right.

The sisters in this book are shit-balls crazy, they don't serve who you think they serve, considering they're nuns and all, but therein lies the fun of this story. The abbey, a school of orphaned girls called St. Gertrude's, is creepy in and of itself and is known throughout the local town of Moonfall as St. Gruesome's. The architecture involves gargoyles, like any good abbey should, and I am carefully looking for them on the campus but haven't found any yet. Though maybe they're out and about, and I should spend more time on campus after dark...

There's a sheriff who had a traumatic adolescence when his younger brother died on Halloween in the early 1970s. He has a son of his own now. There's a former student of the abbey's who has come back to teach there to try to solve a mystery of a death that occurred while she matriculated there, some spooky-ass nuns (as previously stated), a neighborhood witch, a town full of questions without answers, a scary forest, and a sinister doctor who wants in girls' pants.

Back in the 1990s I used to read a lot of these sorts of books, and Pinnacle books are the absolute best. I used to pick them up for cheap on family vacations and read during our road trips, so reading this one reminded me of those occasions. It's the perfect time of the year, with the leaves changing colors, the weather cooling, and just a couple weeks out from Halloween. I recommend it to anyone who likes a good, chilling read. It's not perfect, but fun to read if you're already into scary reads.