Rating: 5/5

King of Pain

Storytelling and copulation are the two chief forms of amusement in the South. They're inexpensive and easy to procure. 
Robert Penn Warren

Robert Penn Warren had been teaching at LSU for about a year prior to the 1935 assassination of U.S. Sen. Huey P. Long (La.), nicknamed "Kingfish," the populist and crooked 42-yr-old senator and former Louisiana governor, on whom his novel is loosely based. The title comes from Long's motto, "Every Man a King," and a "Humpty Dumpty" verse.

The story follows the political rise and fall of the fictional Willie Stark, who came from modest roots as a small town lawyer and made it into office as a populist before the Depression, to be elected twice as governor of a Southern state. Warren left references to location intentionally vague, even throwing in red herrings about coming in from the "beach" at a close-by vacation home (Louisiana has lakes, but no beaches; it's oceanfront: the wetlands leading into the Gulf of Mexico).

Jack Burden, the novel's narrator, was a former newspaper columnist and history student before becoming Governor Stark's right hand man. He is exceedingly dispassionate as a bystander and participant in the ongoing tragedy, and remains so despite watching the tragedy unfold and suffering two epic betrayals. Maybe Penn Warren was going for the shock or sense of bewilderment a reader may feel about the narrator seemingly not being affected by occurrences that would likely devastate any normal person. 

This is not simply a political novel as I thought; I was surprised to learn that Warren said he didn't intend it to be one. 

The book is much more about:  all actions having consequences, intended or not; 

 accepting responsibility for one's actions; 

issues of identity, such as how a boy can be affected even as a man in his 30s upon learning the true identity of his father; and, 

maybe most substantially, the variety and grades of betrayal and the impact of each on the betrayed and the betrayer.  As I think about it, I'm certain All the King's Men covers all 7 deadly sins, particularly the Big Five: Pride, Greed, Lust, Envy and Wrath.

A quote from the novel I found most poignant as I was reading it, but not quite as much so today: 
“...the air so still it aches like ... your heart in the bosom when you stand on the street corner waiting for the light to change and happen to recollect how things once were and how they might have been yet if what happened had not happened.” I must admit I tuned out a couple of times when the author/narrator trailed off into 2 to 3 page abstruse ramblings on the meaning of life in relation to space and time. I don't like lectures.

All in all, I enjoyed the book immensely for its political nature, its place and time and its exploration of these various themes.