Rating: 3/5

Finally – a vengeful hero who has waited 11 years for the heroine to grow up so he can marry her for revenge. That’s the premise of this story. That’s the ridiculous logic of HPs I crave. And yes, the hero’s actions make no sense. And yes, the heroine’s abrupt turn from hate to love makes no sense, either. But what a fun book.

Our ex race car driver hero (and Greek tycoon) wants revenge because the heroine’s race car driver father stole his wife and almost killed him on the race track. As it was, he is blind in one eye and is full of bitterness. Both his wife and the hero’s father are now dead so the heroine is the one who will pay the price.

He has been watching the heroine since she was a child of ten – and he knows when she graduates college. He arranges a job for her at his estate in Cornwall as a companion to his sixteen year-old daughter. (He married at 19) 

The heroine has no idea of this plan until the hero spells it out and the daughter shows up to fling a few “I hate yous” her way. The heroine is angry and decides she’ll try to escape by shimming down the drainpipe.

The hero startles her and she falls, injuring her shoulder and ankle. Hero seems shook up that she is so determined to get away, but he carries out his plans for vengeance when they marry a few days later. He tells her that he will go to the papers with the story of her father’s attempted murder – since it was hushed up as an accident back in the day. Heroine thinks that she can use that as blackmail back since hero won’t want to be known as marrying the daughter of a murderer. (Later he finds out the father had a brain tumor and he had blacked out right before the accident – he wasn’t a murderer)

Since heroine is injured, she has a reprieve from sex. Hero says he’ll spend the work week in London where has mistresses for all of his sexual needs. Heroine is outraged and jealous and doesn’t know why. To pass the time, she tries to be friendly with the daughter who has a crush on the tutor.

When hero returns, the daughter tells him the heroine is flirting with the tutor and the hero is jealous. They do talk it out and heroine informs him his daughter has a crush on the tutor. The hero decides to send his daughter to his Greek island so she’ll get over her infatuation. Daughter is not happy and decides to show the heroine the file the hero has on her mother and father. There are lots of insinuations that the heroine’s mother committed suicide. The heroine is devastated by this news and decides she needs to speak to her aunt and uncle in Scotland. She escapes – only to find the hero waiting for her there.

The hero has charmed her aunt and uncle and is surprisingly nice and gentle with the heroine. The heroine suddenly finds herself in love and decides to be a good wife. He takes her to his Greek island and things look promising for the H/h until the OW shows up. The hero installs her in the guesthouse and taunts the heroine with her presence. Heroine is full of angst and confusion, but she gets closer to the daughter by urging her to get new clothes and listening to her hopes and dreams. The daughter’s betrothed is there as well and he also confides in the heroine. 

Of course the hero is jealous of the betrothed – but he does listen to the heroine and the daughter and agrees to let them have a longer engagement so they can have freedom before marriage. 

Finally the hero snaps and takes the heroine without love or gentleness. (Heroine later says it wasn’t forced) Then he sends her back to England while he stays in Greece. 

Heroine spends her time lamenting her lost love and going to her flatmate’s wedding. Hero returns after one of his employees tells him off for neglecting the heroine. They finally talk – hero loved her when he saw her shimmying down the drain pipe. He’s been trying to make her jealous so she would come to him, but it backfired when he lost control. The OW was his secretary and cousin. He never had an OW since they were married. HEA. 

Hero was remarkably blind about a lot things - but he eventually had his one eye opened about his daughter, his wife, and the man against whom he sought revenge. Get it? His physical state was a metaphor! Wheee. Heroine has talked herself into love and she'll probably stay that way. This was good old skool fun.