Rating: 5/5

It begins with a classic introduction from Archie Goodwin as he wants to avoid any confusion by strangers to the Wolfe genre who might think because Wolfe didn’t get paid in two of the cases that Wolfe makes a practice of solving murder cases pro bono. He also explains the symmetry of the stories. It does a great job setting the tone for what follows:

"Man Alive"

A fashion designer hires Wolfe because she believes she’s seen her Uncle at a fashion show. The problem? Her uncle committed suicide in spectacular fashion jumping into Old Faithful at Yellowstone National Park a few months before his partner does himself in. It turns out she was right about him being alive but not for long. Her uncle is murdered in her office and she becomes a suspect even though the police have no idea who the victim is. Wolfe has to find out who did it. This one is solved with a clever deduction based on the behavior of one of the heirs.

Rating: Very Satisfactory

"Omit Flowers"

As a personal favor to Marko Vukcic, Wolfe undertakes to clear a former great chef of the murder of the boss' husband and his heir apparent as head of a large chain of restaurants. Wolfe has no lead, but Archie makes a lucky guess that leads to startling information that the widow has been stabbed but she won't reveal the identity of the perpetrator.

This is a very well-balanced story that shows Archie's intuitive reasoning in action. That allows him to uncover information another detective would have missed and that Wolfe absolutely needed. The mystery is engaging and the identity of the actual perpetrator provided a solid surprise ending.

Rating: Very Satisfactory

"Door to Death"

Door to Death may be the crown jewel of this collection. When Theodore has to take care of his ailing mother and take an indefinite leave as orchid nurse for Wolfe, Wolfe is left with the full time job taking care of them. This because so intolerable that Wolfe not only leaves the brownstone, but gets in a car and travels to hire away Andy, the gardener of a wealthy family to tend the orchids. However, before Wolfe can get away with the replacement orchid tender, a dead body is discovered and Andy is the prime suspect.

Wolfe’s determination to find an acceptable replacement for Andy was enough to interest him in solving the case. However, when a young woman has the impertinence to call him Nero, Wolfe becomes determined to solve the case even as he’s being ordered out by the local police. Wolfe goes to extreme measures to get back into the house and obtain an opportunity to investigate it.

This was a very satisfying story that showed both Wolfe’s genius and self-awareness as Wolfe insists on staying away from home knowing that if he goes home, he’ll be impossible to get back out. And this is a case Wolfe wants to solve.

Rating: Very Satisfactory

You really can't go wrong with any of the stories. The whole collection is Rex Stout at his best and the best novella collection I've read so far.

Overall Rating: very satisfactory