Rating: 4/5

Fittingly, the cover of my copy of Markings has the memorial to Dag Hammarskjöld created by the great 20thC sculptor Barbara Hepworth. That brings two worthy thinkers and figures of the twentieth century together. I love it when book cover art and the content come together so well. Why don't publishers think about this a little more often?

Hepworth’s sculptures work with organic ideas, flows and surfaces that we think we know and can touch. They deal with external forms, almost circles, curves and columns, figures. Yet, there are always two planes in her works, the inner and outer seamlessly work towards each other. Look up Pelagos, Corinthos, Wave, Two Forms, Mother and Child, Rock Form (Pothcurno) and you see the relationship of inner and outer, always in motion, your eye can’t pinpoint one as the two merge to form one. One I suppose is what we strive for in ourselves, an inner place we can live with ourselves having tended to the outer world at some stage. Inner and outer, and the tension and flow between the two describe the thoughts of Hammarskjöld perfectly:  “What is necessary? – to wrestle with your problems until the emotional discomfort is clearly conceived in an intellectual form – and then act accordingly.” 

These markings weren’t meant for the reader. They describe an inner journey and aspiration of the ever evolving movement towards a better person, the ultimate person that many humanists strive for. And yet of course we all want help in that area. They are his thoughts over a lifetime compressed into (often turgid) aphoristic form, sometimes they try to do a little more in their imagery. 

”The aura of victory that surrounds a man of good-will, the sweetness of soul that emanates from him – the flavour of cranberries and cloudberries, a touch of frost and fiery skies." 

They often don’t flow and lack the elegance we expect of great producers of such forms – Samuel Clemens, Samuel Johnson etc. They are more like that other Germanic thinker Nietzsche, hard, penetrating, merciless. Hammarskjöld offered a note to his assistant that if he thought they were worth publishing after his death, then he could see to it. He died early, perhaps he foresaw the event himself. 

”Isn’t the pathetic grandeur of human existence in some way bound up with the eternal disproportion in this world, where self-delusion is necessary to life, between the honesty of the striving and the nullity of the result? 

I find reading diary thoughts difficult. I am a voyeur. An idea I do not like. The discomfort makes me doubt. After all, they were published and offered to the reader. A collective of thoughts brought them together, not just a singular, vain plan. These little thoughts have a purpose. I don’t know if I can use them as a guide, except in the sense that anyone who spent the time looking into themselves like Hammarskjöld, believing that truths exist if we work hard enough to unearth them, then they can assist if not guide others. 

”we remember our dead. When they were born, when they passed away – either as men of promise, or as men of achievement.”

 ”He received – nothing. But for that he paid more than others for their treasures.“

He was born to public service. His family tree goes back to 9thC Swedish kings and from there a near unbroken ancestry of state service, aristocratic authority and political power. In a sense he was born to be secretary general of the UN during the early cold war. He didn’t marry and died aged only fifty-five under still suspicious circumstances on a mission to resolve a Congo conflict, the last thought on the matter was that a mining company hired a pilot to shoot his plane down and they were in league with the CIA and several other nefarious players. I've always liked the dictum that if you are pissing off enough people, you’re doing something right. 

”Is your disgust at your emptiness to be the only life with which you fill it?"

He is harsh on himself constantly, struggling, striving like some religious figure from history to be better at what he should be. The better version is always at the centre of his thoughts. There are historical models for these. The outer world is always close by, watching, but it is the inner person who has to deal with it, alone, even if they see their goal as service to others. The inner glow from altruistic acts is often spoken of as a reward for one’s virtuous thoughts and actions. I find that idea too simplistic and revisionist, as though the modern world of naked narcissism has to out everything to reflect and protect that personal need. Reading Dag Hammarskjöld’s inner thoughts makes that clearer through a complex struggle. Perhaps these humanists have more to offer than I thought.

Afterthought
I'm in a deeply reminiscent state. So this is another example of my search for lost books and writers. Dag Hammarskjöld was already some kind of legend by the time I even knew who he was in the early 80s. I was a teenager. Is he known now? The Secretary General of the UN, who died in 1961 on the job. He's an impressive character on the world stage, perhaps as important as world leaders at the time. There's something about people who devote themselves to public service. Worth knowing about, there are few like him today.