Rating: 3/5

Overview: 
Their cosmologies have been overtaken by modern science and their social blueprints, drawn for times now gone, need revision in the light of changed circumstances and the continuing quest for social justice. But while jettisoning their chaff, we should continue to sift for wheat. “The telling question of a person’s life is whether or not she or he is related to the infinite.” Carl Jung. The animating conviction of this book is that these great wisdom traditions remain our most resourceful guide to the Infinite- to that Beauty so ancient and new (Christianity) and Eternal (Judaism) yet Closer to us than our jugular veins (Islam) vouchsafing the Unshakeable deliverance of the heart (Buddhism) and the end of all love-longing (Hinduism). 

Hinduism
Beginning with the Vedas, The bedrock of Hinduism, concerning well being and prosperity in life and focusing on Indra (He, O Men, is Indra); 

then a thousand years later, the Upanishads that detailed reincarnation, karma, disciplined yoga and is known as the “Himalayas of the soul.” “The diagnosis of the human condition as trapped in a ceaseless round of death and rebirth (samsara) due to the consequences of actions (karma) performed in the ignorance of the ground of Life (Brahman) with a prescription of liberation (moksha) through realization of our inner spiritual nature, Atman, the Universal Self and also Brahman. “ 
 concealed in the heart of all beings is the Atman, the Spirit, the Self; smaller than the smallest atom, greater than the vast spaces.
“Even as fire without fuel finds peace in its resting place, where thoughts become silence the soul finds peace in its own source. “
“The mind should be kept in the heart as long as it has not reached the end. This is wisdom, and this is liberation. Everything else is only words.”
“FROM JOY ALL BEINGS HAVE COME, BY JOY THEY ALL LIVE, AND UNTO JOY THEY ALL RETURN.”
“There is a light that shines beyond all things on earth, beyond us all, beyond the heavens, beyond the highest, the very highest heavens. This is the Light that shines in our heart.” 

then the Bhagavad Gita, taking shape between 400 BCE and 400 CE; an epic story that epitomizes the Vedas and the Upanishads. Karma Yoga is the greatest teaching of the Gita, and it advocates for action without attachment to results, selfless action that will break the cycle of rebirth. There is also the yoga of devotion (Bhakti), knowledge (Jnana) and meditation (raja yoga) 

“In what manner does an illumined soul live in the world? Not shaken by adversity, not hankering after happiness, free from fear, free from anger,free from the things of desire. Water flows continually into the ocean, but the ocean is never disturbed, desire flows into the mind of the seer but he is never disturbed.”

“A man should not hate any living creature. Let him be friendly and compassionate to all. He must accept pleasure and pain with equal tranquility. He must be forgiving, ever-contented, self-controlled, united constantly with me in medication. Such a devotee is dear to me (Krishna).”

“The winds of God ‘s grace are always flowing, it is up to us to raise our sails.” Ramakrishna, b 1836, mystic-sage, jivanmukti (liberated soul)