Rating: 5/5

"It is probably no exaggeration to call Verdun the ‘worst’ battle in history; even taking in account man’s subsequent endeavours in the Second World War. No battle has ever lasted quite so long; Stalingrad, from the moment of the German arrival on the Volga to Paulus’ surrender, had a duration of only five months, compared with Verdun’s ten. Though the Somme claimed more dead than Verdun, the proportion of casualties suffered to the numbers engaged was notably higher at Verdun than any other First War battle; as indeed were the numbers of dead in relation to the area of the battlefield. Verdun was the First War in microcosm; an intensification of all its horrors and glories, courage and futility."

Alistair Horne's examination of "one man's monstrous vision"; Erich von Falkenhayn's experiment in "bleeding France white" - is a readable, even nearly 60 years after it first saw print. Telling the story from the point out view of the humblest Poilou or Landser all the way up to French and German headquarters, we're taken from the devastating first German blow, to the absolute nadir of French hope as it appears Falkenhayn's plan may succeed in breaking the French army, to their eventual partial resurgence after the Russians and British step in to relieve the pressure with offensives of their own.

All the elements from my childhood introduction to the battle (reading Charley's War, Volume 4: Blue's Story) are there; the Trench of Bayonets, the dreadful subterranean battles in Fort Vaux, the Germans first employment of Phosgene, the troops bleating like sheep on their way to the front and especially (to a nine year old) the callous employment of colonial troops in the latter stages of the battle:

 "The capture of Douaumont itself had been allotted to General Guyot de Salins’ 38th Division, composed largely of Mangin’s beloved African troops. Among them were two untried battalions of Senegalese; big, tough, fearless soldiers, profoundly dreaded by the Germans because of their summary way with captives. These arrived at Verdun in September, were entranced like children by the novelty of the ‘firework display’, and then propelled into a minor attack to see what they could do. At once they ran amuck, beyond all control of their officers, captured some German positions and butchered the survivors. Then the Germans recovered their nerve and set up a machine gun. The wretched Africans, never having been under such fire before, incapable of understanding where all the bullets were coming from, all grouped together in their bewilderment. Those that escaped the massacre that day were quickly pulled out of the line for further intensive training."

 The book ends with an examination of how the "lessons" of Verdun were interpreted by the French and Germans, leading to the development of the Blitzkreig and the Maginot Line, and also the fates of some of the participants (it's nice to see that the hapless Feldwebel Kunze, single handed conqueror of Fort Douomont, eventually got some recognition). 

This stands with The First Day on the Sommeas one of the best books on World War One. Highly recommended.