Rating: 4/5

I love me some good ole fashioned vampire, I do! Put him in a three piece suit, a cape and now we're talking! 

Though the title sounds like a place at the mall where you could pick up blood sausage or Filipino "chocolate sauce," the cover of Vampire Express delivers the goods, along with a medieval castle, a midnight train, a wolf, a bat (I hate bats. Fuck bats,) a vampy vampire companion in heels, and a couple intrepid kids with feathered hair because it was the '80s and everyone wanted to be Farrah Fawcett.

I'm not sure my anticipation could be much higher for this one, so let's dive in!

As per usual in Choose Your Own Adventure books, you are a kid. This time around you're on a train in the Carpathian Mountains of Romania (Fun Fact: Sesame Street's "The Count" spent his youth there!) You and your Uncle Andrew are out to scientifically prove that vampires exist. You are joined by two other companions: Nina, a girl "about your age," whatever that may be, and her aunt. The aunt goes missing straight away and a mysterious box is discovered in the baggage car. Thus begins our adventure!

Here are my attempts made while reviewing this book:

1) Nina and I consult the gypsies on the train about the mysterious box and missing aunt. After a bit of mysticism, she and I go to the vampire's castle, kill the vampires, obtain proof of their existence and save auntie. Wow…I knocked that one out of the park on the first try!

Note: The choices led to positive conclusions waaay too obviously. Let's try another…

2) We question the other passengers about the missing aunt. We enter the car of the mysterious Count Zoltan and Countess Carmilla, who offer us supposedly tasty delights. But they are NOT tasty! Naturally, we spit them out and make a run for it, because how dare they foist shitty candy on us?! Low and behold, the count is a vampire and so is the countess! He blocks the door (she apparently does nothing). We escape by climbing on top of the train and jumping into a snowbank. A lucky escape!

Note: Although I intentionally took a wrong step or two this time, still the correct choices were telegraphed. Hmmm…

3) This time we ask two men to help us find auntie. One's a flamboyant magician, the other a curmudgeonly professor. When we're left alone with the magician he tries to hypnotize us, but I know a predator when I see one and I'll have none of this touchy-uncle nonsense! The magician does however have an interesting vampire-catching device, so we stick around. Suddenly auntie is running away from vampires, who catch her and demand "The Bloodstone" from us. The magician performs an entrancing illusion that attracts the vampires, who do a little dance (but do not make a little love or get down tonight). The trap fails and we are all turned into vampires. 

4) Nina and I open the mysterious box. It contains a painting. A gypsy and my Uncle Andrew (who has been very nonexistent up until this point) help us with the painting, trying to figure out its power. We make for the vampire's castle. Nina gets left behind to fend off a pack of wolves. I find an ugly little dwarf gnawing bones near the castle wall. The dwarf scurries away. Oookaaay. We slip into the castle and use the painting to destroy the vampires. Miracle of miracles, auntie and Nina are both okay!

Note: Uncle Andrew doesn't seem interested in getting lasting proof that vampires exist, but is very anxious to kill them. That doesn't sound like science to me.

End Note: There are too many obvious choice-to-consequence resolutions for this one to be rated 5 stars. However, there are lots of choices that lead to many differing story-lines. That and all the wonderfully odd characters make Vampire Express a winner!