Rating: 4/5

"People do not give it credence that a fourteen-year-old girl could leave home and go off in the winter-time to avenge her father’s blood but it did not seem so strange then, although I will say it did not happen every day."
 
This is exactly what Mattie Ross, now on my list of all-time favorite narrators/protagonists, sets out to do in this entertaining and adventure-filled western. The industrious Mattie hires Deputy Marshall Rooster Cogburn to search for her father’s killer in the formidable Indian Territory. Not to be left out of the action, Mattie insists on coming along for the ride. A thorn in both Rooster’s and Mattie’s sides, Texas Ranger LaBoeuf joins them as he has his own reasons for capturing this loathsome killer. Told with simple and straightforward prose, True Grit has wonderful moments of comical banter between Rooster, "an old one-eyed jasper that was built along the lines of Grover Cleveland", the handsome but insolent LaBoeuf, and the spunky, intelligent Mattie Ross herself. Despite the discomfort of the journey, the uncertainty of the outcome, and the fear of the perils she encounters, Mattie refuses to give up and remains true to her goal of seeking justice. She haggles with the shrewdest of men and stands up to their relentless jabs about her age and gender as a hindrance to their mission. My only complaint with the book - I wish it could have been a bit longer so I could have relished it even more. It seemed to end way too fast for one I was enjoying so much!

I can’t resist adding a couple of my favorite quotes here:

"I would not put a thief in my mouth to steal my brains."

"I have known some horses and a good many more pigs who I believe harbored evil intent in their hearts. I will go further and say all cats are wicked, though often useful. Who has not seen Satan in their sly faces? Some preachers will say, well that is superstitious claptrap. My answer is this: Preacher, go to your Bible and read Luke 8: 26-33."

Don’t let the "western" genre turn you away from this great little book if you have any appreciation for a little piece of the American landscape, thrilling encounters with infamous outlaws, superb and cutting dialogue, and plucky female heroines. Thoroughly engaging throughout, True Grit seriously had me on the edge of my seat with the book gripped tightly in my hands during the dramatic climax. Can’t wait to re-watch the movie now!