Rating: 5/5

A BOOK PROVIDING MANY INSIGHTS INTO ROGERS AND HIS WORK

Carl Ransom Rogers (1902-1987) was one of the founders of Humanistic Psychology; he was professor of psychology at the University of Wisconsin (1957-1963) and the University of Chicago (1945-1957). His style of psychotherapy is known as ‘Client-Centered Therapy.’

He wrote in the Introduction to this 1980 book, “This book encompasses the changes that have taken place during the past decade---roughly, the seventies. It brings together diverse material which I have written in recent years. Some of these thoughts have been published in a variety of journals, some have never been published… I would like to look back at a few landmarks of my own change… In 1941, I wrote a book on counseling and psychotherapy… It was spawned by my awareness that I was thinking and working with individuals in ways which were quite different from other counselors… in 1951, this point of view was presented more fully and confidently in a volume on client-centered therapy. In this book there was a recognition that the principles of therapy had application in other fields… 

“I cannot believe how slow I was in facing the ramifications of the work that I and my colleagues were doing. In 1961, I wrote a book… indicating that the focus of all the papers was individual work… the publisher … suggested I call it ‘On Becoming a Person.’ … I had thought I was writing for psychotherapists, but to my astonishment discovered that I was writing for PEOPLE---nurses, housewives, people in the business world, priests, ministers, teachers, youth---all manner of people… The response broadened my life as well as my thinking. I believe that all of my writing since contains the realization that what is true in a relationship between therapist and client may well be true for a marriage, a family, a school, an administration, a relationship between cultures or countries.” (Pg. vii-viii)

He continues, “The theme holding the book together is that every chapter expresses, in one form or another, a way of being toward which I strive---a way of being which persons in many countries, in many occupations and professions, in all walks of life, find appealing and enriching. Whether this will be true for you, only you can determine…” (Pg. x)

He recalls, “Let me begin with my childhood. In a narrowly fundamentalist religious home, I introjected the value attitudes toward others that were held by my parents. Whether I truly believe in these I cannot be sure… I think the attitudes toward persons outside our large family can be summed up: ‘Other persons behave in dubious ways which we do not approve in our family… So the best thing to do is to be tolerant of them, since they may not know better, but to keep away from any close communication with them… ‘Come out from among them and be ye separate’ is a good Biblical text to follow… this unconsciously arrogant separateness characterized my behavior all through elementary school.” (Pg. 27-28)

He reports an important result of interacting with one of his clients: “This was a vital learning for me. I had followed HER lead rather than mine. I had just LISTENED instead of trying to judge her toward a diagnostic understanding I had already reached. It was a far more personal relationship, and not nearly so ‘professional.’ Yet the results spoke for themselves.” (Pg. 37)

He explains, “Let me say that I have a great personal respect for Fred [B.F.] Skinner. He is an honest man, willing to carry his thinking through to its logical conclusions. Hence, we can differ sharply, without damaging my respect for him… My one disappointment in regard to Skinner is his refusal to permit the nine-hour confrontation we held at the University of Minnesota to be released. It was all taped and is the deepest exploration in existence of the issues between us. All of the other parties to the meeting had understood that it was agreed that the tapes, or transcripts of them, or both, would be released. After the meeting, Skinner refused his permission. I feel the profession was cheated.” (Pg. 56)

He states, “My experience in therapy and in groups makes it impossible for me to deny the reality and significance of human choice. To me it is not an illusion that man is to some degree the architect of himself. I have presented evidence that the degree of self-understanding is perhaps the most important factor in predicting the individual’s behavior. So for me the humanistic approach is the only possible one.” (Pg. 57)

He notes, “I am no longer actively engaged in individual therapy or empirical research. I am finding that after one passes the age of seventy, there are physical limitations on what one can do. I continue to engage in encounter groups when I believe they might have significant social impact.” (Pg. 67)

He reveals, “My belief that death is the end has, however, been modified by some of my learnings of the past decade. I am impressed with the accounts by Raymond Moody [in ‘Life After Life’] of the experience of persons who have been so near death as to be declared dead, but who have come back to life. I am impressed by some of the reports of reincarnation, although reincarnation seems a very dubious blessing indeed. I am interested in the work of Elizabeth Kübler-Ross and the conclusions she has reached about life after death. I find definitely appealing the views of Arthur Koestler that individual consciousness is but a fragment of a cosmic consciousness… So I consider death with, I believe, an openness to the experience… I can accept it as either an end, or a continuation of life.” (Pg. 88)

He continues, “In the eighteen months prior to my wife’s death in March 1979, there were a series of experiences in which Helen and I and a number of friends were all involved, which decidedly changed my thoughts and feelings about dying and the continuation of the human spirit. The experiences were intensely personal, and some day I may write fully about them. For now, I can only hint.” (Pg. 90)

He asserts, “[A] challenge I wish to raise, especially for clinical and social psychologists, is the radical possibility of sweeping away our procedures for professionalization. I know what heresy that idea is, what terror it strikes in the heart of the person who has struggled to become a ‘professional.’ But I have seen the moves toward certification and licensure, the attempts to exclude charlatans, from a vantage point of many years, and it is my considered judgment that they fail in their aims. I helped the APA form the [American Board of Examiners in Professional Psychology] in 1947 when I was president of the APA. I was ambivalent about the move then. I wish now that I had taken a stand against it.” (Pg. 243-244)

He continues, “I think of the ‘hot-line’ workers whom I have been privileged to know… Over the phone, they handle bad drug trips, incipient suicides, tangled love affairs, family discord, all kinds of personal problems. Most of these workers are college students or those just beyond this level, with minimal intensive ‘on-the-job’ training. And I know that in many of these crisis situations they use a skill and judgment that would make a professional green with envy. They are completely ‘unqualified,’ if we use conventional standards, But they ARE, by and large, both dedicated and COMPETENT.” (Pg. 245)

He states, “Finally, I must mention a challenge that is, I believe, the most dreadfully threatening to psychologists. It is the very strong possibility that there is more than one ‘reality,’ that there may indeed be a number of realities. This is far from a new thought… Now, with knowledge of many types of drug-induced states of expanded consciousness and changed reality, with all the years of careful study of ESP… [and] psi phenomena… we will have a harder and harder time closing our eyes to the possibility of another reality (or realities)… I have never had a mystical experience… nor any drug-induced state that gave me a glimpse of a world different… Yet, the evidence grows more and more impressive… I would have to say that the most vividly convincing documents I have read come from one man, Carlos Castaneda… his excursion into a new way of knowing as practiced by a wise old Yaqui Indian becomes a truly exciting and hair-raising adventure.” (Pg. 253-254) [However, you should read ‘Castaneda’s Journey’ and ‘The Don Juan Papers’ by Richard de Mille, and ‘A Magical Journey with Carlos Castaneda’ by his former wife, Margaret Runyan Castaneda, for a ‘contrary’ perspective on Castaneda.]

He admits, “Person-centered therapists were under pressure… to prove that our approach to therapy was effective. We gradually carried on more and more sophisticated studies to assess the outcomes. But when this was a sole purpose of the research, the results… were always disappointing. We found, as could have been predicted, that some clients were more successful than others, some therapists more effective than others. But assessment studies … offer almost no clues to the elements we need to know to improve therapy or to understand its process.” (Pg. 311)

This book will be of great interest to those studying Carl Rogers, and his approach to psychology.