Rating: 4/5

Spring is finally here and it's time to work on my tan. John D. MacDonald published twenty-one Travis McGee mysteries (between 1964 and 1984) narrated by his weary "salvage consultant" who often agrees to locate missing persons or items, 52-foot houseboat The Busted Flush docked in Fort Lauderdale serving as McGee's office. MacDonald was one of the earliest authors to use themed titles for their series and his brilliant use of color not only offered a visual motif to help readers distinguish each one, but generated some of my favorite titles: The Deep Blue Good-By, A Tan and Sandy Silence, The Lonely Silver Rain, etc.

Concluding my MacDonald/McGee jag is Free Fall In Crimson. Published in 1981, this entry combines at least three areas of interest for the author--dirty motorcycle gangs, moviemaking and hot air balloons--that make for very unlikely running partners, but propel the novel forward with the detail and menace that MacDonald keeps supplying with each novel. Our sleuth is introduced aboard his boat talking with Ron Esterland, a talented young painter who harbors some guilt for his estrangement from his father Ellis, a ball-busting prick who, while suffering from cancer, was mysteriously beaten to death nearly two years ago at a rest stop outside Citrus City.

An estate worth $3.5 million after taxes was left to Ron's half-sister Romola, who suffered a severe skull fracture from a bicycle fall in L.A. and died before her father. The IRS took a chunk of the estate, leaving $1 million to Romola's mother, Josephine Laurant, a film actress. No arrests were made in the beating of Ellis Esterland. His son dangles a $10,000 expense account at McGee to provide him closure with his father. McGee consults with his neighbor Meyer, a retired economist, who knows Ellis Esterland's personal secretary and partner Anne Renzetti. Traveling to Naples, where Anne works as a hotel manager, McGee finds what he feels is a kindred spirit with Anne, who like him, has had to pick up the pieces after the death of someone she loved, or felt she loved.

"I've been over it ten thousand times. It seems so pointless, dying like that. I wouldn't admit it to myself at the time, but I did later: I was relieved. I'd been bracing myself to go all the way with him. Through all the pain. Caring for him when he became helpless. I was getting myself charged up to really do a job. But at the same time I dreaded it. Which is natural. He didn't love me. He sort of liked me. I had good lines and I was obedient, like a show dog. And I sort of loved him.

"There can be a habit of love, I think. You justify the way you are living by telling yourself that love leaves you no other choice. And so you are into love. Women stay with dreadful men. You see it all the time. You wonder why. You know they are wasting their lives. You know they are worth more than what they have. But they stay on and on. They grow old staying on and on. They say it's love so often to themselves, it does become love. I can't understand the Anne Renzetti I was then. I look back and I don't understand her at all. We're all lots of people, I guess. We become different people in response to different times and places, different duties. Maybe in a lifetime we become a very limited bunch of people when, in fact, we could become many many more--if life moved us around more.

"Well, it moved me here and I know who I am now, and I will stay with this life for as long as I can. I never even suspected who I might really be. If it hadn't been for that new manager falling asleep at the wheel, I might never have known about this Anne. You can't miss what you don't know, can you? Maybe that's why we all have that funny little streak of sadness from time to time. We are missing something and don't even know what it is, or whether it will ever be revealed to us."

McGee and Meyer visit the River County Sheriff and after Meyer presents credentials as a "Certified Guarantor," McGee gets to study the case file on Ellis Esterland. He concludes that the victim was at that rest stop for a business meeting gone bad. The deputy investigating the murder is a member of a motorcycle club and found bike tracks he suspects could have been made by the killer, laying in wait for Esterland. While Meyer returns to Fort Lauderdale to entertain a newspaper publisher he's fancy with, McGee heads back to Naples to chat with Esterland's doctor, who reveals that he had suggested his late patient try hallucinogens to manage his pain. 

McGee and Anne take a roll in the sheets. He shares his theory that Esterland was murdered in a drug buy gone bad, but this is shot down by Anne, who thinks she can account for all of her ex's finances. Recalling that some unaccounted for Krugerrand was discovered in one of Esterland's suits after his death, she has to admit he could've had some funds stashed on the side, used to spend on a treatment he'd have been too proud to tell anyone about. McGee connects the biker tracks with Josie Laurant's boyfriend Peter Kesner, a film director who shot to prestige with two low budget biker pictures that were hits, starring two real-life bikers as anti-heroes "Dirty Bob" and "The Senator." 

Seeking out an Army buddy named Ted Blaylock who runs a biker bar and tattoo parlor, McGee confirms a biker "legend" that Dirty Bob and The Senator killed Ellis Esterland. Operating on the theory that their director Peter Kesner put them up to snuffing out Esterland so that Josie would inherit his estate, McGee visits an old flame in L.A., TV game show producer Lysa Dean. She shares the gossip she has on Josie &amp; Peter and Dirty Bob, alias Desmin Grizzle, all in Iowa shooting a runaway production about hot air ballooning called Free Fall. She provides McGee cover as a network consultant making a TV show about the film business and McGee heads to Iowa to confront Esterland's killer or killers.

I had begun to feel a little bit like Sellers in his immortal Being There. I felt no urge to enrich either Ron Esterland or myself. And no urge to punish Josie Laurant any more than she was going to be punished by the gods of stupidity at some time in that future which was getting ready to crash down on her. I was a fake consultant in the employ of Lysa Dean, queen of the game shows. I represented, to Kesner, a chance for free promotion of a motion picture that would probably never be shown in the unlikely event it was ever completed. 

I had zigged and zagged until, finally, I had completely confused myself. I had spent some of Ron's money and had myself a nice balloon ride, and I wished heartily that Meyer would happen along, listen, and tell me what to do next.

There's a lot of zigging and zagging in Free Fall In Crimson, the nineteenth entry in the Travis McGee series. The good part in that MacDonald never tires, holding so many hoops for the reader to leap through--estate beneficiaries, a dark haired and dark eyed hotel manager, straight motorcycle clubs, outlaw motorcycle clubs, a biker bar brawl, Hollywood, movie stars, hot air balloons, behind the scenes intrigue--that he can't be accused of getting too old in the tooth. Desmin Grizzle/ Dirty Bob develops into a grim reaper who kills more people than Freddy Kruger and strikes such existential terror into Meyer that MacDonald would need to resolve it in Cinnamon Skin.

I glanced at Meyer. There was going to be no help there. It happens sometimes. I think it is the deep unwavering conviction that life is about to end. It is an ultimate fear, immobilizing, squalid. It crowds everything else out of the mind. There is no room for hope, no chance of being saved. I have seen it happen to some very good men, and most of them did indeed die badly and soon, and the ones who did not die were seldom the same again. Were a man to awaken from sound sleep to the dry-gourd rattle of a diamondback coiled on his chest, head big as a fist, forked tongue flickering, he would go into that dreadful numbness of the ultimate fright.

I don't feel that Anne Renzetti, motorcycle gangs or Hollywood gel in terms of story well enough to rank this as the best entry I've read so far--that would be The Empty Copper Sea--but what thrills me about the Travis McGee series is how MacDonald uses his iconoclastic sleuth to explore questions about happiness and a life well lived, questions that are far more compelling to me than what weapon Mr. Body was killed with and in what room. In these mysteries, I never cease to learn something about criminal activity, self-defense or how to lie to the police, info I hope I never need, though John MacDonald has me convinced I'm far more likely to at some point than how to order a martini or acquit myself in one of Ian Fleming's casinos.