Rating: 3/5

11th book from my reading challenge with Ted.

#5 - Read a book that was originally banned.

Quite simply, here is the formula:

An American Dream + Devastating Horniness = An American Tragedy

This wasn’t a short book. Coming in at just under 900 pages, it demanded a lot. Perhaps as a result of these demands, I wanted to be a bit more critical. After all, why do you get to write that much and not have to justify it? Let’s start off with the negatives then, just to change it up a bit. I already hinted at one: it’s way too long. Outside of that, it felt weird to read this type of prose. It felt stuck between old, stuffy, Victorian prose and newer, succinct prose. It often tended toward the former, and when Dreiser wanted to make a point, he latched on to it and grabbed you by the back of your neck, shoving your head into the point over and over as you gasped out for air, him not letting go, you fearing for your life, as he yelled LOOK AT IT. LOOK AT MY FUCKING POINT GOD DAMN IT LOOK AT IT. So there would, perhaps, be 10-20 page strips of the novel where he was expounding a character’s thought process and beating it six feet under. Related to this, Dreiser would sometimes give us the true event, the true viewpoint for something, and then have characters discuss the verity of that event for 50-100 pages, them not being privy to it. It felt as though it went beyond the bounds of ironic literary device – maybe it was meant to create suspense, maybe remorse. Whatever it was, it didn’t often work.

That takes care of the bad. Because of the bad, I have been thinking about 3 or 4 stars for this throughout the last 100 pages. I went back and forth, but in order to be fair, I have to settle on 3 – with the caveat that this is damn near the highest 3-star rating I can give. I don’t like doing the decimal system, but if you convert the 5-star system to a 10-star system and allow the decimals, you could say this is a 7.9, if you wanted to.

Dreiser achieves something rare here – he creates a mix of unholy emotions (hatred, rage, envy, greed) but manages to convey this with an implicit understanding that these emotions have systemic causes. The name of the book is apt. This is an American tragedy, and with our non-stop march forward in time, a Western and increasingly global tragedy. He manages to show us that it is entirely possible to lose the right path and correct aims – well, if we want to be consistent, he manages to show us that it’s possible to never be on the right path. Wry hits at abject, fanatic religiosity sandwich the mindless craving for ease and luxury, for beauty, and for love. There is a constant urge to have pleasure, wealth, and position, but wisdom is sorely missed. The American Dream is sold to the characters and they are plugged into it, perhaps never questioning what it means to hit the 100% mark on that specific progress bar. What happens when you achieve it all? What happens when you get to the top of the professional and amorous totem poles? Won’t the hedonic treadmill continue rolling on? When you pine after a girl, wanting her to love you, to accept all of you… when she is driving you insane, taking over every single inch of your grey cells… when she finally reciprocates with the same energy and the world seems so bright… why do the lights fade when a slightly more beautiful, slightly richer, slightly more well-connected girl comes along? Could it be because the ramp will continue to escalate forever?

A forgotten American classic, but perhaps more relevant than ever, with the yearning and clawing and desire happening within the confines of our own rooms as opposed to the drab streets of Lycurgus, New York.