Rating: 1/5

I read this book when I was at school in Ireland in the mid-1980s and found it fascinating. It was an excellent book for its time. Journalistic and flawed but with interesting insights. Should it be read now? Well it shouldn't be read if you are looking to understand post Soviet Russian history. Like innumerable history books written before the break of the Soviet Union this one swallows the tale of Muscovy under Rurikovich and Romanov Tsars advancing and 'reoccupying' territories lost at the time of the Mongol invasions. This is a history which, outside Putin's Russia, would result in a failure grade on school or university course today and make you deeply unpopular with Ukrainians, Belarusians, etc.

So for me this, like almost all 20th century English language works on Russian history, are deeply flawed because events have moved on so dramatically. It is not simply the vast new archival resources available but that we can no longer look at vast amounts of what was imperial and later Soviet territory as 'Russia' or their history during those years as 'Russian'.

Of course this is less a history than a portrait of the Russian people in the 1970s - but even here we have learned so much since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Books like this tried to put a human face on the mass of Russians which is good, for the time, but how little the author understood of the reality of life in the Soviet Union is awe inspiring. I remember a teacher pointing out that 70 years after the revolution Russian women were still using rags for tampons. But then this author, nor most of the academics, journalists or spooks in the CIA or MI6 would have noticed that. They were all men.

A book that was, maybe, very good for its time but now reads those 'balanced' accounts of John Gunther in the 1930s when he went around profiling Mussolini, Hitler and others - utterly pointless now except for showing the ignorance of contemporary reportage.

I give this book one star to reflect its use now.