Rating: 3/5

For those who have watched 24 Hour Party People, as in the film of the same name, 80% of this book will sound familiar to the point of repetition. In other words, this book is more or less a direct novelization of the based-on-a-true-story film about Factory Records, only written by the man the film was about. Confusing? Sort of, especially if you stop to think about the boundaries between fact and fiction too much. I suppose 24 Hour Party People is one of those books where you're not necessarily expected to.

I have to admit I was mildly disappointed to learn that Wilson's writing deliberately borrows so much from the film; luckily the book is peppered with details that are not outright stated in the film, and expands on a number of things that were more or less glossed over due to restraints of the medium itself. I personally found Wilson's style of writing fun, for its dry wit and use of sarcasm, but a great part of Wilson's public persona was always in the interplay of his educated pompousness and genuine drive, so some readers may find it equally grating.

All in all, the book is a sort of jack-of-all-trades; it dabbles at a number of issues, but does not fully divulge any of them. Therefore it makes for great reading for those casually interested in the subject, but will probably not offer a great deal of new information for seasoned fans. Many of the hilarious anecdotes on the catastrophic managing of The Haçienda may be better detailed in books like Hooky's own, so what I found most fascinating to read about were Wilson's notes on record label management. Again, there are a thousand and one books written about Factory Records, but among one of my favourite quotes is the following:

There's a strange fact of life about good second division bands. They're more arrogant than the first division bands. First division bands know about music. Marketing, accountancy, design? Fuck off, that's what you guys do.

But the second division band, who seduce you with their real abilities to write fine songs, such fine songs, these fuckers know everything about everything. The world economy, distribution incentives, travel arrangements; they're the boys. They know everything. And everybody else knows shit.

And they die. Their careers bleeding die. It's a shame, but I'm not crying anymore.