Rating: 3/5

The book is about ETs gynecological lab and their breeding program between ETs and abductees, and abductees with abductees. Jacobs speculates that their agenda for such experiments is to populate Earth with Hybrids, or replace humanity with this upgraded advanced species.

But is this secret agenda really a Threat?
Lets see...
who is destroying the forest? polluting waters?disrupting weather?poisoning foods? causing wars? bask in the glory of religion stupidity and sheep mentality? takes pride in ignorance and rather have money?
Is violent, aggressive,immature,childish,greedy,selfish, follows propaganda,lacks critical thinking, mocks spirituality and the realm of metaphysics, lies, steals,cheats,kills,back stabs, abuses children,adults, animals,trees, environment,and etc.
Aliens? or Humans?

I'm all for the ETs to REPLACE this vile civilization of humans with the Hybrids/ETs/etc...
This species is a Failure! They failed to be good to each other, let alone to reach spiritual ascension to join the Federation. 
I gathered from this book that the ETs will take their favorites/starseeds off planet before they cleanse the rest of humanity. Then, populate the New Earth with hybrids and their favorites and starseeds. It's called upgrading the species.
I wonder if memories will be erased from their favorites/starseeds who lived on Earth before the coming golden age( supposedly). Here is a conversation between a hybrid and an abductee:

“Someday people who are like you will not have those memories either. They’ll be like me.” Like him meaning. And I’m saying, “What do you mean by that?” He’s saying, “Don’t you understand that?” I said no, or rather, I don’t say no, I just shake my head. And then again he tells me to listen. He says, “There will only be one purpose for you. You won’t have memories like you do now.”

There were a couple things that bothered me while reading the book.

1) I was disturbed to read girls between 6-12 or so were involved in forced sexual activities with hybrids without their free will. Ugh...
One case describes a girl being physically and sexually abused by a sadist hybrid. 

2) Jacobs strongly criticizes and explains the weakness of John Macks hypnosis technique. That abductees may be reciting false memories, screen memories, or make stuff up. Although Jacobs has a very valid point, but his scolding was inappropriate and a bit disrespectful to his colleague who had the balls to investigate UFO abductee cases at the cost of being ridiculed by his stupid colleagues at Old Fart Harvard.

3) Some parts of the book were long and boring