Rating: 5/5

Since radio is my field of endeavor, it's a wonder I never was aware of this book. And I have to say I learned some things I didn't know. For instance, Guglielmo Marconi didn't invent radio, he invented a crude method of wireless telegraph that freed the transmission of dots and dashes from the limitation of telephone lines. This was valuable during wartime and aided in ship to shore communications. An inventor named Lee DeForest took Marconi's invention further by developing a vacuum tube that improved sound quality and reception reliability. Another inventor, Edwin Howard Armstrong, improved on DeForest's vacuum tube by adding a third element and a coil, thereby creating an amplifier/transmitter system that opened the door to greater use of the technology. But radio was still thought of as a point-to-point, person-to-person medium until a rising staff member of the RCA Corporation named David Sarnoff outlined a one-to-many vision in which a variety of programs - educational, cultural, entertainment - could be delivered broadly to listeners over radio waves. RCA would profit by being in the business of manufacturing radio receivers. Like any new technology there were fits and starts and squabbles over patents and lawsuits that dragged on for decades. DeForest and Armstrong fought each other in court for years. Meanwhile Sarnoff, having risen through the RCA ranks to become president and eventually chairman, was laser focused on introducing television at the 1939 World's Fair. Introduce it he did, but plans for a launch were interrupted by World War II and it was not until a decade later that television, pushed by Sarnoff, entered the marketplace. By the early 1960s, Sarnoff's final grand vision - color television - took its place in American homes. If you're at all enthralled with the history of the 1970s computer revolution and the rivalry between Steve Jobs and Bill Gates, you'll enjoy contrasting that history with the drama and machinations of an equally, if not more momentous, technological era, the Radio Age.