Rating: 2/5

Until I read “Hardcastle” by John Yount, I never knew that ginseng was gathered by farmers in Virginia in the 1930s. Furthermore, I had never heard of John Yount until I read a brief biographical note about an author whom he encouraged to take up writing as a profession, John Irving.

This story is set mainly in the 1930-31.

Bill Music, unemployed, is slowly making his way home to his home in Virginia by taking illicit rides on freight trains. When he reaches Switch County in Kentucky, he leaves the train and begins walking, searching for food and drink. He falls asleep in a haystack, which belongs to Regus Bone and his mother Ella. They take a shine to him. Regus, who is employed as an anti-union mine guard at the local Hardcastle coal mine, persuades Music to enrol as a guard. Music does this with considerable misgivings. The mine guards are regarded with hatred, and scorned, by all the mine workers, and this discomforts Music greatly. 

Time passes, and Music falls for Merlee, the embittered young widow of a miner cut down in his prime. At first she does not reciprocate, but, being almost destitute, does accept his gifts. A certain warmth begins develop between them, and a relationship flowers. One evening Regus and Music, suspecting correctly that there would be a secret meeting between the workers and union officials, apprehend two union agitators, and prepare to take them to see the sheriff. If I tell you anymore, I will spoil this tale for you.

The writing is slow paced, as I imagine life was in a sleepy mining community in Kentucky, until near the end of the story. A feeling of impending doom hangs over almost every page. The Great Depression is already underway. Will the mine go ‘bust’? Will the unions stir up trouble? Will Regus and Music be shot by angry miners or company ‘goons’? These are the uncertainties that hung over the lives of those living in Valle Crucis, Mink Slide, Bear Paw, and other settlements around the mine. 

The writer’s descriptive powers good. Occasionally, I felt that he went into too much detail. For example, when Yount describes Regus and Music overhauling an ancient .44 Walker Colt gun, the text reads almost like an instruction manual. The author certainly has an eye for detail, but I’m not sure whether so much detail and the dialogue (in what I assume is Kentucky dialect) was 100% effective in creating a thoroughly credible ambience for the novel.

I read the book, wondering what would happen eventually. I mostly enjoyed it, but would not recommend it as essential reading. 

Having now read something by Yount and also by the person whose writing he encouraged, John Irving, I believe that I understand why Irving’s novels attract a greater audience than those of Yount.