Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars

“Now there was no movement of air except the unnatural breath of the trap doors opening and closing in the tunnels. The smell was like the inside of our coal stove, but damp and decaying. Ahead of us, lamps bobbed like monstrous lightning bugs. Here and there an arm swung free from the darkness and disappeared again. I felt the mountain hunkered over us, pressing down, and it was hard to breathe.”

I simply can’t imagine what it would have been like to work in the coal mines or to watch a loved one, a father, a husband or a son, disappear into that gaping hole in the earth, wondering if he would return that evening or be lost forever. This book opened my eyes to a period of time and a series of events that I’ve not previously given much thought to – the struggle of the coal miners and the labor disputes of the early 1900s in West Virginia. I’d never even heard of the Battle of Blair Mountain in 1921, the largest labor uprising in U.S. history, when the exploited miners clashed with the ruthless and corrupt coal companies. 

“American Coal Company owned our house. Richmond and Western Railroad owned our land.”

This story is told through the point of view of four different characters in alternating chapters - CJ Marcum, town mayor and activist; Rondal Lloyd, union organizer and part-time banjo picker; Carrie Bishop, nurse and lover of two men; and Rosa Angelelli, a Sicilian immigrant who loses most of her family to the mines. To be honest, I would have been happier with perhaps just two points of view, or even just one, to make the storytelling more fluid. Carrie Bishop won my heart – what a woman! We meet her as a young dreamer, a headstrong and passionate girl, wishing for a romance like the ones she reads about in her beloved novels. 

“I see myself, waiting for Heathcliff, waiting for someone to come from outside, bearing with him both passion and menace. I knew he would come from the outside, because Daddy and Aunt Becka said I would never find a man on Scary Creek or Grapevine. I was too forward, they said, too stubborn.”

Well, she does eventually lose her heart, but to two different men, loving both at the same time… ahh… And it’s all so believable! But I digress; this is not a romance story! So don’t let me lead you astray. This book is full of the cruel mistreatment of the miners, starving families, child labor, tragic accidents, brutal violence, and gruesome death. The author does a superb job of highlighting the years of struggle to organize the miners into unions, which were a threat to the ultimate power of the coal companies. It was not safe to be spotted as a union man; your life and that of your family were in danger if you were discovered. Much of the organizing was done in secret. 

The first section of the book was a bit slow-going, as the scene is set and characters are introduced. I almost lost interest, my mind being rather scattered this past month. Yet I was hopeful, mostly thanks to Carrie’s sections, that there was a good story to tell in there somewhere. And I was right. The middle section hooked me. I had to discover for myself the eventual outcome for these vibrant characters and oppressed mineworkers. The beauty of Kentucky, Carrie’s homeland, is beautifully described in contrast to the dreariness of the mines themselves. I was struck by the writing in many of her passages.

“You have seen old photographs, brown and sweet-looking, as though dipped in light molasses. My memories of the Homeplace in Kentucky are like that. Sweet, bittersweet.”

If you don’t know how the Battle of Blair Mountain ends, I won’t ruin the climax of the story for you. It is interesting to do a little research into the true events afterwards. It won’t be the first or the last time that underpaid, underprivileged workers will be taken advantage of by those with more money and power. Thanks to people like the ones in this story, however, there will be those with enough courage to fight for their rights and stand up for what they believe in. Without them, it doesn’t bear thinking about.

“I first began to understand what I have learned since, that there are forces in this world, principalities and powers, that wrench away the things that are loved, people and land, and return only exile.”