Rating: 2/5

Well, I finished all ~900 pages of this monster, so I guess there's that. I won't be recommending it, however, as I think there's far better books that tackle the American Dream and its disillusionment.

Obviously The Great Gatsby, but also The Day of the Locust, and even Native Son echoes similar ideas about determinism and how individuals are trapped by forces beyond their control. Jay Gatsby, Tod Hackett and Bigger Thomas were all far more interesting to me than Clyde Griffiths.

I found Clyde a bit of a blank slate, which may well have been intentional, but it made for a dull almost 900 pages. Fuelled by the promise of the American Dream and the seductions of a fiercely capitalist and materialistic society, Clyde leaves behind his religious family to seek something bigger— wealth, success, and a pretty girl. If it's a spoiler to say it ends badly, then blame the title.

There were times when I felt half asleep reading this novel. The writing is neither Gatsby poetic, nor Native Son urgent, and not a single one of the characters stood out to me. Like I said, Clyde himself feels not like a fleshed out person, but more of a blank slate upon which we are called to project any average American with a bit of ambition. It's a novel about determinism, so Clyde is mostly batted around by forces beyond his control— Dreiser seems to hammer this point home by stripping Clyde of all agency, but he strips him of a personality at the same time. His thoughts are mostly shallow and his emotions left unexamined.

Unlike Jay Gatsby, who embodies both the allure and corruption of the American Dream, Clyde is simply a void around which the author builds an argument. The other characters feel like a collection of archetypes, too, from victim to shallow socialite.

Even the climax of the story is narrated didactically, so I never got a sense that something truly tragic was happening. While the book may be, or have been, thematically important, it is devoid of emotion, passion and urgency. It was very difficult to care.