Rating: 5/5

Are you interested in reading about reading about love in a fun way? If so, “love poems” is defiantly the book for you! This amazing book is about different authors views on love. It uses a lot of beautiful imagery and metaphors to keep you interested in the poems while reading. There are also many different love stories they tell about their loved ones and they describe them in very interesting ways. 
	The book “ love poems” does not just have one author, this book is composed of many different authors and their Poems. This book is extremely powerful and enjoyable to read. It has many different poems about love, some good and some bad. It has a lot of diversity with the type of poem and author, which helps the reader stay connected and focused on the text. This book doesn’t have a specific plot or setting. It is mainly a different variety of authors expressing their feelings towards love. 
	 Since their are many different poems and differ authors, the poems are written in 1st or 3rd person depending on who the author was. What makes it fun to read was never knowing what your about to read next. You could be reading a beautiful poem on how love is so important or how in love one person is with another and then go to how much the author hates love and how ugly his or her lover was. It is fun to s the different point of views o n love depending on the many different experiences there has been.The tone of the book was bth happy and disturbing at some points but is still interesting and fun to read. 
	Due to the fact that their is a variety of different authors and writing styles, each author has different literary devices that consist of mostly imagery, metaphors, personification and simile. They all use positive and negative attitudes throughout their writhing so the ready really needs to pay attention to their tones because they can change through the poem very easily. Some of the authors purpose is writing their poems are to express their feelings about love, weather good or bad. Some others choose to talk about their loved ones or their lover. The main idea most authors focused on was hoe beautiful their lover was and how strongly they felt about them.The book was organized randomly with a different poem every page, they all had different stories and meanings behind them. 
	Overall I loved reading this book. It was enjoyable and for some of the Poems i could relate to certain lines. The book really spoke to me because I love love and reading about the power of it. Before reading this book, i knew i would enjoy it because it has a happy feeling to it. I would defiantly recommend this book to Myone who believes in love and enjoys experiencing and reading other peoples feelings. This a positive review.