Rating: 4/5

I never expected from Pournelle a 'feel good' military space opera, but that basically describes King David's Space Ship. The tale is set in the CoDominion universe and actually may be seen as a loose prequel to The Mote in God's Eye; this is the same universe as the Codominium: Revolt on War World series as well. 

Essentially, humanity in the 21st century started to colonize the stars, the so-called 'Empire of Man', and hundreds of years latter, suffered horrible secession wars that devastated not only planets, but the Empire itself. Some planets were bombed back to the stone age and interstellar travel ceased. Now, several hundred years later, a new Empire, the Imperium, emerged and begins actively seeking out colonies of the former empire. 

The story centers on the planet Prince Samual's World, which is currently entering an industrial age after the horrible secession war. When the new Empire finds Samual's World, they ally with one of the multiple 'feudal' powers with the aim to conquer the world under one government. It gradually emerges, however, that Samual's World will become a colony of serfs, if not slaves, under the new Empire. If, however, Samual's World had the technology to launch space ships, they would enter the Empire as a 'Class II' world, giving them autonomy and representation in the new government. Unfortunately, the King, one David, who allied with the Empire and will soon conquer the rest of the planet, knows they do not have the tech to launch a space ship. What to do? Well, it emerges early in the novel that a nearby world has a massive library of the Old Empire's technology; if they could send a trade delegation there, maybe they could get the tech, bring it back and launch a space ship before Prince Samual's World is annexed as a colony... 

This is definitely an old-school planet/sword adventure to be sure. First published as a serial in Analog Science Fiction in 1973, but this 1980 version is heavily revised. We have our plucky government in Prince Samual's World trying to launch a space ship that is pretty easy to root for, some mild romance, and adventure galore. Fun stuff, and much more light hearted than most of Pournelle's work. 3.5 stars, rounding up for nostalgia sake.