Rating: 5/5

Learning more about this ill-fated battle has long been on my to-do list. As an Australian kid growing up many years ago, we did not learn much about our own history - a situation that I hope has been rectified today. ANZAC Day was always a day of national remembrance but I never fully appreciated the details of the battle and the mistakes and amateurish conduct of the campaign by the British command. It is also important to my family as one of my forebears, Harold Denston, died on April 25 on Gallipoli's shores. April 25 is arguably the most important date in Australia's emergence as a sovereign nation - more important than January 26, which commemorates the landing of the First Fleet and the settling of the country by the Brits. 

From my perspective as a long time ex-pat, I take pride in the notion that our "coming out" as a nation was, in fact, not a great military victory but rather an ill-advised military campaign that led to the death of about 8,700 young Australian volunteers who died on the beaches and 60,000 who died in the overall conflict; and helped forge our identity as a nation. It should be borne in mind that our population at the time was only about 4.9 million.

This book is perhaps the defining text on the disastrous Gallipoli campaign, written in 1956 by Alan Moorehead, a renowned Australian war correspondent who lived in the U.K. His description in Chapter 9 of the battle between the so-called Colonials and the Turks and the mutual admiration they developed that encapsulated the ANZAC spirit was worth the price of admission alone! War is hell - but in this situation, it brought out the best of the men involved - on both sides.
 
Moorehead provides the details behind many of the headlines I've had heard about the campaign, such as the incompetence of the English military leaders, the damage to Churchill's reputation, the role of Keith Murdoch, the camaraderie that developed between the soldiers in the trenches - both between soldiers on the same side as well as between the Turks and the Allies as they whiled away the hours and days in unbearable conditions. Notwithstanding the mistakes that were made throughout the campaign, it appears that the evacuation was well-planned and executed. Getting thousand of soldiers off the beaches was no mean feat!

A total of 259 days elapsed between the first landings and the last evacuations - from April 1915 till January 2016. About half a million men were sent to Gallipoli of which approximately half became casualties, ironically about the same number of casualties as the Turkish losses. Today I understand it is a tranquil site, but it is the place where a country's self-image was borne. One day I hope to make a pilgrimage there and pay my respects.