Rating: 5/5

Rewritten 2026. The first time I went to Montserrat I was spending a year going from Trinidad to Puerto Rico courtesy of a very cheap one-way ticket from LIAT very unreliable air 'bus' service, known in the Caribbean as Leaves Island Any Time or Luggage in Another Territory. I booked into a little guest house run by a 40ish English blonde lady and her 21 year old local lover whose official position was 'cook'. Every night all 8 of us guests would sit en famille around the dining table and the 21 year old would serve us macaroni cheese pie, peas and rice and fried chicken. He didn't know how to cook anything else.

The house was a traditional West Indian house. It was wooden with gingerbread and windows without glass but narrow wooden shutters, quite a lot like this one (link on GR). Inside, the wooden walls went to the lower edge of the roof, no ceiling. This is to promote the air flow from the lazily-turning ceiling fans suspended on long poles from the roof. The rooms are therefore somewhat less than private.

The third night I was there, a honeymoon couple came in quite late at night, after dark. They had a really great wedding night full of loud, enthusiastic, kinky sex. It was quite worth losing sleep over. 

Next morning over breakfast, all of the other guests, except the couple, could hardly keep a straight face. We'd all heard everything. The couple told us they were on their honeymoon, and one of the guests said, yes we'd all gathered that! It was hard not to laugh, no one quite managed enough self-control. We never saw the couple again. In the dark they hadn't been able to see the gap above the walls but now they had, and I suppose the embarrassment was just too much for them. 

Although it doesn't say it, this book is based on Montserrat before the volcano erupted. If you know the island you can recognise the scenes. It's a really lovely book, the art work is brilliant and very typical of Frane Lessac's faux-naive style. The small amount of text that goes with it illuminates the pictures. It is fun to sit down with a child and look at the pictures, forgetting for a minute how that way of life has gone forever since Soufriere Hills blanketed half the island in several meters of volcanic ash.