Rating: 1/5

Forget About It
February 26, 2000

Rita Herron's "Forgotten Lullaby" is the latest entry in Harlequin's amnesia derby, and easily one of the weakest. At best, it's forgettable; at worst, it's intolerable. New mother Emma Wadsworth is returning home one night when someone drives her off the road. Struck with amnesia after the accident (but of course!), she returns home to her husband Grant and their baby daughter. Her attempts to remember her old life are hindered by further attempts to kill her. Someone wants her dead. But why?

The problems start with the characters. The "hero," Grant, isn't my idea of a hero at all. Besides being completely unbelievable as a male in his twenties (he's going to sigh thinking about a romantic night dancing to CELINE DION? ), he's also relentlessly whiny and only concerned with trying to get his wife to remember him, regardless of her feelings. I couldn't blame Emma for getting upset when he kept bringing up sappy memories of their past--I was just as tired of hearing about them. Someone's trying to kill your wife and all you can think about is how she can't remember your wedding? How about trying to create a future, pal? His reaction to one key revelation Emma makes late in the book said it all for me; the biggest baby in this book is Grant.

Worse is Emma, more of a victim than a real character. I've tried to think of a recent Intrigue heroine as weak as this one, and thankfully, I couldn't. Intrigue heroines are strong, capable women ready and willing to fight for their lives, loves, and what they believe in. That description doesn't fit Emma at all. The woman does NOTHING in this book but sit around and wait for the next attack on her. I've read about annoying heroines who act in stupid ways and infuriating ones who act in the wrong ones, but I don't ever think I've read a book where the heroine NEVER takes a SINGLE action against the threats on her life. The only thing she does in response to the threats is to throw herself into her husband's arms and hope he'll make it all better--a foolish hope since he's more interested in his job than finding the attacker. I kept yelling, "DO SOMETHING! " She never did. Insufferably weepy, she didn't seem to have a backbone at all, let alone a personality, simply letting the story happen TO her. Neither of the leads do anything to try and solve the mystery, leaving the investigating to the police as they move through page upon angst-ridden page in the soap opera plot. If they don't care enough about the attacker to interrupt their busy lives, why should I?

What there is of a mystery is far too easy to solve, since the clues might as well be underlined in the book. Every once in a while Herron brings the leads' hand-wringing to a grinding halt and has secondary characters step forward and, out of nowhere, deliver information about themselves that seems to have no relevance. But of course, it does! DUH! The title is also horribly misleading, playing up the baby angle that is a very minor part of the plot. Anyone looking for a book about a baby, don't let the title fool you. That's not really what this book is about. The baby is conveniently passed off to secondary characters except for when she's needed to inspire Emma's "How can I be a mother if I can't remember giving birth?" moaning. Ms. Herron's original title, "Remember Me," was much more relevant, since it contains multiple meanings in the book. But then, this title is no more misleading than the book itself, which has the words "romantic suspense" written all over it. It is not romantic suspense. It is a domestic drama about two weak, whiny people, and an excruciatingly boring one. This was the first of this month's Intrigues I tried to read and the last one I finished. I could not stop putting it down. If only I had forgotten to buy it.