Rating: 4/5

(Cover painting by David Mattingly)

What at first seems like a quirky, lighthearted tale with mild fantastical elements soon shifts to all out weirdness and terror, as narrator Thomas Abbey moves to a small Missouri town, the hometown of his hero, a reclusive children’s book author whose whimsical fantasies greatly affected Thomas when he was a boy. He and his girlfriend/assistant are there to do research for a biography he’s planning on the late author, and they notice right away that things are off in this town. A sudden tragedy occurs soon after they arrive, and the people react…oddly. Almost as if it was expected, in a way. What’s with all the bull terriers everywhere? And did Thomas just hear one talk?

I won’t say more so as to not give anything away, but I will mention that the only thing holding me back from giving this 5 stars is the narrator himself. He’s a grade A prick, totally insufferable. It’s not necessary for the main character to be 100% likable and relatable for me, but any fear or unease I felt concerning his well-being would entirely dissipate once I remembered that I really couldn’t care less whether he lives or dies. Still, I was able to get past that and soon became enveloped in this surreal, insane nightmareland. The imagination and creativity on display were more than enough to carry me through, not to mention its…unpredictable-ness.

Plus, I just love me some creepy small town stories.

(ETA: As an aside, I just wanted to mention the fact that I always think of Jonathan Carroll as British for some reason. Every so often I’ll read up on him, maybe deciding what book of his I want to try next, and every time I’m surprised to rediscover that he’s in fact American. There’s something about his writing style that brings to mind English fantasists like Gaiman or Graham Joyce more so than any of his fellow countrymen. Even while reading this book I had to constantly remind myself that it takes place in Missouri. And that’s all I have to say about that.)