Rating: 4/5

A Lucky Man Non-Review:

My mom, at the age of 66, was diagnosed with Parkinson's. This happened last year when my sister noticed that mom's head was shaking for no reason. She has been on a mixed dose of Levodopa &amp; Beloc 20 ever since. 

While a chunk of this book is full of things that happened in Michael's fascinating life, for obvious reasons, I preferred the parts where he spoke about his struggles with Parkinson's and alcoholism.

The taboo this neurological disease brings is real. As if the person affected would inconvenience others by their very presence. That is not the case. My mom maintained her social life while dealing with it during her first year. She was the vice president of our colony before we convinced her to take a step back and focus on her health this year. She still attends all important meetings, visits her temple every Saturday, cooks, and hosts guests whenever she wants. 

It also holds her back sometimes. My mom would cancel plans on days she felt vulnerable. I get that we all feel emotionally raw sometimes. But mom would get unreasonably obsessed with the tiny tremor in her head and skip brunches she rarely used to miss. Even though anyone who met her wouldn't know that she is battling this dreadful disorder.

Oh, and did I mention that mom has diabetes, vision loss due to diabetic macular edema, high blood sugar, high cholesterol, and anxiety as well? No, I didn't. I don't like thinking about all the things she has to deal with.

Michael's struggles connected with me more than his joy. His failures while mired in the blurry cloud of alcoholism kind of mirrored my failures. On the bright side for him, atleast he didn't lose an entire decade to his addiction unlike some of us.

I don't know if I want to post all this. I don't feel good about what I wrote or the way I wrote. I don't feel good these days. People who hurt me are thriving while I stay rooted to the muck hoping things don't get worse.

The best endorsement I can give to this book is that it prompted me to buy another book written by Michael. Maybe I will finally learn something...