Rating: 2/5

How does one write a review for this book without saying too much? 

The ending is important, and that ending is not going to please everyone, but I liked it. It is realistic. It is why I considered giving the book 3 rather than 2 stars. The first half of the book dragged. It is boring. It lacks the humor I so love in Trollope's books. There is very little humor in any of this book. I smiled at only a line or two. For these reasons 2 rather than 3 stars. 

I insist that what happens here IS true to life. This is a story about money and marriage and the social norms of the Victorian era. It is about the restriction that era placed on people. It is also about love, how it messes with your head. It is about love between father and daughter, love between mother and daughter and in a couple. These love attachments are not the same even if they are equally strong. I felt that each character remained true to him or herself. I understood the father. I understood the mother and the daughter. Each one is different and they are not caricatures. There are people like George! If you need to love a book's characters, I don't recommend this book. I do recommend it to those of you who are intrigued by the fallibility of human behavior. Even when you try your best all can go downhill. That is how life is. Good intentions do not prevent disaster.

All the other audiobooks I have read by Trollope have been narrated by Timothy West. He was excellent. It was great to test one narrated by another, to see if this should influence my appreciation. I didn't see as much humor, but I don't think it is there in the lines. I did like the narration by Tony Britton and know now I can choose him for Trollope’s books too. 

If you are looking for a fairytale, don’t read this book. If you have never read Trollope before, don’t read this book. His talents are only hinted at. I liked the book by its end, but struggled through at least the first half. I cannot rate a book solely by how I feel at the end.