Rating: 5/5

The book and the true story were very interesting and had an unexpected plot twist. The plot twist was that Lyle and Erik Menendez killed their parents on a random night. They came out of nowhere with shotguns and started shooting their parents. Joseph Lyle Menendez was the oldest of both of them. He grew up to be his dad's favorite which meant his father had more expectations coming from Lyle. That made Lyle very stressed because his father was a very important person back then. His father always had a very serious attitude and was just a very angry person most of the time. Erik Galen Menendez was the youngest out of the two. He had a very hard time while growing up because neither his mom nor dad gave him the love he wanted as a kid. Although he wasn't his father's favorite, Jose Menendez would support his passion for tennis. Erik was talented at tennis which made him play at contests. Jose Menendez would get mad at his sons if they didn't meet up to his standards which put a lot of pressure on them. While growing up Jose Menendez wasn't just verbally abusive but he was also sexually abusive towards his sons. Lyle Menendez was 6 years old when all the abuse started. Erik Menendez said that it felt like the abuse was going on for decades. Their father would force them to do a lot of adult things the boys weren't comfortable with. Jose Menendez would force Erik to do many more things as a punishment when he wouldn't do things right. Lyle also suffered a lot but Erik would take most of it. One day Lyle Menendez took Erik Menendez to a forest and did the same things he and his dad would do, to Erik. On august 1989 the Menendez brothers had enough of the abuse and decided to kill their parents with shotguns. After doing it, Erik Menendez was really scared and called the police reporting the killings of their parents. The police came and investigated but the brothers weren't charged at the moment until March 8th of 1990. And till then they have been sentenced to life without the possibility of parole. I feel like this book doesn't really connect much with my life because the Menendez brothers went through abuse. What I do connect with tho is pressure from my parents and having hard times. Although the stuff i went through isn't as bad or traumatic as the Menendez brothers. I honestly really liked this book, it probably has to be one of my favorites. To me this book was interesting because, I enjoy reading true crime drama since it's the only thing that catches my attention. I've known about the Menendez brothers case for the past year or two and i am really glad I got to read this book because it gave me so much more information than any movie made. In my opinion the book is a five out of five stars because I enjoy reading true crime dramas and because this case has caught my attention since two years ago. I would definitely recommend this book to anyone who likes reading about true crime dramas or just anyone in general who doesn't know what kind of book to read.