Rating: 4/5

a very allegorical interpretation of Song of Songs, where Solomon’s love for the Shulamite woman is likened to Jesus’ love for us (the church), analyzed line-by-line in a structure reminiscent of IB lang lit essays LOL

summary of stages:
1. the bride’s infatuation for her husband: it’s like when we first discover Jesus and we’re head over heels, all emotion. 
2. the husband pursues the bride: Jesus does all the romancing towards us, revealing Himself and meeting us exactly where we’re at
3. the bride is challenged to follow the husband: now, Jesus invites us to leave our comforts and go follow Him where He leads
4. the bride follows her husband but loses her way: the reality and challenges of following Jesus is introduced. she is even beaten (persecuted) by guards.
5. the bride returns to her husband: still, she continues to search and remain faithful to Jesus. her faith matures because it is not based on the earlier heady emotions but rather a deeper trust and knowledge of Jesus. the bride is able to find him in the garden when she praises Him and recounts His admirable qualities. this then inspires the women around her to also search for this Lover and experience the fullness that this bride has clearly seen!
6. the husband delights in the bride: he witnesses how she is being transformed and delights in this. the bride is now no longer focused on herself and receiving from the husband. rather, she wants to give to and please her husband. likewise, this is when we wean off selfishly conforming Jesus to our needs but start to think of how we can serve/honor/love Him. 
7. the bride is concerned with His affairs and what concerns Him: she is checking the fruits of the vineyard, whether the pomegranates have bloomed. in doing so, she is swept away by her Lover! as we too focus on doing good work for God &amp; others, we find that Jesus captivates us in every moment
8. the bride and the husband co-labor together, in complete union and in step with each other. their love is no longer about either of them, but rather being a blessing to everyone around them, restoring all sheep back to the Shepherd. the bride says “we” now because she knows her husband and his will so well, that she can speak as if they are one.

song of songs ends beautifully with, “Make haste, my beloved, and be like a gazelle or a young stag on the mountains of spices.” (8:14 ESV) which Nee interprets as foreshadowing of Christ’s second coming, and the reminder go eagerly await the bridegroom’s return.

also: it’s interesting how he points out that in SOS there are “two wildernesses” – a spiritual poverty (worldly/materialistic) and physical one (dark night of soul/testing), and a corresponding “two returns” – a restoration of fellowship by the Holy Spirit, then the foreshadowed one, which is when our work will be revealed on the day of judgement.)
‭‭