Rating: 5/5

Helen Keller Crusader for the Blind and Deaf is a children’s book written by Stewart and Polly Anne Graff and illustrated by Wayne Alfano. In this book, the readers are able to learn about the life of Hellen Keller. The book discusses the challenges that she faced after becoming blind and deaf from an illness she suffered from when she was one and a half years old. Annie Sullivan became a very important person in Helen Keller’s life. She would trace letters and words on Helen’s hand repeatedly, explaining who people were and what objects she was feeling. She never gave up on Helen even when she would act out at first because her parents would choose to let Helen do whatever she wished to do. Annie helped Helen become the accomplished person that we are taught about today. The major themes in the book were determination and overcoming challenges. The theme of determination can be seen through her teacher, Anne Sullivan, who never gave up when trying to teach Helen Keller. Anne had her mind set on teaching Helen how to understand words and giving her an education. Even when Helen acted out, Anne never gave up on her. The theme of overcoming challenges can be seen throughout the entire book. Helen grew up blind and deaf, she did not know how to behave, and that other people had feelings. Giving her an education is not an easy task because she cannot be taught the same way as other students. She soon overcame the obstacles in her life and learnt how to read through braille, write, and speak. The main genre of this book is biography. Children reading this book could learn about the life of Helen Keller and how she was able to overcome the challenges that she faced. Children can also learn about the importance of education and to not take what they have for granted. This book was a WOW book for me because it was simply written and easy for children to understand but still discusses all of the key parts of Helen Keller’s life. 

Two of the writing craft techniques the author used in this book were imagery and chronological structure. The authors used imagery by writing things like “suddenly the screen door slammed. Helen turned. She could not hear the slam, but it made a shake. It was a vibration that she could feel” (p. 4-5). The reader is able to create a picture in their head of the scene that is happening. The authors used chronological structure by telling the story of Helen Keller’s life in the order that it happened, from her youth to her old age. These writing craft techniques enhanced the quality of the writing in this book because they help the reader image what is happening and what Helen Keller’s life was like when she did not understand the world around her. It also helped the audience to understand all of the events in her life because the events are told in the order that they happened, instead of jumping around. I would consider this book to be an anti-bias book because the authors did research and accurately told the story of the life of Helen Keller.