Rating: 2/5

The first thing you notice about this book, one of Michener's last, is how slim it is compared to the earlier historical opuses he was known for. Caribbean, the only other one of his novels I've read (some thirty years ago) clocks in at nearly 700 pages; this one doesn't hit 100. 

Legacy is an odd book. Michener uses the Iran-Contra scandal as a springboard to discuss the history of the Constitution from its creation to its gradual expansion to cover more and more Americans. The main character, Maj. Norman Starr, is a staffer on the National Security Council. He's been summoned to appear before the Iran-Contra committee. His lawyer advises him to spend the weekend before he testifies brushing up on his family, a distinguished but fairly unknown group several members of which were present at crucial moments in the Constitution's evolution. 

One member was signed the Declaration of Independence. His son was a member of the Constitutional Convention. His son was a Supreme Court justice who was an ally of John Marshall. Another was a key lieutenant of Robert E. Lee. A female Starr was a notorious suffragette. And so on. 

Michener sketches out his history well, but it can't help feel potted at times, especially with the need for him to weave his fictional creations into the real history. Hence the Starr who was at Philadelphia in 1787 conveniently never spoke during the debates, though he was a involved in informal discussions outside Independence Hall. The Confederate officer Starr manumitted his slaves before 1861 and turned them into sharecroppers, inspired by fellow Virginia plantation owners to do so. That such manumissions happened before the Civil War is probably true (Michener knows his history too well to make such a thing up). But it, too, is convenient in that it exculpates his protagonist and his ancestor from the guilt of having fought to defend slavery. 

In what can only be described as a serendipitous coincidence, Norman Starr's mother, Rachel, is a political scientist who became an expert on the malapportionment of legislative districts. This is an issue that went all the way to the Supreme Court in the 1960s in the form of several cases, including the one that established the rule of "one man, one vote." The issue has come to the fore again in debates about the supposed malapportionment of the Senate and gerrymandering. I was not expecting a technical discussion of the issue in a James Michener novel, but he does get into some nuts and bolts in the mouth of Rachel Starr. An example, perhaps, of Michener's liberal sympathies.

Michener is clearly a democrat in the small- and large-D senses. But he is so in the senses that prevailed in the post-WWII era of American liberalism. His attitudes are not what one would call progressive, at least not by today's standards. Indeed, in 2021 he'd probably be considered fairly retrograde for his evident reverence for the Constitution. Norman Starr greatly admires the Constitution. And so does James Michener. That's an attitude we could well do with a lot more of, on both sides of the political spectrum. 

Thursday 8/19/21