Rating: 4/5

****SPOILERS**** LOTS OF SPOILERS

This story is Book 3 in the Tower and Hive Series.

Going back to the end of Book 2, Damia and Afra, as well as Damia's siblings were involved in the defence of the Alliance against a Hive mind. One of Damia's brothers died in that attack. At the same time the Alliance also met a new species called the Mr'dini who have been fighting against the Hive Mind for centuries. The Mr'dini are hellbent on destroying the Hive. They made contact with the Humans after watching the Humans successfully fight off a Hive ship and teleport said ship into the sun. 

Book 3 starts some 16 years after the end of Book 2. Damia and Afra have had at least 8 children in total. The 4 oldest are called Laria, Thian, Rojer and Zara. 3 of Damia's children have inherited strong talents as Teleports and Telekinetics. 

The contact with the Mrdini is now a huge part of the Alliance. Talented children are raised with the Mrdini children from a young age. They learn each others languages, cultures and engineering. Creating new space ships and weapons to destroy the Hive. 

The Hive race act as one with a hive mind, and their only way of live is to find a new planet to colonise, remove all other living things from the new planet and then take over said planet. 

Both the Mrdini and the Humans do NOT want to allow the Hive ships to enter their part of the galaxy. 

Laria is sent to live on the Mr'dini home world and become their tower prime - teleporting goods and people between Earth and Clarf (the Mr'dini home world).

Thian is sent on a Naval vessel out into the far reaches of space to search for the Hive Home world. They are following the ion stream of the Hive ship that attacked the Earth 16 years earlier. When the home world is discovered a year later, the Alliance learns that the Hive were forced to leave their home world because their sun went nova and destroyed the home world. 

After the Hive home world is discovered, the alliance scientists now want to learn more about the Hive, while the Mr'dini are still hell bent on destroying them all. Thian's scout ship found a queen in a dead ship and that ship along with the queen were transported back to earth and settled onto the moon. 

When Rojer turns 16, he too is sent out to a scout ship around the Hive home world, and becomes the communications person between the Hive home world and his grandfather, Jeff Raven - aka Earth Prime. 

14 year old Zara is a strong empath and she feels emotions. She can also teleport, but is weak on the telekinetics. She feels very bad for the queen, and she feels many of the humans feelings about the Hive and the Mr'dini. Apparently the Mr'dini look like weasels, and many humans are still xenophobic - despite the strong alliance with the Mr'dini now being 16 years old. 

The Hive Queen is kept in a concrete cage, dug below the surface of the moon, with a large Monitoring window. She is given food and while she does start eating the food, she eventually stops eating and noone knows why. 

Zara finds a way to teleport to the moon, sneaks into the Cage and feels the queens emotions. Basically the Queen is freezing to death. she cannot lay her eggs because it is too cold. So Zara tells the Navy to increase the temperature before the queen dies!!! 

Once Zara is removed from the moon, she is sent to train to be a healer. That will make better use of her talents than teleporting cargos across the galaxy. 

This was an interesting story. I give it 4/5. There is a lot of new jargon and vocabulary words to learn and remember.