Rating: 5/5

The creation of a book is a rite of passage for the author even more than for the reader. It is a way of stripping down to the essential being, a self-analysis far more profound than any professionally guided psychoanalysis and a way of remaking oneself spiritually. It is for this act of self-transformation that writers write. And they are fortunate when they recognize this, because such self-transformation is the only truly dependable reward of writing. 

~ Erica Jong The Devil at Large

Nin’s independence both as a wife and as a lover seems beguiling. At first she appears as a beacon of liberation for women, but perhaps she was more enslaved to men than most of us. Anaïs had an independence in her marriage to Guiler that she would have never possessed with Henry. She remained tied to Guiler all her life, but she always needed at least two men to reenact her oedipal drama.

Her freedom came at a very high cost: she was unable to publish her journals freely during her own lifetime. In a way she traduced her art for the sake of her deceptions. She knew that women can have their sexuality as long as they don’t publish it.

I had an amusing encounter with Anaïs once at the Poetry Center of the Ninety-Second Street Y in Manhattan, where she was speaking after her edited diaries had begun to appear. At that point I had published only one or two volumes of poetry and was just writing Fear of Flying.

“Why did you edit the sexual parts out of your diary, Miss Nin?” I asked from the audience.

“Becasue I had observed,” she replied cooly, “that whenever a woman revealed her sexual life, she was never again taken seriously as a writer.” Nin was pragmatic. I was passionate and young.

“But that’s precisely why we must do it,” I said, unwittingly predicting my entire career. Nin did not comment further. I remember being disappointed by her lack of candor and thought she was being hypocritical. Now, I see that I was terribly green and brash and she was wise.

She was right, of course: if a woman exposes her sexuality in print, she is always exposed to attack. It was a situation she was destined to help change, but only after her death. I was to beard that particular dragon with my very first novel, and in many ways my reputation has never recovered. 

~ Erica Jong The Devil at Large