Rating: 2/5

Not a history book

Hosbawm's "The Age Of Extremes..." is, best described as "A collection of Marxist Thesis on the 20th Century" than a history book. Perhaps an even better title is "A collection of Hosbawm's highly biased comment on a few 20th century historical facts". 

Over the course of its roughly 400-500 pages, Hosbawm does his best make the non-communist (read: capitalist) nations look like complete monsters. He is, of course, right in that the capitalist nations often commited attrocities and war crimes, but his systematic efforts in making communism look better than it actually was achieve ignomious proportions. He stops for entire pages to comment on the wrongdoings of the United States and the United Nations towards the "poor" communist nations, yet he only mentions the horrific acts in communist nations (for example the Tiananmen Square Massacre or the Soviet Gulags) in cryptic and offhanded references. He goes so far as to state that Orwell was wrong in classifying Stalinism as a totalitarian dictatorship. How someone can actually defend the stalinist regime is beyond me.

This is a book only for people that know history, since on many ocassions the reader is expected to already know what happened at a particular time period. The books only function seems to be to describe some of the historicall currents the world was subject to in the 20th century.

To be fair, both the chapters on the beginning of the 20th century and the ones dealing with the "The Fall of Socialism" (that deals with the last days of the Soviet Union) are excellent. If anything it does seem that Hosbawn was unusually interested in writing about these two things and put all of his effort into it. 

There are also chapters dedicated to the arts at the end of each of the three main sections of the book and devote very little space to explore the more recognizable changes of the century. The creation of comic books, the fall of the Hays Code (which is mentioned exactly once in an easy to overlook sentence) the comics code, the inclusion of violence in comic books and other important facts are left out, because Mr. Hosbawm feels his readers will be more interested in architecture and fahsion. Rock music and its subgeneres are also left mostly unexplored.

There is also a chapter dedicated to the scientific advances of the "short century" which is somewhat acceptably written. Of course it serves only to underscore Hosbawms own beliefs. Whenever Russia takes questionable agricultural desitions, unsupported by actual science it is presented in a neutral fashion, but when the Catholic Church accepts the Big Bang Theory they are "extracting consolation from it". There are also a few errors in this chapter. For example his claim that "a theory cannot be complete and consistent at the same time" is a missunderstanding of Gödel's incompleteness theorem (in fact there are theories known to be complete *and* consistent). It should instead read "A *sufficiently powerfull system* cannot be complete and consistent at the same time". Of course, this is a common missunderstanding, but one would expect that Hosbawm would counsult with mathematicians before writing about advanced mathematics.

The books ends with a somewhat aceptable summary of the century and Hosbawm's own conclussion of what the future challenges are. This is surprisingly a very good and accurate summary. 

All in all, the readers might be able to get something useful out of this book, but only readers who are already knowledgeable in 20th century history.