Rating: 4/5

Well, that got dark.

I read this to prepare for watching the 1979 film adaptation and studying Brad Dourif's portrayal of Hazel Motes, the preacher of the Church without Christ. I have a character idea for a novel and can't stop imagining him without seeing Dourif's face, so here we are.

This book is nuckin' futs.

It's absolutely absurd, strange, and weirdly funny yet shockingly violent. I now understand why Flannery O'Connor's name comes up a lot in conversations about the Southern Gothic. I feel like the feverish extent of the dark, ironic, postmodern humor in fact challenges the high rank held by William Faulkner in the genre for this reader. All at once, in this one novel, O'Connor takes the vinegary irreverence of Ambrose Bierce, combines it with the everyday horrors of the American South in the 1940s, and somehow anticipates Kurt Vonnegut's abyssal and somewhat surreal sense of humor in Slaughterhouse Five (minus the sci-fi).

And this was her debut novel.

Wise Blood predominantly follows Hazel Motes, a 22-year-old army veteran who, upon coming home to the U.S., decides to found the Church without Christ and become a street preacher of its non-gospel (or anti-gospel?). He basically preaches that there is no Christ and that there is, therefore, no use in seeking redemption and no such thing as sin anyway. Of course, there's a huge wink behind this since O'Connor was Catholic, but myself as an atheist reader found the ways in which a young former Christian might try to justify the impulse of belief without spirituality absolutely fascinating. 

"I preach there are all kinds of truth, your truth and somebody else's, but behind all of them, there's only one truth and that is that there's no truth," he called. "No truth behind all truths is what I and this church preach! Where you come from is gone, where you thought your were going to never was there, and where you are is no good unless you can get away from it. Where is there a place for you to be? No place."

Hazel Motes is full of contradictions and cognitive dissonance, so his perspective and temperament were extremely compelling to follow, even as he actively tried to repel others from page one. Regardless of his pushing, people were still pulled to him, and these people were equally compelling, particularly his landlady whom I won't discuss here because spoilers.

I enjoyed this a lot more than I thought I would. I consider it a new favorite and am looking forward to reading more of O'Connor's work as well as watching the film adaptation of this novel.

CW: racism, blackface, self harm

For fans of: Slaughterhouse Five by Kurt Vonnegut, Civil War Stories by Ambrose Bierce, The Devil All the Time by Donald Ray Pollock