Rating: 5/5

"The Question of separatism" has a very clear and persuasive message. Jacobs makes the case for Canada's eastern province of Quebec's nationhood. I was surprised by the lack of reviews, or comments for this book. However, it had been out of print for nearly 30 years, and re-emerged posthumously just a few months ago. 
 A brief summary of the book would be that Jacobs is clearly in favor of Quebec sovereignty, and to make her argument she utilizes her usual direct, and somewhat conversational prose. She also gives a brief history of Norway's slow -yet persistent- quest for national identity while being under Swedish rule. 
 Jacobs' main concern is Quebec's chief city: Montreal. She feels that Montreal has done an excellent job at preserving The Quebecois culture and language, despite Canada's belief that after many years of being anglicized, would have simply faded away. While cultural preservation is applauded, the argument is made that Montreal, along with the entire province, is being reduced economically to nothing more than a "regional or feeder city." By this she means that jobs are leaving both Montreal and Quebec City, to the more successful, and larger city of Toronto. She feels this trend can be reversed if the province were it's own sovereign state, with it's own laws and regulation, or lack thereof. 
 The book is filled with many more excellent and insightful arguments for the separation. I'd put this one up there with her best works on economics. This seems to be somewhat of a precursor to her follow-up "Cities and the Wealth of Nations" which is essentially the same argument, just preferring to take a more universal look at the advantages of the city-state, rather than a direct one involving her adopted home country. 
 So, I'm glad that it was put back into print, and I'm also glad I read it. I feel that Jacobs writing will always be relevant, as it has proven to be. I feel that her writing reveals more about human nature and interactions and development than any "self-help" or philosophical approach will ever achieve.