Rating: 4/5

I woke up in the middle of the night and decided to read one of the shorter books on my TBR pile (I'm currently going through all my books to see which ones I might re-read and which ones I want to donate). I keep coming back to children's and young people's books; they often tackle life lessons that more people should heed, and often this is done via engaging stories.
Moreover, this book was just right for the situation: by the time I was ready to go back to sleep, I had read the whole book.
With just the right amount of words, the setting is described so well that I really was there, as if I was part of the groups of friends/neighbours. It shows that the location is based on where the author herself grew up. At times I felt reminded of the excursions Pippi Longstocking, Thomas and Anika get up to. 1950s childhood - get out, have adventures, come back for dinner...
But then people somehow always make things complicated. Nancy, the first-person narrator, is stuck in the middle and has trouble figuring out how to deal with some outrageous information she finds out about some neighbours.
Spoilers(?): 
.....
....
...

The sections where Nancy finds out and describes what she knows about "the facts of life" nearly made me laugh out loud, but with a wee tear in my eye: I'd like to think that no child nowadays would be this naive (we know too much about child abuse now; can't really indulge in wishing for the allegedly "simpler times" to come back).**
Everything comes good in the end, for most of the characters anyway. The last sentence is spot-on funny, but only if you've read the whole story!

** Edit: I note one of the reviewers read the book as a child and at the time did actually believe Nancy's version of "the facts of life". That's a little scary. I therefore take several other reviewers' point that maybe this is less of a children's book than might at first appear. But really, dear parent/carer/guardian: if the child in your care doesn't know the basics, and especially the bit about consent, please remedy the situation! (Sorry, this is straying out of book review territory. Over &amp; out.)