Rating: 3/5

I first came across the Brother Cadfael chronicles as a teenager. I loved them at the time -- I read as many as I could get my hands on. I then put them out of my mind until very recently when I had a bit of time and wanted something familiar and re-assuring to keep me company. Brother Cadfael is re-assuring; a well-weathered monk with knowledge of the world, of battles and romantic love, a gentle man, whose knowledge of medicinal herbs and ailments makes him even more respectable. Approachable, humble, but with wit and razor-sharp intelligence. What's not to like about Brother Cadfael?

Many of the recurring characters of the series are like that. The Sheriff, Hugh Beringar, a man to be relied upon for his fine sense of justice and duty unencumbered by narrow-minded interpretations of the law. The Abbot, Brother Radulphus: a very capable leader of the monastic order, and a man without obvious faults: unwavering in his convictions, protector of the weak, a friend to Brother Cadfael, and keenly aware of the need for political shrewdness at a time of civil war (as that time was for England).

And this is what I dislike about the series, the near-perfection of the main characters, the lack of any obvious faults or strife to weigh them down. Brother Cadfael's world comes across as an idealised world where goodness always wins because the main actors are fundamentally good. Of course, there is evil in this world too, there are thieves and murderers and those who betray their friends or their causes, but the fabric of the world is never irreparably damaged by their actions because justice is always restored at the end.

Enthused as I was with the series in my adolescence, I now feel dissatisfied with Ellis Peter's world. And at the same time, I'm irresistibly drawn to it; its tranquility, peace, and predictability. Ellis Peters wrote to a recipe: a well-ordered world inhabited by decent human beings striving for the best. Her recipe plays on our desire for justice and goodness to emerge triumphant but it shoves under the carpet moral puzzles, quandaries and human weaknesses as well as the fact that justice is an elusive entity that is not always restored at the end.