Rating: 4/5

The current 50-50 split in the US Senate has raised the visibility of some of its extensive rules. Those so interested can do worse than read this blockbuster best seller that won a Pulitzer Prize in 1960. It chronicles two-weeks of Washington intrigue surrounding the U.S. Senate’s process to advise and consent to (or, as it turns out, not to) a liberal president’s choice of an experienced bureaucrat named Robert Leffingwell to be Secretary of State. Don’t let the 616 large pages in the hardcover edition deter you from either starting or finishing the book. It is a real page-turner of interacting ambitions, jealousies, power and (perhaps surprisingly today) intellectual discussions among Senators. After reading, one share’s the author’s respect for the role of our legislative branch and its sometimes arcane procedures as a check on unfettered Presidential power. 

The backdrop for this book is late 1950s cold-war politics, when the Soviet Union was not only bad ass but ahead in the space race with its potential military significance. The prospect of catastrophic war was high in the minds of the public. In the book, the liberal party in control of the White House and the Senate became favorably disposed toward more accommodation (some would say appeasement) with Soviet leaders. Leffingwell wrote a popular book espousing this view, which convinced the President to nominate him for Secretary of State in order to advance his desired Reset with the Russkies. 

The Senate majority was headed for quick confirmation of the President’s nominee, until evidence arose that Leffingwell had enthusiastically participated in a small, intellectual Communist cell during his few years as a college instructor. When confronted with this evidence during the Senate’s hearings, Leffingwell denied it. It was later determined that he had lied (under oath, of course). This became the main issue concerning his suitability for the job – not his actual participation in a Communist cell. 

Apparently one feature of the political milieu hasn’t changed a bit since the 1950s depicted in the novel. The mainstream media are depicted as overwhelmingly liberal, continuing to heavily favor the nominee throughout while pilloring his senatorial opposition, no matter what. Current Russian government behavior doesn’t differ much from that depicted in the book, either. The author depicts an Empire so Evil that when it succeeds in a manned space mission to the moon, it immediately broadcasts to the world that it intends to leave a military contingent there to defend its ownership claim to the entire Moon. That the first manned mission to the Moon would be Russian was plausible, because they were ahead in the space race at the time. But the author and his original readers appear to have watched too many of that decade’s science fiction movies, and thereby found plausible that the first manned mission to the Moon would be massive enough to establish a working military base there. 

But the 1950s backdrop shows its age in other aspects of the plot. The McCarthy Era (Joe, not Eugene) had recently ended. The widely accepted view by the late 1950s was that his Communist Witch Hunts reflected a broader reality in which there was little evidence of Communist infiltration of the Federal Government. In light of this it isn’t surprising that the author depicts most senators as unconcerned about the nominee’s distant past participation in a Communist cell, dismissing this as a brief youthful, intellectual exuberance that could now be forgiven. Had the author written this book after Mikhail Gorbachev’s reign, he would have had to consider that Gorbachev released KGB records establishing that many diehard communists had, in fact, infiltrated the Federal Government and spied for the Soviets. Yes, Virginia, Julius Rosenberg really was a spy, along with lots of others – just not all those individuals fingered by McCarthy and his ilk. There is no doubt today that more senators would connect the dots between Leffingwell’s early communist leanings and his later advocacy of accommodation with The Evil Empire, and oppose him on those grounds. It appears that in the late 1950s it was somewhat politically incorrect to do so, making Leffingwell’s cover-up the main issue. 
 
It appears that the working duties of senators have also changed since the 1950s. Senators are depicted spending many hours alone in their offices, answering correspondence and poring over transcripts of committee hearings. Currently this is done by a senator’s battalion of staffers, while the senator meets with campaign consultants and attends photo ops. Also changed is the expectation that senators make up their own minds when voting. Currently the Majority and Minority Leaders make up their minds for them, with only an occasional renegade like Joe Manchin or Mitt Romney willing and able to nonconform. 

Perhaps the most glaring contrast between then and now is the importance placed on the Secretary of State. The author depicts this as perhaps the most important official in the Federal Government, writing as-if the future of the free world depends on it. If still true today, it is sobering to consider that President Obama once appointed Hillary Clinton to this post. The free world did survive her stint, although the Ambassador to Libya did not. Encouraged by this, Obama then surmised that the free world would also survive John Kerry. Of course it did, although he left our Middle East allies madder-than-hell, as the current Secretary discovered. The foreign policy apparatus is more extensive and not “run” by the Secretary of State anymore, unless the Secretary is transcendant. Kissinger, where art thou? 
 
But I digress. Back to the plot: the Russian belligerent broadcast didn’t aid the nominee’s case when the President finally stood on his hind legs and barked back at them, whipping up public sentiment against the Reds. Then the coup de grace to the nominee came by revelation within the Senate of a conspiracy involving the otherwise honorable Senate Majority Leader, the ruthless President, a liberal Supreme Court Justice (really?) and an ambitious young, take-no-prisoners leftist senator (from Wyoming!!) to blackmail (votemail?) a respected opposing senator with evidence of his (WW II) wartime homosexuality. This led to his suicide before the vote was taken, and a desire by his colleagues to honor his memory by joining the opposition.
 
I giggled when the author reports that the media gets wind of the wartime homosexuality but does not report it out of respect for the gay senator and his family. Apparently “all the news that is fit to print” has now become “all the news that can be Tweeted to get a rise out of the public”. I’ll leave it to readers to nominate a current politician who could play the role of the ambitious, take-no-prisoners leftist senator. Perhaps a sequel would depict that senator as a female from a coastal state, instead of a male from Wyoming. 

Some of the book’s considerable length is attributable to the author’s extensive character development of the key Senators, their political/social lives, and their thought processes as the two-week process unfolds. Another factor is the author’s extensive narrative of the Senate proceedings. This is so page-consuming that I sometimes felt like the story was unfolding in real time. Still I often could not put it down, especially when the alternative was to watch political opinion shows on cable. 

You may find the book online in several formats, but I enjoyed a used hardcover found at a small used bookstore conveniently located near my dog groomer.