Rating: 5/5

It seemed profoundly unwise, to tamper with time itself.
— Chapter 10. Penelope Lively’s novel, theoretically aimed at younger readers, is a novel that doesn’t in any way talk down to its readers. In fact, if it was published as a straightforward literary novel you wouldn’t guess it to be for young adults, or even a fantasy. It gets so close to not only the protagonist’s thinking and feelings but also to the various individuals she interacts with that it’s nigh impossible not to feel you know them, or are there in the room they’re in, or wherever they may be.

So, Clare Mayfield, born September 1959, may be only 14 when this story begins but she has a thoughtful, sensitive head on her body. An orphan, she lives with her two aged great-aunts in an old house in north Oxford overlooking the Parks. As visitors all remark one way or another, the house is like “a museum where you’re allowed to take everything out and mess about with it.”

But there’s one object that, as autumn turns to a chill, deep winter, Clare really doesn’t want to mess about with – an object from the other side of the world which is not only a repository of memories and traditions but one which affects her in ways that Clare finds impossible to ignore, such as having vivid dreams disturbing both sleep and equanimity. And at that point had flowered in Clare’s mind the notion that if you had more rooms than you in fact needed there were, by the same token, and according to the convenient arrangement of supply and demand, people who needed rooms. The house in Norham Gardens owned by Clare’s maiden aunts, Susan and Anne, is a time capsule from the Edwardian period when their father brought home ethnological objects and material from an early 20th-century expedition to what’s now Papua New Guinea, stored alongside clothes and mementos from their adolescence and later.

Money however is tight and, in a passage that’s faintly reminiscent of the opening of Pride and Prejudice (“a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife”), Clare thinks that taking in a lodger or two will bring in some regular and much needed income. And so, in due course, Maureen and then Ugandan student John arrive to take up two of the twelve rooms superfluous to the needs of the Mayfield ménage.

But what of the object that Clare and her schoolfriend Liz uncover? It turns out to be a tamburan or ceremonial shield, believed to be the embodiment of an ancestral spirit from Papua New Guinea tribe the Baganda; it’s a relic that Clare’s great-grandfather brought back but which, unlike other items, he chose not to donate to Oxford’s Pitt-Rivers ethnographical museum. What is it about this anthropomorphic object with its alert eyes and vivid colours that affects Clare? What is it trying to tell her via the dreams that increasingly come to her during the bitterly cold winter?

From the few titles of hers I’ve read over the years (and have yet to read) I sense that Lively is strongly rooted in the past – and in how it speaks to the present and how events from years ago affect people and events to come. Norham Gardens has a library filled to overflowing with books and box files and papers and letters; there are old photo albums and hats and a china collection. But it is more than that: “it seemed to her that the house itself, silent around her, was a huge head, packed with events and experiences and conversations. And she was part of them, something the house was storing up, like people store each other up.”

That sense of a past that is simultaneously documented as well as dream time comes through in Clare’s conversations with student John and in his delight in his extended family in Uganda, in the practical Mrs Hedges who ‘dailies’ for the aunts, in Maureen who lives both ‘in’ and ‘for’ the present yet respects the Mayfield sense of history, and of course in the aunts themselves: ‘When you are old you remember things quite well if they happened years and years ago: it is yesterday that becomes unclear, or last week.’

Clare, whose parents died when she was very young, finds her ‘family’ in these her friends, and in her schoolfriend Liz, and in a sympathetic teacher. But she also becomes aware of other families through the dreams, through her involuntary connection to the tamburan which is also a tribal ancestor and, like Clare, orphaned. Will it too have a home, a new family to belong to? ‘My dear child,’ said Aunt Susan, ‘you can’t carry a museum round with you. Neither will you need to. What you need, you will find you already have to hand — of that I’ve not the slightest doubt. You are a listener. It is only those who have never listened who find themselves in trouble eventually.’ 

I loved this novel: it felt intimate, even personal; the people felt real and so did the setting, which anyone who has visited Oxford and walked its streets will affirm as a true reflection. Lively herself will have remembered bitter winters as a student there (though not necessarily in the year this novel is set), and her old college St Anne’s sits near one end of Norham Gardens, while Lady Margaret Hall is located at the other end (from where I suspect the building work Clare hears emanated, when the Sutherland Building in Lannon Quad was constructed in 1971).

As for the Papua New Guinea aspect of the story I’m almost sure Lively will have seen the younger David Attenborough in a 1971 TV documentary, A Blank on the Map, as the broadcaster joined an expedition attempting to make contact with the Biami tribe. But the ideas in these pages about repatriation of indigenous material and the changes wrought by the passage of time will have been her own; in this she really seems ahead of her time.