Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars 

This book could have easily been a 4-4.5 star book had it not been for the dated perspectives that the author clearly held (both about women and POC, although i can really only speak for the former) and the bizarre obsession with sex that was weaves throughout the whole book. Also, the sex scenes in this book we’re just bad, so the constant jabber about sex in the book didn’t even pay off when it actually came to the act itself. 

Looking past the prejudice (yikes), however, the plot was slow but interesting. I found that the portion of the book that took place on earth very interesting and honestly would have liked to hear more about this era where casting shadows is considered wasteful and people are banned from having children with people from their own race as a form of population control. Those points were very interesting to me and added some spice to the story for sure.

I also really enjoyed the allusions to the deadly sins and to the game of chess in this book, and how every character had characteristics of a sin and a chess piece. I also found it really neat how the author seemed to be suggesting that the deadly sins were actually necessary traits for humans to have in order to survive. 

The ending of the book really took the rating down for me, while reading the book i was set at 4 stars, but upon finishing the story i felt more like a 3 was being fair, because it really was just weak. It felt like the author wanted to avoid the obvious ending (she was actually his long lost love all along! OR she was really their daughter all along!) and instead picked an ending that kind of just read as “i mean...i guess this could work” and then the story ended?? so i mean, that was bleh

ALSO what was with the author constantly drawing attention to Tibet and chocolate ice cream? i thought he was going to make a point with it and then there was just?? nothing?? so that was weird 

Did i enjoy reading this book? Yeah i mean i finished it in about 3 sittings so i guess it was fun. Would i recommend it to anyone? God no, there are way better things that didn’t made me grimace as much as this one did, so give it some thought before you decide to read this book