Rating: 4/5

* An slightly different audio version will appear on the Reading in Bed Podcast for April 2021 in April which is available on all the usual networks including readinginbed.bandcamp.com 

BLURB: 

A gripping and heartfelt war story from Britain’s best-loved children’s author, Michael Morpurgo.
Turned away by his own son, Cessie’s long-lost grandfather finds himself in the place he fears most a nursing home called Shangri-La. Only Cessie loves him and is determined to help him escape and unravel the truth of his past. A past that comes to him only in glimpses a lifeboat, a tin of condensed milk, a terrifying night on the beaches of Dunkirk in World War II …
Former Children’s Laureate and award-winning author of War Horse, Michael Morpurgo, demonstrates why he is considered to be the master story teller with this tale of strife and loss in World War II.

STRENGTHS: 

Although the book has some supporting characters, this story is mostly focused around 4 characters – Cessie (a 11 year old girl), her dad Arthur and her mom. This compact family unit’s relationship is changed when Arthur’s dad, Popsicle after being separated from Arthur 50 odd years ago.

Popsicle is however unable to say much as he is suffering from a illness which bought apparent was a stroke and he eventually gets placed in Shangri-La, a care home. 

The strengths in the book for me was Popscile and his relationship with Cessie which was touching and heart-breaking building up into a story about relationship – teaching us to be more tolerant, learn to forgive and accept.

As a book, it’s not a patch on the last book of his I read ‘Why the Wales come’ which I also reviewed for my podcast ‘Reading in Bed’ as that film had much more of a dark emotional feel on the island, but the themes of the book are the same about love and understanding. 

WEAKNESSES: 

Perhaps the book could have being teased out a little bit more as it was only just over 200 pages, but sometimes that’s not a bad thing I did see the ending coming a mile off.
The last bit of the book also in France also felt a step too far with a crew of elderly pensioners all sailing a boat to France, but it was charming and engaging.

8/10