Rating: 5/5

HAPPY VALENTINES DAY GENERAL SHERMAN! HAHAHA

Let's start first with the best of General Sherman. 
"I prefer to maintain my allegiance to the Constitution as long as a fragment of it survives..."--1861
"The section of thirty pounder Parrott rifles now drilling before my tent is a more convincing argument than the largest Democratic meeting the State of New York can possibly assemble at Albany..."-- 1863
"This I construe as the end of my military career. In looking back upon the past I can only say, with millions of others, that I have done many things I should not have done,and have left undone still more which ought to have been done; that I can see where hundreds of opportunities have been neglected, but on the whole am content; and feel sure that I can travel this broad country of ours, and be each night the welcome guest in palace or cabin; and, as 'all the world's a stage, And all the men and women merely players. I claim the privilege to ring down the curtain."-- 1884 

To me, General William T. Sherman is comparable to the General James N. Mattis (currently Secretary of Defense) of our time. Both of them called it as it is, despised political mingling in military affairs, and did their duty as lawful commissioned officers of the United States. On to the content, Sherman gave a candid, honest, and frank recollection of his military career starting as an officer during the Mexican-American War and to his rise as commander of the 13th Infantry Regiment and then to his position as General-in-Chief (Currently known as Chief of Staff of the US Army). 

I would like to particularly highlight his finest hours in Vicksburg in 1863 and his campaign in Georgia in 1864. He explained it with utmost detail in accordance to his recollections and I really saw how he was classified as the "First Modern General". Modern, in the sense that, he emphasized in quick maneuver warfare than a protracted static warfare. The swiftness and violence of actions are complemented by the use of skirmishers to live off the land. 

Nevertheless, the Memoirs of General W.T. Sherman provides the insights of early modern warfare and the disdain for politics that can upset operations. ONWARD TO GRANT'S MEMOIRS.