Rating: 5/5

With Richard III, Shakespeare created a monumental villain, and with him his first great play. Richard is a glorious psychopath, a pure antihero, and the throbbing heart of the play. He would be cartoonish but for Shakespeare’s soaring language on his tongue and for the gleeful relish with which he contemplates his deceptions, schemes, and murders. He is the greatest, great granddaddy of all modern antiheroes, from House of Cards’ Frank Underwood to Family Guy’s Stewie. 

Richard owns this play. He strides alone onto the stage, opening the action by breaking the fourth wall, speaking his powerful, famous monologue directly to the audience. Here he lays bare his wicked intent, his cunning plans. He makes the audience his unwitting accomplices. Again and again, he tells us his planned deceptions, we watch his execution of them, then he turns to us again to gloat at his own cunning —

”And thus I clothe my naked villany 
With old odd ends stolen out of holy
writ;
And seem a saint, when most I play the 
devil.”

Though this play is thick with murders and violence, most of the bloodletting (before the final battle) happens off stage. Instead, Shakespeare presents us with a war of words, language used to fence, wheedle, bludgeon, words converted to weapons. Richard is the primary combatant in this war that many others don’t even understand is happening until too late, but the sorrowing women of the play give as good as they get. Dowager Queen Margaret, in particular, is mighty in her words as she enters the arena against Richard, swapping insults and turning her words into powerful curses —

Queen Margaret: ”Hear me, You wrangling pirates”

Richard: ”Foul wrinkled witch, what makes thou in my sight?”
“Have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag!”

Queen Margaret: ”Thou elvish-mark’d, abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast seal’d in thy nativity 
The slave of nature and the son of hell!
Thou slander of thy mother’s heavy
womb!
Thou loathed issue of thy father’s loins!”

Shakespeare proved himself wise in the ways of statecraft. His creation of Richard as unredeemable villain was itself an act of historical propaganda — a gift to his patroness, Queen Elizabeth, to blacken the name of the king her grandfather usurped. But within the play itself he displayed a keen knowledge of deceit and bullying in cajoling toadies and cronies, sycophants and even untrusting enemies into doing one’s will. He understands well the utter lack of conscience of such tyrants, as displayed in Richard’s words:

”Conscience is but a word that cowards 
use, 
Devised at first to keep the strong in
awe”

His play proves timeless, as these lessons in tyranny prove to be as current as yesterday’s newspapers. One line in particular, advice from Buckingham to Richard on how to pose to gain advantage toward the throne vividly recalled a modern tyrant’s photo op by a Washington church:

”And look you get a prayer-book in your 
hand, 
And stand betwixt two churchmen”

One final note: The Arkangel Shakespeare Collection’s audiobook of this play is an outstanding production. It’s a great way to experience this powerful play.