Rating: 3/5

Lisbeth Fischer is consumed with hatred for her cousin, Adeline Hulot. Cousin Adeline has married a Baron and come up in the world, and Bette is the poor spinster relation, who has to work for part of her living and depends on the charity of the family for the remainder. Cousin Adeline’s husband, the Baron Hulot, is a despicable womanizer who ruins himself for “love”, uh make that lust. Nothing to envy in Adeline’s life at all...I’d have rather had the independence of Lisbeth, but then Lisbeth never bothers to enjoy her independence except in the ways that it gives her opportunity to take revenge and help to destroy her family.

Balzac does some great character development, especially with his female characters. Valerie Marneffe is the epitome of the beautiful woman who manipulates men for money, her husband the consummate cur, Bette the picture of a soul driven by jealousy and pettiness, and Steinbock is all the artist who squanders his talent and good fortunes might ever be. His good characters are weaker, in my mind. Adeline becomes almost a caricature, and does all the fainting, enduring and praying to excess, Victorin is almost too willing to sacrifice for his father’s sake, and Clementine too forgiving of hers. 

I did enjoy parts of this novel immensely, at other times I wished to speed up the narrative and push Balzac toward some conclusion. I was troubled by the ages of the girls that Hulot pursues, fourteen and sixteen year olds who are often already overly acquainted with the world. But, I kept reminding myself that this is Paris of the early 1800s and seventy year old men bedding fourteen year old girls might not have shocked a soul, particularly if the old men were Barons.

I debated long about whether my 3.5 star rating should be rounded up or down, finally settling for down. While there was much I did like about the novel, it falls short of being a truly captivating read. I am glad to have read it, however, since it is only the second Balzac I have tackled.