Reading books about Partition has never been easy. The sheer pain of reading those horrific incidences after which one doesn't even feel good to be a human, let alone one that is stuck with that as a history. 
Still Bhishm Sahni's take on Partition is a very poignant read. The Story starts off with Nathu a destitude man attempting to kill a Pig, for a handsome amount of 5Rs (Which by the way is not a very comfortable first page read), which has been commissioned by a wealthy Muslim Man apparently (or what we/ Nathu knows) for a vetinery purpose. Little did he know that the same pig would be used for the act of blasphemy by keeping it on the stairs of a Mosque. And in this way starts the Domino effect of riot killings. No one was spared, from sikhs to Hindus to Muslims. The novel depicts how suddenly the once very familiar cross religion neighbourhoods turn bitterly hostile towards one another. The events depicted are based on the true account of 1947 riots, and hence we have elements of brutal killings, Forced Conversions, women falling off the well and also a good Muslim who before hand cautions a sikh couple about the impending doom.
The brilliance lies in the decoding of the human psyche during the riots and wonderfully shown through a series of conversations.

Bhishma Sahini also shows the politics that gripped the Congress due to sycophancy and petty ego issues of the members , while we waited for Independence. Along with that he shows the British nonchalance, who otherwise could have stopped the riots.

Liza:‘Will they fight one another? In London you used to tell me that they were fighting against you’
Richard: ’They are fighting both against us and against one another’

‘You are again joking, Richard. Aren’t you?’

‘In the name of religion they fight one another; in the name of freedom they fight against us.’

‘Don’t try to be too clever, Richard. I also know a thing or two. In the name of freedom they fight against you, but in the name of religion you make them fight one another. Isn’t that right?’