Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars

'How do you know,' she asked in reply to this, 'what I'm capable of?'

One of James' most notoriously 'difficult' novels, this is a tour de force of intrigue, deception, lies, conscience, love and money. In many ways, it's a return to the eroticised economic triangle of The Portrait of a Lady, but this time it's the European lovers with whom we're most aligned, complicating our responses to, and negotiation through, the book. 

In lots of ways there's more 'action' than in many of James' novels, but the real dynamic is that between characters, and within the conscience of individuals especially, perhaps, Merton Densher, the man around whom so many women circulate, albeit for different reasons. Passionately in love with the magnificent Kate Croy (surely one of the great modernist heroines/anti-heroines?), Densher allows himself to be beguiled into a relationship with the young, fabulously-wealthy, and ailing Millie Theale, the 'dove' of the title. Like Isabel Archer before her, Milly has an American innocence that clashes with the guile of her European friends, and her desire to live becomes the quest around which so much of the book revolves.

Make no mistake, James' prose is at its most labyrinthine and Latinate in this book, occasionally tipping over into obscurity - it forces us to read slowly both for syntactical reasons but also to unweave the complex, sometimes contradictory, psychological impulses and nuances of the characters and their conversations. The dialogue, particularly, is tremendous, and the 'big' scenes, especially those between Kate and Merton, are exemplary of James' deep interest in the inner workings of personal psychology. 

This is also (and I'm aware of the oddness of associating this word with James) a deeply erotic novel, but a kind of underground, dark, secret form of eroticism that helps to mark this as a modernist work rather than a Victorian hangover. 

I've docked half a star because there are places where it's nigh on impossible to make sense of what James is getting at - but overall a stunningly complex, thrilling, breathtaking drama that refuses closure but remains satisfying.