Rating: 2/5

From the back cover: 

There's always room for one more--especially at Christmas! 

"A Christmas Marriage" by Dallas Schulze 
They'd had a Christmas wedding and a Halloween divorce. But even after five years, Tess knows she still loves him. So she allows herself one night in his arms. But that one night only makes her want Nick more. As a lover--and now as the father of their baby! 

"Dear Santa" by Margaret St. George 
Amy and Flash know that parents are supposed to live together. Theirs don't. Even though it's almost Christmas, even though mom is about to have a baby. So the children decide to take matters to a higher court--they write a letter to Santa! 

"Three Waifs and a Daddy" by Margot Dalton 
Dr. Sarah Burnard has seduced Jameson Kirkland Fleming IV. Now she's pregnant--according to plan. But she's not going to marry him. Then Sarah and Jim stumble upon three orphans, and Sarah discovers that Ellie, Billy and Arthur have plans of their own. The kids want a mother and a father. By Christmas! 

And my review: 

I was really excited to buy this book. While all of these stories are reissues, I had never read any of them before. This collection includes two of my favorite authors - Dallas Schulze and Margaret St. George aka Maggie Osborne. Also, this book is almost 650 pages long, which means that each story is much longer than the usual novella length you find in anthologies. But I was disappointed. 

"A Christmas Marriage" was just an average, if somewhat annoying read. I felt that the reasons that Tess left were weak. And the fact that she left him without any explanation was terribly childish. If you have fears, then you should discuss them with your husband, not just run out on them. And then, she refused to tell him about the baby - he had to find out himself. I could understand her wanting to know that he came back to her because he loved her, but still, the man had a right to hear that he was going to be a father from the mother of his child. I wouldn't bother re-reading this one. Three stars. 

"Dear Santa" had many of the elements you like to see in a story, but they just didn't feel very well pulled together. I found the heroine's negative attitude towards her pregnancy to be kind of a downer. Yes, I know some women feel fat and awkward, but did the author really have to dwell on that so much? The children were pretty much flat plot devices, not well-rounded characters. Though the reasons that they were getting divorced were valid, I felt that it took the heroine forever to get her head screwed on right. And I wanted to scream at the heroine to stop drinking alcohol during pregnancy! I know this story was written in 1989, but I still find that inexcusable. People knew the dangers, even back then. All in all, this story just dragged, and it was hard to push myself to finish it. Three stars. 

"Three Waifs and a Daddy" I skimmed and skipped. From reading the back cover description, I thought I would find it offensive, and I was right. I don't find relationships built on lies, manipulation, or trickery to be at all romantic. How on earth could I like a woman who tricks a man into fathering her baby? Disgusting! Funny, but if a man was the one tricking a woman into becoming pregnant with his child, women everywhere would be screaming for his blood! How is it okay when a woman is doing it?