Rating: 3/5

Gretchen Brannon is ready for a holiday. Four months before her mother passed away after a very lengthy and draining battle with cancer. So when Gretchen’s best friend Maggie announces that she’s taking a job in Qawi as personal assistant to the Sheikh and invites Gretchen to a week’s vacation, Gretchen jumps at the chance to travel. On the day they arrive, Maggie receives word that her foster-brother has been in a horrible accident and she’s needed at home. Maggie convinces Gretchen to stay on in Morocco, and then travel to Qawi assuming Maggie’s identity and take the job. On her first excursion as a tourist, Gretchen literally runs into Phillipe Sabon, a suave businessman who seems to know his way around. Phillipe hides his identity as the Sheikh of Qawi, and he escorts Gretchen to various tourist spots, and they begin a romance. Phillipe is enchanted with Gretchen, esp. after she confesses to him that her friend had suggested she deceive the Sheikh by taking her friends place. When she is so honest, Phillipe realizes he too must be honest and he confesses that he is the Sheikh and that the job entails his new assistant to pretend to be his lover. Phillipe further confesses that the severe injuries he sustained in a landmine blast have left him impotent and thus the need for the pretense, as the Sheikh must appear to be a virile man.

This was another abridged audio version. And I enjoyed it very much. The narrator did a spectacular job. Gretchen, though naïve is not afraid to explore her desires and once she realizes she loves Phillipe, she’s willing to give her life to protect him. Phillipe is much more than the suave businessman Gretchen bumped into. And as their romance advances, desires long dormant in both of them awaken, much to Phillipe’s astonishment. There are some over-the-top plot devices, however, this is fiction and a bit of fantasy is quite all right if used well, as in this case. Very nice chemistry between Phillipe and Gretchen. I was very pleased with their HEA