Rating: 4/5

Two sickly, arrogant, lonely neglected little children from wealthy families both ten, cousins, live continents apart Mary Lennox in hot, steamy colonial India and Colin Craven, he in rainy, cold, Yorkshire northern England a cripple just before the start of the First World War, they don't even known the other exists but will soon both like to show contempt to servants by yelling at them, while giving orders . Mary is spoiled unhappy and angry her beautiful mother loves parties, doesn't look kindly at the plain offspring , father too busy also helping govern the enormous colony, truth be told they dislike the unlovable girl. Cholera strikes and both parents fall, the little orphan child, is not emotionally attached to either one, and never a single drop of tears is shed...Shipped off as quickly as possible by the authorities, to her uncle Archibald Craven in England, Colin's father owner of an ancient family mansion, ( 600 year- old) Misselthwaite Manor with a hundred mostly unused rooms a decade previously, Mr. Craven lost his wife (Mary and Colin mothers were sisters ) he adored in an accident and never recovered emotionally his face always sad and mournful. The lord of the manor is a frequent traveler abroad, he must get away from his bedridden weak boy, it pains him to look at the pitiful sight and mostly does when Colin is asleep....Mary after a long, boring, escorted sea voyage arrives eventually and lives alone in an isolated part of the mansion, Martha a teenager her servant, the only person she talks to gives information about a secret garden, Mrs. Medlock the housekeeper, like everyone else ignores the unattractive girl and hides her far from others just the hired hands are there, after a quick visit to see her strange uncle he leaves for foreign lands. Poor little Mary, nothing to do but stare at the furniture... exploring the the grounds of the estate the nearby unnatural moors, outside and somehow finds the secret garden... later after hearing again weird wailing sounds, coming through the walls in her room the rather frightened Mary gets up in the middle of the night, down the dark, long , sinister corridors enters an unknown room and discovers a pathetic, depressed boy in bed her cousin Colin that no one mentioned....They become close friends after a few minor disagreements life begins in reality, for the two children at Mary's urging, she gets Colin outside for fresh air, with the help of a third Martha's younger brother Dickon, 12, who animals love, a hidden door , opened showing the eerie, gloomy, mysterious, dying secret garden locked for ten years by Mr. Craven, something dreadful occurred there brave Mary is delighted though, she wants a beautiful garden with colorful roses, live trees, growing plants birds singing and flying bees humming, butterflies floating, rabbits jumping, squirrels climbing, crows cawing brilliant flowers springing up in all sections of the Secret Garden.. and people lying on the green grass, sightseeing looking at the bluest of the blue the sky above. They have hoes the children, let the plowing and weeding begin...A children's classic that can be read and enjoyed by adults, rejuvenation of the human spirit with a simple act of planting a few seeds in the ground, yet more than just exotic flowers coming above the dirt the most precious commodity on the Earth may also spring into existence, life for the soul.