Rating: 4/5

My nanny was named Missus Ryland. As a young English girl, she had been sent by her parents from England to Norway to avoid the War. When Germany invaded Norway in 1940, that plan came a cropper. She married a Norwegian fisherman, Mister Ryland, who moved the family to the United States where he fished and she looked after me. When it came to reading books to me (and teaching me to read before the schools had a chance), she chose texts which were familiar and cherished to her, which meant English children's literature. This is how I came to know and love Dr Dolittle of Puddleby-on-the-Marsh. Missus Ryland would cleverly leave off at a most exciting part of a chapter to attend to other things, leaving me most anxious about what happened next. She converted this anxiety into the motive to learn to read, which I quickly did. We read all of the dozen Dolittle novels but not "Gub Gub's Book" which is a short novel in which the doctor does not appear. The premise is that Gub the pig is writing an encyclopaedia of food. He gathers the other animals in the household by the fire in the evening and reads to them from his work in progress. Tommy Stubbins, Dr Dolittle's human assistant, writes down what Gub Gub says at these readings and his words become the book, which is reduced from twenty volumes to one. The auditors are familiar to readers of Lofting's novels: Polynesia, the parrot; Jip, the doctor's dog; Chee-chee the African monkey; Dab Dab the duck, who is the doctor's housekeeper; Too-Too the owl, who is the doctor's accountant; and Cheapside, a Cockney sparrow from East London. I enjoyed this book thoroughly. I've not read Lofting in a long while and this was a wonderful visit with an old friend. The humour is very dated; it was written in the 1930s. The language is simple; it was written for children. But an adult's enjoyment of the book is greatly enhanced by a knowledge English literature and history, to which there are numerous allusions. It is a clever children's author who also entertains the adults reading aloud to their children.