Rating: 3/5

This collection of folkloric stories from historic and modern-day Tunis, Tunisia, were collected by from three contemporary women from the Beldi or elite class in Tunis by author Monia Hejaiej, who recorded a total of 47 their stories in spoken Arabic and translated them into written English. To be honest, I enjoyed Hejaiej’s introduction and background on women in Tunisia and the reasons behind their story-telling more than I enjoyed the stories themselves. The tales, while full of local color and culture, and sometimes downright risqué, are brief, and often deal with the supernatural and the macabre. In short, they resemble a lot of other cultures’ folklore. Some inspire sympathy for a woman’s lot in this culture; others are just silly. The most important aspect of women’s story telling is that it offers an avenue for women to express themselves in a strict Muslim society that does not allow women to become public figures or professionals. “These tales reflect prevailing moral standards; and yet they display attitudes and explore relationships and practices that are sometimes in total contradiction to social norms,” says Hejaiej. “Women explore alternative subjectivities and depict alternative models through which they speak, expressing a refusal to be fixed by the gendered meanings which their society attaches to individuals. . . . [the stories:] empower women by allowing them to transcend social conventions.” (21). She adds that the tales “provide excellent accounts of the social fabric of the cultural and sexual parameters of the entire society.” Hejaiej gives a short portrait of each of the three women whose tales she recorded. The first narrator, Ghaya, age 60, learned story telling from her grandmother and another professional teller. Ghaya, who always regretted her unhappy marriage and wasted education (she was allowed to go to school, but then kept at home), relates several stories about women, like herself, who were forced into marriages with men they did not love and expected to live a life of domestic duty. Her stories, however, tend toward respect for women’s traditional roles. In her tale “Sabra,” Ghaya describes a dutiful wife whose children are killed one by one by her husband, yet she remains devoted to him. (At the story’s end, we find out he didn’t really kill the children, but he did take them away from their mother until they were adults. For this, she is supposed to be admirable for staying faithful to her husband, then living happily after with him and the grown-up, married kids). The second narrator, Sa’diyya, 55, still illiterate because her uncle-guardian thought it shameful to send girls to school “to be raised by male foreigners,” also was unable to marry a man she loved, but finally married a 70-year-old widower. Her stories give artistic shape to her painful life. She depicts heroines who seek sexual fulfillment, break social barriers, and surrender to impulsive passions. The third narrator, Kheira, 62, went to school wearing a veil and accompanied by a servant until puberty, then was confined to home “for her protection.” She decided never to marry, and to dedicate herself to a religious life. (She has made four pilgrimages to Mecca and hopes to make seven). Kheira’s stories suggest resignation to Fate and God’s will, and are more complex and phantasmagorical, but her heroines generally have happy marriages. “Reality is depicted as harsh and wearying for most women; fantasy is common on their stories as a compensation and an escape from the unbearable,” Hejeije states. “Women are confined, but not in their imagination” (60).