Rating: 5/5

The reviewer's sisterhood who belong to WV have rated this book high, understandably so. But I am an Indian reader and totally alien to the settings of this story. I can assure you all that I loved the book too!

Its not because its sheer literary genius, or a very original story, or even a mind blowing passionate romance. It is a perfectly structured story, well carried out with smooth scenes, clearly visualized characters and a good dose of melodrama. The romance is not bad either. Its written more or less like a movie script.

I haven't read this author's works before. I am impressed. I don't know about her writing credentials but this work of hers I loved. Looking forward to reading more of her work.

Coming to the tale itself, its quite simple really. A rich mine owner is at the verge of bankruptcy, his mining business is going kaput over some safety regulations. So he wants to find a salvage buyer who will help his business tide over. He narrows in on the hero and his large mining corporation. The heroine is his daughter, Glenna.

Glenna is a nature lover, writer and her dad's darling daughter. She can see how the business trouble is slowly killing her dad. So she proposes a direct appeal to the hero for help, instead of going to through formal business channels. 

Her dad's appeal fails. Jett, the mining tycoon hero makes a simple, logical business decision that the buy out is not viable. 

So she decides on a more persuasive, personal campaign to convince him! They have bumped into each other a couple of times before and she can see he is attracted to her. She devices a brilliant plan of seducing him into agreement. The seduction works, they get into bed !!

But before they go through with it, she feels shameful at her cheap stunt. He knows he still cant jeopardize his company. So they back off. And she flees in humiliation.

In an unforeseen twist, the loss of property and assets that should have broken her father, actually seems to bolster him into living a newer, simpler life !! He is totally kicked up about selling off all their unnecessary holdings and taking up a small cottage. Glenna gets a full time job. And the reboot works admirably for both of them.

Only hitch being, she is pining for the guy and realizes she has burnt her chances with him by demeaning herself once. The hero is also away from her for a while just to let things cool down.

After a few months, he comes looking for her. And sees their reduced status, feels a bit guilty. He offers the manager's job to her dad. But the man is happy he got rid of his burden. He recommends the job be given to the OM, Bruce.

This guy Bruce is her father's right hand man at the mine. He is sweet on the girl of course, has been for years. But after her encounter with the hero, Bruce can see the girl is visibly changed. The girl adores the OM, but as a friend. How insulting for the poor guy !

When the hero lands up at her doorstep months later, within minutes Glenna is in his arms. And Bruce walks in to witness the cozy cuddle. The tension between the hero and the OM is well presented by the author.

A grand climax scene acts as a fitting close to the tale. A blast in the mine, Bruce is one of the men trapped. Heroine is sick with worry, hero feels eaten up with jealousy seeing her state. But keeping all emotions aside, the hero and the girl's dad mount an elaborate rescue operation, and succeed.

All is well. Both the men are trying to be gallant and offer the girl to the other. But Bruce wins the hand over scene, though he has lost the girl. After uniting the happy couple, he walks away with dignity.

It is rather difficult to maintain a sense of urgency and drama in a tale when there are no negative characters. This story has a loving father, a charming OM, a lovely heroine and a gorgeous hero! But still the tension is there, the drama is there. Lovely writing.