Rating: 5/5

Loved it! Feeling like I lived through WWII in Rumania and Greece. This book works on three levels--you're seeing world history unfold, you're also getting to know the friends and colleagues of this young, newly married couple, and you're watching how their marriage plays out. It really doesn't get better than this. The book felt to me like it must be highly autobiographical, it felt very real. If Olivia Manning had been a man and this book had been written about a male protagonist, it would have gotten far more attention and probably be on all the 100 best book lists. My favorite thing? The relationship between Guy and Harriet--it is so spot on believable. In fact, I could really identify with Harriet and I could see so much of my own husband in Guy. Weird. But ALL the characters are so well drawn. Yakimov provides a lot of comic relief. AND there is so much to learn about what it's like to have to keep on living even when the world is turned upside down by war, and one has no idea what the future holds. How can I convey the brilliance of this novel? 

some quotes:

about Guy:

"She was annoyed at the same time, seeing his willingness to have Sasha here as a symptom of spiritual flight--the flight from the undramatic responsibility of to one person which marriage was."

"And yet, watching him as he sat there, unsuspecting of criticism or boredom, an open-handed man of infinite good nature, her heart was touched. reflecting on the process of involvement and disenchantment which was marriage, she thought that one entered it unsuspecting and, unsuspecting, found one was trapped in it."

"those who give too much are always expected to give more, and blamed when they reach the point of refusal"

"He did not recognize emotional responsibility and unlike emotional people, he was not governed by it."

"She had once been ambitious for Guy, but saw now the truth of the proverb that the children of darkness were wiser than the children of light. Guy, with all his charity, would probably remain ore or less where he had started."

"If Guy had for her the virtue of permanence, she might have the same virtue for him. To have one thing permanent in life as they knew it was as much as they could expect."

falling in love: "their sense of likeness astonished them. It resembled magic. they felt themselves held in a spellbound condition which they feared to injure. Although she could not pin down any overt point of resemblance, Harriet at times imagined he was the person most like her in the world, her mirror image."