Rating: 4/5

* Comments matter a whole lot more than clicks and are why I write publically.

Every Margaret Laurence book reaches our empathy with anecdotal feelings. Even more memorable is exquisite wielding of language and unusually apt ways of conveying everything. I do not mean wordy. I relish among her attributes, the colloquialism of my Mom’s 1950s girlhood. Hearing our idioms is a Canadian’s joy. Margaret occupied the topmost calibre of skill: intelligent observations, elegance, and vividly rich tableaux of settings and meanings. I can picture her environments and there is humour so funny, I will be sure to quote it!

I need not picture everything. Her Wemyss Grandparent’s home, modelled for “A Bird In The House”, is in Neepawa. Better than imagined is this novel’s light nature. Were it not for one unhappy dog story, I would herald it with five stars. The titular bird came out okay! I like these 1970 personages more than those of “The Stone Angel” but that 1964 novel was more poignant.

Clara Thomas in “The Manawaka World Of Margaret Laurence” described a sour Grandfather. Have you noticed most protagonists are alone in their trials, which creates desperation? Vanessa’s Dad was alive for half of the novel and Grandmother a bit less long. Her Grandfather was merely rude. Her parents were loving and her Mom too, had a Sister with whom to commiserate.

Keen at connecting details, I see the Manawaka heroines’ timeframes. Hagar’s Father was a town pioneer. Vanessa is 1940s peers with Rachel &amp; Stacey of “A Jest Of God” &amp; “The Fire-Dwellers”. Morag, of the remaining book for me to read, grows up hearing about people those three teenagers knew. Here are scenes I laughed about heartily!

“I went to Sunday school, where there were red chairs that resembled kindergarten furniture and pictures of Jesus surrounded by a whole lot of well-dressed kids whose Mothers obviously had not suffered them to come unto Him until every face and ear was properly scrubbed”.

“Grandmother MacLeod, face as rigid as a cameo, brought her hands together.
Ewan, if that half-breed youngster comes to Diamond Lake, I’m not going.
I had trouble stifling my urge to laugh, for my Mother brightened visibly and quickly tried to hide it!”