Rating: 5/5

The Menendez case was one that captivated thousands of people here in Los Angeles and the rest of the country in the early 90's when it occured. Today more than 20 years after the brual killings of Kitty and Jose Menendez this case still has a fascination in Hollywood. There were numerous movies and documentaries made on the Menendez family. What was it that caused 2 handsome, rich young men to brutally murder their parents? From the outside looking in it seemed like Erik &amp; Lyle had it all: looks, money, cars, friends &amp; bright futures. However, this was all a facade. They were handsome, were rich and had the nice cars. But the one thing they did not have according to them that they craved the most above all was the love of a father. 

During the trial the Menendez brothers talked about sick perverse child molestation they endured at the hands of their father, while their mother seemed to never notice or would turn the other cheek. One reading this book can easily sympathize with Lyle &amp; Erik as they describe the twisted things their father would do to them. At the same time, one can also wonder if they are telling the truth at all. Yes, their father Jose was known to be hard on his sons and would "buy" out their problems at school and with the law. But was it really true that behind this strict, father was a child molester? We will never know. 

I personally do not know if what Erik and Lyle said about their parents, their father in particular is true. I have looked at numerous videos during the trial when they both break down and cry describing the molestation. I do sympathize greatly with them if this was the case. However at the same time the killings of their parents are not justified. 

This will be a case many will continue to read up on. I know that I will continue to read more follow up books on this case. I find it very interesting how the minds of these 2 young men worked when they commited these crimes. I read that Erik got married to a woman while in prison and she till this day will vouch for him as being a warm hearted man..... I am not sure if that is really true, after all would you consider a man who killed his parents warm hearted?.....Probably not!