Rating: 3/5

Juliet has a wonderful (and challenging) job and a wonderful (and challenging) daughter. Sometimes the two don't mix very well. She's an attorney, and right now she's defending a man suspected of fraud - and one of the witnesses for the prosecution is none other than Blake, the father of her eight-year-old daughter Mary Jane. For the last nine years she's avoided Blake - not hard to do in a city the size of San Diego, especially considering he was living abroad for several of those years. But after her client commits suicide and leaves behind information that suggests Blake may have been involved in the fraudulent dealings, Juliet feels she has no choice but to take his case and try to prove him innocent. Spending so much time together reminds Blake and Juliet about the passion that raged between them on that one night nine years ago. But things aren't easy - Blake's petrified that he's going to end up spending years in prison, and Juliet's finding that her loyalties are split between the precocious Mary Jane, who's used to their man-free life, and Blake, who has no idea that he's a daddy.

I've been noticing a trend with the Tara Taylor Quinn books I've read lately. I really love the family settings, greatly enjoy the heroines, quite like (but am not especially attracted to) the heroes - and can totally take or leave the romance. Which is a bit odd, considering these are romance novels.

In this, as in a few other Quinn books I've read, the romance takes a distant second place to the plot, although it doesn't feel almost nonexistent as it did in A Child's Wish. While both hero and heroine seemed like nice people with a whole lot of attractive qualities, the attraction between the two felt a little flat. When they finally admitted their feelings for one another, it seemed to come out of nowhere.

However, the family portrayals are both touching and convincing. The relationship between Juliet and Mary Jane, in particular, felt very lifelike (and quite a lot like my childhood relationship with my own mother). I was a little surprised that Mary Jane was so dead-set against meeting her father, or having him even know about her (don't most kids want to meet their fathers, if they never have?) but I enjoyed the progression of their relationship after they finally did meet.

3 - 3.5 stars, I guess. A hard one to rate, since I enjoyed it a lot while reading but it didn't really stick with me.