Rating: 4/5

My Film/Book comparison for Cruella
—
I read this for the above. I wanted to see how Cruella was changed in this film adaptation.
—

This is a great book for preteens, it teaches traditional values about marriage, parenting, and empathy towards animals. As you probably already know it's a story about dogs being rescued from a villain trying to turn them into fur coats. It has a happy ending, Christian-friendly themes, and a fairly active and well-constructed plot that makes me think it's good story for children to read. It's sometimes tense but never scary or frightening (scenes often involve things like dogs almost being discovered by Cruella).

Given that it was published in England in 1956, it's socially progressive in showing alternative marital norms, a strong female antagonist, and keeping a relatively subtle religious tone. That said, it's espousing traditional values in quite an open-minded way, and most importantly, teaching children to be inquisitive about animals. The only human that can talk to dogs doesn't talk to them with words, which is interesting, as I also don't talk to my dogs with words and find it does lead to closer communication. It at least gives children the insight that perhaps dogs have their own language and so it doesn't make too much sense that they should understand our language without us also paying attention to their own language.

I think the role of marriage is fairly explicit. The opening pages mention how the Dearlys took the husband's surname, the dalmatians took the father's surname (although the mother commonly uses her maiden name), the stewards kept their surnames (Cook and Butler), and Cruella De Vil made her husband take her surname. It's hard to tell whether Smith is condemning women who make their husband take their surname, but later in the story one of the parent Dalmatians says that the only difference between Cruella and her husband was strength — both were evil.

The role of parenting is also fairly obvious. Pongo (the father) shows bravery in learning how to protect his pups by doing things he has never done before with confidence. Missis (the mother) shows care in keeping track of her pups, saving Pongo, and while making many mistakes always showing good humour and compassion. While these fall into tropes of provider/carer roles, it's done in a very natural, open-minded, mature way that I think gives good ideas to young readers. The dogs are anthropomorphized so much here it is easy for children to relate to them.

I feel one review here has excessively criticized the use of 'Gypsy' and 'Romany' as terms in this book. The passage makes no negative connotations about these animals, only in that they and their dialect originate from elsewhere. While these words may now be derogatory, given the book is from 1956 and the context and brevity of the passage, I would not at all worry about children normalizing now-derogatory terms from reading this. 

The Christian themes mightn't be welcome to everyone, but I'd like to stress that they are really relatively subtle. At a point where the dogs are cold, they briefly find warm refuge in what they don't recognize to be a Church. At the end of the book one of the dogs fondly remembers being in the Church. I would guess that a third children reading this book might not even realize it is a Church, or see the metaphor of salvation, because there's nothing explicitly mentioning these things. The religious message is small in comparison to the biggest 'moralizing' or 'preachy' sentence in the book, which was that children who do not know dogs might not be 'good' children — I've explicitly quoted this line in the updates I've made for this review (which you can see if you click on this review).

 
—
Key points about Cruella:
-She burns when bitten, which is why they did not bite her.
-She tastes of pepper when bitten.
-She owns no dog coats, and never has skinned a dog as far as we can tell.
-She drowned 44 Persian cats for furs.
-Many of her coats have not been paid for, and are owned by her husband (furrier), who becomes bankrupt and decides to make plastic coats in the future.

—
I read this for context as a primer for watching the recent film adaptation — Cruella. Still haven't seen it yet so I'll get back to comparing it later.