Rating: 5/5

Newton’s Principia, famed for its difficulty, must be oftener cited than actually studied. Indeed, anyone approaching the masterpiece through the old Andrew Motte translation of 1729, as revised by Florian Cajori in 1934 – long the sole edition available in English – as did this reviewer over a decade ago, would be apt to find it off-putting. The bulk of the Principia consists of solutions to abstruse problems, such as to find the ellipse which is tangent to five given lines. All this can strike one as almost perversely opaque. Newton does not define his terms and launches into complicated geometrical constructions without explaining what he is doing. He asserts without proof properties of the ellipse that can take a page of algebra to derive. The modern reader will frequently find it easier to rederive his results for himself rather than to try to puzzle out Newton’s arguments. 

Clearly, there ought to be a better way. The great works are learned most profitably from the original, where one has the context to help one to appreciate what the author does and why – and this comment applies no less to natural science than it does to literature. Therefore, the authoritative new translation of Newton’s Principia undertaken by the renowned historians of science, I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman, comes as long overdue. Compare with the Cajori translation? It is hard for one insufficiently versed in Latin to judge which might be truer to the original, but Cohen and Whitman describe in their introduction the great lengths they went to, as professional historians of science, to ensure that the terminology they use is precise, consistent and scientifically accurate. Thus, their version is probably more reliable, however much its literary quality may suffer in consequence. To a fluent speaker of the language, their English suppresses archaisms and strikes one as erring rather to the side of being too simple. But who cares about Newton as a prose stylist? His scientific ideas are what ought to matter.

Cohen also outfits this edition of the Principia with an extended 370-page guide that comments on all aspects of the work, from its origins and the circumstances leading up to its publication to a detailed commentary on individual hard-to-understand propositions. Perhaps most useful are the sections covering general aspects of the Principia (chapter three) and some fundamental concepts in it (chapter four). Here, Cohen’s unsurpassed erudition is put on display, deployed not so as to overawe the reader but to help him find his way from an exposure to the modern curriculum back into Newton’s mindset. Chapter five on axioms, or the laws of motion, is excellent as well. As for the rest of the commentary, it can be invaluable for rendering old-fashioned notation into terms a modern reader can recognize.

A guide to what one can get out of the text by skipping the pointless exercises, which appear to be designed mainly to exhibit the author’s ingenuity but which are of little relevance to the impact of Newton’s work. For they have been superseded by the calculus anyway, whereas the physics itself continues to have lasting import. Focus on the logical flow. Book I starts with definitions and axioms, or the laws of motion, and proceeds to demonstrate several elementary propositions, such as the parallelogram of forces, parabolic free fall and motion under centripetal forces. The later sections of Book I descend into a welter of particular but not intrinsically very interesting problems that illustrate the general theory.

Book II continues in the same vein by taking up a series of problems concerning motion in a resistant medium. Thus, what everyone rightly deems the supreme accomplishment of the Principia is postponed to Book III, entitled the System of the World. Here, Newton begins by stating the phenomena and reproduces tables of astronomical data. Then he proceeds to their theoretical interpretation in a series of propositions that apply the general theory to the case of celestial mechanics. Here is where the celebrated law of universal gravitation is inferred from the phenomena. Later sections in Book III become more problematic and demonstrate the sweeping scope of Newton’s classical mechanics by solving hitherto-perplexing riddles concerning the geographical variation of the gravitational force at the earth’s surface, the tides and the lunar theory, and comets.

What may we say about Newton with a view towards Kant? Newton appears to resemble more Kepler or Descartes, viz., to be primarily interested in explaining a variegated assemblage of puzzling phenomena in the physics of his day and not so much in system-building for its own sake. For instance, he declines to define space and time, seeing as, in his view, they are sufficiently well known. Kant tends to the opposite extreme, the system-builder par excellence.

The six-page general scholium tacked on to the second edition of 1713, however, deserves close scrutiny. For here, Newton (after discarding Descartes’ vortex theory) unveils the theological motivation behind his researches. At the time, unlike today, theology and natural science were allied subjects and the great figures of the early modern scientific revolution, all of whom were deeply religious (each in his own way), felt no need to conceal their theological views in print. Kepler is a born mystic who manages to overcome imprudent enthusiasm to attain to a mature contemplative attitude late in life (let us refer to our reviews of two of Kepler’s minor works, here and here). Descartes institutes his revolutionary turn to the subject and to rigorous method because he genuinely wants to put religious conviction on a sounder basis; as anyone who has read his meditations on first philosophy knows, what drives him is a vision of the divine perfection and it is here – only here – that he alights upon something that is objective and that must originate from outside his own mind, on which to anchor his certainty. One could go on and analyze the religious attitudes of other major seventeenth-century figures, though here is not the place. But what about Newton himself? It will be well to stick to the text of the general scholium and not to bring in what else one knows about his lifelong preoccupation with alchemy and biblical prophecy, for thus we stay with what Newton wants the public to understand about his religious views. To quote his own words:

This most elegant system of the sun, planets and comets could not have arisen without the design and dominion of an intelligent and powerful being….He rules all things, not as the world soul but as lord of all. And because of his dominion he is called Lord God Pantokrator [παντοκράτωρ]. For ‘god’ is a relative word and has reference to servants, and godhood is the lordship of God, not over his own body as is supposed by those for whom God is the world soul, but over servants. The supreme God is an eternal, infinite and absolutely perfect being; but a being, however perfect, without dominion is not the Lord God. For we do say my God, your God, the God of Israel, the God of Gods and Lord of Lords, but we do not say my eternal one, your eternal one, the eternal one of Israel, the eternal one of the gods; we do not say my infinite one, or my perfect one. These designations do not have reference to servants. The word ‘god’ is used far and wide to mean ‘lord’, but every lord is not a god. The lordship of a spiritual being constitutes a god, a true lordship constitutes a true god, a supreme lordship a supreme god, an imaginary lordship an imaginary god. And from true lordship it follows that the true God is loving, intelligent and powerful; from the other perfections, that he is supreme, or supremely perfect. He is eternal and infinite, omnipotent and omniscient, that is, he endures from eternity to eternity, and he is present from infinity to infinity; he rules all things, and he knows all things that happen or can happen. He is not eternity and infinity, but eternal and infinite; he is not duration and space, but he endures and is present. He endures always and is present everywhere, and by existing always and everywhere he constitutes duration and space. Since each and every particle of space is always, and each and every indivisible moment of duration is everywhere, certainly the maker and lord of all things will not be never or nowhere. [pp. 940-941]

We know him only by his properties and attributes and by the wisest and best construciton of things and their final causes, and we admire him because of his perfections; but we venerate and worship him because of his dominion….For all discourse about God is derived through a certain similitude from things human, which while not perfect is nevertheless a similitude of some kind. This concludes the discussion of God, and to treat of God from phenomena is certainly a part of natural philosophy. [pp. 942-943]

There is something impressive, if not exactly resplendent about Newton’s austere piety in which obedient submission to God’s dominion figures far more prominently than love, the very word Newton studiously avoids – perhaps it reflects the ideology of absolute state power popular in England after the Reformation and Henry VIII’s Act of Supremacy of 1534. For Newton does not, after all, believe in the God of scriptural revelation but inclines rather to the Arian heresy, then undergoing a revival among intellectuals – what is consistent with these passages from the general scholium. As the second passage quoted above indicates, for Newton dominion is not a mere theoretical term; he views it as providentially active in ensuring the continuance of the world, which repeatedly threatens to veer off course due to the accretion of unavoidable perturbations. Thus, in his view, dominion can be a proper subject of natural philosophy, in as much as God’s providential ordering of the world can be discerned from observation (at a high level). Who imposes the restriction that physics can be about only low-level instrumental readings and not proceed to higher-level inferences therefrom? In everyday life, one interacts all the time with other entities and persons who, strictly from sense perception represent high-order constructs by which we render our experienced world intelligible. Nobody is a solipsistic Machian instrumentalist in everyday life! Newton, therefore, regards it as being unproblematical to go one step further and to entertain the possibility of observable action by angelic spirits or divine providential intervention into the course of worldly affairs.

One wonders what Newton would make of the argument to design from fine-tuning of the parameters in the standard model and concordance cosmology – one could construe this as a modern-day enterprise very much in a Newtonian spirit! To close, let us commend Cohen and Whitman for their untiring effort in making the Principia much more accessible to the educated reader of today than it ever was before. For he is now enabled to approach Newton’s masterpiece as a living document that speaks to perennial concerns in the physics of our natural world rather than regard it as but a museum collection of curious Mathematical Tripos exercises, as do Motte and Cajori (who, tellingly, omit the vital general scholium).