Rating: 5/5

Nine different women clinically diagnosed as schizophrenic are interviewed multiple times and in multiple combinations with their family of origin and sometimes extended family members. 

What emerges from these interviews is that the standard psychiatric interview is not sufficient to get a clear picture of who a person is ,the cause(s) of their troubles and how to proceed as regards treatment. It's interesting that 60% of psychiatric drug prescriptions in the United States are not even given by psychiatrists but by general practitioners who spend no more than 15 minutes with a patient. However, these interviews demonstrate clearly that even the 45 minutes or 50 minutes a psychiatrist will privilege a patient with is not nearly sufficient.Perhaps the most fascinating part of this book for me was how many subtle and seemingly subtle ways in which parents can create serious mental problems in their child generally unbeknownst to the parents through their behavior. Sometimes, the parents are simply repeating what they themselves got from their parents.Education and status doesn't necessarily confer less problems which points to the real problems of hyper specialization that exists in our world despite it's obvious advantages.

We live in an age run by pharmaceutical companies. They are, by the way, the largest lobbying group in the US. There can be no more unscientific and damaging branch of medicine than psychiatry. Their products are tested for no more than 12 weeks maximum and long-term studies are virtually nonexistent. When this book was written, in 1964, there was a common belief amongst people, including clinicians, that mental issues like schizophrenia are brain disorders or brain illnesses. Almost 65 years later, we have no more proof of that than we did then. But such faulty reasoning persists. Humans need to believe in something. In the past, they had God and religion. Now, we have big medicine(along with so-called scientific thinking generally)and ,in a market economy like ours, GDP is our other God.