Rating: 5/5

Roch Carrier's 1968 novella La Guerre, Yes Sir! (well, at least I personally do consider La Guerre, Yes Sir! to be a novella) was translated from its original French in 1970 by Sheila Fishman (and yes, I did in fact read both the original and the English translation simultaneously for grade twelve French in 1985). 

Now basically but brilliantly, Carrier (and of course by extension Fishman as well), they put with La Guerre, Yes Sir! the tensions between French and English Canada under the magnifying glass, under the lens, where the recurring and constant conflicts and bones of contention are not only based on language, but also on religion, culture and historical resentment (by means of a small Quebec village during World War II, with La Guerre, Yes Sir! thus also taking place during conscription, which historically was particularly unpopular in Quebec, since for the vast majority of Quebecois, WWII was Britain's and Europe's conflict and not their own). So with the above mentioned conscription as the backdrop, La Guerre, Yes Sir! focuses on a Quebec family whose son has just been killed in the war and on a troupe of English soldiers, or rather on les maudits Anglais (the goddamned English) as they are referred to by the villagers (and who represent Quebec in general) who are bringing the body to the parents’ kitchen for the wake, making this young man the first war casualty of the village to be repatriated. And what Roch Carrier has textually ensuing in La Guerre, Yes Sir! is a delightful and immensely readable mix of tears, laughs, fists, tourtiere, and cider, is a fun and engaging story to a point, but La Guerre, Yes Sir! is most definitely an account both entertaining and equally so hugely thought-provoking, both deeply painful and deeply humorous, and also covering issues regarding French and English Canada that are as relevant today as they were in 1968. 

Finally, I also have to say that Sheila Fischman has done a simply superb job translating Roch Carrier's French text, and I totally appreciate that she has made the decision to leave the humorous prayers the villagers make and the Roman Catholicism based curse words, the many religious themed profanities in French, because indeed, trying to render these into English would in my humble opinion sound at best strangely unnatural and artificial. And La Guerre, Yes Sir! is in fact the heading of both Roch Carrier's original French language story and also of Sheila Fishman's translation, and I sure am glad of that, since the book title itself is already meant to highlight the linguistic divide between English and French Canada and to change this would be to take away part of the fundamental raison d’être of the novel. And therefore, and wonderfully, Sheila Fishman's translation of La Guerre, Yes Sir! thus reads not really like a translation, but more like story in and of itself, and yes, this makes for a totally brilliant textual rendering and also yet another reason why my rating for La Guerre, Yes Sir! is solidly and shiningly five stars (and that I therefore absolutely do very highly and warmly recommend both Roch Carrier's original and Sheila Fishman's translation equally).