Rating: 3/5

I think the most interesting thing about this Valentine's book is that Amy hangs out with both Liz AND Jess, and the Unicorns are nice to Amy throughout, trying to make her over, to hilarious results. Here's what you need to know:

Amy &lt;3 Ken.
Liz &lt;3 Todd.
Jess &lt;3 Aaron.
Two Unicorns &lt;3 two different Peters.
Janet (still) &lt;3 Denny Jacobsen.
Veronica Brooks &lt;3 Todd.

Wait... what?! Who the hell is Veronica Brooks? According to this book, she is SVMS's version of the devil. Snobbier than Lila and (almost) as devious as Jessica, she strives to be the best at everything. Which is a problem, as you know, because Liz is *already* the best at everything. So then she decides to make her mission taking Liz down a couple of pegs. I think we can all agree we've wanted to do that at some point, am I right? So, because of Veronica's machinations, at everybody's first school dance with a date, Veronica whisks Todd away from Liz, Jess leaves Aaron in the dust for Bruce, and so Liz and Aaron end up dancing alone together in the hallway outside the gym. And Aaron kisses her. And Caroline Pearce sees it. Yep. Hence "The Great Boyfriend Switch," because now people assume Liz and Aaron are dating, Jess and Bruce are dating, and that Todd and Veronica are dating. 

Veronica is the only happy one in this situation, because Todd clearly misses Liz, Jess gets sick of Bruce (because he doesn't get sick of Bruce), and Liz can't stand anymore soccer talk from Aaron. When both twins realize how unhappy the other one is, they scheme to put all the original couples back together (and hopefully pawn Veronica off on Bruce). Naturally this scheme involves a twin switch. There is a comical three page scene in which Jess &amp; Liz wait for each other to get dressed so they can each see what the other one will be wearing, but neither of them know that they are both plotting the same thing. At this point they are getting ready for ANOTHER boy/girl dance, which seems like the perfect time for everyone to make up. 

I don't have to tell you that all's well that ends well. Jess apologizes to Todd as "Liz," and Liz apologizes to Aaron as "Jess." And, sure enough, when Jess abandons Bruce to play Liz, Veronica shimmies on up and takes her place. There's also a whole plot with Veronica stealing a locket Todd gave Liz before the first dance, and when Jessica confronts her about it Veronica rips the locket off and vows revenge (this time on Jessica). I'm guessing that's why Jess becomes a "thief" in the next book. It's one of the few SVT books I don't have yet. 

Well, I don't know about you guys, but I'm sure relieved that Jess and Aaron can go back to talking about soccer and cheerleading, Todd and Liz can go back to talking about books and more books, and Veronica and Bruce can go back to talking about themselves (although they never really stopped).

On an unrelated note, Ken is a nincompoop (even Amy says so). 

Quotes:

Liz: This is what I imagine a dormitory's like on Saturday night. 
(How the hell does she know what a dorm is at 12-years-old? I certainly didn't.)

"Jessica felt as if she was riding on an emotional seesaw. Her spirits soared when she realized how much the other Unicorns admired and envied her. But they plummeted when she realized that the only way she could keep up her image was by having Bruce as her boyfriend."
(Personality disorder confirmed.)

"'It's my own fault,' [Jess] thought miserably. 'If I hadn't gone running after Bruce, they never would have gotten together.'

... and on down the same page:

'Elizabeth really stabbed me in the back,' Jessica thought bitterly. 'She's always known I liked Aaron. And she stole him anyway- the first chance she got!'"
(See my commentary above.)