Rating: 2/5

My book group read John O’Connell’s 
  Bowie’s Bookshelf.
 We each decided to read one of the books talked about on the Bookshelf. I chose John Cage’s Silence: Lectures and Writings. My choice of this book goes back 50+ years ago when I was in high school and I heard one of Cage’s pieces-I do not remember which one. As a college freshman, I played a recording of Cage for my existential roommates. They thought it was rubbish. And now I am back to exploring the thought behind his pieces.

I suspect that I really did not comprehend the depth of Cage, so this review may be more about my perception than his writing. I only got about two-thirds of the way through the book. It is a difficult book to read. Both from the conceptual and philosophical perspective presented, as well as from physically reading the material. Many of the essays in the book were lectures given to an audience, almost like a performance. Cage played around with the syntax to coordinate with his concepts of silence and randomness. For example, the chapter I. Changes was written in columns. Each line was to be read at a pace of one per second. When completed, it would be exactly the same length in time as one of his compositions. There were places where only a word or two was on a line or even lines left blank. This was to indicate pauses for silence. Not so much for drama, but in the spirit of randomness. It made for difficult reading.

About the time I listened to Cage, I became a Christian. My world view is different from Cage’s. From what I can tell, Cage did not think there was too much meaning in the world and definitely there was no meaning in music (Music means nothing as a thing). He used music as a catalyst to other things. He emphasized randomness and silence, not as a brief interlude but as foundational. At each turn, the path which Cage would choose would dehumanize the performers, the listeners. They were expected to be mechanical in nature, not adding their own artistry.

At one point in my notes, I wrote it seems like Cage is doing the opposite of what God did in the Genesis story. According to Genesis, God put his spirit into humans. Cage wants to remove any spirit from the music.

If you are a follower of modern music, Cage or philosopher, then this book is probably a worthwhile read. For the rest of us, I would keep a bottle of aspirin by your side, just being careful not to overdose on it.