Rating: 4/5

I must thank Wodehouse for writing this book - for it was because of this, that I decided to start collecting PGW again.

There is a species of humanity called "sensitivity readers" - their job is to search all old books and purge them of "objectionable" content: meaning, anything and everything that would be deemed offensive any particular section of humanity. Well, against such zeal, I need not tell you that a humorist stands no chance at all. Because, you see, political correctness has no place in satire.

A comedian is a guy who looks at the world cockeyed: and he sees idiots everywhere, from the church to the palace to the country house to the slum dwelling. He is the guy, as Aristotle pointed out, who thinks - and chuckles at whatever he sees.

God knows Plum does offend a lot of people with his writings - but this book is something special, because the plot involves "Negro minstrels". The extended climax comprises Bertie Wooster prowling about the countryside with boot polish on his face, in an imitation of a black person - along with his bete noire, a similarly attired Sir Roderick Glossop, the famous psychiatrist (or "loony doctor", in the author's words). Bertie is doing it to escape from the clutches of the millionaire J. Washburn Stoker, who wants to forcibly wed him to his daughter: while Sir Roderick is endeavouring to entertain the unspeakable son of his fiance. One can hardly blame these people, of course, but one must regretfully say that by today's exacting standards, they are not PC - not by a long chalk.

So when the censors come with their scissors to mutilate these volumes, this book would likely get substantially modified: so much so that the story may lose all its punch, because Bertie roaming around in blackface is crucial to it. Hence the decision to scoop it up now!

Oh, and what else does the book have? Well, it has Pauline Stoker, the millionaire's beautiful daughter; Lord Marmaduke ("Chuffy") Chuffnell, her jealous lover; Brinkley, Bertie's inebriated and violent valet who replaces Jeeves when he leaves the Wooster employ due to disagreement over Bertie's playing the banjolele; Chuffy's formidable aunt Myrtle and her despicable son Seabury; Stoker's equally despicable son Dwight; various excitable parlourmaids and over-zealous policemen... and of course, Jeeves. A non-stop hilarious romp of a story. Read it before it gets "sensitivised"...

... Unless Jeeves can prevent it from happening, of course...