Rating: 1/5

Every so often I come across a clunker of a book -- in this case, a howler of stilted language, improbable events and anachronisms. I'm sure that a lot of research went into this book and the intriguing historical figures and events on which it's based, but it's been wasted by a treatment that's as overloaded and preposterous as the heavy, dark oak furniture and woodwork that's repeatedly invoked in the text.

For any masochist who's thinking about reading the book, here's the briefest of plot lines. Note that this is based on me being able to get through only about 100 pages of a nearly 500-page book. An upright, moral young German, raised in a sophisticated and comfortable bourgeois home the aftermath of WWII, decides to become a theologian because he loves the intellectual challenge. He is not a religious believer. His eyes are opened to both religion and social activism through religion on a one-year program to Harlem. He becomes a resister to the Nazis and decides -- though he's against killing -- to try to kill Hitler before too much damage is done to the German nation-state and the world. He fails (I read the back cover -- oh, and Hitler did go on to do a lot of things instead of being killed by a patriotic German theologian).

The book is loosely based on a real person, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, and it includes many other real people -- Hitler, of course; but also Reinhold Neibuhr, probably the most respected theologian of the 20th century (at least in the US); Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., who became one of the most powerful Black activists in the civil rights era, but by becoming a member of the US Congress (until being forced from office due to multiple scandals); and others. It weaves in such ridiculous things as trips to Harlem to see jazz, where Dietrich wows the crowd with his updated version of a polka, and two theologians and a doctor dressing as hobos so they can infiltrate a dangerous tunnel operation being built in West Virginia.

And then there are the ponderous Latin and German chapter titles, in Gothic typeface, of course.

Enough. Just read something else.