Rating: 5/5

I love, love, love this book! Not a review, just a happy rave!

Verity and Gabriel (well named) - Haven’t loved a couple as much as this one in a while! It’s beyond sweet how their every waking hour, minute is spent thinking about the other (when and if they are not together) - she mooning and sighing, him irate and cussing at her for her not doing what he wants her to do - fall in love with him quickly so that he can propose and get his convenient moc.

Verity, I love for being the sweet, uncomplicated woman that she is. I love her for loving the H like she does - her little dried up spinster’s heart burns fiercely and passionately for him. The way she daydreams about him and lives for the next time she’d see him.
Usually it’s easy to dislike a h who acts doormat-y for her family but this one’s no goody two shoes. She’s just good but not too good. She strongly detests every woman - real or imagined, sight unseen - she thinks the H’s associated with or will be. And doesn’t shy away from saying NO to her stupid selfish sister when it’s most important! 

Gabriel, our fallen angel, I love, adore, wanna crush and squeeze the life out of for being the sweetest fella under that grumpy, growling bearish façade. For not realizing how bad he’s fallen for the plain convenient would-be wife whom he’s maneuvering so hard and inexpertly to fall in love with him. 
I totally applaud and admire his propensity to threaten and intimidate people in the most bully-like manner to get what he wants or especially if they threaten the h - his aunt, his mistress, his cousin, his disloyal servants. He doesn’t hold back, and threatens to destroy them like no H has ever dared to do! Normally the H’s aggression is saved for the h and not the mistress.

The mean, horribly selfish relatives I want to thank for inadvertently pushing these two at each other. 

Best scene - hilariously so - the H trying to manage his house and new servants.

The book does get a bit slow and repetitive at times but overall puts up a very strong show. It’s not angsty in that exact way but is heart wrenchingly sweet!