Rating: 4/5

ONE DOLLAR AND EIGHTY-SEVEN CENTS. That was all. She had put it aside, one cent and then another and then another, in her careful buying of meat and other food. Della counted it three times. One dollar and eighty-seven cents. And the next day would be Christmas.

Why do we give presents to each other, what is their significance? Perhaps they act as tokens to establish or affirm our relationships. Does it mean that our relationships are strong enough at the core that they require these physical emblems to emphasize our kinships? Probably we need to broaden our perspective and need to see it from a radical angle, though the presents represent our care, appreciation, and empathy for others but they also symbolize our desire to keep relationships with particular persons. So, could it be inferred from it that not giving a gift essentially means not wanting to have or continue a relationship? Well, it may not be as much true but our relationships work in an intriguing way, they are like our other daily requirements (such as energy, food, etc.), we need to work upon them regularly to keep them healthy and stimulating.

link: source

What about a perfect gift then? Could there be something like a perfect gift? Don’t we have to consider the various parameters on which it is dependent, economics, society, culture, religion, occasion, behavior, and our nature seem to affect our decisions for the presents? So could we say there could not be any set perfect gift, or could there be, at least in abstract terms. The story by O. Henry- The Gift of the Magi  is an emotional, sentimental but far from superfluousness, inquiry about what could be said to be a perfect gift, through the life of a loving couple-Della and Jim.

As we know that various religions have influenced and direct our decisions for gifting our loved ones. In the same regard, there is a practice of giving gifts in celebration of Christmas in Christianity, it is supposed to be symbolic of the presentation to the gifts by ‘three wise men to baby Jesus. The title of the story alludes to magi which means these three wise men. Della, who like any other person from a middle or lower-middle-class family, finds herself in the dilemma of gifting her husband- Jim- on the occasion of Christmas, she has been working her way out by saving some amount every month to celebrate this particular day, however, to her utter dismay, finds herself with just one dollar and eighty-seven cents to buy a gift for her beloved Jim. The sacrifices she might have made to live this moment with happiness and proud, fail to impress her piggybank to throw up something substantial.

Della desperately tries to make her way out of her existential soup to arrange money for the gift. What could she do, she doesn’t have the fortune of property, wealth, money, and inheritance at her disposal? She has to mend her ways of whatever is available to her, and is there something? The reader is thrown into this intense emotional psychological quandary, the sympathy of the reader oozes out from his/ her heart to commiserate the falling heart of our protagonist Della through metafiction bouts of the omnipresent narrator. 

Eight dollars a week or a million dollars a year—how different are they? Someone may give you an answer, but it will be wrong. The magi brought valuable gifts, but that was not among them. My meaning will be explained soon. 

What follows is a beautiful romantic tragicomedy wherein Della decides to give away one of the most beloved features of herself or in a sense, a part of her body, the intriguing thing is that her husband likes this trait of her personality, more than anything else, is her husband also framing similar sort of sacrifice and surprise for her too? It digresses me to a strange point, in such a closely knitted relationship where we like attributes of each other’s persona, do we really have our solitary right on those facets of ourselves, isn’t it like that those people in such a relationship amalgamates into a coalesced being? 

The omniscient and omnipresent narrator of the story manifests through its vigor and refers to these two loving people as ‘foolish children' but at the same time declares them as wise- the magi, since their relationship is not bereft of love. Eventually, we find that both lovers find themselves in a sort of anti-climax wherein irony of the life permeates through acerbic humor which does not ridicule their intention of gifting, rather emphasizes and accentuates it  to realize that perhaps their pure love is the most prized and perfect gift for them and they must relish it. 

link: source

The prose of the story is simple but the author used the surprise elements of the story with nuanced authority so that the reader always finds her/himself chasing the narrative though he/ she may get the illusion of guessing it, time and again. It explores and examines the themes of irony, love, respect, selflessness, and most importantly the process of gifting. The story ends with the narrator connecting directly with the reader once again, and transforming his view about them to acknowledge that the wisest men, they are magi

It may come across as a straightforward and uncomplicated romantic story to naïve and insensitive eyes but it demands a gradual absorption rather than skimming through the narrative as we say to read between the lines. The tale draws an important conclusion about the morality of gifting that perhaps it is not necessary to buy humungous exorbitant gifts which may cost your fortunes, rather what matters most is the intention of the people behind those gifts and probably in that way the ideal of perfect gift could be achieved, and every one of us irrespective of our social and economical background may achieve it, probably the ultimate way to celebrate Christmas. 

It represents one of the best examples of irony in literature and the author has been able to do justice to portray the irony of life. It is my first story by O. Henry and I thoroughly enjoyed and would recommend the story to everyone who wants to read. 

Of all who give gifts, these two were the most wise. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are the most wise. 

The story could be read at- https://gutenberg.org/ebooks/7256