Rating: 5/5

The Cardinal of the Kremlin
	The Cardinal of the Kremlin by Tom Clancy recounts a fictional story of political intrigue and espionage between the United States of America and the United Soviet Socialist Republic (U.S.S.R.) during the Cold War era. The book is 547 pages long, and was published by G. P. Putnam’s Sons in 1988. The plot revolves around the two nation’s development of a program akin to the Strategic Defense Initiative originally proposed by Ronald Reagan, which was devoted to serve as an aegis to the country in the event of nuclear war. The main characters are Jack Ryan, a United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) counter-espionage data analyst, and Colonel Mikhail Semyonovich Filitov also known as the Cardinal, a highly placed spy in the Soviet Defense Ministry. The Cardinal of the Kremlin is predominantly in the point of view of Jack Ryan, however it does change to encompass Colonel Filitov, the Komitet Gosudarstvennoy Bezopasnasti (KGB) Chairman Gerasimov, and various lower stationed officials. Tom Clancy utilizes characterization, point of view, and setting to present the audience with the full story in a convoluted plot around the clandestine art known as espionage.
	Tom Clancy breaks through the traditional “secret agent” archetype in order to present the audience with memorable and relatable characters. The main character, Jack Ryan, is not a clandestine, silver-tongued agent, but rather a wealthy ex-marine who spends most of his time analyzing data at a desk at the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. Likewise, Colonel “Misha” Filitov is not a dapper young American sympathizer, instead he is an aged Soviet war hero that fulfills a role akin to secretary to the defense minister. With the plethora of spy novels available, Clancy’s characterization of these key figures sets his novel apart. As with any spy novel, The Cardinal of the Kremlin is full of unforeseen plot twists, many of them uncontrollable, and many of them facilitated by these characters themselves. Clancy’s deep and personal characterization allows the reader to understand why characters made the choices that they did.
	The way of espionage is “to know” without allowing one’s enemies “to know”, therefore it would not be logical if one character with a single allegiance knows all of the facts. Tom Clancy expertly utilizes point of view to present readers with the full story in a realistic fashion. Usually, Jack Ryan or a lesser functionary is used to convey the United States’ plans and knowledge, while Misha Filitov or Chairman Gerasimov fulfills a similar role for the U.S.S.R. As is true in reality none of these characters, no matter rank, have the full picture. To remedy this, Clancy uses perspective changes to give the reader the entire story while still maintaining realism. Utilizing point of view in this fashion allows for dramatic irony, however given the context it is usually fairly somber. 	
	The Cardinal of the Kremlin is set predominantly in the Soviet Union during the Cold War. However, Clancy also utilizes various locations in the United States and the Afghan-Pakistani border. Due to the sparsely populated nature of the U.S.S.R., the upper echelons of military and civilian society inhabit Moscow, the capital. This means that most of the state decisions are made in Moscow, therefore the majority of politics and intrigue occur there. At this time the Soviet Union is fighting a war against the United States-backed Muhajideen in Afghanistan and Pakistan. By incorporating this location Clancy is able to add action to the novel, without which he would lose many of his reader’s attention. While much of the political machinations take place in Moscow, the United States, particularly Washington D.C. and New Mexico are also settings. These places are where the United States agents and functionaries meet and voice their thoughts and plans. Whereas doing so in Moscow would be committing the unthinkable. Throughout the novel, Clancy maintains a sense of realism which is continued in the setting as all of the locations were important during the Cold War. 
 	Tom Clancy masterfully manipulates characterization, point of view, and setting to present a realistic espionage novel that shatters typical archetypes. Rather than the common furtive, clandestine, spies who typically inhabit “spy” novels, Clancy’s characters are each unique and resemble an everyday person one may meet. Clancy also makes successful use of point of view in order to present the audience with the full story while still making the book believable. His choice of setting serves both to hold the reader’s attention while not detracting from the other facets of the story. The Cardinal of the Kremlin is an engaging espionage novel that breaks the usual boundaries while still maintaining the sense of realism that is eminent in all of his publications.