Rating: 3/5

A Return to Ringworld
5 February 2020

	So, I enjoyed the original so much that I ended up going on a quest to attempt to locate the sequel, namely because I wanted to find out what happened after the first book. Well, that book certainly exists, and there are a few others as well, and these particular books are set in Niven’s Known Space universe, and as such there are a number of creatures that would be familiar to people who know this setting.

	Well, we once again meet up with Louis, who has become what is known as a wire-head – they are drug addicts, except that are addicted to a drug that would pretty much bankrupt the world’s drug dealers. Basically a device is implanted in the brain and a device known as a droud is plugged into it. Current is then used to drive the pleasure centres of the brain. Needless to say that once you have the device installed, you don’t need to buy anything else (well, okay, electricity, but drug dealers don’t sell that).

	Anyway, this isn’t what the book is about because Speaker with Animals (who is know known as Chmzee because the previous mission meant that he returned with honour and has now been given a proper name) and Louis suddenly discover that they have been kidnapped by another Puppeteer so as to return to Ringworld and collect some more artifacts to return to Known Space. However, when they arrive they discover that something has happened and Ringworld has slipped off of its course and is destined to collide into its sun.

	One of the main reasons for this plot is that a lot of scientists who read the previous book noticed the problem, and all of a sudden Niven found himself being hounded by letters and complaints, so of course the best way to solve this was to write a sequel where this is the actual problem and that the main characters go off to solve it.

	For those familiar with the previous book (and I would highly recommend reading that before reading this book) one of the mysteries was who built this structure. Of course, an answer is given, though of course there is no real hard evidence as to whether this is true or not, unless of course we consider what happens at the end (something that I’m not going to reveal).

	Another thing is that we find ourselves meeting a lot more Ringworld natives, and of course there is Rishathra, which is basically having sex with somebody that doesn’t happen to be the same species as you (though they are still homids). A lot of races practice it, but some of them don’t. In fact, a number of them use this as a means of sealing a contract. The interesting thing that is explored here is that it does not seem possible to cross breed in Ringworld, which is not quite explained but it does suggest that there may be greater differences between the species on Ringworld which prevents that from happening. Anyway, it does happen to be a Sci-fi world, so I guess the creater to do what he wants anyway.

	I did quite appreciate the diversity of the world this time around, especially since a number of rather interesting species were encountered. The other thing is that this time they are searching for the control room, because this would hopefully give the characters the resources to be able to move the Ringworld back into position, and as such prevent it from destroying everything located on it. It is also interesting that this time the world seems to be a lot more populated than it was previously, giving us an idea of how many lives were at stake.

	Yeah, this book wasn’t bad. I’m not entirely sure if I am no going to go on a quest for the next one, though of course if I do happen to come across it then I no doubt am going to purchase it.