Rating: 3/5

To live in a state of fear, according to retired FBI profiler and author John Douglas, is to live with a sense of heightened awareness. Although, he goes on to say, victims of such crimes of stalking did nothing to deserve their perpetual state of terror. But living with a moderate dose of common sense fear is a precursor to living a safer life because that is the way our world and justice system does (or maybe doesn't) work. 

"There is no conflict between civil liberties and victim's rights," he writes. And yet, a crime victim can realistically expect to have his or her image mud-raked by the defence while not having the same "luxury" themselves (on fear of having a case thrown out due to mistrial, or perhaps appealed on those very grounds). Douglas presents various examples from real-life in which it is the accused (and, oft-times, previously convicted felon) whose rights seem to supercede the wounded party.

Douglas makes it clear through his writing that victims cannot always rely on the good sense of law enforcement - in fact, he attributes the syndrome of repeat offenders to the lenience of the American court system and the lack of expedient capital punishment. Victims also cannot dependently judge a person by using the same set of socially-set values that they themselves live by - a stalker, or serial rapist or murderer, or spousal abuser, etc. has a particular obsession that does not abide by any logical standard or legislation. A protective order, while a positive step toward self-protection from a potential attacker, is essentially just a scrap of notarized paper which may even exacerbate feelings of hostility in said victimizer.

And so, Douglas devotes the bulk of Obsession to detailing the basics of self-protection through personality profiling. If a person can only fully depend on their own wits, then best to begin the needed education to fulfill this skill. Though a rape, or attack, or even murder is never the fault of the victim (a point which Douglas makes extremely clear, in so many words), it is every person's responsibility to learn how to best prevent such an attack.

Through tragic anecdotal (and much-publicized cases), Douglas delves into the particulars of a variety of situations, using such tactics to startle a reader into seeing how the criminal mind can work. Each case is different, he says, and deserves individualized attention - but the ultimate goal is to have a library of essential knowledge in one's head which could ultimately protect one's well-being. And the well-being of loved ones.

Certainly, Obsession relies heavily on shock value. The stories given within are genuine articles which have appeared in newspapers all across the country (with the occasional change in details to protect privacy, in certain cases). And the level of detail spares little from the more sensitive reader. However, such examples are necessary (Douglas feels) in order to fully illustrate his points, and to give some level of credibility to his views and suggestions. He was directly involved in many of these cases, and therefore has brought away something which he wishes to share with the rest of the public.

Though arguments can be made against several of his points in this book (particularly his less-than-optimistic view with regards to criminal rehabilitation), Douglas himself presents decisive and pointed evidence to back up his views and concerns. It is a book written with both real-life experience as well as factual evidence - and that alone helps to make his points that much stronger.