Rating: 1/5

I could not finish this book. (My review is based on the first few chapters)

Carroll starts off with the image of the cross that was erected at auschwitz- and how offensive this was/is to the survivors of the Holocaust. He uses this image as a way to start the conversation of antisemitism within Christianity- 

However he then continues to give away that he wants to prove that antisemitism and Christianity can be separated and specifically it feels like its because he wants to feel justified in remaining Christian rather than giving an honest critical history of the church and Jews. - He notes that historical Christianity &amp; the historical Jesus - using historical critical analysis- are not inherently antisemitic- which he makes a decent case for. However, he then randomly loses sight of the entire message with thoughtless comments like the idea that Christianity and Judiasm are like brothers- or even fraternal twins- who both see themselves as inheritors of the promise of Abraham.. This is a terrible way to try and begin removing antisemism from Christianity. Early records show Judiasm to have been in tact possibly in the 9th century BCE, Christianity beginning specifically as a sect of Judiasm in first century C.E. Christianity is founded upon the beleifs and traditions of Judiasm and it fully appropriates the original Jewish scriptures. Christianity did become it's own religion in the first century- but Judiasm was more like a mother or grandmother to Christianity. It feels so weird to try to make them seem like they are two twin branches off the same tree. If I was Jewish Id be so annoyed to hear this.

Also to say that Christians beleive themselves inheritors of the promise of Abraham as equally as Jews feel themselves- wouldn't that then immediately be a reason for inherent antisemitism within christianity?- and in fact it WAS an early reason why Christians broke off from Jews stating that Jews had gotten everything wrong and did not understand their own "bible" (ex. justin the martyr) If Christians beleive themselves correct and are the true inhetitors of the Abrahamic promise whereas the Jews got it wrong- and do not beleive in Jesus. Then will they be in hell and are no longer Gods chosen people? Does that not feel like plausible cause for inherent antisemitism?

In the beginning of his historical critical analysis he posits that it was Rome who was persecuting the Jews and therefore the early new testament writers were influenced to adjust the gospels (especically John) to make the Jews the enemy of Jesus, relaxing pontius pilates role, making Jesus seem less Jewish- and more in support of Rome, distancing themselves from the Jews in order to avoid further persecution toward their sect. 

Jesus was a Jew- who preached to Jews and who practiced Judiasm. Its easy to see why the historical Jesus was most likely not antisemitic- However Christianity IS founded off of these new testament writings so how does it make it better to say that they were antisemitic because they were scared of the roman empire? (There is also much evidence of Christian antisemitism apart from the the persecution of the roman empire)

Finally, I stopped the book when I read, "The essential message of Jesus despite all questions of sources, sayings, oral and written traditions, and situations of gospel composition comes through every aspect of the communal memory with ringing eloquence. That message is love"

How can he possibly say this after starting his book with the image of that cross erected at Auschwitz? With the communal memory of the holocaust and the communal memory of the crusades? As well as his alluding to a historical/critical look at Jesus- all of a sudden he just randomly makes personal claims about the overarching meaning of the scriptures?

Shouldn't the overarching message of love have been clear enough for Christians to have avoided causing genocides and persecution of other religions and people groups? 
 Christians could say that the crusades were really "love" because they were showing people the right way to heaven.. They could say that persecuting the Jewish people and religion is "love" because Judism is a "false" teaching and goes against God. 

It is certainly NOT agreed upon by scholars that Jesus' primary message was love.

It's just so tiring. It doesn't feel like Christianity is capable of saying sorry and admitting to any wrong doing! They always move the needle and try to present a Christianity that isn't like that. Maybe its just like that. It's ok to have been wrong and to just say that you despise your antisemitic past!