Rating: 3/5

This year, while reluctantly commuting the vast distances necessary to continue earning a salary, I've taken to listening to audiobooks, and burn through an average-length novel in under a week. I started out with some rather cerebral works (Pynchon, Faulkner, Doctorow, ...), but as the drive has become more onerous, I've gravitated toward stories that are more action-oriented. Such fiction requires less on the reader's part. It's just diversion. On the other hand I've found that sometimes this kind of writing can be as tedious as the drive it's meant to distract me from. 

I read some Elmore Leonard titles a couple years ago, prompted by a coworker, who was a recent graduate from an English department somewhere. The coworker said Leonard was highly regarded by his faculty. The titles I read then had appeal (here's my review of one), but I wasn't convinced they were the stuff English majors needed to be reading (as compared to, say, the authors listed above).

Anyway, Mr. Paradise turned up in the public library, so I began listening to it while commuting. 

It's a crime novel, primarily involving a collection of guys who are a whole lot tougher than they are smart. The title character is a retired lawyer who made his money defending drug dealers and similar lowlifes and bringing civil suits against the cops who'd arrested them. Not a particularly charming guy, but his money has enabled him to surround himself with servants and beautiful babes (such as Chloe, a Victoria's Secret model and former Playboy bunny). There'd been an understanding that, on shuffling off his mortal coil (an event likely to happen fairly soon, given that he's 84), he would leave his house to Montez, his butler. But now Mr. Paradise has changed his mind. This annoys Montez, who responds by hiring a pair of thugs to whack the old coot. And Chloe too, as it turns out. Also in the house on the fateful evening is Chloe's friend Kelly.

Next on the scene is homicide detective Frank Delsa, recently widowed and scarcely aware at first that Kelly finds him attractive. Kelly's ability to change gears in that way, immediately after seeing her roommate sprawled across the sofa with two bullet holes in her, is the least plausible part of the story. I guess it's the only part that strains credulity. 

Everyone who comments on Leonard novels praises the zippy dialog, and yes it does keep things moving. Another thing I like about this is Leonard's ability to narrate events while dipping into the characters' thought processes enough to flesh them out as convincing characters. I've grumbled a lot, particularly with these action novels, about mere summary narration and two-dimensional characters, but with the possible exception of Kelly I don't see that here. 

On the other hand (and Leonard aficionados in or outside the faculty lounge will surely scoff), an idea at the back of my mind throughout the time I was listening to this was a passage from Philippians 4:8: "Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable--if anything is excellent or praiseworthy--think about such things." I think that's good advice, especially when my own circumstances feel as fragile and off-kilter as they have this year. So I wasn't real comfortable listening to this narrator's somewhat weary rendering of conversations and events revolving around the notion that life is a worthless commodity. 

I've already started another audiobook, which is definitely closer to my taste.