Rating: 2/5

This book took me a very long time to read. My brother passed it on to me over a year ago, and I started it a couple of times but could never stick with it. I finally was able to finish it out of desperation when I moved and had no television or internet or anything better to read unpacked. I really love learning about history, and I love understanding historical events and their significance... i can say that I accomplished one of those two by reading this book. I did "learn" more about the Vietnam War, including its key players and timetable, but I can't honestly say that I fully understand it. I would say that by reading this book, and having a couple of talks with my dad who is a veteran of Vietnam, i probably have about a 50% understanding of how and why the "conflict" took place. 

The book itself was a huge undertaking, spanning over 20 years of fighting in Vietnam. (Between France and North Vietnam, between the South and the North, and between the South and the North with all the other players including the U.S.) It was challenging to follow the author throughout the timeline and keep all the Vietnamese generals and various ambassadors and Secretaries of five different U.S. administrations straight. The author is Canadian, and I believe a little biased against the United States and their involvement. Several times, after reading his commentary about the social climate in the states or the quality of soldiers we were sending to Vietnam, I would call my dad for clarification, and was usually informed that it really wasn't that way at all. For example, I asked my dad if he was surrounded by imbeciles and degenerates who took delight in raping and murdering villagers while stationed in Phu Cat with the Air Force. He said of course not, and that maybe some of Maclear's more depressing statistics came purely from the Marines, not the armed forces in general as he made it sound. So, although I'm glad I read this book and I feel a little less ignorant about the war because of it, I have taken this account with the proverbial grain of salt.