Rating: 2/5

This is one of the weakest books in the Nero Wolfe series. It was published in 1973, after an unusual four-year gap, when Stout was 87 and two years from his death. Uniquely, it is not set in the (then) present day, but explicitly set four years earlier, in 1969. Did this avoid any need to touch on thorny intervening issues like the Vietnam War, race riots, and Nixon? Or was it withheld from publication for years because he or his publisher knew it wasn’t particularly good?

It is also one of the shortest Nero Wolfe novels at 150 pages. Essentially, nothing happens for the first hundred pages. Stout wrote lots of 50-page Nero Wolfe novellas. Was this a novella that he padded out with filler because he needed money or to fulfill a book contract?

Nero Wolfe novels usually contain some interesting observations on contemporary life and this one is no exception. Color television and concern about rising inflation are mentioned for the first time in the series. There is way too much filler about the “Amazin’ Mets” 1969 turnaround season. There is some lame use of hippie jargon for the second time, like Archie calling Inspector Cramer “Mr. Fuzz”. LSD figures (somewhat ignorantly) in the plot and marijuana is referenced several times, including one of Wolfe’s operative’s daughter smoking pot. Bomb making figures prominently (led by Bill Ayers, who would later mentor Obama, the Weather Underground started bombing things in 1969 and three members blew themselves up while making bombs in a Greenwich Village townhouse in 1970). There is a minor sub-plot involving Arab/Palestinian terrorism, which flared up in this period.

The worst misstep involves what Stout calls “Women Lib” being clumsily incorporated for the first time in the series. Wolfe dismisses it with, “That’s merely the herd syndrome. Fad.”. Oops.

There is one high point, when Wolfe finally gets revenge on Lt. Rowcliiff, but the mystery itself is well below Stout’s usual standards. As mentioned, there is no progress for the first hundred pages. The essential clue is only dropped in the last 20 pages. The ending is weak and unsatisfying. This is the first time in the series that Stout has written two flops in a row and it is hard not to think that he is losing his abilities in his late 80s. I have read all of the previous books in the Nero Wolfe series and am very fond of it, but I don't think this one rates any higher than 2.3 stars. Only its immediately predecessor, Death of a Dude, was worse.