Rating: 4/5

Why did Isaac Babel go back? In 1935, he was permitted to leave the Soviet Union to address a writers' conference in Paris, where his wife and daughter were living. Despite pleas to stay, he returned to the Soviet Union; four years later, he was arrested by the NKVD and taken to the Lyubanka, where he was killed, presumably after torture. To understand his decision is to look at the contradictions of his life, the self-censorship. When criticised for his diminished output, he jokingly called himself "a great master of the genre of silence".

Babel was born in the poor neighbourhood of Moldavanka in Odessa. It was the home of the Jewish crime kingpin Mishka Yaponchik, who Babel turned into the character of Benya Krik in short story, theatre and film. As a young writer in Moscow, he met Maxim Gorky, who told him, "it is very clear that you don’t really know anything, but that you are good at guessing quite a lot. What you must now do is go out into the world." Babel listened. His early stories attempt, not quite successfully, to mimic the French and Russian short stories Babel had read; he then signed up with the "Red Cavalry" fighting the Polish-Soviet war of 1920 (the Comintern's first attempt to export Communism, an utter failure) which he fictionalised into a popular series of stories. (Unwisely, since some of the characters whose names he did not change eventually rose to Stalin's inner circle.) He also wrote a series of stories about life in Odessa among Jewish gangsters. After a decade of journalism and travel dispatches in the faltering promise of the new workers' state, he translated Shalom Aleichem and adapted him for film (Wandering Stars), wrote more stories, some autobiographical, and worked on film projects. He was collaborating on Mark Donskoy's famous trilogy about Gorky when he was arrested and declared persona non grata, his name removed the credits and his body disposed of.

Those autobiographical stories (among his best) contain this line (from The Story of my Dovecote):All the men of our clan had been too trusting of others and too quick to take unconsidered action. We had never had any luck in anything. My grandfather had once been a rabbi in Belaya Tserkov, had been chased out of town for blasphemy, and then lived in scandal and poverty for another forty years, learned foreign languages, and started going insane in his eightieth year. My Uncle Lev, my father's brother, studied at the Yeshiva in Volozhin, evaded conscription in 1892, and abducted the daughter of a quartermaster serving in the Kiev military district. Uncle Lev took this woman to California, to Los Angeles, where he abandoned her, and he died in a madhouse among Negroes and Malays. After his death, the American police sent us his belongings—a large trunk reinforced with brown iron hoops—from Los Angeles. In this trunk were dumbbells, locks of a woman's hair, Uncle's tallith, whips with gilded tips, and herbal tea in little boxes trimmed with cheap pearls. The only men left in the family were mad Uncle Simon, who lived in Odessa, my father, and me...[I]n our family I was my mother's only hope. Like all Jews, I was short in stature, weak, and plagued by headaches from too much study.This massive paperback brings together all of Babel's extant work: stories, diaries, sketches, scripts, and plays. Translator Peter Constantine, who has said it was his favourite project, has added explanatory notes, and the book includes a preface by Cynthia Ozick and an afterword by Babel's daughter Nathalie which adds some family history. (She has some fairly shocking claims against Ilya Ehernberg, the Stalinist writer and close friend of Babel.) Babel lived a life of secrets - he had not one but two secret families - while navigating a society increasingly hostile to writers and the truth, one he still seems to have truly believed in - as much as we can guess what was in his heart.

After Khruschev came to power Babel was rehabilitated and celebrated in the Soviet Union and the West. (Red Cavalry came out in English in the 50s with an introduction by Lionel Trilling, and Babel has been cited as an influence by American writers such as James Salter, George Saunders and Denis Johnson). His writing remains powerful, mixing violence and kindness, despair and romanticism, the ability of human beings even in the worst privation to admire the moon through some clouds. As is clear from the multiple drafts in this volume, Babel worked hard to pare down his writing to just the lines needed to convey his point, abstracting a hundred gory details into one incident of black humour. As he puts it in Guy de Maupassant (an astonishingly perfect story)I spoke to her of style, of an army of words, an army in which every type of weapon is deployed. No iron spike can pierce a human heart as icily as a period in the right place.