Rating: 4/5

Stephen King shares his subjective opinions and ideas about horror media (film, television, and novels mostly) and speculates on the reasons why horror has an adult audience, preceding from the assumption that enjoying scary stories is something most adults abandon at some point.

This was a fun, nonfiction book from King and I enjoyed all the recommendations for books and films I hadn’t seen and the breakdown of some of the ones I’ve already enjoyed. 

The television section was the weakest. He didn’t think much of the available horror offerings on television before 1981 and because of this timing, he was too early some great horror television from the ’80s-’00s.

The part I liked best though was his theories on why we like horror. 

I related to his notion that imagination is something that can remain for adults and some of us like to feed our imagination in this particular way, with scary stories. I have spoken to friends who declared that they’d lost interest in horror once they “grew up.” 

“And whenever I run into someone who expresses a feeling along the lines of, ‘I don’t read fantasy or go to any of those movies; none of it’s real,’ I feel a kind of sympathy. They simply can’t lift the weight of fantasy. The muscles of the imagination have grown too weak.”

I also think it makes a great stress coping mechanism for living in this world. 
 “...we make up horrors to help us cope with the real ones.”

As a kid, I started watching horror movies and reading the books to be like the "big kids" and take it as a dare or a challenge but a safe one. “To show that we can, that we are not afraid, that we can ride this roller coaster.” Also, because like a roller coaster, it’s fun

Last but not least, it's a safe way to express your dark side. 

“The mythic horror movie, like the sick joke, has a dirty job to do. It deliberately appeals to all that is worst in us. It is morbidity unchained, our most base instincts let free, our nastiest fantasies realized . . . and it all happens, fittingly enough, in the dark. For those reasons, good liberals often shy away from horror films. For myself, I like to see the most aggressive of them--Dawn of the Dead, for instance--as lifting a trap door in the civilized forebrain and throwing a basket of raw meat to the hungry alligators swimming around in that subterranean river beneath.

 Why bother? Because it keeps them from getting out, man. It keeps them down there and me up here. It was Lennon and McCartney who said that all you need is love, and I would agree with that.

As long as you keep the gators fed.”