Treasure Barrett was a curious girl and very intelligent. She was allowed to go wherever she wished with little restriction due to her curious mind. She spent a lot of time in the library of Squire Darcy Renville. He allowed Treasure inside his house to borrow books any time of night and day and often stayed overnight. Darcy even gave her a room of her own. 
Treasure was known as a thinker and was often called to the homes of others for help in healing. She knew a lot about herbs and healing from the books she had read. Father Vivant was another of her teachers. He was the priest in town. 
Darcy Renville died when Treasure was 17 and his son came to town to take over what he owned. Treasure came to the library late one night to return some books and Sterling Renville came in and accused her of being a thief. He also kissed her and attempted to have sex with her. She hit him over the head with a vase and got out. He was determined to see her punished but the people of the town wouldn't allow it. Sterling was embarrassed by her and was determined to see her punished. She was just as determined to see him punished for his assault on her. 
Treasure was called to come to the houses of many of the townspeople to find out that Sterling had called on them demanding payment for money they owed to his father. They didn't know what to do so they called on Treasure for help.
One of the first things that Treasure did was to talk with the priest. He invited Sterling to their services and Sterling dressed in his finest clothes that he had brought with him from England. He had lived there with his mother since he was 7. Treasure had all the people dress in their poorest clothes. Sterling looked like a silly peacock whose feathers were being singed by the preaching of laying up treasures in heaven rather than on earth. Sterling was so angry at being dressed down by the preacher to notice that he had seen some of the people dressed much better than they were on this day. He was determined to make Treasure pay for the anger he felt.
Sterling spent 4 days collecting what was due from the people who owed his father. Treasure had helped them all to hide the best of their stock and saw that he was given cheese that soon spoiled. She laughed at him trying to catch chickens from trees. Not a single person was evicted from their home. Sterling felt something was off but wouldn't admit to being taken by simple folk. Treasure was at each house to give him some type of proverb about collecting things from folks who had little. He had very little to show for the time he had spent collecting. He got into an argument with his housekeeper who told him that in order to find out why the cheese went bad, he'd have to ask Treasure. He went in search of her and found her bathing in the river. He embarrassed her by sitting on her clothes until she had to come out to get them and a few of the town's young men were there to watch. She vowed that they would be paid back for their part in what they had done. Sterling noticed that the boys seemed genuinely afraid of her. She went home to be plagued by thoughts of Sterling and Sterling was even more plagued by thoughts of what he wanted from Treasure.
Sterling went on collecting what he could from the people while Treasure stayed out of his sight. She continued to have the people dress and act poor. What Sterling was able to collect was varied and not worth much. 
A week after Sterling caught her bathing and the boys of town witnessed her too, she was bathing again. One of the boys returned and was really close to raping Treasure when she got out of the water and was heading to get her clothes. Sterling was furious at his collections that week and was ready to have it out with Treasure. He arrived where Treasure was just in time to stop the rape. He held her until she stopped shaking and comforted her rather than blasting at her. He couldn't stop himself from kissing her. Treasure asked him to make love with her but he remembered what he was there for and stopped. 
The next day, her mother noticed something was bothering Treasure and Treasure told her about the attempted rape. Her mother met with a few of the town's family heads and they decided it was time Treasure married. They decided that the best fit for her was Sterling. They were told that he was going to sell his property and go back to England. They thought that if he married Treasure, he would leave her in the house and go away. Things would go back to normal. They had a party the following weekend and got Sterling drunk. They gave a sleeping potion to Treasure and put them in bed together. They were caught in bed the next morning and forced to marry. Treasure's parents locked them together in Sterlings bedroom and they ended up first fighting and then making love. Sterling was already hurt from being beat up to force the marriage. Treasure hit punched him in his face due to his comments. He woke up mad the next morning because he had wanted to annul the marriage. He packed up to leave, convinced that Treasure had arranged to marriage. At the last minute, he took her with him to Philadelphia. She was put in her own room and when she came down to dinner, she overheard Sterling comparing his marriage to her as being yoked with a pig. She ran off and it took until the next day for Treasure to be located. He took her to where he was staying, with a college friend and lawyer, Wyatt Colbourne, and had sex with her again in her room. Sterling had asked Wyatt for help in getting an annulment and Wyatt told him that there was no way that was going to happen due to him sleeping with her.
Sterling took Treasure to England with him and met his father and sister-in-law. Sterling had planned on returning to England and marrying Larenda. Everything Sterling did, he did with profit in mind. Larenda had an inheritance he wanted and his uncle's title. That wasn't going to happen now and he tried to resent that. He knew he was falling in love with Treasure but did his best to stay away from her. He told her that her continuing to help people as she did was an embarrassment to him. Treasure tried to stop but often found she couldn't. Sterling left to London and Treasure was hurt because she wasn't told and he was gone for a few months. Treasure grew fond of his uncle and Larenda. She was worried that Larenda would be hurt but she found out that Larenda was actually happy for her. She didn't really want to marry Sterling but it seemed to be expected of her. 
Treasure discovered that Sterling was a lot like his father, the squire in the colonies who taught her. He just didn't know it or want to admit it. He resented his father for not being a part of his life. He overheard some conversations between his uncle and Treasure and found that out. He fought with everything he had to not be like who he thought his father was. There was a lot that his uncle didn't tell him about his father. 
Larenda took Treasure shopping for clothes and taught her how to be acceptable to London society. Sterling was surprised at the changes when he returned from London. He accepted invitations to people's homes and balls now. She still embarrassed him at times but he was a little more tolerant. He was still trying to find a way to make money and Treasure decided to help him find a future. She met Benjamin Franklin. He spoke to her about having Sterling work for America and help the new country fight the French and embargo's on trade with England. Sterling had an ability to make profits out of things that others couldn't. 
Larenda was being pursued by Sterling's cousin and he wanted Larenda for her title. She didn't like him and he tried to force her into marriage. One of the times he was going too far with her, Wyatt stepped in and pulled him off of her. He kissed Larenda and she liked it. She tried to get him to kiss her again but he refused. He told her that he was too much of a gentleman and he was not titled. Sterling got involved in helping Wyatt break up a trade embargo. Part of how they worked around it and getting Larenda out of the clutches of the cousin was to have her pretend to be engaged to Wyatt. She pursued Wyatt until he had little choice but to give in to Larenda. She told him that she didn't care about the title or that he lived in America. She was willing to leave England. 
The work Sterling and Wyatt were involved in with the trade embargo ended up being questioned by the British government. Sterling wasn't punished because he had no money to invest in the work he was doing. Benjamin Franklin came to the hearing and told stories about Sterling that put him in a bad light. Benjamin did it on purpose because he wasn't well liked in England and he felt sure that the judges would let him off if Benjamin didn't like him. 
The British Prime Minister was at the hearing and called Sterling into his office the next day. He told Sterling that he felt that he would be a good representative for England in the colonies to get the Americans to pay taxes and for a portion of the expense of the British fighting the French to protect the colonists. Sterling was happy to accept the job and the payment offered. 
Treasure was thrilled and Sterling came back home to find Benjamin explaining why he had acted like he did at the trial. He wanted Sterling in the colonies to help the Americans make money from what they had. Treasure was going to be able to go back home. She was thrilled that she could go home and see her family and friends. Sterling had taken her without her having had a chance to tell them all good-bye. 
Things had changed while she was away. The people of Culpepper had learned to do things a little more on their own. Treasure was still needed but not quite so much. She was 4 months pregnant when she arrived home. 
Larenda and Wyatt were in the colonies too so they had friends to visit and more to make. Sterling had learned to accept that fact that he was a genuinely nice guy. He had fought it all his life but Treasure taught him to accept who he was. They were a lot alike and got along well. 
Treasure and Larenda each ended up for four boys apiece and Treasure had a little girl they named Modesty. She was just like Treasure and often wandered off on her own and ended up okay when she was finally found.