An accomplishment of failures. Snippets of poems, social theory, literary criticism, and art critique that eschew classic forms and structure. This novelty and rebellious is my favorite aspect of the book because it allows one to consider what writing is differently. As Sontag wrote on the writing of Artaud-- "all amount to a broken, self-mutilated corpus, a vast collection of fragments. What he bequeathed was not achieved works of art but a singular presence, a poetics, an aesthetics of thought, a theology of culture, and a phenomenology of suffering" (from Under the Sign of Saturn). I appreciate that the collection opens with a correspondence between Artaud and the well-respected filmmaker and critic Jacques Rivette becasue it allows insight into how Artaud viewed himself as an important rebel who refused to conform his ideas to a more consumable and clear form. "All I ask is to feel my brain" he writes. Throughout the anthology that ensues, the narrative voice reflects an individual alienated from society but also alienated from his own consciousness. His mental and physical deficits becomes, directly or indirectly, the dominant, inexhaustible subject of his writings. As interesting as this is to consider, for me they were exhausting to read. All his writing is in the first person, and is a mode of address in the mixed voices of incantation and discursive explanation. I would read the work in very small fragments and took long breaks before returning. I loved thinking about what Artaud was doing and appreciated many of the ideas put forth (each fragment seems to have a thesis) and yet found the reading experience very strenuous. Many of the sentences were borderline indecipherable. The struggle he is trying to negotiate within himself (mind is body and body is mind in way that clashes rather than harmonizes) caused a visceral struggle in me as as reader to carry on after each sentence. This statement applies to the majority of my reading experiences. There were fragments like his rightly most famous work in the collection "Van Gogh: The Man Suicided by Society" which managed to present his idea in his unique form while remaining a pleasurable reading experience. So how to rate a book that I greatly appreciated thinking about what the author was doing but for the most part did not actually enjoy reading? I give it three stars-- the middle ground between 5 stars for what the author is doing, and 1 star for the reading experience.