Rating: 3/5

I had high hopes for this one, which might’ve been my problem….maybe I set my expectations too high. I’m a huge DP fan, and was so excited to see her take on a sheikh romance. In a nutshell, Gretchen Brannon (has ties to the L,TT series-so some crossover) and Sheikh Philippe Sabon meet while on vacation, and share an instant connection. Stuff happens and she agrees to a MOC.

I liked both mc’s. Gretchen is pretty feisty/normal for a DP h. She’s a gun shooting cowgirl, and the most adventurous virgin I’ve ever read. Philippe is pretty nice/level headed for a DP H. He's the leader of a small desert country, and has injuries from a landmine accident that has caused physical and emotional wounds. (his plumbing doesn't work so he leaks fake news that he's a man-ho so haters don't dethrone him) On paper it looked like my cuppa…H hung up on OW…h struggling with being second best. I love these types of plots, but something was just missing.

I didn’t love the H’s Magic Stick being a Muggle Noodle. In RomanceLand, (especially in soapy-smut) I like my H’s to be OTT virile alphas, so I found this off-putting. But, my biggest grump was the OW drama which was a HUGE letdown. We are teased with “Brianne drama” but it comes out of nowhere at 75%...don’t get me wrong, there for a minute it was “rub my hands together” drama-llama, but that comes AFTER skipping over a “few weeks” of him ignoring Gretchen, and spending it with Brianne and her son where all the angsty goodness should have been!! Was she running out of pages?? Cuz this made ZERO sense to me. Then it was over…POOF moving on… with really no work, grovel, conversation, or much page-time. Most importantly…NO ANSWERS… Why the about face if G was your soul-mate P? Why wouldn’t anyone know you were married?? Why is she hanging out in your room?? Why did you avoid her for 3 weeks?? Why did you lie in front of her face?? Why. Why. Why??? At the very least, why does she look just like your lost love?? None of these were answered which was such BS. Not to mention, it felt like he might never have come if Hassan hadn’t leaked info. 

Bottom Line- It was ok. It’s an easy read… I didn’t dislike it; it just could’ve been so much better. (from a drama-angst point) I also didn’t feel like it flowed well with Once In Paris, where Philippe and Brianne were introduced. He has a completely different personality, and they never had this great love connection. He didn’t let her go, because she was never his. They weren’t really even good friends. She pretty much used him to make her H jealous. I did feel by the end that Gretchen became the #1 girl because I think P was in love with an ideal, not a woman... and IMO, he did better with G anyway.