Rating: 5/5

This is by far the best contemporary book I have set my eyes upon. It was short and easy to read, there weren't any unnecessary or boring scenes and the story was absorbing, keeping my interest piqued until the very end. 

  I SUPPOSE YOU want to know all about us, don't you? All the nasty, horrible details about the vicious things we did. How we planned the accidents, how we plotted against everyone who got in our way. That's what you want to hear, isn't it?

I have always thought that the beginning of a certain story was the most difficult part to write, but Neal Shusterman obviously knows how it's done right. I absolutely loved the prologue because it set the mood of the book and I could feel the tension right off the bat, making me wonder what was in store for me.

Jared Mercer along with his childhood friend Cheryl decide to start a club, namely "The Shadow Club", whose members are all teenagers second-best in a certain area. Though at first they have no intention to do anything bad, that soon changes when Jared suggests they start pranking those who are better than them. Even if those practical jokes are mild in the beginning, things gradually start escalating and unknown people carry out their vengeance by causing injury or making their victims have a traumatic experience. The mystery revolves around finding out who the offenders are before it's too late. 

The book is realistic because we all know how cruel kids can be to one another without feeling any remorse. I also like how despite what was happening and how some characters were bullies, I didn't come to hate any of them. They were likable, not all of them were rotten to the core. Jared was very brave and was determined to find the wrongdoers in order to prove his innocence and that's exactly what I like to see in a main character. He was never whiny and never backed down no matter what had happened to him. It was a pleasant surprise. 

All in all, this is a book that everyone should try reading because it is definitely worth it.