Rating: 5/5

Rather than just reading about the Scientific Revolution (1543-1687), I chose to experience it through some of the books that initiated, shaped, and crystallized the scientific method. My reading journey began with Copernicus' On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres (1543), followed by Kepler's Astronomia Nova (1609), Harmonies of the World (1619), and Epitome of Copernican Astronomy (1621), down south to Galilei's Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632), then to Descartes' Discourse on the Method (1637), and finally here, the crown jewel, The Principia (1687).

What makes this book one of the greatest scientific works of all time is that Isaac Newton (1643-1727) presents in it the mathematical language that is capable of revealing the marvels of the cosmos. Newton has crafted mathematical expressions that can decipher the behavior of the universe. He has discovered simple formulas and a new branch of mathematics, calculus, that can even predict the time, position, and rate of change of celestial bodies in motion and certain objects on Earth that are set in motion. I can't help but notice that it took a proper interpretation of the behavior of the heavens to initiate a Scientific Revolution here on Earth.

Reading The Principia we see how the fabric of space is governed by a rhythmical pulse; where the invisible, to the naked eye, phenomena such as time, forces, and resistances are in varied proportional (mathematically expressible) relationships to the visible characteristics of space; such as the mass of celestial bodies and other objects, their motions, and the distances between them. We live in a clockwork universe of consistent symmetry.

The Principia is composed of 3 books. In the 1st and 2nd book, Newton presents his mathematical principles of nature through his theories, countless calculations, and experimental results which felt like reading a textbook, but the 3rd book reads like an astronomy science book and was more of an enjoyable read with the last few pages of the book being a real treat.

In my view, Newton's, mathematical approach to codifying the celestial mechanics of the solar system is considerably Keplerian. It's clear that Johannes Kepler's three laws of planetary motion inspired Newton to devise his three laws of motion and possibly laid the foundation for Newton's law of universal gravitation. Although to my surprise, Newton, does not give Kepler any recognition for it, other than briefly mentioning Kepler's laws of planetary motions.

Even though, Newtonian mechanics were considered, for over 200 years, to reflect an accurate interpretation of the behavior of the physical space around us, but with the introduction of the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics, at the turn of the 20th century, Newton's laws became great approximations for everyday life purposes. All in all, this was a short and insightful journey, and I look forward to revisiting this period to fulfill other reading aspirations.

(4.5/5.0)