Rating: 5/5

Brooke Hayward's memoir, "Haywire" is back in print this year - 2011. Originally published in 1977, Hayward - who is related by marriage to almost every big name in Hollywood from the 1920's to the 1980's - was the daughter of actress Margaret Sullavan and agent/producer Leland Hayward. The book's title "Haywire" came from Leland Hayward's cable address, "Haywire". Hayward and Sullavan were married for ten years and had three children, Brooke, her younger sister, Bridget, and their younger brother Bill. That Hayward family of five - with the beautiful sun-kissed children and the beyond beautiful parents - that "golden" family - survived as a unit for ten years before Leland and Maggie divorced.

Divorce for the parents was nothing new. Leland Hayward eventually married five times - the last time to Pam Digby Churchill Hayward Harriman - and Margaret had four husbands in total, including a brief marriage to Henry Fonda.
They both appeared to be "high maintenance" - not surprising in successful Hollywood folk - but two high maintenance people can't fulfill the emotional needs of the other. With the parents' divorce, the children were moved from Los Angeles to the Connecticut suburb of Greenwich, where Margaret settled down with her fourth - and final - husband, a British businessman.

Their parents' divorce began troubled times for the children, particularly Bridget and Bill. But could the emotional troubles be totally attributed to the divorce? Or are some people born with fragile coping mechanisms? Certainly the Hayward household before the divorce had been an eccentric one. Did the parting of the parents and the subsequent two-house upbringing exacerbate or bring on the sad mental problems of the two youngest? From Brooke's memoir I could see that the three children were deeply loved by both parents but perhaps those parents didn't know how to handle children-with-problems. Parenting is not easy at best, and I would think much harder for the peripatetic parents who are often tending their own needs. Maggie did provide the children with their home base in Greenwich, but the children were sent away to school at relatively early ages.

It's never easy to know what happens behind closed doors, but Brooke Hayward has done an amazing job of writing about her parents and her siblings with love and grace and a sense of wonderment. That "wonderment" can be seen in the picture of the family - pre-breakup - on the pages preceding Chapter 3. It's a picture taken of Leland, Maggie, and the three kids, holding hands as the run together into the Pacific ocean. The abject beauty of the five and their seeming joy of being there, together and holding hands, is one of the most beautiful - and saddest - pictures of a family I've ever seen.

I thought Hayward's book was excellent when I read it in 1977, and I have the same view of it in 2011. One of the best - if not THE best - memoir I've ever read.