Rating: 4/5

I first read The Wild Hunt of Hagworthy as a child and loved it. Recently (well a couple of years ago now because I’m THAT behind on reviews) I reread it and still thoroughly enjoyed it. It’s a spooky, atmospheric read which is perfect for reading near Halloween. I can’t remember it that well but have a few notes from when I read it so will try my best to review. 

 Lucy is spending the summer at her aunt’s in Hagworthy, a country village. It has been many years since she was last there and her friends have all changed. A village fete is to be held and the new vicar wants to include an ancient horn dance that has not been performed in a very long time. The older people of the village think this is a bad idea, and so does Lucy. As the book progresses the dance, and its performers start to take on a sinister edge.

 A main aspect of this book seems to be the clash between the old ways and the new. Many of the villagers hold onto the old ways and look down on anything that goes against their ways or is different. This means that both Lucy and her friend Kester, are considered outsiders as they have more of a grasp on the modern ways. This may be why Kester seems to be the target of the dance’s darker side and why he is bullied by the other boys of the village, who are the ones set to perform the dance. 

 Foreshadowing is scattered throughout the book with people’s reflections appearing with antlers on and people using the hunt as a way to scare children into obedience. This foreshadowing helps to create the books spooky atmosphere and hints at what’s to come. 

 The end of this book was unsatisfying. I felt myself wondering, ‘is that it, is it solved?’ There didn’t seem to be any definite ending but maybe that was the plan.

 Reading The Wild Hunt of Hagworthy for the second time, years after the first was definitely worth doing. It is a highly atmospheric story and keeps the reader worrying over what is going to happen when the dance is performed. I have a feeling I will read this book again some time.