Rating: 5/5

In 1894 George Moore had gone to a particular London bookstore
to inquire why they were not stocking "Esther Waters" and he
was told "because of a certain Pre-Raphaelite nastiness". The 
book doesn't really explain why they came to be so vilified
when almost 50 years before they banded together to thumb their
nose at the Art world.
Hilton starts with who he feels is the father of the Pre-
Raphaelite movement - John Ruskin, a man who blended the
sensibilities of poet and painter with a scientific love of
nature, the elements and rock minerals. Along with a love of
Turner, he championed the modern painters and in his book "Modern
Painters" he gave vent to his idea that painting in the post
Renaissance tradition contained all that was loathsome.
His ideas were taken up by a group of painters who had come to the
conclusion that the Royal Academy was stifling young and creative
artists in their adherence to the conservative views and rules
of the founder, Sir Joshua Reynolds (called "Sir Sloshua" by the
Brotherhood).
Naturally enough the stuffy R.A. were disgusted with their irreverent
style - Charles Dickens wrote a blistering piece in "Household
Words" where he attacked John Everett Millais "Christ in the House
of His Parents" (1849) calling the depiction of the Mother "a monster out of the vilest gin shop in England". But the public loved the
colour and naturalism of the paintings and that is what the PRB's
did - where leaves and forests were brown in the old Masters 
pictures, here they were green and lush and highly coloured (the
brightness was a PRB secret - they painted on a wet, white back
ground, giving a luminous effect).
Millais was the first to leave the Brotherhood at age 29 and went 
on to become one of London's most fashionable painters - everything
despised by his early group. Hilton feels Holman Hunt almost relished
the lurid, obviously moralistic pictures that became his style,
then his trip to the Holy Land brought about a change of style 
(Hilton thinks for the worse). Rossetti and his sensuous, seductive
portraits of women kept the Pre-Raphaelite flag burning the longest
with his links to William Morris and Edward Burne-Jones.
Again Ruskin was to the fore, establishing classes and lectures
in painting techniques in working men's institutes and night
classes paving the way for the Arts and Crafts boom almost 30
years later and the collapse of the old Academy. The Brotherhood
would become William Morris's "The Firm".
Hilton doesn't pull any punches - a great admirer of Millais and
Rossetti, he finds Holman Hunt distasteful, William Morris
boring and Burne-Jones flat. Hilton's text is meticulous and thorough and the numbers of the paintings are shown in the margins so the reader can refer to the paintings as they are discussed. I would have loved far more colour prints but with the numerous black and white pictures, the beautiful vibrancy of the colour really hits you. 
I bought my copy around 1971,72 and found it just as exciting a
read now as I did back then.