Rating: 2/5

What I thought I was getting: (i.e. the synopsis on Goodreads)

Careless of both murder and manners, Charlotte Ellison and her sister, two determinedly unconventional young women, ignore Victorian mores and actively join the police investigation, led by young Inspector Thomas Pitt, into the murder of their servant girl.

What I actually got:
Charlotte: "Oh my! These deaths are so tragic. I'll say everything that comes to my mind. Isn't my brother-in-law hot? Women are so down-trodden."
Emily: "Oh sure this guy I'm seeing is a philandering gambler who everyone is warning me about...but he is titled so its okay. I'll make him marry me. Women are down-trodden but we can use our wiles."
Sarah: "Do ALL the good works for the poor! Women are down-trodden."
Caroline: "Oh dear, my husband is coming. Women are down-trodden!" 
 
Then there is the back of my copy of this book which adds: 
"But it was not panic beating in the heart of pretty Charlotte Ellison. And something more than brutal murder was on Inspector Pitt's mind. Yet, such a romance between a society girl and so unsuitable a suitor was impossible the midst of murder..."  

So I thoughts I would get a nice mix of romance and mystery. The truth is I'm still not sure Charlotte or Inspector Pit are even main characters. The writing continually switches POV between the family members, which I eventually got used to. It was not, however, the voices of two strong female leads (Charlotte and Emily) like I expected. It is mainly the tragic shock of the women in the house as they discover men are not to be trusted and that even the most seemingly loyal of gentleman have horrible secrets. 
Bleh.
The romance is mainly Charlotte crushing on her brother-in-law at the end until, for no apparent reason, she decides 'That vulgar policeman...he might do! I'm now deeply in love!' 
The mystery was obvious. There is really only two people who could be the hangman and based on the down-trodden, rebelling women theme it was obvious which of the two it was so I found that kind of disappointing.
The ending was weird. Not just the very last paragraph (which ends abruptly) but Charlotte being all like 'even though every young woman has wandered around alone at dusk has died...I'm gonna just pop down the block'
WHY?!
Definitely a disappointment for my first my first venture into Anne Perry.