Rating: 4/5

A few years ago New Zealander Roberta Grey met the Lamprey family, a bunch of Micawberish English aristocrats, when she was an adolescent and they were living in her home country. She and Frid Lamprey were schoolmates, and before she knew it she'd fallen in love with the family and they seemingly did so with her. Soon, though, they had to move back to London as yet another of their "financial crises" overtook them -- a "financial crisis" representing one of those periods when none of their elderly and wealthy relatives had died, leaving them enough money to get through the next few years.

The Lampreys are, you see, complete scroungers. Mother and Father are just utterly useless, parasites upon society, while the kids have been expensively educated to ensure that, in the old English aristocratic way, they're quite unemployable. If they were alive today they'd doubtless be eligible for lots of high-paid City/Wall Street jobs, where they could earn a stack of money for being entirely unproductive. As it is, they're living in the UK immediately before the outbreak of WWII.

A few years have gone by and Roberta's parents have fairly recently died in a car crash. She's had to close up the family affairs in New Zealand and take herself on a months-long ship journey to Dear Old Blighty, where the plan is that she'll live with a Dear Old Aunty somewhere in deepest Dear Old Mumbleshire. But the aunt takes ill and the Lampreys step forward to say that they'd love to have Roberta come live with them for a month in the double apartment they own in London.

When she arrives, though, she discovers the Lampreys are facing the worst "financial crisis" yet, even though their response to it is to carry on spending as much of other people's money as they always have. Their last hope seems to be to butter up the elder brother of paterfamilias Lord Charles, the immensely wealthy but also immensely tight-fisted Gabriel, Marquis of Wutherwood and Rune. So Gabriel and his bonkers wife Violet are invited to the London apartments.

The trouble is that Gabriel refuses the family's entreaty for an advance and, as he's waiting crossly in the elevator to depart for home, someone sticks a long metal skewer through his eye and into his brain, thereby quite efficiently offing him. Soon enough, Chief Detective-Inspector Alleyn is on the job, alongside his usual stalwart sidekick, Detective-Inspector Fox.

Up to this point, Surfeit of Lampreys is one of the funniest detective novels I've read. Much of the humor and later the drama center around the fact that, even though Roberta may adore "her" Lampreys, it's quite obvious to anyone with an objective eye that really they're self-indulgent freeloaders, their various quirks and quiddities being not so much joyous expressions of eccentricity as a pain in the rear, especially to all those who've seen the Lampreys absorb "borrowed" money like blotting paper.

Marsh achieves this effect by keeping us mostly inside the viewpoint of either Roberta or Alleyn: Roberta is still, despite everything, in love with her witty childhood friends, although even she begins to wonder if she's made a big mistake -- it's she who draws the comparison with the Micawbers that I mentioned above. As counterpoint, we have Alleyn's view of them: "And what the hell," he asks at one point of Fox, "have you been telling that collection of certifiable grotesques about me?"

This tension between the two viewpoints of the Lampreys is what gives the novel such great wit: is the trusting Roberta right about the family, or is Alleyn's harder-headed antagonism a better guide?

This isn't a perfect detective novel. If the reader is to have any hope of working out who did the Dreadful Deed, s/he needs to have either a pencil and a stack of graph paper or a photographic memory; since I had neither to hand, I adopted the lesser-favored yah-de-yah-da technique, whereby I simply assumed the author must have got those bits right. Likewise, I felt that the actual murder method was so flipping complicated that the chances of it working out in real life must be next to zero. On the other hand, John Dickson Carr.

But, but, but, but, but . . . the novel has so much to offer to fans of Golden Age detective fiction. It's genuinely very readable and, as I say, intermittently quite funny enough that I was often laughing out loud. ("Yes," I told my wife waspishly more than once, "I'm just about to turn the light off.") I love the way that Marsh reveals what she really thinks about the Lampreys while yet letting Roberta's positive assessment of them stay at center stage. This is a very skilled satire set at a particular moment in time -- as the UK awaits the murderous assault from beyond the Channel -- when the old school of English society was really rather swiftly having to recognize the fact that extinction awaited just a few years down the line unless it could rapidly adapt. We suspect that all of the Lampreys -- with the possible exception of Henry, who's sure to marry Roberta (unless she suddenly gets herself a lick of sense) -- aren't going to be able to do that, that they'll emerge out of the other side of WWII just as broke, just as incompetent, just as charmingly parasitic, and just as unemployable as ever they were.

Bearing the surface of a straightforward mystery, this is actually a pretty effective social satire . . . while at the same time delivering as the mystery novel it purports to be. Marsh isn't everybody's cup of tea, but for me, with this one, she hits the spot just about right.

This is a contribution to Rich Westlake’s 1941 roundup at his Past Offences site.