Rating: 2/5

First, let me admit to one thing: I am a Cohen fan although I admire his prose/poetry set to music more than his written word.
This largely autobiographical volume was first written in 1978, published in 1979, but reissued in 2010. Like much of his work it has the recurring themes of love, sex, religion and depression. In these pieces we see Cohen in his many guises: pop star, failed artist, revolutionary, husband and seeker of religion. Its main thrust is the failed relationship with his wife and the demise of his marriage which he characterizes as one that heals itself from petty arguments and constant bickering. Like any marriage it is in constant evolution as it is pummeled by Cohen’s constant womanizing, his self-absorption, his perception of personal failure, and his search for spiritual calm.

Initially I found this volume confusing and difficult to understand. What was going on here? These were prose poems, almost all followed by a commentary written several years later. In these follow up notes he criticizes, judges and evaluates the previous work with the same title, all from the perspective of a later self with the simple gift of time which provides a lens through which he sees things differently. 
The commentaries frequently refer to notebooks and a finished but unpublished manuscript titled “Life in Art” from which many of the pieces appear to have been excerpted. Often the commentaries lead you to reread the poem with a different perspective and this is where the book for me was the most interesting and enjoyable.

Like much of Cohen’s work, these pieces can be provocative, perplexing and at times vulgar. This is not a quiet contented read. You must tolerate angry tirades and some obscenity. But if you push on, he does pull you in as you move from page to page, and as you get more settled with it, you become engaged with its questions, comments and challenges.

A different literary experience. Cohen is Cohen. You don’t always understand all of it, but if you get at least some of it, it gives you something to think about from this mournful introverted artist.