Rating: 5/5

For gentle humor you can't beat Jeeves and Wooster in this novel sized story. 
P.C. Warning! Contains non P.C. language.

Such great recall
'Jeeves,' I recollect saying, on returning to the apartment, 'who was the fellow who on looking at something felt like somebody looking at something? I learned the passage at school, but it has escaped me.'

'I fancy the individual you have in mind, sir, is the poet Keats, who compared his emotions on first reading Chapman's Homer to those of stout Cortez when with eagle eyes he stared at the Pacific'

A small enemy
Little Seabury, a child who should have been strangled at birth. I have no positive proof, but I have always been convinced that it was he who put the lizard in my bed the last time I stayed at the Hall.

His new valet longs for the revolution
Outwardly he was all respectfulness, but inwardly you could see that he was a man who was musing on the coming Social Revolution and looked on Bertram as a tyrant and an oppressor.
'Yes, Brinkley, I shall dine out.'
He said nothing, merely looking at me as if he were measuring me for my lamp-post.
He sighed slightly. All this talk of my going to shows was distressing him. What he really wanted was to see me sprinting down Park Lane with the mob after me with dripping knives.

Don't tell a lady to calm down
'Bertie.'
'Hallo?'
'Ever been hit over the head with a chair?'
'No.'
'Well, you soon may be.'
I began to see she was in difficult mood.

Its the usual trope of "who will marry whom" with Bertie getting caught in the middle
'What are your views upon engagements, Mr Wooster?'
'Engagements?'
'Should they be short or long?'
'Well ...'
'I prefer them short. I feel that we had best put this wedding through as quickly as possible. I shall have to find out how soon that is on this side. I believe you cannot simply go to the nearest minister, as in my country. There are formalities. While these are being attended to, you will, of course, be my guest. I'm afraid I can't offer you the freedom of the boat, because you are a pretty slippery young gentleman and might suddenly remember a date elsewhere – some unfortunate appointment which would necessitate your leaving. But I shall do my best to make you comfortable in this room for the next few days.

By the end Bertie and all his companions are in a terrible muddle with business and marriage plans threatened with failure.
And like a deus ex machina Jeeves enters and all is solved. A most satisfactory ending.

Enjoy!