Rating: 4/5

Thirteen-year-old Hélène St. Onge was born to a good family. Her beloved Papa was a scientific scholar before he succumbed to the smallpox. When he died he left little money and the estate will pass to Cousin Pierre. Hélène has been milking cows and cleaning her Papa's study. Then Cousin Pierre arrives with his family including a daughter of marriageable age and Catherine is seen as competition, therefore she must go. Catherine agrees to become a filles de roi. She will travel to the far away distant land of Montreal to marry a farmer, trapper or soldier with a dowry provided by the King. Catherine only agrees to leave for Montreal if Hélène can come with her- NOT as a filles de roi, but under her protection. Hélène is sad to leave her home but excited by the new adventure. She has her sister and her pampered kitten to keep her company. Soon she's exploring the ship and making friends with a half-Mohawk girl named Kateri. Then Hélène hits rough seas both literal and figurative and must decide what her future is going to be.

I really enjoyed this story. I had heard about the filles de roi and was curious about this story. Usually with the Dear Canada series I have to start with the historical note because the history is unfamiliar so I was glad to be able to dive right into the story. It is a little slow at first but captured my attention. The plot is a little predictable for those who have read the Dear America books but I did appreciate the realism. The author doesn't shy away from tough topics like racism, illness, death and survival. The period details were amazing and I felt like I was there traveling to Montreal. I've never actually been there, even though it's only 5 hours away. I also really liked the author's note explaining how her research into her own family history revealed that art imitates life, even unknowingly. The one thing I did not enjoy about this novel was the romance. It's shocking to think of 13-15 year-old girls marrying men twice their age. Yuck. That's young even for the 17th century. 

Hélène is a great character. She's spunky but still a girl of the 17th century. She knows her heart but not always her mind. She goes through dark periods and light ones. Hélène's heart is pure and good. I love Kateri. She's a little more lighthearted than Hélène because she's eager to return to her home in Montreal. Their friendship is really nice and they stand by each other in good times and bad. Catherine is a kind and loving sister. She's willing to be brave and sacrifice herself so she and her sister can have a better future. It takes a lot of courage to even cross the ocean on a wooden sailing ship nevermind to leave behind your home and make a new life in the wilderness. Séraphin, a ship's boy, becomes a good friend when Hélène needs one and she to him.

The adults are mostly unpleasant. Of course Cousin Pierre and his family are drawn from the Cinderella book of awful relatives. Cousin Pierre doesn't have a heart. Madame Laurent and Monsieur Deschamps are snobby and rude but typical of their time. There are kind adults too. Kateri's father, Monsieur Aubry is taciturn and quiet at first but he is grieving the loss of his Mohawk wife. He has a good heart and is kind. Mr. Aubry loves his daughter very much and I think he spoils her a bit. Tante Barbe is a bit much to take all at once but her heart is in the right place. She is kind, warm and loving even if she's loud and likes to play matchmaker. She quickly became a favorite character of mine. 

I sent my parents looking for this book when they went on vacation to Montreal and they couldn't find it. I'm really happy I was able to obtain a copy. I highly recommend this entry in the Dear Canada series.