Rating: 4/5

Books are India's partition and communal riots are hard to read, and certainly harder to write. Bhisham Sahni's Tamas (meaning 'darkness') opens with Nathu, a lower-class tanner, trying his best to kill a pig asked for by his upper-caste boss. Little does he know that this very pig will be used to incite a riot and kill hundreds of people. The scene then jumps to a group of Congress workers from all religions gathering for a morning march and chatting and joking among themselves, until the first signs of communal tension show up. From here on a large part of Tamas is focused on the rising tension between the different communities before the riot breaks out. There is no protagonist in Tamas. The story moves between many people, from different religions, and social and political classes, the only unifying factor between them being the brewing riot. Then of course the riot begins, and it's violent and haunting and heartbreaking to read. The sudden burst of violence between neighbors in the story might sound unbelievable, but unfortunately, most of us even today have seen some evidence of this sort of violence at least on TV making it scarily easy to believe. The brilliance of Tamas is in its unbiased storytelling. Sahni is not partial to any religion. There are zealots on both sides, and so are the victims. There are people on both sides capitalizing on the riot for their political gains, and of course, there are the indifferent British rulers to whom the communal riots were of little consequence beyond being a means for keeping Indians from focusing on Independence. The characters are multilayered, just like the reasons behind such horrific incidents. In the last chapters after the riot has ended, people from different religions gather together to form a peace committee and they again chat and joke among themselves. The brilliant scene is taut with tension, at the same time it shows the inevitability of communal cohabitation in a society like ours. Tamas is haunting, more so in the parts without active violence. It is truly a tale of a dark time and the darkness of human souls.