Rating: 5/5

Spoilers everywhere. 

This book starts where you expect and ends where you have no idea what just happened. A truly gripping ride. 

The three characters of this book that stand out: Barbara (60, history teacher), Sheba(40, pottery teacher) and Connoly (15, their student). While the story is told in Barbara's diary, the scandal of which the title speaks is the sexual relationship between Sheba and Connolly, her pupil. You might start the book with the knowledge that you are appalled by such an idea, but trust me, this is not your typical I'm-your-teacher-and-I'm-a-pervert type of story. 

Now, really, spoilers everywhere. 

Barbara is fucking evil. Not only is she a virgin 60 year old that has a vicious tongue, but she also makes Sheba become dependent on her in a very manipulative and subtle way, so much so that you get hints throughout the book, but by the end it's like Barbara took off her circus mask in the finale of her act only to reveal an even uglier face underneath. She is the one that turns Sheba in, out of spite and viciousness that you can only guess under the pretense of an old teacher. She is so lonely that she wants to be important for someone, so important that she becomes the sole carer of them, so caring that she becomes their only life-line. She picks Sheba not because they were predestined to be together, but because Sheba is ... well ... spineless. 

Sheba is indeed a malleable character. She morphs into whatever shape you give her. She married at 20 with her 20-years-older-than-her lecturer because she never thought she could take care of herself. She has two children, Polly the teenager who wears t-shirts with "Bitch Goddess" imprinted on them and Ben, a little boy with Down syndrome. She secretly finds no happiness in this, but she accepts her form as it is given to her by her role as caring wife and mother of a disabled child. When Connolly comes around and compliments her on her looks - like only a fifteen year old in which hormones are gathered up at the tip of his penis and are yelling in unison can do - she falls for it. You might say she puts up a fight. That was not a fight, if I've ever seen one. She complacently has sex with him, after he becomes a bit of a stalker and tries to forcefully kiss her, and then falls madly in love with him. 

Connolly... I mean, what can I say? Teenager boy who wants to fuck his hot teacher. Have we never heard this story before? I was fifteen once. If any female teacher who managed to look even remotely hot presided over my class, my friends' eyes would have a glazed look, as if they're there, but not totally there. Probably thinking about fucking her over her desk - which, by the way, is more of a way of sexualizing power than of sexualizing the actual woman; it comes down to how a pupil would embrace the role of having his teacher, who holds power over him, to become submissive to his own desire, and that a fifteen year old would only understand as the result of having sex. Nothing surprising there. 

What was surprising and lovely to read, though, was Barbara's slow ascent to power. Power over the situation, power over Sheba. This book is absolutely great in terms of character building and, even though I found myself angry at this wretched woman, I can also step back and admire the craftsmanship in penning her to her last old, withered, gray hair. 

Read it!