Rating: 5/5

I just finished Behind the Stories by by Diane Eble today, and I have to say this book completely renewed my faith, not only in myself as a writer but in God's will—nay, His permission—for me to use His gift of writing, a passion He placed deep down inside my soul when I was a kid.

After reading this book, I feel like Jeremiah 20:9: There's a burning fire in my bones that must be let out! Just shy of a month, as I read the many wonderful stories of some of the world's most popular Christian authors (just reading two stories a day gave me a lot to think about), I constantly felt the need and desire to experience the joy of delving deep into what truly feels like a calling to write.

Being a creative individual myself—I play several musical instruments, write both fiction and non-fiction, read a wide variety of books, and pursue many other creative interests—I frequently find myself feeling forced to choose one creative outlet over the another, much to my own disappointment. But when I read Beverly Lewis's story of how she was able to continue pursuing her many passions all at once, my heart lifted, and I realized I could do the same.

In addition, reading stories of how authors such as Jerry B. Jenkins, Jack Cavanaugh, and several others gave up their evenings—sometimes writing late into the wee hours of the morning—to do the hard work of becoming full-time authors gave me the renewed motivation to work harder at honing my craft and digging deep to write what I love and be persistent at it.

When I read about how T. Davis Bunn surrendered his desire to write to God—even if it meant he would have to give up writing for good—it renewed my sense of trust in God, who gives us the desires of our heart, if only we delight ourselves in Him (Ps. 37:3-5).

There are a great many other awe-inspiring stories in this book that address issues of rejection in the publishing world, balancing writing with family and social time, prolific and productive writing, and making the right decision between several great opportunities. As I read, I saw many similarities between 
  
    Behind the Stories
  
 and the hugely popular Chicken Soup for the Soul series of books, only with more of a Christian and spiritual approach.

Some of the story categories include:

• Say Yes to God
• Perseverance and Hard Work
• Not By My Strength
• Redeeming the Past
• God's Stretching Places
• And more

Each one is there to remind you that though the writing life can be difficult, it's not an impossible dream. You can become a successfully published author, even in today's ever-changing publishing mediums and platforms. But make no mistake, there will be hard work, there will be challenges, and there will be times when choosing the right path will seem unclear. 

Thankfully, with 
  
    Behind the Stories
  
 as your guide—and each author humbly leading the way on a well-worn path they've all traveled—you can be assured that even as the authors themselves found hope, inspiration, courage, and motivation to pursue their God-given desire to become writers, you, too, can be confident God will take the reins and lead you to fulfill your desire to do the same.

This book has now been added to my top-rated-all-time-favorites Goodreads list, and I'm confident that, after reading it, you, too, will find it worthy of such an honor on your own bookshelf.