Rating: 4/5

I don’t have kids. I read this for pleasure as a 32-year-old man. And, surprisingly, I definitely enjoyed it. As I made my way through the book, though, I kept trying to picture what a kid would think. It’s very weird. VERY weird, and kind of dark too. I’m not very familiar with the Disney version of this story, but I’m sure Pinocchio doesn’t murder that singing cricket with a hammer like he does on page 13. And things like the growing of his nose when he lies are not major plot points in the book at all. In fact, it only happens twice and both times it is addressed for only slightly more than a paragraph. 

Basically, the story is about an insolent little marionette who - through folly, disobedience, and naivety - is subjected to a constant slew of misfortunes, each one more ridiculous and over-the-top than the last. And although the overarching moral to this tale (that being GO TO SCHOOL YOU DUMB LITTLE DONKEYS!) is rather reductive and simplistic, the story is odd enough and the imagination of the author is unruled and unbound enough that the well-worn lesson is not a hindrance.

Here’s a personal note: I love books translated from other languages into English. Sentence structure and word choice are often juxtaposed and arranged in ways that you normally don’t get to see when reading things originally written in English. Part of this is undoubtedly due to the translator as they struggle to preserve the story in its original form, and part of it is due to the fact that often there is often not an analogous term for certain words or phrases. It creates a certain patchwork of language that, for whatever reason, tickles me. Almost as if the charm lies in its sloppiness, or imperfection. I actually downloaded two different translations of this to my Kindle and read the first chapter of each before deciding on which translator’s voice I preferred.

In the end, I can’t really say if your kids will like this. All I can say is I did. And I’m kind of like a giant kid.