Rating: 3/5

Wow. Okay. My thoughts on this book are mixed. It's like throwing my emotions and writing opinions into a mixing bowl, and spinning them all up into a gooey mess. So maybe that's not the best analogy... but...

 When I first had the opportunity to review this book, I snatched it up pretty quick. I do like historical fiction, and the fact that it was about the war between the states, and spies, and such things only interested me further. But when I started reading, I wasn't the most happy camper. It IS an interesting story. At least it should be. All the elements are there. Everything's in place. Before I say more, I should tell you one thing. This book took me almost an entire YEAR to read. I'm sure for any book lover this is very odd. I was constantly reading something else that I found more interesting. I would feel bad, and try to finish it, but would soon tire of it. So, you ask, what was so bad?

 It wasn't allll bad, of course. But there were a few elements that threw me off. Al Lacy has a certain way of writing that doesn't really appeal to me. I suppose I should have known this after reading a bit of one of his other books, but the thought never occurred. I love history, as I said, but the way Mr. Lacy incorporated the history was distracting to the story line. He would have a chapter with a bit about the main characters, and then lots and lots of paragraphs and chapters dedicated to unimportant characters who usually just died at the end of the chapter. It wasn't the most fun experience. I could have enjoyed the book without reading about the guy and his dog who died, or such. I don't know if it was of historical significance, but it really just made me sad and want the book over with!

 The positive side of things is that when I could push myself to read, I did enjoy it for the most part, even if the writing style and storyline were a bit off. I rate the book three stars, and I say that I'm being generous sometimes. :D Don't just take my opinion, though, because many people have rated this five stars.