Rating: 3/5

Hard-boiled, but with a sense of interiority that isn’t pervasive in mid-20th century crime fiction, this novel is engrossing and easy to get lost in. The specific location is not essentially well-developed but the overall atmosphere, the sense of desperation and the paltry strings tying together the emerging middle class, is developed as a great backdrop for the story. It does start a bit slow, setting up all the players and getting you familiar with the lay of the lad, so to speak, but once the death happens the narrative starts picking up speed and doesn’t slow down. There are numerous ancillary characters and almost across the board they are given more nuance and authenticity than you might expect. They might feel a specific narrative (or social) archetype, but they are offered as genuine people without judgment, whether they are sex workers or closeted gay men or scoundrels looking to make a buck. The main character, Archer, has a sense of nobility about him, and while he is happy to play fast and loose with some laws he stands above the somewhat corrupt, or at least corruptible, system that he has left by leaving the police to be a private investigator. The mystery expands in exciting and fun ways, a little outlandish at times but fitting with what I expect from this type of story. There are enough red herrings, a deep enough potential suspect list, that it is fun to travel with Archer as he pieces things together, even if the reader is a step or two ahead of him. There are two mysteries, the initial job he was hired for and the subsequent murder, and the two of them twine together nicely and both have fitting resolutions. 

The writing is generally quite clipped and direct, in many ways a paradigm of what became recognized as the hard-boiled style. Archer slips some witty one-liners in here and there, which are always entertaining. I think, importantly, they are also always thoughts he has, they aren’t dialogue; he has a sense of stern bravado when dealing with the other characters, with maybe a hint of compassion around the edges, but he has a running monologue commenting on what is going on. Because of this contrast the one-liners work as comic relief and make the narration not just accessible but very easy to get lost in. The eventual pacing, starting around 25% of the way in when the body is found, parallels that, and makes it easy to glide through the story without any interest in putting it down for a break. It doesn’t have quite the compulsive quality or level of interiority that is more common in contemporary fiction, but it shows that even in 1950 there has been depth to this subgenre that is easy to overlook. Definitely fun to read, breezy and quick. 

(Rounded from 3.5)