Rating: 2/5

I'll say this--there is no point, either in the title or the content, that Mencken is at all shy or misleading about what this is.
This is, quite literally, a selection of prejudices. I had no idea who Mencken was when I picked this up off of a Free Shelf in college, so I can't quite chime in on his impact in some of these other reviews. I imagine, though, that he would have loved to have been in this age of opinionated blogging--he would have had a ball with the entire Internet to hear his ideas. He's quite delighted to simply tear apart things he finds ridiculous: "The truth is that criticism, if it were thus confined to the proposing of alternative schemes, would quickly cease to have any force or utility at all, for in the overwhelming majority of instances no alternative scheme of any intelligibility is imaginable, and the whole object of the critical process is to demonstrate it." (84) 
This collection of essays is Mencken's weighing in on all manner of things in the way that only a 1920s, highly-educated white dude in America could. He's pretentious, racist, profoundly and self-righteously atheist, and utterly lost in despair that he was born American rather than English. The thing I appreciated most about this was the insight into the 20s, that rare moment of hindsight about the awfulness of The War To End All Wars before the realization that the 30s and 40s are going to suck like crazy. I don't know all that much about this time period, so it was cool to see from the viewpoint of a guy living through it. It manifests in some hilarious ways, like his enduring hatred of Methodists (who were very big in the Prohibition movement; fun fact, Welch's Grape Juice was invented partly because Welch was a Methodist trying to figure out how to make communion wine non-alcoholic) because they're taking away his lovely liquor. He also really dislikes chiropractors. And Calvin Coolidge. He does, however, absolutely love Baltimore, which was an interesting thing to come across with the recent race rioting there.
Some of this is terribly dated and some of it just clunky and silly because, again, overly-educated white dude. But it's an interesting peek into the era and what was important then. And some of the things he says are very much still things to which we should pay attention. A mixed bag; glad I picked it up, but I'm not going to hang on to it.

Some notable quotes:

"In view of the popular or general character of most of the taboos which put a brake upon personal liberty in thought and action--that is to say, in view of their enforcement by people in the mass, and not by definite specialists in conduct--it is quite natural to find that they are of extra force in democratic societies, for it is the distinguishing mark of democratic societies that they exalt the powers of the majority almost infinitely, and tend to deny the minority any rights whatever." (p. 25)

"[T]he United States is essentially a commonwealth of third-rate men--that distinction is easy here because the general level of culture, of information, of taste and judgment, of ordinary competence is so low...Third-rate men, of course, exist in all countries, but it is only here that they are in full control of the state, and with it of all the national standards. The land was peopled, not by the hardy adventurers of legend, but simply by incompetents who could not get on at home...No American colonist, even in the worst days of the Indian wars, ever had to face such hardships as ground down the peasants of Central Europe during the Hundred Years War, nor even such hardships as oppressed the English lower classes during the century before the Reform Bill of 1832." (98)

"What makes New York so dreadful, I believe, is mainly the fact that the vast majority of its people have been forced to rid themselves of one of the oldest and most powerful of human instincts--the instinct to make a permanent home...The very richest man, in New York, is never quite sure that the house he lives in now will be his next year--that he will be able to resist the constant pressure of business expansion and rising land values." (207)