Rating: 3/5

I have to remind myself that 1983, the year Intimate Strangers was published, was a long time ago. So why am I reading this book from 27 years ago? Since it is about social psychology, we know that a lot has changed in those years. But I find that it still has something to say to me, a man who was a househusband in 1978 with a professional wife and two young sons when Ms. Rubin was urging Americans to work toward fathers having a co-equal role with mothers in nurturing infants and young children.

We were (and are) shifting from a country where "Women and men each had a place - a clearly defined, highly specific set of roles and responsibilities that each would fulfill. She'd take care of home and hearth; he'd provide it. She'd raise the children; he'd support them. She'd subordinate her life to his, and wouldn't even notice it; her needs for achievement and mastery would be met vicariously through his accomplishments and those of the children" It seemed fair at the time. Now in 1983, we're not quite so sure. 

Lillian Rubin writes about a changing society, new roles and new rules, the child within, the approach-avoidance dance, the sexual dilemma, dependency, combining love and work in the two job household, and raising the children together. Intimate Strangers is not quite a text book although it has plenty of footnotes and an index. It is not quite a self-help book although it has plenty of suggestions for change. As Lillian always does, there are plenty of facts and the verbatim words from plenty of men and women in research and therapy seeking a way to achieve intimacy. She believes, as I do, that Knowledge is Power so the first part of social change is to impart knowledge. This book does that with most of the information being quite accessible. (Although some psychoanalytical pages were a bit much for my brain.)

What is her solution? Well, if you read page 204 of Intimate Strangers, you can get the short version. But the really short version is: "It wouldn't take some ideal world to resolve the differences between us - only one in which children have two parents to nurture them from the moment of birth."

My major criticism of the book is its failure to deal with how gay and lesbian couples fit into this plan. Lillian was focused on woman's liberation in those times of the Equal Rights Amendment. She is light on gay awareness, something that I believe is true of most of her writing.