Rating: 5/5

Between 1902 and the year of its publication (1904), Joseph Conrad was caught in an abyss of depression, financial collapse and severe gout, but somehow still managed to write what is a deep, adventurous and dark novel. A Tale of the Seaboard, was originally planned as a short-story but was to become his longest work, with the composition it would lead him to say "I see nothing, I read nothing. It is like a kind of tomb which is also hell where one must write, write, write.". Nostromo was received poorly back in the day, a product not so much of its characters or their complexities, but of the plotting. It's no doubt a well oiled machine, but I can see why for some, those who like nice flowing stories that are easy on the eye, it's all too much. I can say it took up to a hundred pages too finally grasp hold of its dense narrative, but after that I was starting to see a masterpiece develop before my eyes. 

Set in the fictional Latin American country of Costaguana, and a silver mine, the novel has so much going on, but simply put is based around one thing - a crisis. A crisis by which the province passes from the troubles of post-colonial misrule to the unquiet prosperity of Anglo-American imperial capitalism. Two key men are important to the story, Nostromo himself, the trusted boss of European laborers, and Martin Decoud, a shady journalist working for an even more shady government, who's aim is to smuggle a last shipment of silver out of the Occidental Province and thus ensure continued American financial backing. Of course this failed, leading to almost total chaos. 

The country simmers in the sweltering heat, with labour troubles, Catholic priests going to war with American Protestant evangelists, factions clamouring for the invasion of Costaguana, and the majority of characters either killed off, or left physically and mentally damaged.
Decoud and Nostromo, like the book itself, are engaged through the first half of their stories in discovering the flaws and corruption of their society, and there is certainly a lot of that!. I could never take sides, and didn't trust anyone, and this here is one the great strengths of the novel - the unpredictable actions of it's main characters. Most of what goes on is, to put it bluntly, ruthless. And I'm not one of those who has to fall in love with a novel's characters to love the novel. 

Politically, this is a serious work, and just goes to show what can happen when the people you think are in charge, are just as much the scoundrels as the scoundrels themselves. And yet the novel somehow presents that actions are taken admirably, and with morel. I can understand the determination of each and every character, and consequences that sometimes play out with them. Through backstory, historical facts on the region, flashbacks and anachrony, Conrad's stylistic innovation gives the reader plenty, and I mean plenty, to chew on. Like I said, its dense. 
His lavish storytelling on civilization and social conventions is so well done, it has me thinking of him wondering around south America with map and compass looking for some inspiration.
And that's why in the end Nostromo works so well. As somewhere in there is an adventure story, just without any real heroes. 

Nostromo on the whole may be a difficult, unconventional novel, but for me it's a masterpiece. In anyone else's hands it wouldn't have worked. If F. Scott Fitzgerald really did say “I’d rather have written Conrad’s Nostromo than any other novel”, then I'm glad he didn't! Not because Scotty was a bad writer, far from it, but because this is a world far away from all that jazz, flamboyance and glamour.