Rating: 3/5

I am a huge fan of short story collections. Instead of reading a chapter or two while waiting for the doctor you can knock out a whole story. This collection wasn’t the best of the best, but it did entertain.

  “Don’t Look Now”
 - 4 Stars
A husband and wife on holiday after a family loss find themselves in the middle of much more than they expected.

It makes sense that this story is the one that had a movie made from it. It had great buildup and the ending was one that the reader wouldn’t expect.

  A Border Line Case”
 - 3 Stars
A daughter decides to track down a friend from her father's past and learns that some searches are better left undone.

The ending was obvious from the beginning but it was entertaining. I liked that it wasn’t as description heavy as some of the other stories in this collection and that it read quick.

  “The Breakthrough”
 - 3 Stars
A man sent to assist with a computer learns that science experiences in secluded locations never end well.

The beginning and middle of this one had me hooked but the ending left a lot to be desired. This was the one story I would have liked to see in novel form with more story at the back end.

  “The Way of the Cross”
 - 2 Stars
A group traveling discover many truths about themselves while visiting a holy location.

I liked the idea behind this story but got bored with the telling of it. It was way to descriptive and took up too much of my reading time. The way the characters were written was impressive, but the excessive detail killed it for me.

 
  “Not After Midnight”
 - 1 Star
A vacationing teacher has a gut feeling about another couple's invitation to spend more time together.

This one was overly dramatic and had this ridiculous buildup to nothing. I went back and read the beginning multiple times to figure out what I had missed and could not figure it out. It was like he did something shameful and everyone knew about it and left his job because of it. I am not sure what that piece had to do with the rest of the story and assume I misunderstood something about it.