Rating: 4/5

Mr. Randall’s well-written Thomas Jefferson biography was published in 1993. With a few exceptions, it has held up well. The author vehemently disagrees with the argument that the slave Sally Hemings had children by our third president. He states, “(It’s) one of America’s most durable myths, unproven and unprovable, burst upon the sleazy scene of yellowing political journalism…” He takes a few pages to lay out the facts behind the so-called myth. The problem with Mr. Randall’s assertion is that DNA testing done in 1998 (five years after his Thomas Jefferson biography was published) and a review in 2000 by the Jefferson Foundation concluded a high probability that ole Tommy got it on with Sally, resulting in six of her offspring being his little darlings. While the author logically explains why Jefferson could not have possibly been bonking Hemings, the DNA results and review seem pretty solid to me. Also Mr. Randall depicts John Adams in a less than pleasant light which was more in vogue back then until David McCullough’s 2001 John Adams biography burnished his image. 

Anyhow, it is a minor glitch in what is a wonderful biography. Sally Hemings only appears in a handful of pages, thus the author implying she is not worth any more attention beyond debunking a myth. The real meat and potatoes of the book is the rest of Thomas Jefferson’s life. And it was a full life indeed. The tome covers such things as his upbringing, how the American Revolution came into being, his family life, his views about religion, Britain’s attempt to capture him, his being governor of Virginia, the creation of the Declaration of Independence and Constitution, his five-year stay in France, the affair with Maria Cosway, his attitude towards slavery, the French Revolution, becoming President Washington’s Secretary of State, our country’s third president, the Louisiana Purchase, the creation of the University of Virginia, his lifetime architectural project Monticello, and why he created the Jefferson Bible. It also delves into his relationships with such notables as Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, John Adams, James Madison, James Monroe, John Quincy Adams, and Aaron Burr. The backstabbing between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton gets special attention. I really should read a biography about the brilliant Hamilton to see if the dude was more than just his Machiavellian shenanigans and hound-dog trysts. Also the 1800 presidential race sure shows that nasty campaign tactics were very much baked into the American bread near the beginning of our republic’s birth. The only dry spot in the book is the author detailing Jefferson’s three-month trip between France and Italy. Those pages were a chore. I’ve read more exciting material on a toothpaste tube. The book has no illustrations or photographs. 

Mr. Randall also gives a more well-rounded biography about Jefferson by describing the culture, people, and events during his lifetime. Man, the Grim Reaper sure was busy back then. The author shows him to have been a complex individual who evolved from a passionate idealist into more of a crafty pragmatist. Clearly, Jefferson was one of our country’s big brains. His accomplishments are truly breathtaking. It also shows that the guy was all too human. Overall Thomas Jefferson is a man to admire. When historians claim he is the spirit of our country, they’re not kidding.