Rating: 4/5

Well, it took me since April to read this damn book, BUT I DID IT. I am so glad that The Garlic Ballads is out of my life. Why, you ask? Because this book is the equivalent of reading Les Miserables.  EVERYONE DIES.  Not to say that this book isn't good, but the story was depressing and for some reason it was set in 1980's but it felt like feudal China.

I know that many of my friends have stated that they will never read this book, so below I have a nice summary of Mo Yan's novel. Obviously this is a very shortened summary of a beautifully written novel. There are several spoilers, so if you have any interest of reading this at all, I would stay away from my review. Your interest will diminish. 

As this story opens, we are introduced to our resident sad sack, the Charlie Brown of The Garlic Ballads, Gao Yang. He is called into town for some reason and is immediately beaten down by some officers. He is arrested for inciting a riot in which will take the whole novel to see unfold. He pees himself, because that's what everyone in this novel seems to do at one point or another. We find out he is a garlic farmer, due to the fact that after the revolution, the Communist government has assigned the peasants of Paradise Valley to plant garlic and nothing else. 

Then we are introduced to Gao Ma (not to be confused with Gao Yang), or Romeo, of the garlic ballads. He has the hots for his neighbor, Jinju, or Juliet, who is betrothed to another man. One day he approaches Jinju and lets her use his Walkman and helps her with her chores. The quickest way to a woman's heart is letting her sit there while you do heavy labor for her apparently (wait not apparently... I'm on board with this idea) and they instantly fall in love. Gao Ma decides that it would be a great idea to tell Jinju's highly abusive parents that she is no longer a pawn in their dowry scheme. Naturally, Jinju's parents do not take to the news happily, and proceed to beat Gao Ma and Jinju nearly to death. 

From then on, Jinju is beaten daily, for loving another man other than her future husband who she has never met. Crazy kids and their hormones! She and Gao Ma decide to run away together, start a new life in the big city. They are able to make it to the bus station, (but not before having sex along the way!) where they are caught by Deputy Yang, and distant relative of Jinju's family the Fangs. He lets Jinju's brothers beat Gao Ma nearly to death and get in a few kicks at Jinju.

The joke, however, is on the Fangs. Gao Ma and Jinju's brief sexual encounter results in a surprise pregnancy. The marriage contract becomes null and void, and the Fangs agree to give Gao Ma Jinju as long as he pays a sum. But, this proves to be difficult for Gao Ma. The Communist Government has a surplus of garlic, and will no longer purchase anymore until some of it sells (because that would be just too easy!) 

At the same time, Gao Yang and Jinju's father travel several miles to sell their own crop. Of course, they are unable to sell any garlic. Naturally chaos ensues and Jinju's father is hit by a car and dies (BODY COUNT: 1.)

Back in Back in Paradice Valley, a pregnant Jinju decides that she can no longer live without Gao Ma, and thinking that he is arrested for inciting said riot that still hasn't been explained, hangs herself. (BODY COUNT: 3.) 

In the flashback, Gao Ma and the rest of the garlic farmers (including Gao Yang and Jinju's mother) lead a riot, destroying government buildings, demanding that someone buy their garlic.

And thus, the novel comes fill circle, and the flashbacks connect to the present. The Gao Ma/Yang are arrested and tried, along with Jinju's mother. Years pass, and eventually Jinju's mother is released from prison. Jinju's brothers, being the assholes of the novel, decide to sell Jinju's ashes to the father of the man she was previously betrothed to, since that guy decided he couldn't live without Jinju, and thus jumps down a well and kills himself (BODY COUNT 4.) They want to combine the ashes of Jinju and this random guy, so they will be together forever in the afterlife. 

Jinju's mother does not approve so she hangs herself (BODY COUNT: 5.)

When Gao Ma is informed that his lover's ashes were sold to another, he escapes from prison, knowing that he will be gunned down (BODY COUNT: 6.)

 

THE END. 

 

There are a lot of deep themes in this novel, like the failures of communist leaders and the clash of a feudal ways of life in a modern world. Violence also plays a major role, which is emphasized by Deputy Yang to the Fangs, "Under the new government you can't just beat your daughter, she is a person protected under the law." But then Deputy Yang proceeds to let them beat Jinju in front of him. I think Mo Yang is trying to say that communism or any government in general, when run by corrupt officials, just doesn't work. 
 
 

Or 

 
 
Just let people be together that want to be together. Otherwise everyone will die.