Rating: 5/5

The first psychology textbook i read after trying it out at uni. So i didn't see it as work and took about a week and a few days to read it. I had my reasons for erring away from the study of psychology. And chose to study nonsense instead. After nonsense I came to see myself as a Buddhist as i like, and revere what is true and Buddhism is as true as Robert Wright says it is. So after reading about the subject for a year or so and soaking most of it up i had the urge to gravitate towards something new. As i go through cycles and stages. Psychology is something i have always been interested in, probably because i used to struggle to understand my thoughts,feelings and behavior. But being pushed into a box i didn't agree with by people in that profession caused me to dissociate from something i used to be fascinated with. So returning to studying psychology again i see as a part of my recovery. Its really interesting too its like discovering a treasure chest. 

I like psychology because i like science and i like understanding people. So what did this book do for me. It introduced me to a vast array of approaches to looking at personality. And gave me an overview of the history of psychology in terms of studying personality. There are many different approaches and all have something to offer in understanding ourselves and others. I found truths to identify in all of them . The approaches covered were psychoanalytic, neo freudian, trait, biological, humanistic, behavioral/social learning and the cognitive approach. 

The author segwayed many ideas in an easily understandable manner where he tied and linked them together, making the data easier to memorize, so that after reading this text i could talk to friends and peers about it in a confident manner. The book also touched on some abnormal psychology by discussing how problems like anxiety and depression make themselves manifest in the personality and their typical causes. This book was utterly fantastic i annotated and underlined the hell out of it, and will return to it, to brush up on it periodically. After reading it i immediately jumped into studying a social psychology textbook and after that i'm going to read one on abnormal psychology. Psychology is a very interesting subject that has a lot to offer those who love thought. So i highly recomend this textbook it was very thought provoking, and as i read it i was constantly thinking how this info applies to my own situation and people i know. Reading science textbooks such as this , is as enlightening as science itself. I may be saying the obvious, but its really true to me as i was wrapped up in irrationality, conspiracy theories, and mind control cults for years.