2.5 stars - I won't give it two stars as it had enough material I found interesting that it was a mildly worthwhile read, but three is a stretch. 

The bad: This book isn't especially well-written, and is rife with typos and spelling errors (at least in the Kindle edition). For instance, it goes back and forth between "Cilla" and "Cilia" from one sentence to another when referring to singer Cilla Black, whom he mentions frequently. At one point it had "Waharishi" for "Maharishi," and at another it had "Hamaiian" instead of "Hawaiian." This kind of error popped up many times, and was just silly to have in an ebook that could've easily been spellchecked. It was first printed in 1983, but once you "reprinted" it as an ebook years later, surely modern software could've fixed any errors missed in the original. Many times, it used the letter "S" instead of a dollar sign, as in "S2 million" instead of "$2 million." Just as bad, the author had a habit of repeatedly noting that a story was "revealed here for the first time" about some small, uninteresting tidbit that hadn't been in the press before. 

The good: It was interesting enough that I read the entire book. It's from the view of someone who worked with the Beatles for many years, from the early days, so it goes more into business aspects than I cared to read about. It managed to toss in a few tidbits about their personal lives and relationships, however, which is more where my interest lies. I'm especially interested in how Paul and Linda ended up together, and the same for John and Yoko - neither woman seemed likely to catch the attention of two of the biggest superstars in the world, and yet they did - and both men seemed to have picked a wife who was actually a good match for them, which can't be an easy task when women are falling at your feet everywhere you go. The author did give a tiny bit more insight into how this all came to be - not as much as I would've liked, but I discovered a few things I hadn't heard before.

All in all, I learned enough of interest to make it worthwhile for the few bucks I paid for the book on sale.