Rating: 4/5

4.5

"… when people fall in love, merit, goodness, kindness are not what ‘tis always determined by. And we cannot think for others. We cannot feel for others…"

The Miller’s Dance brings me through book nine in the exceptional Poldark series. And, I am happy to say, it’s just as addicting as ever! This book continues where the last one left off - examining the lives and loves of the younger generation. I admit that I was a little skeptical initially about being introduced to a new set of characters, fearing that my old, true friends would be left behind. My hesitations were groundless, however, because author Winston Graham does not abandon the older, beloved generation. I sense he was not ready to cast them aside himself! 

What Graham does so masterfully is make the reader really care for his people, to feel their aches and joys right along with them. And what can be more painful, at times, than young love? It seems no one is left unscathed by this intense emotion. 

"It was like being in a period of health – almost having forgotten one’s ill health – and then suddenly recognizing a stirring of pain again, a pain which one knew to be incurable, deep down, reminding one in the midst of happiness that for some complaints there is no cure."

This installment unearthed an exciting and promising discovery, revealed a joyous surprise, and took me on an adventure filled with heaps of tension! I was alternately nervous and elated. Characters are neither black nor white, and that moral gray area is often examined in these novels. One minute you may find yourself swearing at a favorite character, the next you may realize you have been subconsciously rooting for the villain! This is the stamp of excellent writing and storytelling all wrapped up in one (or in this case, twelve books). If you have any inclination to sink your teeth into this series, then don’t hesitate any longer. I’ll be singing praises for another three novels, but then you will need to rely on others to convince you if I haven’t yet succeeded!

"You don’t live to be safe, Ross. You live to be alive, to take a deep breath of the air and to know your heart is beating!"