Rating: 5/5

Read for a literature class focusing on Japanese literature on the theme of war and memory.
Like Soseki's Kokoro, a very thin read, and yet so complex, thought-provoking, and just beautifully written. Probably because this was taught to me by the same Professor with whom I read Kazuo Ishiguro, but I was strongly reminded with the idea of "buried memory"/"The Buried Giant"—our past, our memory, traumatic, painful, and so heartbreaking, that we cannot but bury it deep within us, at times even temporarily forget it, until it comes crawling back into our consciousness and physical lives, as if to haunt us, demanding us to come to terms with it. As Manase is one that lived through the war, tormented by the memory from then, this story most certainy would read as the way in which the traumatic memory of war were and is for many, along with the way we should or must deal with it. It is a tale that speaks to all, even, or especilly, those that have no first-hand experience of the war, including myself, and the author himself too, involving us in our own collective memory of the past, that, despite it seeming so distant, is undoubtedly a part of who we are. And yet for me, more than this aspect of war memory, it was a story that hit close to home, one that spoke to a very personal part of me. I think we all have those memories that we rather keep buried, forgotten, even cut off from our lives, even when we know it will always linger somewhere in your mind, and that sooner or later, we woud have to confront it in one way or another. Manase's story is of course, extremely tragic; elements of his postwar life, especially his two sons, became repetitions and doubles of the past he had resisted to remember, with which he dealt by further retreating to his shelter of the stones, resulting in the deaths of both of his sons. Although our recollections may not be as vivid and horrific as Manase's, nor come with grave consequences like his, I think we can definitely relate to the way our buried memories, mistakes, and disasters keep coming at us like deja vu, repeating itself in our lives that come so many years after the event of the memory. This is an example my professor provided with, but this is true for our failed relationships, and I certainly have some that come to my mind, ones that I wish I could erase from my life. The way Manase attempts to escape into the larger, much more vast, geological time is a complete disaster, and one cannot but think, "only if he had pushed himself to face his past much faster!". But isn't Manase's ways exactly the way we deal with things like this? And that's precisely why this story is so painful to read... because we know the feelng of constantly escaping, and the struggle to live with the consequences of that. The metaphor of the dark cave that parallels with the cavernous hole in Manase's memory is wonderful, so clever. Being the place in which the lance corporal and Hiroaki were muredered, it is a darkness so deep within the cave, as if buried deep down in our mind. The story is left hopeful though, with Manase being able to dig into this cave in the end, with the green chert, which travelled through the hands of his two sons and the lance corporal, back into his own hands. 
Beautiful, and so so painful.