Rating: 4/5

"Road 1 was the main north-south artery of transportation along the coast. The stretch of heavily-fortified villages, a line of sand dunes, and salt marshes stretching from Hué to Quang-Tri. Losses had been heavy, one ambush after another...inspired the French soldiers to call it la rue sans joie or in English, 'Street Without Joy.'" pg 144

Bernard B. Fall put tremendous time and energy as a war correspondent about the failed political and military objectives in French Indochina. The book gave a brief set-up to the French Indochina War starting after World War 2 but focused mainly from 1950 onward when Chinese and American intervention enlarged and internationalization of the conflict. The author gave detailed accounts of the heavy combat action in chronological order that played out of the next four years. Alongside that he gave insider accounts of the social aspects of French Indochina, daily life inside the expeditionary military forces and capabilities, the roles of women in the French colonial society (families, nurses, legal prostitutes, etc.), detailed information on the make-up of the armed forces (mainland French, Foreign Legion, North African, Vietnamese, Laotian, Cambodian and mountain tribe volunteers, etc.), and details from inside outposts, forts, and combat deep behind enemy lines.

The war was a failed attempt to produce effective counterinsurgency (COIN) operations against the successful jungle warfare tactics employed by the communist forces, the Viet Minh. Constant uncertainty gained the upper hand and started psychological rifts among the ranks. Jungle warfare gave fears of where shadows, fog, and foliage hide the enemy because "once more, the dreaded pattern of grigontage, the slow gnawing away man by man, platoon by platoon, was setting in regardless of static defense" (pg 191). Communications, mobility, resupply, timely medical EVAC, ambushes and boobytraps, and fighting an unseen enemy provided many obstacles of Western concept of traditional warfare the French had fought most of their existence. The Viet Minh constantly had the advantage of clandestine maneuvering compared to the French: the positioning of large units required the prior arrival of reconnaissance detachments and liaison officers whose presence rarely remained undetected. Thus, the tactical surprise, was non-existent and the terrain itself precluded the use of high speed as a compensating factor. pg 172

The evolution of combat had developed Special Warfare and honed the concept of a self-sustaining Special Forces operator.
To train a man for guerrilla warfare was long and tedious. If he managed to stay alive for more than a year in his assignment, he usually had learned at least one, or even several, mountain dialects perfectly and had physically adapted to the murderous climate and the food and to the way of life in the jungle. The man had become irreplaceable because of his specialized knowledge. pg 271 

May 1954 was the military failure at Dien Bien Phu. This was the French High Command's last ditch effort to stop Viet Minh maneuvering throughout the northern region. The operation was an attempt to stop Communist supply movement into neighboring Laos and draw out the enemy in the open to inflict as much damage as possible to the Viet Minh. French forces were quickly overrun with overwhelming Communist forces both in manpower and artillery barrage. The first 24-hours sealed the Viet Minh victory and led to ceasefire. Similar to the Korean War, POWs existed on both sides but the unique indoctrination in the Communist camps posed internal conflict. Brainwashing, reeducation, and cases of soldiers turning on each other for compensation during imprisonment. 

I learned a lot while reading and enjoyed the narrative. The last part was a chronological bullet-format list of events that led to the gradual total-involvement of US Forces, who up to 1964 has acted as military advisors for the Vietnamese Army. I would recommend this book to anyone interested in the preluding events of Americas combat involvement in Vietnam. Thanks!