Rating: 2/5

This is a book that I wish I could say I enjoyed more than I did. Written in 1993, it's difficult to delve into now because the basic plot has been covered several times in the intervening years, primarily in film: Her, A.I., and Ex Machina (among others) all cover very similar territory. 

We get the lone, introverted genius designing his "ideal woman," Maggie (inevitably reminiscent of Pygmalion); her slow progression through understanding her own consciousness and embodied existence; her inevitable parting from her creator, resulting in a road trip section in which she meets people who help her cope; and a reunion with said creator who continues to think of her very much as his creation, with consequences she must counter for her own survival. 

There's nothing wrong with this story, of course--it's really, at this point, a worthy standard of science fiction, and Virtual Girl obviously preceded the films I'm referencing. But those intervening works do make it difficult to re-capture the freshness the novel probably deserved at the time. It also embraces a cyberpunk portrayal of the online world which tends to date it (and may have done so even in 1993). 

Thomson clearly put some effort into portraying Maggie's life as a homeless person (in fact, she references the importance of that here), and that emphasis does make the book stand out. She also includes a transgender character who would not meet expectations of a novel written today, but whose portrayal is more sympathetic than one would expect of a novel written when it was. (This is a sensitive issue, of course, so I would respect anyone who disagreed with that assessment.) 

(Also: Thomson's portrayal of Arnold and his gendered assumptions is consistently spot-on, and has the unfortunate effect in 2018 of making the book feel LESS dated.)

What ultimately holds the novel back, though, is the author's style, which is a bit hard to describe. I don't mean to be unfairly critical, but the style simply feels.... let's say "unpolished." There is heart in this book, and I respect it for that, but the lack of polish in the novel's style ultimately hamstrings what it's trying to accomplish. To be fair to the book--and I want to be--it is a first novel, but the problem remains and may limit what the reader will get from it.