Rating: 5/5

This was a very thought-provoking book for me. Even though the book was published in 1995, the findings are still important today. At one level, the book is discouraging as it discusses the problems associated with the absence of fathers in the home. A lot of research is cited to support the author's premise that the absence of a father in a home is associated with significant problems in American society. 

The popular culture of movies and TV denigrates the role of the father and suggests that suitable replacements can be found. The research presented in this book clearly shows this isn't true. The book spends time on how some people who advocate against the importance of the father have gone against or misinterpreted their data in order to support their denigration of the father. Some people actively argue that fathers are not necessary and that the "old father" is a person to be shunned and avoided. The "old father" is mean to his children and wife and does nothing but bring sadness and misery to family life.

While some of these "old fathers" exist, advocates have generalized that all fathers must be like that, and that what is needed is a "new father." The "new father" is genderless and doesn't necessarily prioritize providing for his family above other roles. (I found it interesting how many people involved in family science were pushing for the removal of gender-influenced traits in the family in the 1980's and 1990's.) However, the research shows that this does not lead to good outcomes in family life.

Other forms of fatherhood discussed in the book include deadbeat dads, visiting fathers, sperm fathers, stepfathers, and the nearby guy. This book shows how our cultural scripts not only try to show that these options can make up for the "old father," but that they are actually better. (The deadbeat dad becomes a suitable alternative to a father if he pays child support.)

The book concludes with suggestions of how fatherhood can be improved in American society. All throughout, the importance of good fathers is emphasized. The research shows that none of the alternatives provided by the alternative cultural script can compensate for the good father. The author provides suggestions for how the importance of fatherhood could be reenthroned in American culture. As I read, I realized that I can be a better father. For that, I give the book five stars.