Rating: 2/5

A light, frothy summer read. If you don't know a lot about courtly life in the 17th and 18th century, its informative enough to sketch out a good picture. I liked having a very human portrait of some of the great figures of the English and French court. If you want light summer non-fiction reading, this is a good bet. 

HOWEVER, there's a lot that needs fixing for it to be perfect. 
1) It really only focuses on the reigns of Charles II and Louis the 14th. So if you're looking for a wide historical context from the middle ages to today (as the back promises) you aren't going to get that. There's a smattering of 19th century, a mention of how the middle ages frowned on mistresses, and then a few pages devoted to modern mistresses (really half a chapter devoted to Camilla). I get it if an author wanted to focus on one era, that's fine, but it would have been stronger if they had just said "This book is about 1600 to 1800. Enjoy." 

2) The structure. It hops around from mistress to mistress to examine specific aspects of court life for these women. There are two problems with this. You end up retreading old ground as you revisit women you've already read about a couple of times. While it isn't straight out boring, it feels padded to reintroduce and reexamine something mentioned earlier but with a sliver of new information. Secondly, this book is obviously not for big history buffs. So having a time line or something would have been useful, because by the second half of the book I had no idea WHEN things were happening, unless it was during a big event (ie the French Revolution). Sorry I don't know the Polish line of inheritance by heart, but it would have been nice to have some reference other than the first time you mention these people and never bring it up again. 

3) The tone. The info was great in terms of sketching out court life, but the author seemed weirdly ok with how crappy these women's lives were, and straight up treated rape like it was a joke. Weird. Then I read an interview with the author at the end of the book, and she said the one thing she took away form her research is that men don't like being around women who complain, so you should try to dress up and look good for your man. If you're in the middle of something when he gets home, you should drop what you're doing, make a cheese platter (yes, specifically that) and go ask him about his day. What. WHAT. You spent years researching how these women tried to make the best of sexist, violent world and your response isn't "Women should work toward a more equal world" but "Catering to men all the time makes them happy so yay cheese!" I was offended, my husband was offended, and we both thought she was nuts. 

So in short don't expect too much and stay the hell away from this woman if you see her approaching your daughter with a cheese plate.