Rating: 4/5

The casual reader can be forgiven for reading this title and thinking, as I first did, that this is a book set in a desert. Some covers aren't very helpful with that, either. Instead, this is an interesting adventure novel, published in 1903, focused on a sailing holiday taken by a young Englishman with a school friend. While exploring the Black Sea coastal area around Denmark and Germany stumble onto what may be a German plot. Exactly what this plot is unfolds very slowly. The "sands" of the title are sandbars, apparently numerous and treacherous in that coastal region. 

This book almost entirely takes place on a very small yacht, and a lot of the story involves details of sailing. Those with a background in boating will probably feel comfortable with all the jargon, but the descriptions are well-drawn and the two MCs are interesting young men. Considered by some to be the first great espionage novel, though others give that award to Kim, this really read much more as an adventure story to me, though there's certainly an element of "What is going on?" This story won't please everyone, but I really enjoyed it.

NB - If you have no sailing knowledge, here are a few terms that might be helpful. You may want to look them up and learn more about them, but even this much information should help.
Sound(ing) - Sounding off a sailboat means dropping a weight chain to the bottom to gauge the depth of the water you're in.
Centerboard - This is a retractable piece of the boat that can be lowered into the water to provide stability. It rises up into a "case" that sticks up from the floor of a small boat, taking up space in the cabin. 
Beat - Sailboats can sail into the wind by taking a zigzagging course that gradually moves them forward.
Tack - Tacking is when the boat changes its direction while beating. Each switch in direction is a tack.
Kedging - A small anchor is attached to a rope and thrown ahead of the boat. The boat is hauled up to the anchor, and the process is repeated until the boat is free of the sandbar or reaches its destination.