Rating: 3/5

AN ATTACK ON POLICIES INTENDED TO HELP ‘NON-PREFERRED’ GROUPS

Thomas Sowell (born 1930) is an economist, social theorist, political philosopher, columnist, and author (known particularly for his books on race and economics, such as ‘Ethnic America: A History,’ ‘The Economics and Politics of Race,’ etc.), who has long been associated with the Hoover Institution at Stanford University.

He wrote in the Preface of this 1990 book, “Groups receiving preferential treatment are indeed as disparate as can be imagined---from untouchables in India to whites in South Africa. That makes it all the more surprising to discover common patterns in programs for such extraordinarily different peoples, in wholly different circumstances, living in countries separated by vast distances and differentiated by sharply contrasting traditions. Much of the massive literature on preferential policies… concerns itself with the morality, sociology, politics, legalities, administration, or goals of these policies… the ACTUAL RESULTS have received remarkably little attention or systematic analysis. A recurring complaint in the relatively few empirical studies that have been done is the lack of data available… Part I of this book focuses on such facts as are available for various groups in various countries… Part II will explore the beliefs and rationales of preferential policies---and why they so seldom match the actual results.”

In Chapter 1, he states, “Preferential policies, as defined here, are policies which legally mandate that individuals NOT all be judged by the same criteria… when they originate in groups differentiated by government into preferred and non-preferred groups… The mechanisms and the consequences of preferential policies will be analyzed in an international perspective… The social context of these programs varies radically among these countries… This makes any common patterns among them all the more striking and deserving of closer scrutiny. Among these patterns are the following: 1. Preferential programs… have tended not only to persist but to expand in scope… 2. Within the groups designated by government… the benefits have usually gone disproportionately to those members already more fortunate. 3. Group polarization has tended to increase in the wake of preferential programs… 4. Fraudulent claims of belonging to the designated beneficiary groups have been widespread… 5. Both official and unofficial writings on preferential programs tend to abound in discussions of the rationale, mechanics… with a dearth… of data on the actual outcomes.” (Pg. 15-16)

He suggests, “Given the differential costs of discrimination in competitive labor markets versus controlled labor markets, it is possible to understand the otherwise puzzling anomaly that Jewish artisans were once more prevalent in eastern Poland, where anti-Semitism was greatest, and black artisans in the American South where racism was most blatant. In each case, these were regions where guilds ... or labor unions … had less control. In each case, there was MORE prejudice than usual but LESS discrimination, because the costs of discrimination (in these particular occupations) were higher in competitive markets than in the controlled markets in other regions of the country.” (Pg. 31)

He argues, “The keystone of many arguments for preferential policies is that large disparities in ‘representation’ are due to discrimination against the under-represented group is clearly false where the under-represented group is the politically dominant majority, which either controls the institutions … or forms the bulk of the clientele on whose patronage the minority depends. Group disparities, which are so often discussed in terms of their abstract statistical improbabilities, are empirically and historically commonplace around the world.” (Pg. 89)

He notes, “The often reiterated belief that standardized tests predict a lower subsequent college performance level than in fact occurs with black students has somehow survived innumerable empirical studies which show the UTTER FALSITY of this claim. There is, in fact, a tendency for test scores to predict a somewhat higher college performance than black students actually achieve. In general, test scores are more accurate predictors than high school grades for blacks, though the reverse is true for whites and Asians… Whether the tenacity with which the belief is held that test scores are less predictive for blacks reflects simply a … pragmatic need to avoid admitting that admissions standards have been lowered to obtain statistical ‘representation,’ this belief simply does not fit the empirical facts. More important, the actual consequences of admitting blacks to institutions where they do not meet the usual admissions standards have been educationally disastrous for those students.” (Pg. 109)

He reports, “The disincentives created by group preferences apply to both preferred and non-preferred groups… [In] Jamaica, after it became independent and black-run… it was the whites who faced the disincentives of a non-preferred. Many withdrew from the competition for public office because they ‘felt that the day of the black man had come and questioned why they had to make the effort if the coveted job or the national honor would go to the blacks, despite their qualifications.’ In short, preferential policies represent not simply a transfer of benefits from one group to another, but can also represent a net loss, as both groups perform less well as a result.” (Pg. 124)

He contends, “Those viscerally convinced of the pervasiveness of discrimination and its potency as an explanation of social disparities---and convinced also of the effectiveness of preferential policies as a remedy---are little troubled by the logical shakiness of the statistical evidence. That is all the more reason for others to be doubly troubled---not simply because an incorrect policy may be followed but also, and more importantly, because actions ostensibly based on the rule of law are in substance based on visceral convictions, the essence of lynch law.” (Pg. 135)

He points out, “The contemporary socioeconomic position of groups in a given society often bears no relationship to the historic wrongs they have suffered. Both in Canada and the United States, the Japanese have significantly higher incomes than the whites, who have a documented history of severe anti-Japanese discrimination in both countries. The same story could be told of the Chinese in Malaysia, Indonesia, and many other countries around the world, of the Jews in countries with virulent anti-Semitism, and a wide variety of other groups in a wide variety of other countries. Among poorer groups as well, the level of poverty often has little correlation with the degree of oppression. No one would claim that the historic wrongs suffered by Puerto Ricans in the United States exceed those suffered by blacks, but the average Puerto Rican income is lower than the average income of blacks.” (Pg. 149)

 He summarizes, “preferential policies are intended to favor groups currently ‘under-represented’ in desirable occupations or industries. Both majorities … and minorities … have equated statistical inequalities with moral inequities… the presumption that groups would be evenly represented in various sectors and levels of society, in the absence of discrimination, has become a belief almost hermetically sealed off from any logical or empirical argument. Criticism is dismissed as malevolently motivated, evidence as culturally biased, criteria as irrelevant. 

"Evidence that clearly contradicts the vision has often been hidden by redefinition. For example, where the assumption that non-whites’ lower economic position is due to whites’ discrimination, non-white groups who have been successful in the same society are an obvious embarrassment to the proponents of this theory. In Britain, this has led to a redefinition of all non-white groups, including Asians, as ‘black.’ Thus Asians disappear as a separate group by verbal sleight-of-hand, as the collective economic, educational, and other performances of ‘blacks’ as a whole are compared to those of whites. In the United States, a similar burying of discordant evidence is achieved by using the ponderous phrase ‘people of color’ to encompass all non-whites, thereby swamping the above-average income statistics of Chinese and Japanese Americans under the larger numbers of below-average income statistics from blacks and other low-income, non-white groups. In Canada, the lump-together phrase is ‘visible minorities.’ It too helps to conceal the fact that some non-white groups in Canada are more prosperous than some white groups. The particular words used to lump disparate groups together differ from country to country but the tactic is the same. In short, no matter what the evidence says, the vision is protected from it.” (Pg. 176)

He states, “In the United States, the unbridled vilification of the Moynihan Report marked virtually the beginning of the end of candid discussion of minority groups. Ironically, the Moynihan Report was a plea for more government help for blacks, and what it said had already been said by black scholars, some of whom joined in the vilification of the Moynihan. Moreover, the candor of the Moynihan Report did not begin to approach the painful frankness of ‘Black Bourgeoisie’ by E. Franklin Frazier, the outstanding black sociologist.” (Pg. 179)

As with all of Sowell’s books, some love them, and some hate them.