Fascinating, but controversial enough, Jung always challenged my restless neurons, true piranhas in permanent search for flesh of more or less spectacular theories. His idea, here, is quite simple, yet quite innovative, I'd say.
Synchronicity, defined as the meaningful coincidence of two or more events that are not causally related, suggests that these events are connected by their significance rather than by cause and effect. Brilliant. But. It will always be a " but ", in all the cases. 
Firstly, the lack of empirical evidence could be a quite significant issue. If I dream about an old friend, and then receive a call from them the next day, it might feel profoundly meaningful to me. But this could easily be dismissed as a coincidence without any deeper significance. 
Secondly, confirmation bias plays a huge role in how we perceive synchronicity. Often we have a natural tendency to notice events that confirm their beliefs, while ignoring those that do not. 
 I see the problem of defining meaningfulness as the most debatable problem. What is considered meaningful can vary greatly from person to person, and culture to culture, this making hard to establish a universal standard for what constitutes a synchronistic event, not mentioning the differences in the perception of meaningfulness in the readings of the readers on this site, for example. Which can be considered a normal thing, after all. 
I remember in Poe's novel " The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket ", a shipwrecked crew resorts to cannibalism, and the victim's name is Richard Parker. That was written in 1838. 
In 1884, a real-life shipwreck led to the crew of the Mignonette resorting to cannibalism, and the victim's name was - attention ! - Richard Parker... Coincidence ? Some would say the name Richard Parker was relatively common, and circumstances of shipwrecks often lead to similar desperate measures. 
Another : Lincoln's secretary was named Kennedy, and Kennedy's secretary was named Lincoln. They were both assassinated. So ? 
Take another one : Mark Twain was born in 1835, the same year Halley's Comet passed by Earth. He predicted that he will die when the comet returned, saying " The Almighty has said, no doubt, " Now here are these two unnacountable freaks ; they came in together, they must go out together ". Twain died in 1910, the day after Halley's comet made its closest approach to Earth. 
So, in the end, the subjective nature of what is considered meaningful and the influence of cognitive biases make it difficult to establish synchronicity as a scientifically robust theory. Not all Jung's theories can be supported scientifically, but they are, undoubtedly, food for thought. As an ironic note, the demolisher of Jung's theory is none other than Freud, Jung's former mentor and collaborator. But that's why we have teachers for, right ? For to overcome them, here lies the advance of knowledge.