Rating: 2/5

I wanted to like this book more than I actually did. I seek out genuinely "left" sci-fi and fantasy (Iain Banks, Octavia Butler, Ursula LeGuin, etc.) and this one was on China Mieville's list of "Fifty Fantasy &amp; Sci-Fi Works that Socialists Should Read". But Star Fraction is much more political than believable. It reads in parts like the wet dream of a left-newspaper seller, with obscure Socialist splinter groups (the "Last International") occupying key positions in world history. There's little or no explanation of how these tendencies, currently so marginal on the world stage, become hegemonic. It's just taken as a given.

Some of the politics are frankly mystifying from a contemporary perspective: as an industrial Marxist of the pre-climate change era, Macleod depicts enviromentalists as anti-progress "barbarians", against whom the working class allies with the capitalists. He actually refers to enviros as "green slime"! Ok, some leeway given for being dated, but Star Fraction was only written in 1996. 

The final insult: the book is riddled with Marxist puns and in-jokes which, even when you get them, aren't particularly funny.

It's not all bad. In parts Star Fraction is an enjoyable cyberpunk-meets-Billy-Bragg adventure. Where Macleod's vision of history is darker and less tinted by red-colored glasses, it's also more believable: e.g., his speculations on how nation-states fall apart and get partly reconstituted, or how ideologically-oriented, quasi-autonomous enclaves, like the Christian fundamentalist community and the gay ghetto (patrolled by uniformed "Rough Traders") emerge from the wreckage of the State. And later in the book, when the exposition tails off and the storytelling picks up, you find yourself actually enjoying it as a narrative.

I may give Macleod another chance, and try some of his later works. But if you want a much better written, more believable, more humane novel about socialism in the near future, read China Mountain Zhang.