Rating: 4/5

This book really opened my eyes to how corrupt the justice system can be. Things are different in the UK and US but I'm sure that some of the same things go on here (if not most of them). 
This case is handled so terribly, ending badly for both parties. The judge clearly shows that he is assessing by looks (including people's race) when he is first making a decision about them. In fact, racism plays a huge part in the trial with Urek being judged because he is not classed as American despite living there. The defense calls him Stanley to make him seen more American (or western) while the prosecution calls him Stanislaus, his given name, trying to constantly bring attention to the fact that they don't consider him American. 
The lawyer goes to drastic (illegal) measures to get his client free despite knowing that he commited the crime, even making his client blatantly lie on the stand. 
The prosecutor is slightly better in that he doesn't threaten anyone but he still tries to prepare people to say what he wants (which I know is common practice but surely it's not right?) and even goes as far as to not call witnesses, who potentially could have turned the case around, because he doesn't want Thomassy to make him look bad. 
The ending is really devastating. It shows that the justice system failed both boys, not just Japhet. If things had been fairer then maybe Urek would have been taken from his father when it is clear that he beats him (even doing so in front of the prosecutor). Maybe if he hasn't been there in the first place then none of it would have happened. 
I do feel that this book distinctly lacks female agency. Women are there as objects mainly and are judged by their looks, which is especially the case with Ed's girlfriend who isn't even allowed to take the stand because she is deemed too pretty and will make people jealous. I imagine that Stein was probably trying to make a statement with this but every time that he described a woman just by their breast size, I couldn't help but become frustrated.