Rating: 2/5

Probably a 2.5 star rating. It’s better than “Gone with the Wind.” But not much. This is not to say that I didn’t have moments where I enjoyed the book. I did. But I thought the flaws of the book were just too egregious to gloss over when rating the work as a whole. Here are some of my major problems with the book: (1) It’s too smug and insidery and this comes out in the narration. (2) The characters, to a one, are all pompous asses. All of them. I found nothing redeeming in them, even when it is clear that Drury lionizes some of them as heroes. None of them are heroes. All of them are insufferable egoists. Bob Munson is a coward. Seab Cooley is a crotchety old prick in the worst southern stereotype of a good-ol’-boy patriarch. (I swear, if Drury didn’t overuse the word “sleepy” to describe Seab Cooley’s placid facial expression a hundred times, I’ll be damned!) Brig Anderson is a self-righteous do-gooder who is supposedly so firm of conviction but who gives up the ghost, literally, without so much as an effort to fight or a concern at all for others. I thought Brig ended up being pathetic and weak, though Drury presents his seedy suicide as the foundation of his sainthood and martyrdom. And Orrin Knox is an insufferable egocentric bulldozer who hides his base ambition behind some idealistic nobility. Bob Leffingwell is a crafty and weasely operator whose relationship with truthtelling is mercenary. (3) The role of kids and spouses in the story is 1950s Leave-It-To-Beaver caricatures. Pidge, Brig’s daughter, is insufferable. Mabel is an emotional wreck. Beth/Bee/Hank, Orrin’s wife, is the obviously superior, but secondarily (and happily) subordinate June Cleaver-like character. (4) There was absolutely no purpose whatsoever of the various diplomats who made cameo appearances. Same with Hal Knox and Crystal Danta. Their stories could have been cut out completely from the novel without losing anything in the plot. And (5), finally, the subtlety of political maneuvering in the end gave way to unabashed, full-throated, anti-communist, Soviet-hatred, moralist patriotic nationalism. The ending completely ruined any kind of procedural nuance and wrangling within the Senate. So, no, this book I found unworthy of the Pulitzer. I suspect it won in 1960 only as a paean to Cold War patriotic nationalism, because it certainly didn’t win for its literary quality of writing and storytelling, which I found to be pedantic and amateurish throughout.