Rating: 3/5

This was a strange novel which I felt never quite delivered on the promise of the opening section. While always holding onto its Science Fiction grounding it traverses a number of sub-genres from horror, to thriller, to action to spiritual. The opening scene was definitely unique with the main protagonist, Carmody, chasing the skin of a human face down a windswept street. This was a pre-cursor to the events of the titular 'Night of Light' where people's darkest secrets and desires manifest themselves in the corporeal realm. 
When Carmody goes through the Night of Light both his and other people's 'demons', for want of a better word, appear. For some people it kills them, for others it breaks them. Those that come through the Night are changed in a spiritual way which is never fully explained. 
The novel is split in two to cover Carmody's two forays through the Night of Light. I really liked the first because it was extremely creative and there was the feeling that man's manifest desires could create anything, good or evil. 
The second time Carmody goes through the Night there is much less focus on these materialisations. I found this disappointing because this was where Farmer could really let his imagination roam free. And especially considering the circumstances (I won't reveal too much!) and all the extra people out on the Night I think it would have been interesting to see what might have coalesced. Instead, the novel descended into a sci-fi shoot-em-up. 
On characterisation, my issue with Carmody was that there was very little to distinguish between his character in the first half and his character in the second. Even though his motives have changed and the story explained why I didn't feel like the narrative portrayed this profound change adequately.
Essentially, this novel is about God, religion and belief and it uses a religion on a far flung planet to present this message. The novel ends with Carmody having had a new revelation but it also leaves some questions unanswered, the biggest of which is ‘what happened during his convalescence that changed him so dramatically from the first part to the second?’
I would recommend this to someone who loves reading Science Fiction but it’s probably not a good stairway to SF for someone who’s never read it before.