Rating: 3/5

Re Passionate Scandal - Michelle Reid goes for the second chance romance set against the background of feuding fathers in this one. 

 The h was 18 and the H was 28 when they had a sudden attack of the Lurve Force Mojo in the pool one day and a big romance was on the boil. (Let this be a lesson to a HP voyagers, Don't Go Near the Water, dangerous things could happen.)

Since the h and H's families had been friends for yonks and the H's family is a big time merchant banking family and the h's dad is a big time risky corporate entrepreneur, the two families think it is a match made in heaven. 

The h is known as the wild child of the family and the H is seen as the future leader of the banking clan, so their romance and ensuing engagement is seen as the merging of dynasties in an understated English Gentry kind of way. 

The h, for her part, is wildly in love with the H and ready to justify her love. The H, well he kinda seems to be very interested back, but the H is a TEASE and his continual refusal to relieve the h of her unicorn grooming status is driving her nuts. She isn't sure if the H is really into her or really into the familial dynastic empire vibe and so she waits until the two of them have a private evening alone and she dons one of her dad's silk shirts and some skimpy knickers and she tries to seduce the H.

His reaction - he spanks her like a spoilt child and then calls her a shameless tart. The h, who has a black temper to go with her black hair, tells him if he isn't interested, other men will be and starts crying as the H storms off after she threw her engagement ring back at him. 

A little while later, the h called all her friends for an impromptu house rave and she is making out with a local lad on the couch, when the H comes in and has a hissy fit. The h realizes that maybe she went a bit too far, but the H doesn't want to know. The engagement is ended, but the two families still appear at a lot of the same social functions and the rumors that the h is running wild around the men is all over town.

The h and the H and their families all show up at the same country club party and the H is with another woman. The H drags the h out onto the dance floor to keep up convivial appearances and then he starts in on the tarty comments again. The h plays up the drama to hilt as she sinks to her knees in the middle of the dance floor in mocking contrition. 

 The H looks like an utter wanker and storms off again and the h, tired of all the drama and heartbroken, flees to her mother in Boston for four years. The book opens with the h's return to her father's and stepmum's house. The h's stepsister is getting married and she has requested the h's presence at the wedding. 

The h has spent the last four years having a mopey moment and getting some social sophistication. She and her Boston male BFF, who is also in recovery for heartbreak, arrive in England and the big family reunion is set to begin. The reunion is marred for the h tho, her English BFF, who happens to be the H's sister, is banned from the h's home cause of the two father's feuding.

The h is horrified that her little contretemps with the H has led to outright warfare and now her stepsister and her BFF can't do the bridesmaid thingy like they planned and everything is awful. Plus the h can't even go to her favorite seekrit spot and spy on the dilapidated Elizabethan manor next door without running into the H. 

The next big portion of the story is the h and H trying to figure out a way to end the feud. The H wants to go the fake romance rekindle with the h route, but after ANOTHER teasing H roofie kissing and gropey moment that AGAIN leaves the h hanging for a lurve club connection, the h tells the H off and accuses him of very manipulative and bullying behavior. The h recalls an prior incident where they both slapped each other in the wake of one of their explosive arguments and she just wants to be done with the situation. 

So the h has a dinner party and she invites all her BFF's and the H's sister and the H and his date. Then they all show up at a party together, obviously fine with everybody and the two father's are forced to reconcile. 

Then the H decides that he is ready to commit to the h. So he gets her to go over to her favorite dilapidated Elizabethan manor, that is in the process of reconstruction, and he tells the h that it is hers, along with a very old painting of it. The H sorta apologizes for holding out on the unicorn grooming license revocation, he claims that he was going nuts with lust, but he thought if he gave into the h, she would get bored and go find another dragon to ride. 

Now tho, they are both still wild about each other and the H is going to back the h's father's latest business venture and they can finally get around to the big Lurve Force Mojo Pink Purple Passion moment. The h and H are now firmly together and maybe he can channel all his excess Lurve Force into other avenues of h interaction besides physically hitting her.

The h's stepsister has her wedding and the h and H are all cuddled up, when the H and h have a minor spat and all the guests are thinking there is going to be another scene. This time tho, the h's Boston BFF announces the H and h are married and have been for a week. 

Everybody is delighted and the H and h go home to their Elizabethan manor, secure in their love and ready to express it. The house is pretty happy as well, as it feels like it too is loved again in the conclusion of this HP outing. 

This one is okay, but it is VERY dated and the father's feuding takes up ages and ages of page count. The H was an utter nematode slime gulper for most of the book. It was pretty clear that MR was using the H's physical aggression to reflect his inner frustrated passion for the h, but it comes off as abusive and not thwarted longing. Reading this book now definitely puts a big damper on the romance, cause this thing reads like a textbook of red flags for a domestic abuser. 

Still, MR can do the passionate longing bit very well and the frustration of the h was pretty believable. The family interactions were pretty sweet and you could probably do worse for an HPlandia outing.