Rating: 4/5

An enjoyable read, while providing a lot of "information" about Borgia-sean Italy.

I found this book on my niece's book-shelf. I don't know why I started reading it but it was probably because I read Mario Puzo's dreadful pornographic version of the Borgias (and sometimes I still struggle to forget that read it) and as I scanned the intro I thought this might prove to be an antidote.

The book was originally published in 1947 and I was reading a new edition in 2002. The Intro was by Jonathan Yardley. JY claims that the years from 1930 to 1950 were the "golden" years of American fiction, with works greatly superior to modern works. "Modern works" as defined placed John Grisham and Mary Higgins Clark on the same low pedestal. Books from the "golden age" were by authors who I have never heard of, including Samuel Shellabarger.

oh, well! or in other words, aarrghh!

First and foremost, its a fun read. Especially if you enjoy reading about how a siege might be conducted, how Cesare Borgia might have actually thought, etc.. Shellabarger also has a lot of fun making up courtly language as it might have existed in the courts of Florentine Italy. Since this is 1500s, it is a bit too late for the French style of "Courtly love" with its implications of apparently unrequited love, but that does not stop Shellabarger. The heroine is married to a man old enough to be her father but she is pure as driven snow when she and the hero finally engage in holy matrimony (or maybe a bit before that). The villains are utterly evil; the good guys begin as cynics but their hearts of gold that lurk behind a mask of physical ugliness are revealed by the end; the hero is redeemed by the love of the heroine, but his manliness is in no doubt as even the villainesses hanker for his attentions (one freely given but with the advent of the heroine, no more).

Shades of Tom Jones, be not proud!

Shellabarger also has his hero express the desire to see a unified Italy. I don't know if this has historical validity -- the Italy that was ruled from Ravenna came into existence in the fifth century A.D. and ceased to exist as a unified concept by 1000 AD. 

One factoid that I did not know of : 
 "Zoppo is "cripple" in Italian. Blacksmiths in proto-Indo-European cultures were often crippled to prevent escape."

One anti-factoid: 
Shellabarger describes the sliver of the new moon rising in the east in the evening and compares it to the golden hair of his heroine. Small problem -- the new moon sets in the west in the evening and only rises in the east in the morning.

(Oh, well! Nobody said that Shellabarger was a scientist).

I enjoyed the way Shellabarger described the conspiracies, plots, and counter-plots that the rulers engaged in. If I read this book again it will be because of two things:
a) the conspiracies
b) the description of the heroine (Camilla de Baglioni) and villainess (Angela Borgia), both fictional. Their behavior and the hero's responses.