Rating: 2/5

Another frustrating TO BE CONTINUED...
  Someone needs to explain to me why I paid $8 for a book that didn't have an ending to it. Honestly, it didn't have a beginning either because that was in book 4 Vampire Mountain. It's just the next installment in one long book you have to read one part at a time. I bitched about this when I reviewed Vampire Mountain. Maybe it's just me but when I pay for a novel I think it should be a full NOVEL with a beginning, middle and an end. Isn't that what I paid for? Okay I'll stop bitching now.
  This installment of The Saga of Darren Shan was the biggest disappointment yet. Darren has to perform five trials to clear his master's reputation for making him an half-vampire so young. First, I'm not quite sure how that's Darren's problem but then I'm not a vampire. Now consider that these trials are normally performed by vampires in order to prove they are ready to become vampire Generals and they have been preparing for decades if not hundreds of years. Okay so fine Darren fails what's the big deal? The price of failure? Death!
  There were no real surprises for me. The trials were what I had expected. Even the cliffhanger was given away in the first part of the book.
  
    Finally, I'd pretty much figured out in Vampire Mountain that Kurda Smadlt was a traitor (pretty sure he's the Vampaneze Lord everyone is freaking out about). He thinks the Vampaneze are misunderstood, wants peace with them, thinks the vampire way of life is barbaric and out of date, and is making a detailed map of the caves of Vampire Mountain? Hello?
  
  So am I going to read Book 6 The Vampire Prince? Well, see that's the trouble with cliffhangers, huh? You really have to read the next book don't you? You have know what happens to poor Darren. Now I'm going to see if I can check the rest of the series out from my local library because I am so not paying for them any more.
  To read my review of the other books in this series, use the links below:
  
      Book One: A Living Nightmare 
	 Book Two: The Vampire's Assistant 
	 Book Three: Tunnels of Blood 
	 Book Four: Vampire Mountain 
	 Book Six: The Vampire Prince 
	 Book Seven: Hunters of the Dusk