Rating: 5/5

Shizuko’s Daughter
Kyoko Mori
208 pages
The Ballantine Publishing Group
$6.50
ISBN# 0-449-70433-5
		How many times in life have you been hurt? What do you do about it? Twelve years old Yuki is so young and she is facing many difficult problems. “You’re so good; you’re only twelve and so brave! Your mom would be so proud.” Everyone around Yuki says those sentences to her and she is tired of hearing this every time. She wanted more than a couple of sentences; she wanted love from her family. The problem is will she get it? As a young teenager, she faces many challenges like loosing her mom and more. You will think that she will break down but will that happen? How well can Yuki handle the truth? As you know the truth hurts.
	Yuki had moved many times, now she finally settled in Kobe. One afternoon she comes home on a pleasant day to enjoy her new neighborhood but instead she finds out her mom is died. Yuki walks in to her cozy house feeling and sees her mom lying on the floor unconscious. Yuki thought about why her mom had killed herself. She is in a state of confusion and woe. After this tragedy, nothing seemed right to her. Yuki moved in with her with her occupied father who doesn’t seem to care about her. Also her father’s new married wife, Hanae always bring trouble for her. This world seems unfair with out her mom by her side. She is so young and she is in misery. Should she just join her mom? 
	I like this book because Yuki who is younger than me has to go through this hard world all by herself. I like the motivation of her mom memories that pushes her into becoming a women and enjoying this world even through most her joy is taken away. The only thing I dislike about his book is that the author puts all the misery on one person, oh the poor girl but this also makes it more interesting. It makes it interesting because it makes you want to find out what happens and how a young person can handle things.
	Yuki faces many challenges that can’t be changed because it is fate but she still tries to do it. I know this is silly for her to do but she is brave. I bet you can’t take all the misery Yuki had to take. I would recommend this book to anyone but I especially recommend this book to people who think their life is miserable. I recommend it to those people because they think their life is miserable but they don’t look at other’s lives and realize that other suffer more. No one has the worst life because life isn’t over yet; find a way to enjoy it. There are good things that can happen. You just have to try.