Rating: 5/5

Reading this book left me feeling breathless at times – it was like watching a french farce and a screwball comedy at the same time!
Aurora McPhee is about to marry Harland Podell when the wedding is interrupted and the groom exposed as a bigamist (several times over). The Earl of Windham (whose sister had been Podell’s last “wife”) misinterprets her comment about “needing” a husband and, thinking she’s pregnant, offers to marry her himself. I admit, this first chapter or so had me rolling my eyes and thinking that perhaps this might be a book by Metzger that fell short of her normally high standards.

I’m happy to say that my fears were groundless. The description of the wedding is hilarious –

The bride was haggard in crumpled satin. The groom was heroically handsome in his buckskin breeches. Windham’s auburn hair was freshly combed and he had found time to get his boots shined. Still, he smelled of horse, which somehow made Aurora feel better. The earl was a mere man, not a visiting deity.

Instead of her wedding bouquet, which had been trampled in the earlier debacle and kept too long out of water at any rate, Aurora clasped a paper sack of peppermint drops. Lord Windham had returned with it, along with the special license, to settle her stomach, he’d said. Aurora clasped that small kindness to her heart, for courage.

While the vicar wended his slow way through the wedding service once more, Windham patted her hand and whispered, “I promise not to beat you, you know. My first wife died of the typhus. I was not in the same country at the time.”

- And the rest of the book rattles along at a fair pace as Aurora adopts various waifs and strays, charms a grande-dame of the ton, effects a reconciliation between Windham and his son, nurses Windham through the mumps and generally turns his life upside-down – for the better, of course!

The dialogue sparkles, Aurora and Windham are charming and the secondary characters, like Ned, the pick-pocket-turned-groom are all well fleshed out.
I’d definitely recommend The Worthy Wife to anyone who likes a well-written, funny and charming HR.