Rating: 3/5

I don’t want realism. I want magic! Yes, yes, magic! I try to give that to people. I misrepresent things to them. I don’t tell truth, I tell what ought to be truth. And if that is sinful, then let me be damned for it!—Don’t turn the light on! 
 --- Blanche DuBois

It clear that Tennessee Williams set out to explore some of the violence and injustice he sees in his suuroundings when he wrote A Streetcar Named Desire, the story of Blanche Dubois visiting her sister Stella and brother-in-law Stanley Kowalski for a few months after she loses her house. The neighbourhood and surroundings are a harsh reflection of people themselves, the men swaggering around everywhere, the forgiving women deluding themselves to be happy. Blanche wants a life of beauty and elegance, spins stories to cover up the harshness she had to face until no one believes her when she tries to tell them the truth. Stella has found one way to have a somewhat steady life and seems to suppress some occurrences to be able continue living this life. Stanley, the only lead with any power in this play, gets what he wants in his life by his swagger (can't call it charm), and just taking what he wants.

The only point of the play is to show a vignette, lit by a make-shift lampshade of a few months in the lives of Blanche, Stella and Stanley - show all the malignant sexism, the unfair distribution of power, the simple suppression of any truth not convenient and disposal of any person who doesn't fit in the hierarchy, even the casual undercurrents of racism towards neighbours. 

There is no real change in the characters, except when they each go over the edge in their own way at the end. The story arc sees no real resolution towards what is right or just, or the society attempt to be better. The dialogues and the settings of the play give a vivid description of the emotions and tension in the dim little house, much like the constant refrains heard in the street. On the whole, a morbid play, which in my opinion didn't age well over the decades.

🌟🌟🌟
[Half a star for the premise and the whole play; 3/4 star for the characters; 3/4 star for the story and themes; Half a star for the world-building and description of society; Half a star for the writing - 3 stars.]

I think, without planning to do so, I have followed the developing tension and anger and violence of the world and time that I live in through my own steadily increasing tension as a writer and person. I guess my work has always been a kind of psychotherapy for me... It releases their own... Increasing tensions, verging on the psychotic. 
 --- William Tennyson