Rating: 4/5

One of my fondest and core memories of my ex-boyfriend happened when I was 25. 

I went out with my work colleagues and got drunk in the theatre bar where I met a guy who I liked a lot. ''I like you a lot,'' was my thought through an alcohol filter. I was experiencing a full-blown ego-trip; I was flattered, intoxicated, flirtatious, confident on GM as I was consciously opening my wrists to him while smoking. It was a subtle invitation. 

I was young and delirious, and I knew that my boyfriend was sleeping on my pillow in our apartment. This sobering thought hit me hard in the middle of my licking and biting my lips session to achieve a look of being vulnerable yet approachable. My mind started tripping while I was enamoured with a sexy smile and buzzing pseudo innuendo talks. 

I felt a split in my brain, unwelcoming double exposure; I wanted those white lies with this bar guy and I wanted those guilt trips which were making me nauseous. I sobered up instantly the minute he leaned closer, commenting on how he enjoys our banter and a second later I felt his perfume in my nostrils. He kissed me behind my ear and I felt sick. We were outside and the wind started its shivering game as exhausting goose pumps of shame were starting to paralyze my neck and arms. I did the only rational thing I could do; I started running for the nearest taxi. He was behind me, confused and embarrassed while I was horrified. I slammed the door and waved as it mattered. So sorry, yelled through the closed window when he put a palm on it. 

Fifteen minutes later, I was opening the door of my flat and I came to our bedroom, deaf from the pounding tinnitus of my shameful heart, and I climbed in and embraced his back. He woke up and turned around to see my face. He smiled and smelled my hair. You bum, he said, you've been smoking. Yes, I half breathed out. ''How was it babe, did you have fun?'' And I just opened my mouth and said nothing; guilt scorching me while my red cells were trying to push as quickly as possible the shade of beetroot onto my skin. 

Oh, that bad, he said as he started laughing. ''Does it burn? Let it burn sweets...that poor guy.'' 

This is what he said, let it burn sweets, that poor guy. And he lightly hugged me without kissing me goodnight, turned around again to his side and yawned, ''While you burn here, please don't forget to remove your makeup. You know how you're in the morning.'' And he fell asleep and I stared at our window afraid to move, shaking in disgust, hating myself and the silver grey of dawn’s small hours. 

He woke up before me, made breakfast, watched me over the coffee mug rim and said into the cup; ''Was it worth it? What did you do?'' I said, ''Well, nothing really. I was just stupid. Playing around with people’s mind. There was this guy and we just flirted a bit, but, it was so wrong. Nothing happened really.'' I felt so little and ashamed and he was watching me intently, so I asked him how he knew that I had a rough evening. 

''You’re a hugger Jana. And your hug was bone crushing last night. And I know you and your face tells it all. I love you - and I think it is awful what you did whatever you did, but it is more awful to you than it is to me, so let it burn a bit. And then open yourself up again sweets, you’re a good person and I know your intentions. I know why somebody would fall for you, the same reasons I did.'' 

I thought I knew him up to that moment. My love for him overwhelmed me and I was sick for a week, psychosomatic part took care of me as well. And my small night of beetroot turned into one of the most valuable lessons on human kindness. And it was the entrance into the life of the improvement. 

So, I don't cheat. But people cheat. And if the 3rd person in your relationship isn’t consensual and if you are monogamous - and if you still have the energy to work on your battered love after the desired things which almost destroyed it, subdued, you will need to read this book.