Rating: 4/5

Another charmer from Eva Ibbotson. This time, a very young Scottish laird must sell his family's castle and the new owner is a Texan millionaire who wants the castle transported to his hometown for his ailing daughter to enjoy. He wants the whole dark Scottish castle atmosphere--except NO GHOSTS; he doesn't think his delicate daughter can handle being frightened. But, through an odd happenstance, the ghosts to make their way to Granite Falls, Texas--along with some sinister flesh-and-blood villains with designs on the millionaire's fortune; and Alex, the young laird, who helps Helen, the young Texan lass, realize there is more to her than her physical lameness. 

Since I'd read The Great Ghost Rescue there were no real surprises here. The ghosts are all amusing and kind-hearted, with funny little quirks, and they get along well with the boy--so, nothing that "different" from GGR. Oh, but this time we have a Severed Hand, who features most prominently in some of the major plot twists, and I became surprisingly fond of him!!! What also I really enjoyed in this one is the friendship between Alex and Helen. Wonderful! And that the father was actually kind-hearted and very present in his daughter's life, even if he was a bit over-protective. 

The villains are quite awful, especially the lead villain who named herself Adolpha after Adolph Hitler. She keeps some of his hair (at least, the shopkeeper assured her it was actually Hitler's!) in a locket around her neck, and she likes to stroke it and meditate on it. CREEPY to the max!!! BLEH! A few of the things she and her henchmen do are just a little too yucky for my taste and I think sensitive children could be very bothered, although the overall tone of the story is so warm and humorous that many children will probably be fine with the occasional intrusion of evil and, of course, good does win in the end! 

All in all, a very fun read for Halloween--or any time you feel like spending time with some fun spooks!