Rating: 4/5

In the quiet, sleepy, out of the way areas of rural Russia under the autocratic Czars, during the mid nineteenth century, nothing happens, still reality will show its unpleasant dark aspects as other things appear, the catalyst , two university educated arrogant young men return home, they believe that their flame of light will transform the nation for the better . However the students still have a great deal to learn about the ancient land. Arkady Kirsanov under the influence of the bright Evgeny Bazarov studying to be a doctor but an ardent, passionate nihilist his real occupation ( destroy all and rebuild a better world), brings to his widowed father's Nicholas large estate this strange , unsettling person, he dominates the novel, in fact the writer's Ivan Turgenev's best fictional character, he himself has acknowledged...Uncle Paul is a suave, debonair man, a former Don Juan, an unhappy love affair caused his exile from glittering Saint Petersburg , a supporter of the old customs , feels threatened by the new breeze. His amiable brother Nicholas is more tolerant, the inevitable strident arguments between Bazanov and Paul, the medical student,who is an enemy of ostentatious behavior, he is his own boss, about the future of society, gives this the spice the narrative needs, and will cause controversy in Russia, as both the supporters and the opponents of the status quo differ in their opinions of this story. Nicholas is an incompetent administrator of his farm, the serfs don't obey his orders, rumors that they will be set free soon, ( in 1861 , two years hence ) causes turmoil. And the embarrassed Nicholas has a surprise for his son, a baby brother, Mitya, born recently by his young attractive, shy mistress Fenichal, at 23, over twenty years younger than her lover, the daughter of his late housekeeper. Bazarov anxious, elderly parents await his return, these good people, adore their son, and only child, his father a retired army physician much decorated, the couple haven't seen him in three long years...Bazanov has to leave the intolerable situation at his friend's home, his excuse, he must go back and visit his father and mother . Their boy pretends to be indifferent, but secretly is proud of and enjoys the parent's worship and every kindness, still he wants to be alone to do his medical experiments, that gives him contentment. This is the great author's most popular book and probably his best also, it contains both happiness and sorrow, as does life itself. An excellent, riveting glimpse into two families.