Rating: 5/5

If you are reading this book… You understand.

You understand more than anyone how the arrival of your little one will leave you flustered, overjoyed, resentful, anxious, joyful, in love, feeling crazy… 

Because your little one is just not what you expected. And not in a bad way. But in a completely different, unexpected manner you’d seen from television, books, movies.

I had basically zero experience with babies. I only held a few babies a couple of times for maybe five minutes. Imagine my surprise when, within a very short time period, my brand new baby would refuse to sleep alone. Refuse to be in a bassinet, like I was told in the hospital she must stay while sleeping. Refuse others holding her, even her dad. Her cries sent electricity through my arms, my arms always extended out for her without fail… she needed me. It was unquestionable. And I held her. Held her literally all day, all night. 

It drove me crazy whenever people told me her cries weren’t “real” cries unless she had tears. That it was okay for her to cry it out. Every instinct in my body recoiled at even imagining a baby, by herself with no comfort, not understanding why she was left alone to fend for herself. Family used to say she wasn’t really upset unless she had “actual” tears. Those same family members would be confused when, while they were over, my angelic baby within seconds became distraught and unable to calm because she hadn’t been able to nurse as soon as she wanted or not held by me. It probably appeared like we overreacted to her cries, but it was only out of desperation since we knew that each moment her needs were unmet, the harder it would be for me to keep her from being inconsolable.

This is a book for the parents that get it. That know the important work they are doing now is meeting needs so your little one can have the foundation they so desperately crave and need to flourish, be independent and trusting, kind and nurturing… mothers fuel their tanks now. It’s the only opportunity we have. It’s now or never.

Everyone- friends and strangers- rave about my daughter. Her kind and curious spirit is contagious. Her joy is palatable. I am excited to see her bloom into whoever she will be, her talents, her dreams, her thoughts unraveled. God blessed me with this high needs baby. I wouldn’t have it any other way.