Rating: 5/5

This book follows the story of Scotland through four historic periods. It's divided into Four "Books" and really each section could be a novel of its own. Crow's previous historical epic, Glastonbury: The Novel of Christian England often had multiple characters in different generations coming on stage in each book. In this one, each book sticks to the same general set of characters and the approach really works well here. 

The first book focuses on St. Colomba's arrival in Scotland in a sixth century dominated by Druids and how he begins a process of risking his life to spread the Christian faith in Scotland.

The second book takes us to the ninth century where viking raiders are menacing Scotland. Of course, it's not really Scotland as we know it today as the second begins with the Scots and Picts being separate people. Kenneth man Alpine is crowned king at Dalriada and wants to get neighbors to unite to repel the Vikings, but runs into complications, in particular a strong-willed sister who orders an assassination on his behalf and without his knowledge. This is probably my favorite section of the book as there's just so many twists and turns in this story and it ends with a story of the founding of Scotland. 

The third book introduces us to St. Margaret who married King Malcolme of Scotland and really through her faithful life and faith changed the entire nation, in her care for the poor, work freeing slaves, and reforming the manners of the Scottish court. Crow's portrayal of Margaret is true to the Saintly label but also very human.

The final book takes us to the late 13th and early 4th century and the Scottish battle for Independence. We meet William Wallace, Robert the Bruce, and other actors of the era in the war against Edward I. Wallace gained popularity through Mel Gibson's Braveheart and this book definitely painted a more historical picture. Perhaps, the biggest change is the accurate portrayal of the time and difficult involved in Robert the Bruce's victory. In the movie, it was a short time from Wallace's death to Bruce's victory. In The Field of Bannockburn, we learn the truth that it was nine long years. 

The fourth book also uses a character Jamie as the Point of View character. Jamie begins thirsty for English blood, only to be crippled at the Battle of Stirling Bridge and then become a chronicler for both Wallace and Bruce which puts him in great position to find out what's going on. Of course, his struggle against dark impulses of vengeance. 

The book also had a framing story which involved a group of students, one an American girl with a hard decision about her future, as she struggled with questions of truth and faith. The framing story was probably one of the most difficult part of the book as there was limited space to developing the characters and it was kind of hard to follow with 120-150 pages between installments. Still, it did serve some good use as a framing story in allowing us to learn information that would be relevant to people today such as when one of the modern Scots explains how the Declaration of Arborath had on our Declaration of Independence. 

It also shows the power of history to challenge us. Sadly, we have a lot of amnesia about our past, both as a nation and as a world. We've forgotten a lot of great and noble people who came before us and served as faithful examples. This book gives the opportunity to remember at least five historical figures who challenge and inspire us.