Rating: 3/5

Although urban fantasy and the paranormal is my favorite reads, like most women I enjoy a really good romantic read from time to time. For me the best romance novels have a good plot that includes a little humor, plenty of sexual tension and memorable characters. "Taking Love in Stride" has a great plot and memorable characters but not much else.

Andrea O'Connor is a P.E. teacher and coach at a prestigious private high school. Denise, one of her students on the track team has been coming to practise late or not at all. So, Andrea has decided to drop her from the team. However, she has no idea that this single action will change her life forever.

Single father, Ian Powers works hard in his business and that requires him to travel excessively. When he hears that his daughter has been dropped from the track team, he refuses to allow this decision to stand. When he goes to Denise's school to discuss the matter he has no clue that he is about to get a rude awakening. Not only does Ian learn more about his daughter and what she needs he also realizes he has a chance to do something wonderful for his disabled father if he can only get the stubborn but attractive track coach to train him for the upcoming marathon. Together, Andrea and Ian are going to learn some of life's most hard learned lessons about love.

This story had so much potential to be a really great read; but, unfortunately it quickly turned into a mediocre read. First, let me discuss what I liked. The plot was creative especially with the "running/track" theme and the characters were amazing and beautifully flawed. So, what went wrong? Although, there was some sexual tension, the so called romance in this book was tepid at best. If I am going to read a romance book, I want some serious and hot romance. No, it doesn't have to be sex especially since this book is not erotica; but, you would expect some really hot and steamy passion between the characters.

All and all, I was underwhelmed by this book and disappointed. It just wasn't for me. As always, read this book for yourself and decide.