Rating: 4/5

Such a heartbreaking book about Italian immigrants in America during the first thirty years of 1900'. 

The story, which reminded me I Malavoglia by Verga, was very tragic and haunting. Even though there is a tragedy after another, there are happy moments as well. This is life: a mix of happiness and pain. I'm Italian and I could feel the sorrow of the Italo-Americans who moved to the "new world" to look for a better life for themselves but were disillusioned by the American Dream. Despite being almost 100 year old, this story is still actual because many people today still wish for a better life and move to another country to pursue it. I admire them, but I am realist and think that I wouldn't be that courageous to do that and leave my country.

The book is divided into five parts: Geremio, Job, Tenement, Fiesta, Annunziata.

In the first part the main focus is Geremio, who is a foreman and works on a construction site that doesn't seem to respect the Law and at some point, the building he and the other Italian workers were building, collapses, leaving Geremio in concrete. He is paralyzed so he can't free himself and save his life. This event is tragic for his big family and their neighbors in the tenement because it happens on Good Friday and because Geremio was a respected man and worker who worked hard to sustain his people.

It isn't a coincidence that Geremio dies on Good Friday. He and his wife Annunziata are fervid Catholics and for them this day means the day Jesus was crucified and died. Geremio was crucified by his own "padrone" because Mister Murdin, his boss, never respected security norms and probably used low-cost materials for the construction. But of course he doesn't care - after all, it's "Eytalians" who died in the collapse, and they weren't even officially American citizens to begin with, so who cares?

Mister Murdin reasons like many sovereign-minded people today. The immigrant, despite moved from another country to live in my country, will never be seen as my equal. The immigrant is included in the group of citizens but he is also outside of the group. He is included just when you need him. In this case, Geremio's boss preyed on his and his "paesanos" hunger and will to live a better life, but he was exploiting them. They were like slaves and they probably knew it, but what could they do?

As Paul, Geremio's oldest son makes us see in the following parts, Job is needed. Job is what a man must do in order to go on, otherwise, he will starve and he will die. When Geremio dies, Paul tasks himself with protecting his family and he becomes his mother and his brother and sister's "father". This happens in the second part, JOB, which is not only named like that because of the job in general as "work", but also because Job in the Bible was a man who had to trust God even though his faith risked to be shaken because of what happened in his life. Paul too, like Job, holds his faith in Catholic church and trusts his mama Annunziata that God will help them, Jesus hasn't sacrificed for nothing. Geremio hasn't died for nothing. But once the boom period for the constructions of buildings in New York city ends after the infamous Black Friday of 1929 and the beginning of the Great Depression, Paul's faith starts to waver. 

When his godfather Vincenz Nazone dies on the job in a similar manner to Geremio, Paul has lost his father not once, but twice. Where was God? Why didn't he help Nazone from falling? 

Paul, who bears the name of yet another important apostle of Jesus who spread his religious message, feels cheated and betrayed towards the end. We only have one life, and "not even the Death can free us, for we are... Christ in concrete..."