Rating: 3/5

This is an anthology brought to us by the master of horror Alfred Hitchock. Unfortunally I didn't connect to most stories.

Some stories were outdated in my opinion with all stories more than 60 years old. 

"The Day of the Dragon" by Guy Endore (1934)
"The King of the Cats" by Stephen Vincent Benét (1929)
"Slime" by Joseph Payne Brennan (1953)
"The Man Who Sold Rope to the Gnoles" by Idris Seabright (1951)
"Henry Martindale, Great Dane" by Miriam Allen deFord (1954)
"The Microscopic Giants" by Paul Ernst (1936)
"The Young One" by Jerome Bixby (1953)
"Doomsday Deferred" by Will F. Jenkins (1949)
"Shadow, Shadow on the Wall" by Theodore Sturgeon (1950)
"The Desrick on Yandro" by Manly Wade Wellman (1952)
"The Wheelbarrow Boy" by Richard Parker (1953)
"Homecoming" by Ray Bradbury (1943)

My favourite were

The Day of the Dragon is about an experiment gone wrong where alligators turn into dragons. Excelent. After all the crocodiles have millions of years old so...

Slime - It's a story about something that has lived in the botton of the ocean for all eternity and now it came to our doorstep. It is black and pure evil. It remind me of an episode of Star Trek called Skin of Evil where Yar was killed.

The Microscopic Giants tells us a tale about deep exploration and what might live there. Gnomes or Dwarves that could tranverse walls. 

Doomsday Deferred by Paul Ernst is a story about a man who went to amazon so he could capture a butterfly. There is met a man who is willing to help if he brings cattle for him. He even gives gold nuggetts to swift the deal because he can't leave his farm. In the end we understand that the man and the army ants share a bound - hive mind. Quite good story.

The Young One is a tale about werewolves but with a twist. I really enjoy this tale. I could picture myself in it.

I can't reccommend to anyone but one who wish to know more about horror fiction done throughout the time (not counting with those more famous like HP Lovecraft, Robert Howard or Clark Ashton Smith)

Most of these stories are going to be free in a couple of years. Wait and then go read it at Project Gutenberg