Rating: 2/5

What happens with a Lynne Graham or Jacqueline Baird heroine stays in a dingy bedsit after her hero abandons her and refuses to acknowledge his child because he has just found out he's infertile? What happens as said hero goes on to have multiple mistresses and makes more and more money?

What happens? 

I'll tell you what happens.

The love child gets to star in this dreary story called Past Secrets. Yes, the past secrets belong to her parents. Her mother is bitter and the heroine stopped asking about her father when she realized her mother would reject her all together if she persisted. 

The story opens when our hero, an intrepid reporter, tracks down a very rich man's illegitimate daughter. He offers to take the heroine to her father. After a lot of sulky, stormy behavior, the heroine agrees and after a very long and boring (for the reader) trip they arrive at Daddy Dearest's Greek island villa. He's not in, so the housekeeper lets them stay while they wait for a few days. 

They pass the time by the hero making Pepe Le Pew passes at the heroine and the heroine stridently denying any attractions to the hero. Yes, she even stomps her foot at one point. This was very tedious.

We find out that the hero is interested in this story because he was doorstep baby and has no idea who his parents are. He wants to help the heroine solve her mystery. 

Then Daddy Dearest shows up and throws them out but not before blurting out that he was infertile and no way was she his daughter even though she has his dark red hair and yellow (ew) eyes and her mother was the only woman who ever mattered. Yes, he paid for the h's schooling and medical bills, but only because he actually liked her mother. 

The H/h spend the night on the beach and then they return to the villa to talk to DD. 

DD has finally realized that this sulky heroine is his daughter. Instead of rejoicing - he warns her that the hero is using her to get to his fortune and that he'll cut her off without a penny if she doesn't disavow him right then and there. 

Heroine sticks with the hero. They finally have sex and decide to marry. Hero explains he'll have to give up his luxury flat, etc when they get married because the royalties from his novel and movie rights are drying up. He really likes being a journalist and that won't pay as well. Heroine doesn't care about money.

They return to England and the heroine confronts her mother who is still very angry until the heroine tells her that her father thought he was infertile. This is the first her mother heard of this but it does make her feel better. 

And that's it! I wanted the Lynne Graham/Jacqueline Baird hero to come crawling back to the he's mother and grovel *hard.* I wanted him to pry open the wallet and spread some cheer. But no - all that page time was wasted on the heroine trying to ignore the tingles in her hand when the hero touched her and arguing about sleeping arrangements. She is her father's annoying daughter all right. 

Read as a cautionary tale about next generation HP characters.