Rating: 3/5

Sep 8, 1045pm ~~ Review asap.

Sep 10, 130pm ~~ As usual there is a bit of a backstory about why I read this book. You see, not too long ago I was reading 20,000 Leagues Under The Sea by Jules Verne. I got curious about the man so looked at the Wiki article about him. That is where I read about how affected he was in his youth by two books: Robinson Crusoe and The Swiss Family Robinson. He was so thrilled with TSFR that he wrote two books about them, picking up their story at the end of the original book, and telling what happens to everyone from that point forward. 

Well, this was a surprise, and of course I was curious to see what he would do with the tale of the castaway family. I checked Project Gutenberg and they had Verne's second book, Castaways of the Flag, but not the first one, Their Island Home. I checked my print books source but they did not have the book either. So I marked the idea on one of my lists, and then kept my eyes open for that first book.

And a month or so ago it showed up at Thriftbooks so I ordered and at first when it came I thought I would jump right in, but then I got to thinking about how long it had been since I had read the original story. I used to have a paperback copy, but it had fallen apart long ago so I went back to Gutenberg and called it up, and here we are!

It had been many years since I read the book, and I don't remember being quite as annoyed with Father as I became during this reading. He was such a patriarch, telling his boys how to behave and naturally knowing almost everything there was to know about the amazing mix of plants and animals they encounter during the ten years covered in this book. Father lectured, and the reader gets the benefit of his natural history knowledge, even when it is wrong (he never did get pineapples correct). I confess I began skimming fairly early in the book. And I wondered how I did not notice such things in my earlier visits with the family? I read the book more than once in the distant past, but it had been a long time, maybe I just forgot all the lecturing?

I remember the Disney movie. I saw that in the theaters when I was little and it was very exciting! Of course there were many differences between the book and the movie (we are talking about Disney, after all) but I became curious about why TSFR seemed to be more of a school lecture than a regular adventure tale.

So I went back to Wiki. The author was a pastor with four sons and this 1812 "...novel was intended to teach his four sons about family values, good husbandry, the uses of the natural world and self-reliance." It seems most books for young people back then had these aims in mind. But Wyss was also inspired by Robinson Crusoe, the book which was so popular and had so many imitations that it created its own genre of desert island castaway adventures. 

And that led to this interesting little bit of information: in the original book the family's surname is never revealed. I always just assumed that they were named Robinson, like the title and like the family in Lost In Space. (Oh, hey, I just got THAT little inside joke! How clever! lol) If you haven't figured it out yet, let me allow wiki to explain:
" Although movie and television adaptations typically name the family "Robinson", it is not a Swiss name. The German title translates as The Swiss Robinson which identifies the novel as part of the Robinsonade genre, rather than a story about a family named Robinson." 

So I may not have learned much from Father's lectures, but I certainly learned a lot about the book itself and the author! 

This was still a fun book to read, if for no other reason than to try to guess which animal will show up next. I think Wyss wanted to cover all his bases here, because of course there is no way in the world that flamingos, penguins, walrus, tapirs, ostriches, tigers, elephants and I could go on like this forever are going to be all together in one 'desert island'. So you cannot let yourself dispute Father's facts here. Just read and enjoy the weirdness and be amazed at how much of their time is spent thinking about collecting food, preparing to collect food, actually collecting food, preparing the food after they have collected it, and finally eating food. I think I gained ten pounds by osmosis!

I have already started on Jules Verne's 1900 book Their Island Home. But I won't say anything else about that now. Except that he gave our Robinson family a real surname: Zermatt. And Father seems not quite so sure of himself so far. Well, everyone gets old at some point, even a Robinson!