Rating: 1/5

Life is too short to slog through a book you're not enjoying when there is such a vast amount of hugely enjoyable books out there. Therefore I'm throwing in the towel here. One star because I couldn't finish it.

This book did have the fact that it's ultimately a crime novel against it, and I have no interest in those at all. I thought the fact that it was a historical setting, which I otherwise enjoy, would be a redeeming factor, but this was not the case. On top of that, I discovered, well after starting it, that this is actually book 8 in a series! It's okay, though, because I didn't come across anything that confused me. I think it's just a series of standalones with the same cast of characters and very roughly linked together so that it isn't necessary to read them in order. 

My primary problem with this book was that I was just bored. So bored I kept check how far I'd got compared with how much was left. The plot seems to be moving very slowly and about 25% in, the witch hunting referred to in the title was only just beginning to begin. 25% of the protagonist refusing to consider that someone else might be right. Adding to the boredom is the lack of mystery. The person who ordered the murder has already revealed himself saying that he first attempted poisoning his victim by paying an apothecary to mess with the medicine the victim bought there, and when that took too long consulted a witch. So we know who was behind it all. We knew that WAY earlier than 25% in, so I'm not even considering it that much of a spoiler. What remains is to figure out who the witch in question was, and as it's unlikely to be any of the handful of female characters we've met (Protagonist's wife, their maid, his mistress, victim's widow and their daughter) I can't really bring myself to care. Given how opposed to the very idea of witchcraft the protagonist is, I wouldn't be surprised if it turns out he actually ends up helping her. Bit like how he pretty much released a convicted criminal with only a token punishment that everybody knew, protagonist included, would never be carried out, not as one might expect to save the man from the gallows, but because he knew it would irritate the sheriff whom he doesn't got on with (either).

Second, I didn't like any of the characters. It's all well and good to make sure your protagonist isn't a complete saint, because this is annoying, but when you then give him so many flaws that he becomes unlikable, it's also a problem. I found him unlikable. This guy doesn't seem to get on with anybody other than his mistress and his colleagues, and he never ever seemed to be willing to listen to someone else's opinion or even cooperate towards a common goal with someone. Perhaps this would have been less of a problem if I'd read the previous seven books as then I would have known the characters quite well by now, but I don't know if it really would have made that much of a difference.