Rating: 3/5

I've known about this book for awhile, but finally got around to reading it for work-related reasons. As far as I can tell, after three decades it is still considered the best overall work on the subject of Black Seminoles. The term refers to the African-American allies and vassals of the Seminoles, many of whom at least partly adopted Seminole culture and clothing.

The Preface explains how the book came to be. Porter spend over three decades researching, writing, and revising a draft than ended up about 700 pages long, but never published it before his death. The two editors cut Porter's final draft down to less than 300 pages, with some small revisions.

The book loosely follows the life of John Horse aka John Cavallo aka Gopher John, a Black Seminole leader during the Second Seminole War and afterwards. As a result, it takes a surprising narrative route. The first half covers evens in Florida, with the rest following Indian Territory then the surprising twist of going to Mexico and the Texas borderlands. Several chapters cover the activities of a unit of Black Seminole scouts in the U.S. Army. Certainly an unexpected course of events, at least for me!

The half in Florida includes coverage of not only Prospect Bluff (Negro Fort) but also the Patriot War, acknowledging the Seminole Wars origins in 1812 rather than 1817 - something I am a proponent of, and which was an idea ahead of its time when this book was written. The coverage of the Second Seminole War is largely familiar and - occasionally questionable, in light of better modern scholarship - but with an appropriate emphasis on the actions of African-Americans.

The latter half of the book uses not only governmental records, but also makes good use of the author's interviews with Black Seminoles while acknowledging what information is oral history.

The decision to closely follow John Horse's band and subsequently the Black Seminole Scouts makes for a focused second half, but leaves the book far narrower than the title suggests. The Red Bays community gets only a passing mention (the more recent Black Seminoles in the Bahamas covered this topic), and the focused narrative abandons any Black Seminoles who remained in Florida after 1842 and those who remained in Oklahoma after 1850 and were later recorded on the Dawes Rolls.

This book was groundbreaking and earnest study of an often overlooked subject, with decent writing.