Rating: 2/5

When Chris was sick I had a lot of reading time and though I did not intend to read this book, I picked it out for Chris to read from the library then innocently started thumbing through it, then on the 150th page decided to read all of it. This book was interesting because it takes Alfred Hitchcock (a historical figure) and puts a "What If" spin on it and makes him a fictional character in a way that could have very well been what happened. The author took what is widely known about Hitch's meticulous and detailed oriented personality, and took one step further giving him Holmes like powers of observation and deduction. But Hitchcock is a high profile director, and does not have time for investigation, so he hires a down and out ex-cop to be his Personal Investigator, from who's POV the story is told. The idea is cool and intriguing, the murders were brutal, yet mild in the description, the story moved at a pace that held me, but the over all story was a bit cliched, and the Glamour of Hollywood was revealed as a polished shell covering a cesspool of violation and godlessness. After this last weekends trip to Jake and Al's new home and a short jaunt into Hollywood I realized that the author was not fictionalizing the setting at all. It is a sad superficial dump. A big fat illusion that leaves you a little offended. Another thing I did not like is he "Named Dropped" too much, throwing in too many Celebrities in unbelievable roles (at one point Jimmy Stewart interrupts a beating of our PI hero with cavalry like timing). Anyway I give this book two and a half stars cause the amount of research into Hitch's life as well Hollywood of the 50s is quite impressive and I have always enjoyed fictional stories that are written in and around history, but it did not quite make up for the forgettable story as well as the other flaws. The mystery was not that hard to figure either. Though I originally had no intention of reading this book, it was no big loss since I read it in 24 hours. 

-Kohl 10/01/01