Rating: 3/5

˚₊‧꒰ა 3.25 stars ☆ ໒꒱ ‧₊˚

༉‧₊˚. « One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other. » ・₊✧

˗ˏˋ ‼️ SPOILER WARNING ‼️ ˎˊ˗

to be honest, i excepted this to be another 5-star-jane-austen read because when i read pride &amp; prejudice i fell in love with it 😽 maybe that’s mostly because of keira knightley and matthew macfayden but that’s really not the point.

for me, the first half of the book was dragging. it felt like nothing was happening. on the other hand, the second half was really intriguing. i loved that emma realized what was wrong with her opinions and actions.

Emma Woodhouse isn’t the type of main character everyone adores, that’s something i loved about her. she has her faults and in the end, tries to find a way to fix them. she may be stubborn but knows when to take a step back.

it made my heart ache that she tried everything to help her friend Harriet Smith, however failed miserably. she was truly delulu and blind, i can’t believe things still worked out just fine 😃 most of the stuff happening was painfully obvious and throughout the book she was going around like : 🕳️👩🏻‍🦯

Mr. Knightley, it was hilarious reading his commentaries in this book I CAN’T— he couldn’t be more accurate 😭 him judging everyone and being mr. darcy vol. II was my favorite thing in this book. well, emma was right: if she listened to him, this book would only be around 150 pages long... but what’s the fun there, am i right?🧍🏻‍♀️

« If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about it more. »

if a man said this to me, i’d pass out. his love confession had me like 🫠

the only thing confusing me was the age gap… well it’s a classic book, so i can’t really complain. the old times were different and the idea of marriage was different but the part where he was talking about her at the age of 13 made me feel a bit creeped out, i’m not going to lie.

by the way, i think if Mrs. and Mr. Elton were less annoying, this would truly be more enjoyable.. like how can these characters get involved this much and be so insufferable??

overall, i’d say this was a cutesy read. i wish the first part of the book wasn’t that slow-paced. however, i think if i read it in english instead of the translated version, i might’ve enjoyed it a lot more. that’s why i have my fingers crossed for my reread in english for this book 🤞🏻

➼ playlist:

જ⁀➴ 🎵 margaret - lana del rey
જ⁀➴ 🎵 ophelia - the lumineers
જ⁀➴ 🎵 willow - taylor swift

༉‧₊˚. « I cannot make speeches, Emma... If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about it more. But you know what I am. You hear nothing but truth from me. I have blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne it as no other woman in England would have borne it. » ♡₊˚ 🦢・₊✧

༉‧₊˚. pre-read:

it’s been a long time since i’ve read a book from jane austen and i want to read a book from classics, so here we go 🥹💛