Rating: 3/5

Chicago native Ana Castillo will not disappoint you. She knows this city and can kindle the spirit of the early Chicanos that lived where the University of Illinois at Chicago houses its campus, a controversial area often defined as East Pilsen, University Village or whatever is the newly fashioned name positioned by real estate interest. 
Her expertise in the city certainly makes her a must read for Chicagoans deeply vested in the historical makeup of this diverse, robustly energetic and hard working city. Initially I suspected I would have maybe a thing or two in common with Ms. Castillo, but after two weeks of immersing myself in her poetry, blogs, and novels she rivals Pulitzer Prize winning author Junot Diaz among my most recent favorite reads and is definitely a heavy weight contender in the world of books. I knew I would find her familiar, but what came as a surprise, and what I absolutely love, is her ability to avoid clichés and commit to creative and original plots. 
Latina writers usually land in several different categories; Castillo seems to create those categories and re-invent the genres while simultaneously understanding her literary role, contributions and impact. Her creativity is expressed particularly in Peel my Love like an Onion where the author gives voice to a woman’s memory of loves lost or from the past. Her affection for Manolo and Agustín forge an inevitable dialogue around the posed question pertaining to a woman’s memory of the men she loves and how those relationships plague her thoughts. 
In the poetry from My Father was a Toltec Castillo relies on personal metaphors that require a committed thought and research process. Her intense levels of metaphoric connection qualify her as a candidate for a Pulitzer. She knows the craft well. At times her fiction can be accused of having muddled themes or complex historic ideas and interpretations but even that would be a stretch considering how important it is to peel her themes, “like an onion,” even at the risk of tears. 
Castillo’s intelligence, social consciousness, fun novels and witty blog will make her grow a fan base, and grow it quickly. Not soon after reading a lot of her work did I say “Ana Castillo for President.” 
Recently the author has been in Chicago discussing her books and voicing her thoughts. 
“The gloves are off,” says Ana Castillo in her blog about Vice Presidential Candidate Sara Palin. 
The writer, journalist, essayist and political activist spoke to us in the relatively new writing genre called blogging. Her flowing thoughts were blogtastically funny, lighthearted, ironic and even devastatingly serious. It’s extremely apparent that Castillo is researching and listening to both political parties and may have reached her decision for the upcoming election. Read more at www.anacastillo.com. 

(Cynthia Ferreira Extra News Book Report)