Rating: 4/5

Chloe Anne Waverly loves everything about her home and the traditions her family holds dear, especially the magic of the Christmas season. She's a dreamer like her father and on the eve of his departure to return to the diplomatic corps in Spain, he encourages Chloe to hold on to her dreams. When Papa is killed and an unknown relative becomes their guardian, Chloe keeps on dreaming of love and happiness. Her eldest sister Emma is too busy being practical to think much about dreams though Chloe knows Emma dreams of marrying the vicar, Mr. Henry; middle sister Lucy only cares for frivolous fashion and finding a wealthy and titled husband; youngest sister Agnes has her nose stuck in some dusty old tome and doesn't have dreams. Only Chloe Anne is left to hold the memories, magic and dreams in her heart. Captain William Trent is used to life at sea. He's the commander of his ship and used to having everyone obey his orders. He knows nothing about estates or young girls but feels guilty about Sir Waverly's death so takes his leave time and heads to Windheaven Manor. He has plans to marry Emma; a marriage of convenience after a courtship conducted by letters. It seems the right thing to do. Chloe Anne mistrusts the Captain and is at odds with him at every turn. She tries her best to prevent his marriage to her sister and wishes for a miracle. Why then does she keep thinking about Trent and how being near him makes her feel? Captain Trent can not get the image of a laughing sprite with remarkable light blue eyes out of his head. Could it be he's making a mistake for the first time in his life? 

This is a beautiful, sweet story that will warm your heart. It made me cry a little bit in the beginning. I strongly identified with Chloe Anne's dreams and love of tradition. It broke my heart when she saw all she loved slipping away. The plot moves pretty slowly and the ending is way too rushed. The epilogue doesn't cover enough time period to give much detail. I was easily able to put the novel down and pick it back up the next night and the next after that. Do not be deterred by the slow pace though for the story is worth reading. Though the book is set at Christmas and contains a few Christmastide traditions and mentions being in church and listening to the sermon, I think anyone can enjoy this story. It's not religious in any way. 

The characters in this novel are what makes it shine. Chloe Anne is a young adult on the verge of womanhood faced with great changes in her life. Naturally, she clings to hope and tradition for comfort. Her family and friends are her first priority and she's such a lovely girl that her story broke my heart. I can also relate to Emma because I'm the oldest and practical by nature. I liked that Emma kept a cool head and looked after everything in the house. The one thing she overlooked was her heart. I can also relate to Agnes because I'm more likely to have my nose in a book than dream of marriage. The only sister I did not like was Lucy. She comes across as selfish and shallow in the beginning and the story doesn't take place in a long enough time frame for it to be believable. It's certainly predictable though. Captain Trent - Will - starts off stern and a bit cold. He made Chloe cry and that made me sad. He has zero people skills having been at sea for longer than he can remember. Once he opened up and told his story, it touched my heart and I saw him in a new light. I liked the way he develops over the course of the story and he still has a ways to go to really thaw out. By far the best character is Trent's man Doughty. Doughty provides the comic relief and some suspense in the otherwise slow relationship-driven novel. He is quite the charming character.