Rating: 2/5

The only reason I had to rate this at 2 stars is because just as much as I hate reading about women-hating men, I have issues with men-hating women. The story was well written and very entertaining, but the main character, Maggi, had such a anti-men cloud around her I just got frustrated with her. Please, Please, Please do not comment on this and start an argument about women's rights, feminine power and such. I am not suggesting all those things aren't good things and have their place and there is a need for them. What I am saying is that Maggi spent most of the book, and the next one, making sure that Lex knew his place. If this book was reversed and Lex was the main character here, you would be hearing major complaints from women about how Maggi was treated. And I am not saying that Lex was a perfect character; not talking about the trust issues Maggi had with him. I am saying that I liked Lex more than I liked Maggi. A man, heck a Person, who cared, loved another person so much they are willing to do anything for the other person. (And the times that the author threw in those flashbacks from their dating past where Lex became chauvinistic felt so off from his character, they seem added so us women would understand Maggi's obvious attitude.) What I am saying, is that from the first moment, Maggi was sarcastic, short tempered and dismissive to almost every other male character in the book. And the author, of course, made them all sound like chauvinistic male stereotypes to help that along. The one "good" male character she had, Rhys, is an "ex" priest. So obviously the standard set here is seriously high, fellas. 
I am sorry if this review offends anyone but I truly felt that this book was a toned down male bashing rant at times. I liked the story. I liked most of the characters, including Maggi most of the time. I like that she is a strong female. Kick-butt and take names character. I just feel like her female insecurities about herself and her own capabilities took her waay over the top on how she chose to see and interact with the male characters in the story and for me at least that got irritating.