Rating: 5/5

Sharpe #20. Another re-read. The events take place over the course of four days in June of 1815.

In the last book, Napoleon had abdicated and skedaddled to Elba, so the European nations breathed a collective sigh of relief that the long war was finally over. He apparently decided that abdication wasn't in his best interest, however, so he left the island, gathered an army, and proceeded to recapture Paris and invade Belgium.

Most people are familiar with Waterloo, but the details in this book were something else. The Allies were completely caught by surprise that the French had invaded. Napoleon had raced through France and was in Belgium long before anyone thought possible. The four-day battle waged by France against the Allies, (British, Scottish, Irish, German, Prussian and some Dutch forces), began at this totally insignificant crossroads in the countryside just south of Brussels. The fighting began in a field of rye at the crossroads, (Quatre Bras). The descriptions were extremely vivid. The French were advancing through the rye, but they weren't visible over the tall crops... just heard. Their drums were beaten in a distinctive and sinister cadence. Then the drummers would pause and the entirety of the French masses would shout in unison, "Vive l’Empereur!" The Dutch-Belgian forces on the side of the allies promptly fled. (They had formerly fought for France and were hoping that Napoleon would be victorious.) From that point at the crossroads north to Waterloo, it was one vicious battle after another.

Amidst the horror of this war, Lieutenant Colonel Sharpe is unfortunately under the command of the young and astoundingly foolish Prince William of Orange, heir to the throne of the Netherlands. At the not-so-wise age of 22, this Dutch prince was responsible for a high number of casualties due to his inexperience and incompetence. He was infuriating!!!! He also was an actual historical figure, but that didn't make him any less infuriating. Aside from him, the Prussian forces were not too reliable, either. And then there is the whole Jane/Lord John subplot. Poor Sharpe! At least he had Lucille and Patrick on his side. And he has a good dog 🐕

Bernard Cornwell has always been renowned for his depictions of battle scenes, but this? This book was intense!!