Rating: 5/5

The House of a Thousand Lanterns is a terrific Gothic romance: intrepid heroine, romance, deception, an old English manor, a marriage of convenience, a sinister house, murder, family secrets, hidden treasure…this book has it all.

After her father passes away, Jane Lindsay’s mother is forced to go into service as a housekeeper at an English estate. When Jane is on holiday break from her boarding school she visits her mother at the estate, and becomes fascinated by the master of the house and his mysterious locked “treasure room”. Sylvester is a bachelor, the most successful merchant of Chinese art and antiques in business, and is only infrequently at home, as he spends much of his time in China at his House of the Thousand Lanterns, in order to oversee his business interests there. 

As Jane grows up, Sylvester takes her on as an apprentice, and educates her in Chinese history and art so that she can assist him in his business. She also learns more about Sylvester’s House of a Thousand Lanterns, and about the rivalry that arose from what once was a family business: now Sylvester’s nephews Adam and Joliffe are in competition with him in the Chinese art business.

One day, Jane is out walking in the English countryside near the manor when she is caught in a rainstorm. She seeks shelter in an old ruin and meets Joliffe, who she has an instant attraction to. They have a whirlwind romance, which culminates in Jane accepting his marriage proposal. When Sylvester returns from his business trip and learns of their impending marriage, he tries to warn Jane away from Joliffe: he’s impetuous and unreliable, not good enough for her.

Of course Jane doesn’t listen, goes ahead and marries Joliffe and moves with him to his home in London. Their marriage is passionate, but we also begin to see that Joliffe may not be entirely trustworthy, as Jane finds herself very jealous of the women in Joliffe’s life, how charming he is and how much women like him. Jane’s marriage ends when she is confronted by none other than Joliffe’s wife. Brokenhearted, Jane returns to Sylvester’s employ, but soon learns that she is pregnant. Sylvester wants an heir, and Jane needs a name for her child – so they marry, and eventually make their way to China and the House of a Thousand Lanterns.

Everything is not as it seems in China, and Jane finds herself in danger and not knowing who to trust.

This was a near perfect Gothic romance for me. The only false step is Joliffe as the romantic lead. I was not a fan of him from the beginning. Too charming, too dishonest.