Rating: 5/5

Like many others, I'm sure, my first encounter with Jack London was through Disney's beloved 1991 classic movie Wolfsblut (or White Fang) starring Ethan Hawke. I fell in love with the rough and wild landscape as well as the dog portraying the halfbreed.

This is "the other story" Jack London wrote about a dog. It's a novella, technically, but like the novel that he's now known for the most, this also tells of the wild north, of snow and ice and of a hard life.

We meet Buck, a dog living in the United States with a family that is fairly well off. The gardener has a gambling problem so he leads Buck away and has him kidnapped to be sold. Ever since the Gold Rush started, strong dogs are in ever increasing demand and Buck (being half Collie and half Saint Bernard) is definitely strong.
Thus, Buck ends up in Canada, going through the hands of several owners. 
Despite his strength, he has a lot to learn since this is quite a different life from what he's used to.
He's delivering mail, gets beaten, survives attacks, stages coups, almost gets killed and even finds love.

While many of Buck's experiences throughout the story are based on some of the philosophies with which the author was grappling while writing The Call of the Wild, Buck himself was based on a real dog. When London first arrived in Alaska in 1897, he became the tenant of two brothers, Marshall and Louis Whitford Bond. Their dog made an immediate impression on London, for they shared the name Jack (I can say with absolute certainty that the dog would have made a lasting impression on me for a totally different reason).

(Here is Jack the human with Jack the dog.)

The dog was a St. Bernard-Collie mix, as Buck would be in London's novella. In a letter London wrote to Marshall Bond in 1903, he explicitly states, “Yes, Buck was based on your dog.”

What got to me while listening to none other than Pablo Schreiber narrating this story, was the intense descriptions of the magnificent landscape most of this story takes place in (the cold, the wind, the snow, the danger come spring, the hunger and physical pain), of the human stupidity, of the stark contrast between the environment Buck grew up in and the one he later grew to actually love, of the hard work these people and dogs had to perform, of the life in the wild and how not everyone is cut out for it (and what happens if you don't heed advice). It's clear that London knew what he was talking about, having seen and experienced most of what he was writing about for himself and it makes all the difference.

An enchanting story full of harshness but also unexpected tenderness. Just like the wild it depicts.