Rating: 4/5

*some spoilers* This book was an easy, fast read. It, though short, accomplished a lot in a few short pages. I am what I like to call, an empathic reader. I love books were I feel as if I am in the character's shoes. I like to be the character. So upon reading this, I was impressed with how much I could empathize. Gail the main character is an HS student from the mighty NYC. She's lived in the small connecticut town for inly a few years. She was a normal teen with a normal life. She has a boyfriend and of course, her parents are a little skepical of him. *Spoiler* But anyway, everything comes to a fast and terrible halt when her best friend's boyfriend rapes her. He had threatened her for a few weeks with raunchy and disturbing notes, phone calls. She was found bruised and battered on the floor of the woman she babysat for. Once she has recovered a bit, she proceeds to tell the police who raped her. As in most cases, they don't believe her and think she bought this all on herself. 

I have a strong dislike against people who think that rape is "made up". Or my favorite, "You invited him over for some fun. It wasn't what you wanted and now you crying wolf." That statement is pure bullshit but that is a conversation for another time. Anyway, this book was able to provoke my empathy. I could feel the pain she felt when she was hit in the head, the distress of the situation and the feeling of terror. Many times I caught myself freezing when my house phone rang. Or when there was an knock at the door. Peck did a great job of delivering the emotions. He painted a picture that was easy to see and understand. He created very believable characters. For example, the new girl. She was fresh from NYC. I could vividly see her colorful attire and the great love she had for the theater. For her, her clothing choice was normal. But the native were not used to such gear. The struggle to hold onto yourself and fit was real. Her carefree attitude towards their reactions, were indeed the true attitude of a NYC native. After all, you can see her style imtitidated in Times Square or in SoHo.On to the next character. Gail's best friend (cant remember the little conformist name at the moment), is a true definition of trying to fit in. She forgo all that she came from and under goes an transition into an identity crisis. She is willing to become a house wife and an snobby rich person, just so her "future" will be secure. She so into this life style that she dreams of that she forgets to be a best friend. All she cares about, is making sure she is eating tea and crumpets. I just for one want to call her a b**ch. She pissed me off so much, that I found myself trying to punch an fictional character. What happened to loyality to your friends? But anyway, she tells Gail to ignore all the letters stuck in her locker. The friend doesn't believe anybody really going to hurt Gail. How wrong was she. Freaking idiot. Gail's boyfriend was a little boring. I mean, I feel like I didn't know him too well. He just didn't stand out as a person. I'm not sure if she went with him because her mother didn't like him (I don't know why, it wasn't like he was an exciting person. He was def a home body type), or because she known him forever. Not sure. Now the little snob who raped Gail, was a little more interesting. He was everything the "golden" boy in town should be. He was rich, into snobby people sports and was on his way to Harvard. Nobody would expect that kind of behavior was him. Judging by everyone's reaction, nobody really wanted to believe Gail. 

Getting down to the action of the book, the rape scene was the most exciting thing in the book. Although the character were described pretty well, they still remained a bit lifeless. The most reaction or feeling I got from Gail was the rape scene and the after the rape. It like the town sucked the life out of everyone. Except for the new girl. It's like she was a distant memory instead an actual in the flesh person. The drama teacher even stayed distant.Maybe that was Peck's whole point. I'm not sure, so don't take my word for it. Once Gail decided not to go ahead with the trial, the story went right back to being dry and boring. Almost like it never happened. Even when the new girl got raped too by the same person, it's like they didn't care. The new girl packed p and was never heard from again. I still don't understand why the people acted like it never happened. Same thing happened when the golden boy came up missing. They acted like he went to college early. Like come on , the sick dog got sent to somewhere he needed to be. 

It still was a bit of a dry read with the dry characters. I didn't particiularly like the teenage dialouge. I feel like it too boring and not young enough. Again,it was pretty dry. Like the words seem leaf like in the fall. 

But all in all, the book kept you interested until the end. There wasn't any beating around the brush and wasn't weighted down with stuff that wasn't relevant. It got straight to the point and described the teenagers pretty well.The characters were well developed. 

Check the book out for yourself.