Rating: 3/5

This one had its merits and its pitfalls but was mostly good. One thing I liked was that it was a classic tale from the medieval period that dealt with the themes of tyranny and freedom it was a very human story but from a time where custom and culture were very different. 

What I didn't like is that some of the wording was hard to follow, most of the words I was unfamilair with had contextual clues and the prose was not very difficult except when dealing with names. Sometimes the way the writer referred to a person made it confusing who was being discussed...and it didn't help that everyone's name and title was constantly changing. One character might be called 8 different things and the writer will use a different one each time, and he wont use words that imply relation...like for example he wont say Robin spoke to his mother he will say Robin said to dame Fitzooth...but then in the next passage they'll call her his mother as though dame Fitzooth and his mother are different characters when they aren't. 

I like the way many parts of the story are left open ended as well...it's part of why the story is so legendary because it's not a story of one thing that happened...it's a story of a legend and there are many gaps in the story where the reader and young kids especially can fill in the blanks and imagine many more adventures involving Robin Hood and his band of merry men. I also like the way a group of people who become disenchanted with society take it upon themselves to live freely and on their own terms in the woods.

What I did not like was the conclusion of the story, (spoilers) I didn't like that the story resolution came about because the king simply returned and fixed everything. It seemed very deus ex machina and also sent the message that there was nothing wrong with the system of monarchy and allowing an elite class to rule over you...the problem is not having the right monarch...and the right monarch will simply come in and fix all your problems and make life great again. It just seems so wrong that men who were living on their own terms are now asking a king for permission to get married and letting him kiss their brides before they do...that's weird. I also didn't like that the story didn't end on the happy ending and gave us this quick bummer of an ending for no reason at all.