Rating: 5/5

It is a well known phenomenon that writers sometimes fall in love with their own invented characters. Whether it is Jane Austen with Mr. D’Arcy, or Dorothy L. Sayers with her Lord Peter Wimsey, the seductive attraction of a hero they were able to mould exactly to their own taste proved irresistible. A little different, but just as potent and powerful, is the artist’s muse. “Fanny” Brawne was the love of the poet John Keats’ life, inspiring some of his most famous sonnets. Then there’s Dante and Beatrice, of course. Dante Alighieri met Beatrice when he was just 9 years old and remained in love with her all his life. 

So which of these, you may be asking, was Thomas Hardy? Did he have a real life muse? Or did he fall in love with his own invented character? The fact is that both of these apply to him—quite apart from a rather strange obsession with his first wife (but only after she had died).

Thomas Hardy had married Emma Gifford when he was 34, and he was 45 when they moved to Max Gate, a house a mile from the centre of Dorchester (Thomas Hardy’s “Casterbridge”). He had designed the house, having trained as an architect, and his father and brother built it between 1883 and 1885. Max Gate was to remain his home for over forty years, until his death in 1928.

There was already friction between the couple, and their marriage seriously deteriorated at Max Gate. Emma retreated more and more to her attic rooms, to keep out of the way of her husband and his many visitors. Friends have said that Thomas Hardy’s comparatively humble origins led to Emma regarding herself as her husband’s social superior. He was the son of a stonemason and local builder, whereas Emma’s father was a solicitor. In later life by all accounts, Emma would make embarrassing references in public to the gap in class that existed between them.

At this time then, things were decidedly uneasy. Thomas Hardy regularly used to walk from his home Max Gate to the Kingston Maurward estate, where he was welcomed as a frequent visitor and found encouragement for his writing.

The walk took him past a dairy farm, owned by Augusta Way’s father. Thomas Hardy was smitten by the fresh-faced beauty of Augusta, who was just 18, and was so attracted to her that he had her in mind when he began writing his penultimate novel, first published in 1890. He never said anything to Augusta. Instead he put his obsession into his heroine, and reimagined Augusta Way as the “Tess Durbeyfield” of this novel. In the book, Tess is the eldest daughter in a poor, rural working family. She is an innocent and pretty country girl, with a good heart and a sensitive soul.

Thomas Hardy tells Tess’s story, subtitling the book: “A Pure Woman Faithfully Presented”. At the time he wrote to a friend:

“I often begin a story with the intention of making it brighter and gayer than usual; but the question of conscience comes in; and it does not seem right, even in novels to wilfully belie ones own views. All comedy is tragedy, if you only look deep enough into it.”

These words are very revealing. Those who know Thomas Hardy’s work know that his novels became increasingly gloomy. There are some beautiful passages of joy and optimism in Tess of the D'Urbervilles, but they seem short-lived. We fear for Tess as we read. I won’t tell the story here, but it is easy to find, if you wish to. In fact most blurbs reveal what is to happen at the end of the First Phase, if not more.

Thomas Hardy was a troubled man. He was a man out of his time: a “time-torn” man as one biographer has said, and this is nowhere more evident than in this late novel, with its meditations of its characters on spiritual beliefs and doubts. Questions of doctrine, whether Anglican, Methodist or even antinomianism are ostensibly thrashed out by the characters, but we know that their internal thoughts are Thomas Hardy’s own.

He was brought up an Anglican, but his family were not especially devout, and by the time he wrote Tess of the d’Urbervilles Thomas Hardy’s faith was extremely rocky. Indeed his next novel “Jude the Obscure” was even more outspoken than Tess, hitting a blow against the institutions of marriage, the Church, and Victorian education. It presented such a challenge to Victorian views of Christianity and social problems, that it was branded immoral. One reviewer called it “Jude the Obscene”, and the Bishop of Wakefield burnt a copy with great ceremony, “probably in his despair”, wrote Hardy later, “at not being able to burn me”. Thomas Hardy was broken-hearted and was to write no more novels, sticking to his first love, poetry, saying “the experience completely cur[ed] me of further interest in novel-writing”.

Tess’s faith however, is a simple belief in God and destiny. All the country folk’s beliefs are also deeply rooted in superstition, and Thomas Hardy’s preoccupations with Fate and predestination are strong in this book. He manipulates chance and coincidences to weave his story, and to present his case about the wrongs he was passionate about: the hypocrisy of the moral code and the social standards of Victorian society. The subtitle Tess of the d’Urbervilles: A Pure Woman Faithfully Presented is a clarion cry of anguish, and the novel’s final line is a bitter condemnation of the highest power in the universe:

  “‘Justice’ was done, and
 the President of the Immortals, in the Aeschylean phrase, had ended his sport with Tess.”

It is a savage ending thrust, taking a phrase from “Prometheus Bound” by Aeschylus, to apply to his own creation. Tess is a fully rounded character, but the author’s sympathies lie with her throughout, even when she is full of pride, or stubborn, or passive. We see the limited options of a young girl of her time and of her class, despite the fact that she was the cleverest in her school. Tess believes what she has been taught, combined with her family’s superstitions and her own strong instincts. We see her presented as a child of Nature, but also keen to learn.

We even know where she lived. The novel tells us that Tess Durbeyfield lived with her family in a cottage at “Marlott” (which is Thomas Hardy’s name for Marnhull). Marnhull is a very small village, and there is only one Elizabethan-period thatched cottage there. Plus, coins from the reign of James I were found there a few years ago.

In 1924, late in life, Thomas Hardy actually visited this thatched building. The owner’s servant told him that he was tending the garden of Barton Cottage (as it then was), when he saw an elderly figure scrutinizing the house. He asked whether he could be of service, but the stranger replied, “No, thank you, I was only seeing where I put my Tess …”.

Shortly afterwards, the deeds of the property were altered, and the name was changed to “Tess Cottage” (sic: no ’s). Tess was certainly in Thomas Hardy’s mind in 1924, because his notes mention that he attended several rehearsals of a new dramatic production of Tess of the D’Urbervilles that year at Dorchester.

In fact we can identify most of the locations in Thomas Hardy’s invented Wessex, which he described as “a merely realistic dream country”. In Tess of the D’Urbervilles they are nearly all in Dorset, although Stonehenge near the end of the novel, is further West, in Wiltshire. Thus the action all takes place within what we now think of as a comparatively small area.

Yet at that time moving across the county is enough to change all the people in a community, and reveal a completely different type of environment. We see how cruel Nature can be, in the hard land at Flintcombe Ash: a desolate “starveacre” place, and also the opposite extreme; the lush, mellow meadows and fields of Talbothays dairy. We see how Thomas Hardy yearns for the old ways, being at his most rhapsodic when telling of the traditional farming ways, with time for contemplation, and then we read scenes which almost seem set in Hell, as he describes the domination of unforgiving machinery. Humans now seem merely to function as cogs in a merciless machine.

Tess travels through Blackmore Vale, which is a wide valley in north Dorset, extending to parts of south Somerset and southwest Wiltshire. It is part of the Stour valley, in the south of England, and the backdrop to Thomas Hardy’s most lyrical writing about nature. The cart she takes to “Shaston” near the beginning of the tale, traverses one of the most photographed places in England. In real life it is the famous Gold Hill in Shaftesbury; a very steep cobbled street. You might even have seen a calendar of it! “Mellstock” is a village Thomas Hardy knew very well: Stinsford. In fact he loved this village so much, that he willed his heart to be buried here in a grave beside his two wives. “Trantridge” is in real life the village of Pentridge … and so on. 

 Near the end of the book the couple flee to  “Melchester”, which Thomas Hardy places in mid-Wessex. In fact it is Salisbury, in Wiltshire, a city with arguably England’s finest cathedral. All the villages and many buildings have their real life counterparts. “Wellbridge House” is in fact Woodbridge Manor. There is a grave of an abbot at Bindon Abbey: a Cistercian monastery founded in 1149, which is acknowledged as  the grave where the sleepwalking Angel lies Tess. The ancient and sinister stone where Alec D’Urberville made Tess swear never to “tempt” him again, is the well known “Cross in Hand”, on Batcombe Hill, and even the “d’Urberville” name of the book’s title has a basis in fact.

One of the oldest families in Dorset is called Turberville. Thomas Turberville Trenchard’s coats of arms are depicted in a stained glass window, along with other Turberbville coats of arms in Bere Regis church (Thomas Hardy’s “Kingsbere”). Many of the folk myths and legends in the novel such as the phantom coach, and the cock crowing, have their basis in authentic Dorset legends. We thus see how the rural people have a dual set of beliefs which they live their lives by. They attend church, and have a simple straightforward belief in a Christian God. But allied to this are the old ways and traditions; a deep-rooted superstitious sense of unalterable destiny.

Tess does not embody Thomas Hardy’s religious doubts. Instead we see these doubts present whenever Angel Clare is in a scene. It is not an exact portrait of Thomas Hardy, but his intellectualism, scholarly reading and indecisiveness; his questioning about beliefs and the meaning of life all mirror the author’s position. Parson Clare and his family: a mother and three sons, all come from “Emminster”. In real life this is Beaminster, a lovely little town dating back to the Anglo-Saxon age, around the 7th century. Along with Mercy Chant, each of these has their own slightly differing religious position, all carefully chronicled by Thomas Hardy. Both the family and the town have key moments in Tess’s life.

Another character, Alec D’Urberville is often represented in dramatisations as a smooth-talking villain, but he has his own crisis of conscience allied to his beliefs. Critics argue as to what actually happened in the ancient Chase—the incident is not described—but its consequences, and Tess’s own personality, were to determine all the later events in the novel. They are all pawns, Thomas Hardy tells us, in some bigger game.

The ending of Tess’s life was directly influenced by his witnessing the hanging of a convicted murderess Martha Brown, in 1856, when he was just 16, and a trainee architect. Martha Brown was 44, and the last woman to be hanged in Dorset, after she was found guilty of murdering her violent husband John Brown after he had beaten her with a whip during an argument. Interestingly, just last year, the Bishop of Salisbury agreed that her remains, along with 46 other bodies buried at Dorchester Prison, should be sensitively exhumed, and moved to a common grave in the nearby new Poundbury Cemetery, with a suitable service of Christian committal.

No publisher liked the message of this novel, and they certainly did not approve of the details. The first version was called “Too Late, Beloved”, and Thomas Hardy had written half, but his refusal to make alterations led to Tillotson cancelling his publishing contract. Two more publishers also rejected it, believing that the Victorian public would be scandalised. The cultural climate in England at the time was one of widespread prudery and intolerance. There was a perceived spread of sexual decadence, and “family values” were seen as the panacea. Publishers therefore challenged the subtitle, and considered some scenes inappropriate. They sent the novel back to the author unpublished, despite his established reputation.

Finally, Thomas Hardy resigned himself “with cynical amusement” to bowdlerising the story, and the resultant version was published as a serial in “The Graphic” newspaper between July and December 1891, illustrated by various artists. A few months later the author “pieced the trunks and limbs of the novel together” and it was published as a novel in 3 volumes. His early draft showed the title as “A Daughter of the d’Urbervilles”, which presents an interesting slant on Tess. We see suggestions throughout that she possesses some small but lethal character flaws inherited from her ancestors. What we are invited to wonder is whether she must suffer to atone for the misdeeds of her ancestors, or to provide temporary amusement for the gods.

However we interpret it, the story had popular appeal. It was an immediate success, and made Thomas Hardy rich for life.

Most (but not all) critics admired the novel, and recognised it from the beginning as an unusual novel—although it had severe criticism from some clerics. It has always been seen as controversial. Thomas Hardy clearly intended to criticise the Victorian notions of female purity. It was the double standard which made her tragedy inevitable and served as the mechanism of Tess’s broader fate.

As always, Thomas Hardy was also concerned with portraying the natural world. He was a poet at heart, and among the most memorable scenes in the novel are those in which he evokes the fields and woods of his beloved Wessex. Tess herself is frequently depicted as a personification of nature, or an Earth goddess, not only by the self-deceiving Angel Clare but also by Thomas Hardy himself. Then there are numerous pagan and neo-Biblical references. These combine with Tess’s own passivity, continually being presented as someone to whom things happen. She is not the agent of her own destiny, and the author makes us see her as a sacrificial victim, especially in the near closing scene of the novel at the ultimate pagan symbol, Stonehenge. 

This aspect of Tess’s character is interpreted by a few modern critics as misogynistic. Since Thomas Hardy makes his sympathies with this carefully nuanced character crystal clear; her inevitable destiny sealed by the age, time and culture she lived in, it seems a rash and superficial condemnation of a masterly and very moving work.

Thomas Hardy was not to actually meet Augusta, the local milkmaid he had admired again until 1913, when he was 72. By now, Augusta was married and running a hotel. Thomas Hardy set up house there, and used it as a headquarters for his theatrical troupe: “The Hardy Players”. This was made up of local amateur actors, and Augusta’s daughter, Gertrude Bugler—then 16 and an aspiring actress—joined the troupe. Thomas Hardy was quickly smitten with the beautiful young girl who reportedly bore a strong resemblance to her mother, and he cast her in a role in “The Woodlanders”.

Although the play was staged locally in Dorset, drama critics came from London to preview the play. Gertrude Bugler received glowing reviews for her angelic beauty and her naturalistic acting style. Then in 1921, Thomas Hardy cast her in a lead role in “The Return of the Native”, again receiving excellent reviews. In 1924 he adapted his Tess of the D’Urbervilles, and once again cast Gertrude Bugler, praising her performance as “the impersonator of Tess”. But there was one who decidedly did not admire the young actress ...

Thomas Hardy’s second wife Florence Dugdale had been his secretary and research assistant. They married when he was 73, and she was 35. His growing obsession with his deceased first wife not surprisingly caused problems, and Florence also became jealous of his muse. Thomas Hardy had made plans to take the play to London with Gertrude Bugler as the lead role, but his wife, Florence was controlling and forbade it. Florence flatly refused to let her husband bring the Buglers to the London production, which not only disappointed the author, but also those critics who had seen Gertrude Bugler play the role. Florence was jealous of Thomas Hardy’s affection for Gertrude Bugler, even though he was now 83 years old and Gertrude Bugler was 26—and married.

Only after her husband’s death in 1928, did Florence appear to feel some guilt over preventing Gertrude Bugler from her chance at performing on the London stage. She gave her the role of Tess in a 1929 London production at “The Duke of York’s Theatre”, which again garnered much praise for her sensitive performance and natural charm. After enjoying her moment in the sun, Gertrude Bugler turned her back on acting and returned to Dorchester, where she lived quietly and happily until the age of 95.

So was Thomas Hardy obsessed with Augusta Way, or Gertrude Bugler, or with his own created character Tess? Perhaps it makes little difference. He considered Gertrude Bugler to be “the very incarnation” of Tess. 

The last time they met at Max Gate, shortly before Thomas Hardy died, he said to Gertrude Bugler: “If anyone asks if you knew Thomas Hardy, say, ‘Yes, he was my friend.’” 

**

“Meanwhile, the trees were just as green as before; the birds sang and the sun shone as clearly now as ever. The familiar surroundings had not darkened because of her grief, nor sickened because of her pain.

She might have seen that what had bowed her head so profoundly—the thought of the world's concern at her situation—was founded on an illusion. She was not an existence, an experience, a passion, a structure of sensations, to anybody but herself. To all humankind besides Tess was only a passing thought. Even to friends she was no more than a frequently passing thought.”