Rating: 3/5

The first generation of books on President Kennedy's assassination appeared in print before the Warren Report itself was published in September, 1964. Forced to rely almost solely on press reports, these authors built their theories around questions already puzzling the general public. The Warren Commission was aware of these books and dealt with the questions they raised in the "Speculations and Rumors" section of the Report. 
However, as soon as the Warren Report and its twenty-six volumes of testimony were published, serious study of the assassination began. Digging into the evidence, second-generation authors discovered that the Commission's account of the Kennedy assassination was fraught with misrepresentation and contradiction. The initial collection of evidence and selection of witnesses was inevitably dependent on the FBI, the Secret Service and the police. While this limitation of the Commission's powers is understandable, there was a huge problem: the FBI had already reached its own conclusions. J. Edgar Hoover never doubted that 1) Lee Harvey Oswald shot the President; 2) he wasn't connected to any conspiracies; 3) he had murdered John F. Kennedy due to Oswald's "twisted mentality". Thus, the Warren Commission conveniently presumed Oswald's guilt and regarded anyone who would not yield to such reasoning as extremist. 
Mark Lane's work belongs to the second generation fo authors. He noticed the the main weakness of the Commission's work: the investigators tended to create a pattern out of the existing evidence, and then to subordinate all evidence to this pattern. For instance, on what evidence did the Dallas police suspect Oswald? He was arrested in a cinema for the alleged murder of a Dallas policeman, Patrolman Tippit; it was only later that he was identified as the man wanted for the murder of the President. But why then did Patrolman Tippit encounter Oswald? We are led to suppose that Tippit was seeking to arrest Oswald as the murderer of the President. But allowing this to be so, how was it that, in all Dallas, the police, in the person of Patrolman Tippit, contrived, almost at once, to pounce on one man and one man only, and that man, according to their subsequent insistence, happened to be the real murderer? Something just isn't right here, reasons Mark Lane, and I fully agree with him.
But not all is right with Lane's book too. Although it became a bestseller overnight, RUSH TO JUDGMENT is, before everything else, simply an all-out attack on the Warren Report. It's main purpose seems to be not to look critically at the overall picture, at the mass of available evidence, not even to prove Lee Harvey Oswald's innocence, but to refute in a step-by-step manner the whole Warren Report. Lane highlights the fact that the testimony of many crucial witnesses was disregarded by the Commission, and that's a fact, but he doesn't analyze and draw any conclusions from this crucial testimony. He makes it clear that the assassination could not have happened as the Commission said it did. Yet, while displaying the Report's errors, he never expands on the much more important question: how then did Kennedy's assassination happen? 
In summary, RUSH TO JUDGMENT did not impress me at all. I was expecting a book that would attempt to draw all the evidence together and make sense of it. This is not such a book.