Rating: 2/5

1.5

I'll start by saying I get why this is a classic. It hits all those standard marks that most classics do: heavy symbolism, moral struggles (insert 'truth-seeking' and good vs. evil), unique characters, and a historical backdrop. Factor in Warren's gift for writing (it truly is 'poetic'), and you'd think you have a winning combination. Not so for me. For as sharp and introspective as the narrator was, I found him (and most everyone in this shambling plot) absolutely insufferable. 
It's really a shame, because I wanted to like this book. 

(Overall vibe of narration reminded me a bit of the Great Gatsby. Jack Burden resembles Nick Carraway in his observations.)

What I liked: 

1. When the descriptions were good, they were *good.* I am not surprised in the slightest that he was the first poet laureate in the US. He had a gift. His turn of phrase was sharp and clever, and man can that man build atmosphere. That said... see the flip side of this gift under the 'What I didn't like' section. 

2. Vocabulary: I learned a lot of new words while reading this. So that was pretty cool. 

What I didn't like: 

1. Rambling and bombastic (-1.5 points): I, like most people who read this, appreciated Warren's descriptive/poetic skills, but good God, sometimes I wish he would have just put it to rest. You know how someone might have a really great singing voice? Now imagine that they refuse to speak normally, and they'll ONLY sing at you in conversation. That's what this was like. I do not need an entire page describing "meaty faces" and sweaty lips. 
Here's his description of a wink: "Inflamed, beclouded window of Mr. Duffy's soul, and the next you observed the puffy and slightly granulated membrane descend with deliberate emphasis, then twitch upward in its well lubricated track." &lt;-- the whole book's like that. If you like that, you'll love this.

2. Depiction of women in the book (-1 points): I know this book is dated. But that doesn't mean I'll tolerate poor depictions of women in it any more than I usually would. We had the sharp, cunning Sadie Burke (who of course couldn't be pretty and eventually ended up enrolling herself into a sanatorium because she felt too guilty about seeking vengeance on Willie Talos, her ex-lover). We had the abused housewife, Lucy Talos who would be loyal and supportive to her jackass of a husband (Willie Talos) to the very end. We had the dream girl - picture of innocence - Anne Stanton. And let's not forget Jack Burden's ex-wife, whom he spent PAGES referring to as a fuck machine. Honestly, that last one I found the most disgusting. 

At the 65% mark, Warren wrote: "...as long as she was simply a well dressed animal, as long as she was really a part of innocent non-human nature, as long as I hadn't begun to notice that the sounds she made were words, there was no harm in her and no harm in the really extraordinary pleasure she could provide..."

There were no other roles for the women in this book. They were either of the above female archetypes, or they were minor, background characters. 

And let's not forget when Cass Mastern went searching for the slave woman that his mistress sold into prostitution and stumbled upon a bunch of perverts inspecting a naked slave woman. Because we needed that in this book. That was necessary. 

On that note, POC were very poorly represented in this book (N-word thrown around.). Again, I know this book is dated (published initially in 1946), and I know we're in a southern American setting, but it doesn't mean I liked reading it any more than I normally would.

3. The summary didn't match the plot (-.2): I loathe when summaries don't match the books they describe. Based on the synopsis of this book, I seriously thought this was going to be about the rise and fall of Willie Talos. I thought this was going to be a book with plenty of clever political maneuvering, something akin to House of Cards. It very much was not. Not only was this focused MUCH more on the narrator, Jack Burden, but it was also more focused on philosophizing about God and good v. evil and the past and the present, etc, etc, etc. It just didn't end. And by the way, I also hated Jack Burden (see next point)

4. The characters sucked (-.3): There was literally no one to root for. Jack Burden reminds me of an angsty 15-year-old. Willie Talos reminds me of a hardheaded lunatic with good intentions. Sugar Boy was just... what? There for laughs? Sadie Burke was annoying, like Joan Callamezzo from Parks and Rec, except less bubbly. The Stantons were bores. I mean... I just didn't like any of them. It's really hard to trudge through that much literary verbiage for people you don't even like. I didn't feel bad at all when anyone died. I felt relieved, actually, because the book was almost over. There were moments when I was curious about the plot, like when I wondered if Jack Burden would end up with Anne Stanton after all, but if I never found out, I would have been perfectly fine with that. 

5. All the rest (-.5): 
- Constant perspective changes
- Extensive tangents
- Unnecessary details that detract from narrative 
- Lack of quotation marks for some dialogue
- Lack of a clear conflict that drives plot of book (Jack's finding himself or wondering about his past wasn't compelling enough of a conflict for me. I wanted to know about the rise of Willie Talos. Instead I was sucker-punched with Jack Burden's numerous trips down memory lane.) This isn't always a deal-breaker for me (I really enjoyed East of Eden, even before Cathy was introduced as an enduring antagonist), but this book just didn't work for me.