Rating: 4/5

This is the third book I have read about The Burglar and the second one written. Like the others, it stars master thief Bernie Rhondenbarr and has a light, almost airy feel to the story. Which is odd as in almost every book it seems that our misguided protagonist is caught up in some dastardly murder or with some violent characters who are after him or a close associate. Despite the threat of grievous bodily harm (and killing Bernie is often the most grievous harm they wish to perform) or incarceration by the local constabulary, (both of which are taken seriously by the folks within the story) the books sail along nicely.

Perhaps this was only worth a "3.5", but I'm giving it a full "4" because the apparent breeziness of the book hides a wealth of detail, research, and good writing. Perhaps Mr. Block is just a great natural talent as Issac Asimov demonstrated in over 400 books and William F. Buckley claimed to be. If so, then he need only fear brain injury to interrupt his understandably magnificent career. On the other hand if he is a mere mortal then the heavy-lifting of doing research, developing the plot lines, and producing the prose is done so skillfully that it results in an product as light and delicious as perfect, home-made croissant. (If you've made them, then you know what I am talking about.)

Each Burglar book has, at its core, some central artifact or theme that gets exposed in great detail to the reader. Whether the theme is something that a thief might steal or some background/past that affects a character does not matter. The reader is handed and devours this information without any strain or awkwardness. In some books the material feels like you are wading through it in hip waders. Not in these books and that's part of my high regard for them.

If there was any one thing that I would cite as a negative it is the depth of the "detection" and the solutions. There is a fair amount of detection done by Bernie (after all grievous harm and solitary confinement make excellent incentives), but there is nothing as elusive as Conan Doyle at his best. In this specific book the arch-villain is fairly obvious a chapter or two before the denouement. Even how he sets that up is somewhat predictable, but when weighed against all the good things, it's a enjoyable book and one I hope you will read.