Rating: 3/5

Carolyn Janice Cherryh (she used her initials when she started writing, to conceal her gender at a time when the SF genre was still fairly male-dominated, and added the silent h to her last name because an editor thought that "Cherry" made her sound like a romance author) is a very successful and prolific author of speculative fiction, both science fiction and fantasy. Two of her novels (and one short story) have won Hugo Awards, though I haven't read either of those. This series opener was my introduction to her work, and is one of two novels from her pen that I've read so far (the other is Hestia, which I liked better, but want to reread before I review it). I read it as a public library check-out some 35 years ago, and don't actually have a copy before me at the moment; but I can remember the broad lines of the plot/premise and characterizations, and my reactions to the read, well enough to do this short review.

The Goodreads description of this book is very basic, but accurate. Our setting is space, far enough into the future that humans have achieved faster-than-light space travel and have begun to explore the galaxy. However, we're in a region distant enough from human-occupied space that humans are only beginning to explore it. It's home to a number of space-faring species which trade with each other, three of which, the Hani, the Kif, and the Mahendo'sat, we meet in this book. All three of these, and their cultures, are developed in fairly detailed fashion here (and more so, along with others, in the five-book series as a whole, though I didn't read beyond this book myself). Tully, our sole human character, is the only survivor of an exploring vessel unlucky enough to run into one of the ships of the piratical and carnivorous Kif. Brought along as a prisoner, when they dock at a Mahendo'sat space station, he escapes and finds refuge with the all-female crew of the Hani vessel Pride of Chanur [Chanur being the name of a Hani clan]. Ship's captain Pyanfar Chanur chooses to shelter him; the Kif want him back, and space-opera adventures ensue.

Elaborate and plausible world-building is a great strength of this book, as is development of the interactions between species and within the societies of the various species. For instance, the society of the feline-like Hani has much in common with lions on Earth; it's structured into clans dominated by a single adult male, and other males who grow into adulthood are cast out before they can challenge him for leadership. Young males live together outside of a clan until they can successfully challenge for the leadership of one; that proclivity towards conflict for dominance, and their reputation for being overly emotional, means that males aren't allowed on the crews of Hani spaceships. (Some reviewers apparently had an issue with that literary conceit, although I didn't.) Cherryh writes from within the "hard" SF tradition, but the sciences she's most interested in extrapolating from are sociology, anthropology, and biology, not the physics and engineering underlying future high-tech gadgetry. (The former are more interesting to me as well!) Her experiences as a high school teacher of languages (Latin and Greek) and as a book translator are reflected in the attention that she gives to languages here.

The book is well-written, and held my interest throughout the read. My main quibbles are that, at least for me, the completely non-human Hani, as main characters, aren't as easy to relate to as humans would be, and that Tully, after his initial escape, is a rather passive character (though, to be sure, there's not much he can realistically do for himself). Also, the Kif come across as a species for which it's part of their genetic make-up to be incarnations of vicious and self-serving evil; they're depicted as apparently without any individual ethical decision or nuance, beings for whom biology really is moral destiny. Tolkien, we're told, sometimes expressed concern that in his orcs, he had created a species who were beyond redemption; I get the same feeling about the Kif, and personally I prefer more nuance, or at least more personal choice and agency, even in villains. But while these are subjective quibbles for me, they wouldn't necessarily be so for all readers. I wasn't invested enough in the characters or the setting to continue with the series, but I do want to read more of Cherryh's work, and I can recommend this novel to genre fans.