Rating: 5/5

Alternative Asian history, Rincewind's average spin doctoring and political strategist skills, teleportation, Cohen the barbarian, again Rincewind as always unwittingly McGuffining around,  revolutions eating themselves in the good, oldfashioned style of immediately turning into tyrannies or already planning to do an evil rebranding while revolting , Gods manipulating the fate of humankind, and jokes about stereotypical fighter archetypes make war fun.

Uchronia and alternative history is big in this too, because China, just as many great empires before, had the chance of ruling the world, but preferred isolation. This can be seen in how respectfully Vetinari deals with the request, but also in real history with the sheer historical numbers of soldiers, military strategy, and technology, especially ships, gunpowder, and sheer quantity. Not to speak of potentially reaching most of the world by land, for instance, at this moment, extremely primitive and thereby vulnerable Europe or colonizing the Americas, but endless intern civil wars are costly. Shown by the contrast in the book, 1 million perfectly trained, disciplined Asians soldiers vs a hand full of primitive barbarians

Speaking of which, The Silver Horde is dealing with the danger of averaging in the military forces, an often hidden problem that can reduce the stability of well functioning dictatorships. It´s tricky for the poor despots, too many fit, young, but possibly revolting soldiers are as bad as geriatric armies, so it´s possibly the healthy mix to cement your nightmarish autocracy. But at least they haven´t lost their stupid, manly attitudes of fighting, killing, and most importantly, unsubstantiated hubris.

Pratchett uses the mixture of megalomania, bad management, the immense deficits of ideologies, faiths, politics, economics, etc. a lot in his whole work by showing how potentially world dominating forces are self sabotaging by losing their connection to reality. Possibly it's an, by evolution, inbuilt seld destruction system to ensure that complex systems such as human societies don´t get too mighty and thereby monocultural, although this could have failed with Mcdonalisation, Disneyfication, general Americanisation, but let´s see what time will bring. 

I know, this running gag is getting lame, time to say bye bye to it, but I don´t know enough about Genghis Khan, Japanese and Chinese history, communism, if Rincewind has hidden elements of famous historical figures I don´t know, and if I am worthy or capable of adding more sophisticated literary analysis, but at least I can laugh about the bits and pieces I get and especially easier to spot puns and slapstick elements.

Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...

This one is added to all Pratchettian reviews:
https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scheibe... 
The idea of the dissected motifs rocks, highlighting the main real world inspirational elements of fiction and satire is something usually done with so called higher literature, but a much more interesting field in readable literature, as it offers the joy of reading, subtle criticism, and feeling smart all together.