Rating: 4/5

This book had an immediate effect on me. After he describes the process of collecting memorable events, the recapitulation, and perhaps the part about assessing to whom you are indebted, I woke up one morning with an event from high school in my mind. It had only taken 19 years, but I finally understood how this event that I had interpreted in a negative way at the time was actually this act of love that had surely saved me from grave harm. I had not been thinking about this event at all, it just popped out of nowhere. So that led me to start taking the book more seriously--that maybe there was some value in doing the exercises he describes doing in the book. I think I am actually going to have to reach out to the individuals involved and thank them.

Who is Carlos Castaneda
I wanted to not break the spell and just try to experience this book without knowing who this seemingly well-known but mysterious author was, so I resisted learning anything more about him until I was about three-quarters of the way through and I broke down and looked on Wikipedia. I kind of wish I hadn't because I didn't like everything I read there. Eventually I was able to resolve my concerns by concluding that this guy had clearly had some kind of spiritual experiences and however he chose to convey them was fine. Maybe don Juan is totally fictional, but it's sort of like Socrates in Way of the Peaceful Warrior: A Book That Changes Lives--a blend of fact and fiction used as a way to convey a story/spiritual experiences.

Parallels to teachings of Eckhart Tolle
Part of what kept me reading even after learning that maybe there was nothing even remotely real about don Juan was that it didn't matter because so much of what he was saying was exactly the same as what other teachers say. I liked the fact that he was describing the same concepts in slightly different ways using slightly different terms.

The most immediate parallels I drew were to the teachings of Eckhart Tolle. "we are possessors of energy that has awareness that we are the means by which the universe becomes aware of itself." p. 229 [vaguely a spoiler alert] Energy body = inner body. Inner silence = presence. I think you could say the flyers' mind = ego ("The predators give us their mind, which becomes our mind. The predators' mind is baroque, contradictory, morose, filled with the fear of being discovered any minute now."p. 220) and the flyers = pain body ("the predators create flares of awareness that they proceed to consume in a ruthless, predatory fashion. They give us inane problems that force those flares of awareness to rise, and in this manner they keep us alive in order for them to be fed with the energetic flare of our pseudoconcerns." p. 223)

I think the most striking difference between the two teachings, and the part that I found interesting, was thinking about these concepts of ego and pain body as coming from totally outside of ourselves, as predators that are preying on us. In a way, it makes it easier to be aware of these things as they arise rather than thinking that that these patterns are a part of you. Seeing them as something outside of yourself seems like it can make it easier to recognize them and not feed them. 

How the book came to me
Being under a certain age, I had never heard of Carlos Castaneda or The Teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui Way of Knowledge. I was using the wander-through-the-shelves method to find a new book to read and came across some titles by him. I wanted to read more spirituality books by people of color, so this seemed like a good fit. I picked up The Active Side of Infinity first, and even though I could gather that, as the cover noted he was known for being the "Author or The Teachings of Don Juan," something made me stick with this choice instead of his earlier works. 

I definitely had a push/pull relationship with the book. I felt like I had to push myself to read it, but at the same time, I liked it when I read it. Not unlike the relationship he describes with don Juan, I suppose. I actually tried to take the book back to the library twice before I finished it. The first time the automatic book check in was broken and the second time it was working but would not accept the book because it is older and did not have the appropriate bar code sticker on it. After that I was resigned to the fact that I was supposed to read this book.