Rating: 5/5

“Did you say the stars were worlds, Tess?"
"Yes."
"All like ours?"
"I don't know, but I think so. They sometimes seem to be like the apples on our stubbard-tree. Most of them splendid and sound - a few blighted."
"Which do we live on - a splendid one or a blighted one?"
"A blighted one.” 

Tess of the D’Urbervilles is the 1896 masterpiece by Thomas Hardy of Tess Durbeyville, her family bloodline long fallen from aristocratic heights. The central themes are critiques of class and blood distinctions and of the sexual mores of the Victorian era, but it’s a novel, not a tract, as Tess becomes real for us from the very beginning. The book was published more than 120 years ago, and it has been reviewed thousands of times, so, while I won’t reveal every major plot point, I’ll also drop a spoiler here and there. For instance, entwined themes about gender and class unite in the instance that Tess, whose family has fallen on hard times, approaches at her family’s urging whom she thinks are the more affluent d’Urbervilles for help. She is hired by them as a dairy maid and because she needs the money she stays there and is taken advantage of by Alec d’Urberville. 

“’But I don't want anybody to kiss me, sir!' she implored, a big tear beginning to roll down her face, and the corners of her mouth trembling in her attempts not to cry.”

She is but sixteen, needs the money for her family, is confused about what she should do about this guy’s advances, and then is raped by him, which, in keeping with some of the history of men’s treatment of women in the workplace, (and as one chapter title makes clear) Tess “pays for” in the loss of her job and reputation.

Not that Hardy makes this a mere victim story, though: “Let truth be told - women do as a rule live through such humiliations, and regain their spirits, and again look about them with an interested eye. While there's life there's hope is a conviction not so entirely unknown to the ‘betrayed’ as some amiable theorists would have us believe.” 

She’s traumatized by this experience, but she's strong, Tess is, and she continues her honest work as a dairy maid. And yes, there’s a touch of nineteenth-century melodrama in the book, but Tess is admirable, most of the time, at least, and Hardy doesn’t sentimentalize the real challenges of poverty. Tess meets a(n again) wealthy son of another dairyman, Angel Clare, who seems like a good and liberal man for the times with respect to issues of class, who seems to really love her, and they marry, but he soon finds out she is not in fact a virgin, something many men (but, in general, not women?) in the world seem to require (or required?) for their marriages, and though he agrees that she is in the act “more sinned against than sinning” he worries her "want of firmness" in confronting Alec may indicate a flaw in her character and that she may no longer be the woman he thought she was. Ugh, fail, Angel. Jerk! When he runs off to Brazil to brood about the situation, he leaves his wife destitute as her father dies soon after and they lose their home. She writes to Angel:

"O why have you treated me so monstrously, Angel! I do not deserve it. I have thought it all over carefully, and I can never, never forgive you! You know that I did not intend to wrong you - why have you so wronged me? You are cruel, cruel indeed! I will try to forget you. It is all injustice I have received at your hands!"

We agree heartily with Tess here but in our present moment, more than a hundred years later, and completely and angrily disagree that she should keep committed to Angel. He’s no Angel, in short, though in the end he does return, and while I won’t reveal specifically what happens to them, and her, Hardy’s narrator says of them at the very end:

“'Justice’ was done, and the President of the Immortals (in Aeschylean phrase) had ended his sport with Tess.” 

If there is a moral to the story, it might be this, as Angel at one point observes:

“Distinction does not consist in the facile use of a contemptible set of conventions, but in being numbered among those who are true, and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely, and of good report--as you are, my Tess.”

Some people think of the current #metoo movement as the moment in history where some men seem to be finally “getting it” about women and equality/self-efficacy/assault but as you can see, feminist Thomas Hardy makes this point clear more than a century ago in his angry castigation of the Victorian period on issues of sex (and class). But if this seems to you from my retelling like just a feminist morality tale, you miss the way Tessie comes to life. True, you can’t stand how she refuses to give up on Angel Clare, who was a jerk to her, but she is a rich and complex and powerful character, in the main. Her tale is a rich tragedy of a modest young working-class woman, and the working-class are the people Hardy wants to write about: 

“The impressionable peasant leads a larger, fuller, more dramatic life than the pachydermatous king.”