Rating: 1/5

First, I must qualify this review. In reading this book I was hoping for something entertaining and engaging, or something that offered interesting anecdotes, historical facts, people, or situations. That is definitely NOT what this book is. It is actually more of a history of the depictions of breasts in poetry, art, and propaganda, and even then, the book is focused at least as much on a feminist analysis of these texts as it is on the presentation of historical facts/stories. It is told largely without any sort of narrative thread in a very academic manner, making this a very dry read.

No doubt, some of the insights were interesting, including the different social functions that breasts have served throughout history, but even that, for me, was overshadowed by one other element of this book - the author. I am certainly no feminist scholar, and I am aware that however I present the following thoughts, I could be accused of the patriarchal oppression that this author refers to so frequently. But, the author seemed so negative about every topic she discussed that I was very put off. When societies exalted breast feeding, that was oppressive because women were tied to home and kids. When societies shunned breast feeding, that took away from a woman's motherly experience. When women (or just breasts) were praised in art and music for their beauty, that was condescending. When women were exalted based on maternal and home roles, that was belittling.

Don't get me wrong, I understand her point - whatever standard women are held too is undesirable, because it is limiting, even if the standard is something desirable. But I guess I have a hard time believing there was nothing entertaining, humorous, or positive related to the breasts in entirety of human history.

The author also strays quite far from her stated purpose of history when she discusses breast cancer and modern art. Also, despite my best efforts to understand feminism, there were some things that made me double-take. Nipple rings are a form of societal bondage? Today's women's struggles are remarkably similar to those of the women in biblical times? I don't think so.

So, if you need a resource for a paper, grab this book. I would not recommend this for any type of enjoyment reading.