Rating: 4/5

I like controversial books, amongst other things. Not that this is, really, but I remember picking it up on a hot summer day in a book market, where the only thing I knew about McGahern, really, was that his books were considered controversial. 

The other reason I was drawn to it is because my knowledge of Irish history is incomplete, to say the least. I had to spend some time researching what Monaghan Day actually was, amongst other things. I think it's also important that I mention here that my notes on this are about four years old, although that's neither here nor there. Another thing that I should mention is that I don't particularly like books about functional families. For one, I don't think every family is dysfunctional in its own way, not to sound like Tolstoy. For another, I just don't find them particularly fun to read. 

Family is complicated. All relationships are. The same can be said for Moran and his family. Obviously this is by no means a justification of Moran's behaviour. I would not like him if I knew him in person, and I would definitely not make excuses for him. Perhaps, that is the charm of dysfunctional families in books. You don't have to justify their behaviour, and yet, you can still humanise them, somewhat. All of the books I've liked, that revolve around families, they have that in common. Dysfunction. 

  On this his wedding day he seemed strangely  at peace. It was as if he needed this quality of attention to be fixed upon him in order to be completely silent.

I think the technical term to describe Michael Moran is "son of a bitch". He isn't what I would call a good person, although that doesn't necessarily make him a bad person either. He's difficult, although in his own difficult way, he does love his family. More than anything, he misses the good old days. And this is why he cherishes Monaghan Day, whence he gets to relive the days of glory. Or well at least, he did. Obviously, none of this is in defence of him being a son of a bitch, but then again, I don't really think you're supposed to like the man. I think he just is.

Like Blindness, a book I read at the same time as this one, McGahern doesn't really name all his characters. Only the ones that matter, the Morans. Rose's relatives, for instance are not described by name--only by title, as "the married sister" or the "tall, silent brothers". I think this is to further reiterate the importance of his family to Moran; after all, it is his story and his family. It is also possible, as it always is, that I could be reading too much into it. There are books that I enjoy because of the rich, evocative writing, and less often, books that I do for the opposite reason--simple words strung together to make simple sentences. Amongst Women definitely falls into the latter category, and that is the reason it works. Like Moran himself, the book is one of few words, curt and on-point. It's not very long either, and in this case, it doesn't, shouldn't have to be. 

I think it is interesting that the book comes full circle, what with Michael the father dying, and Michael the son mirroring his father. I don't know or think that the message of the book is the circle of life, or that there's any message at all. But it's nice, simple, clean to think so. Unlike life itself. The other lesson, of course, is that all writers that aren't American are just better at describing food on paper.