Rating: 4/5

This one is a trip! Enjoyable if you read it with the right attitude and extra marks for its being so different. The heroine Claire, is a rich spoiled brat who always gets what she wants. She meets the Hero Rod when her father brings him home for dinner one weekend. She treats him to her bratty ways, he spanks her, so she hates him. Some months later, her father contrives to get her stuck in one of his projects in Africa, where Rod is in charge. Father wants to get her away from her current boyfriend. Of course the two are constantly at loggerheads and there is a clash of wills. However, during her stint at the jobsite, in a complete 360, Claire decides she is in love with Rod. This is where it differs from most other books, usually the heroine is at pains to keep her emotions hidden. In this book, the heroine, has too strong a personality and is too used to getting her own way so she throws herself at the Hero. It’s quite hilarious. He tries to resist her since he knows she is a total spoiled brat, but, since she is beautiful and sexy he has a really hard time. Still at barely 3/4 of the book she does get her own way and convinces the H to marry her! This is one determined chic, you'd have to give it to her! 

But this is not their HEA, because of course she is still the spoiled madam she has always been, so after a blissful honeymoon the H needs to get back to work (he s an engineer and builds dams) so she accompanies him to the new site. Naturally, she gets bored!! I was so entertained by this book - I could practically see it coming!

They are battered right and left with conflicts and have a lot of issues to resolve with still 1/4 of the book left. I was quite amused by their problems, mostly brought on by the heroine. This isn’t an angst filled read but I liked that it was quite realistic in showing how, many newly married couples need to adjust to each other. 

In the end I liked that the couple get their hard won HEA. They really did have to brave their storms. Maybe daddy can just offer Son in law a directorship so his daughter won’t have to rough it. Hee hee.