Rating: 3/5

How could you not believe in the power of hydrogen? But then again, how could you write a book about its miraculousness without writing out its superpower-esque name? 

As for the book's content, I found the basic science behind what happens to your body when it becomes too acidic to be extremely helpful and relevant information. It angers me that neither you nor I learned it in middle school health class. The details of how it works were not exactly clearly presented, however, as is typical of these type of pop health books. I understand that it is extremely difficult to present end product research to an audience that barely knows what a cell is, but I do like to feel like the author is giving it their best shot. I'm not entirely sure that was the case here, as the science only makes up a small portion of the book. I also felt skeptical about the empirical conclusions drawn from some of the evidence presented. I'm sure there was a more detailed line of reasoning behind Dr. Young's thinking than what was presented, but I often found myself thinking, "Well, there could have been a number of reasons for that."

Unfortunately, I found the recipes to be highly detrimental to the book, even if not horrible on their own. They comprise about half the book but rarely fall within the 80% (raw veggie) part of the diet that is really fundamental to the pH Miracle. They do avoid fruit, vinegar, yeast, mushrooms, peanuts, and animal products, but they include wheat and other cooked grains, and virtually all of them involve cooked vegetables. The effect was to convince me that the miracle diet Dr. Young just convincingly described is completely unsustainable, even by his own family. Fortunately, I know this is not the case, as I've since bookmarked loads of great raw veggie recipes on the web that I'm now excited to subsist on based on what I learned about pH here.

Finally, the issue of measuring the effect of food on blood and tissue pH seems to me highly controversial and not well addressed here at all. For example, I have heard elsewhere that fruit is highly alkalinizing, but Young claims quite the opposite. He explains this via the connection of sugar to byproducts of candida, but I'm left wondering if fruit is okay - even good - for people who are already in balance. I have yet to read 80-10-10, but from what I can tell, it does seem that history suggests benefits to a human diet high in fruit. That said, I know I'm not in balance (perhaps a result of heavy antibiotic usage since birth). I read the book because adding just a few pieces of fruit each day to my diet was causing problems for me, so I'm going to try Young's approach; I just wish I could reconcile it with other compelling theories of nutrition.

I'm hoping to get a hold of the newer, longer, paperback edition of this book soon, and I'll update this review if my issues are addressed there.