Rating: 5/5

The July issue of Harper's magazine has an article DEATH OF A GREAT AMERICAN CITY, NEW YORK AND THE URBAN CRISIS OF AFFLUENCE. It was disquieting in that the rich have taken over New York City making it very difficult for even the middle class to live there. What was striking is that the same thing is happening in the San Francisco Bay Area and probably other cities across the nation and possibly the world since it is often the global rich who own apartments in NYC that they spend very few days in. Anyway it reminded me of a book I read in 1994 by Jonathan Raban. I pulled HUNTING MISTER HEARTBREAK from my shelf. I had always remembered his term "air people" for the New Yorkers who lived in high rises protected by doormen and only came down to get into private air-conditioned vehicles that would take them to another high rise where they worked or were meeting other wealthy friends. I don't know if Raban coined the term "air people" but it certainly describes what is currently happening in cities around the world. These rich people are so much "air" that they hardly exist and yet they own all the real estate. 

Donald Trump always struck me as an air person, a person of privilege in a penthouse. Raban says: "Perhaps it didn't matter what storey you were on, after all. The higher up you were, the more free you were to live in a world of your imaginative making. By the 30th floor, you could probably tear loose from reality altogether." 

He also discusses the Bess Meyerson trial that went on in 1989 for abusing her public office. The case was eventually thrown out but the public humiliation was there. Raban writes: "We'd been treated to a fine spectacle, we'd watched an Air Person tumbling head over heels from a high window, and seen someone from the street grotesquely elevated to the Manhattan heights." Is this the line that prompted the beginning scene in Mad Men of Don Draper or someone similar tumbling out of a skyscraper? 

What the Air People are trying to avoid: "the current term for these misfortunates was "street people", an expression that had taken over from bag ladies, winos and bums." It is what we now call the homeless. Raban says during the Depression in the 30's these people were called "Buddy" as in "Buddy can you spare a dime? " But by the 1980's they were the outcasts. Raban decides to sit on a fire hydrant and watch the crowds. "It was interesting to feel oneself being willed into nonexistence by total strangers. I'd never felt the force of such frank contempt---and all because I was sitting on a fire hydrant...every one of these guys wanted me wiped out..after only a minute or 2 of this, I began to warm with reciprocal feeling; had I stayed on my hydrant for an hour, I'd have been aching to get my fist round a tire iron or the butt of a .38 just to let a zombie know that I was human too." Explains a lot about guns in America. 

"The real middle class in NYC now consisted of that uniformed army whose job it was to save the rich from the unwelcome attentions of the poor." Only problem is in NYC and SF those waiters, repair people, drivers, doormen and maids can't afford to live nearby and aren't as readily available so technology is taking over. 

This is a great book. Raban goes on to spend time in Alabama, Seattle and the Florida Keys. There is insight to be had in all chapters. Some of the things I think only started happening recently actually were very much a part of 1989-90. For anyone interested in USA social history and trying to understand where we are now, you will find Raban's picture of the late 80's intriguing.