Rating: 2/5

4/10

This was an…interesting read. For the first three quarters of this book, I genuinely thought this might be one of the worst books I’ve read in a long time. Not offensively bad, but just so primitive and bare bones that I felt nothing going through it all.

But then, the last quarter ended up being surprisingly good? Not great, mind you, but a significant step up from the first 3/4, to the point where it felt like a different author took the reins. Which, given the dual author credit on the cover, might actually be the case.

Let me start from the beginning. Honestly, the first 3/4 are straight up a 2/10. A couple promising science fiction concepts are buried under an incredible mundane protagonist, one note side characters, a nothing-burger of a plot (hell, there basically is no plot), and repetitive circumstances which lead to nothing insightful or even stimulating.

I’ll say the book does get better with each section. It’s clear this was meant to be a set of three short stories, wrapped under the same world. The first section, titled simply “Earth”, is honestly just bad. It’s literally a series of gladiator fights, with no compelling stakes aside from MUH PRIDE. I don’t really like Carl, simply because he isn’t really a character. Especially in this first section, he’s just a male power fantasy who takes no nonsense and loves the thrill. That’s it. I don’t really have anything to even talk about, because it’s so barren. And unfortunately, this is the LONGEST SECTION for some reason.

The next section, titled “Hell” is a little better, but not by much. The concept of a proxy war is interesting, but it is not explored meaningfully at all. Most of our time is spent with Carl and Pancho doing covert military ops, which is probably the least interesting angle the authors could have chosen for this conflict. What about Alegria as a medic? What about the actual nations behind the proxy war? What about the kidnapping ring the Hellers have going? None of it is fleshed out, in favor of Carl and Pancho cosplaying as World War II soldiers. It’s only a little better than the Earth section simply because there is somewhat of a subplot going on, with fine stakes, but it’s not enough to make this anything above a 2/10 for me.

But, much to my surprise, the final section titled “Construct” ended up being surprisingly fun.

While the plot is as barebones as the previous sections, the surrounding world and circumstances are actually really fun and interesting. I was initially expecting the Haldemans to make very generic humanoid aliens to inhabit Construct, but I really loved just how creative and, well, alien they all felt. It also helps that a lot of the focus is taken off of Carl and Pancho themselves and instead put on the multitude of alien races and the genuinely fascinating Guide the Linguist.

I also enjoyed how this story resolved, although it was way too fast. I like the idea of the Lobsters, and they felt built up to in a natural way. The ending, while kind of out of nowhere, was also very interesting and way more creative than what I expected from how the first 3/4 of this book is set up. This section was a solid 6/10 for me, and a great breath of fresh air after 170 pages of essentially nothing.

But, that’s only a quarter of the book. The rest I honestly will probably never think about again, and although it builds up to a really fun short story, that’s all this book should have been - a series of short stories.

I’ll give it a 4, but without the last section it really would be a 2. Even 4 feels a little generous, given that only a quarter of the book is passable. Read the “Construct” section for some cool alien concepts, and that’s it. You really miss nothing skipping the first 3/4.