Rating: 5/5

2025 Review
Same plot as The Foundling and Charity Girl but still satisfying. 
I didn't love Lord Gareth as much this re-read (he is a little too perfect), but it was entertaining. I need to re-read this one more regularly. 

2017 Review
Every time I review a Heyer novel I feel like I ought to start with a disclaimer: I have long since given up any pretension of reading her novels with any sense of objectivity. I love her characters. I love her dialogue. I love the setting. And frankly, I quite unexpectedly loved Sprig Muslin. This book isn't as highly rated as some of her others so I pushed off finding it. Turns out, it was quite a hidden gem! The story line follows a fairy standard and oft done Heyer trope - noble gentleman finds a willful, wayward young lady and gets dragged along with her dramatics. However, while the outline was familiar, the details felt charming and fresh.
For one, I love Hildebrand. He cracked me up. 
For two, Sir Gareth Ludlow...who is everything a gentleman ought to be and yet also manages to not overwhelm the pages.  Shooting him and having him fall unconscious was brilliant. It gave the other characters a chance to shine.
For three, the host of other characters, particularly the various innkeeper's wives, who colored the text.
But fourth and most unexpectedly, I fell for the heroine, Hester. Of course, mild and overlooked heroines are not new. Usually her type of Heyer heroine annoy me. Yet as the book progressed, Hester's courage came forward in an unexpected way. She wasn't secretly brave the whole time - but she overcomes her reservation and resignation to be something brave. She isn't The Grand Sophy but I liked her all the same. 
And of course as always, Heyer is a master of showing-not-telling. She conveys Hester's emotions, especially towards Lord Gareth, without banging you over the head with it. This limits angst and allows the imagination to run free! I love it. 
I am definitely going to have to buy this one. Decidedly a delightful read!