Rating: 3/5

** 3 stars **

I can appreciate from a poetic standpoint what Jorie Graham is doing in this collection, I just don't personally love it. Graham is like the Jackson Pollock of poetry here - in fact, there is even a poem toward the end of the collection called "Pollock and Canvas" - she's giving you non-representational art that seems random but actually has been constructed with care. She writes poetry with beautiful words that purposefully fail to cohere around a single narrative or image. She stops right before you can begin to construct a narrative around what's going on in the poem. While her poems often feature the lyrical 'I,' we as the reader know very little about who 'I' is (sometimes not even the gender) or what is going on in their life. 

To her credit, many of Graham's poems in this collection are helpful in understanding what she is doing. Take, for instance, this line from the aforementioned "Pollock and Canvas":

"Oh but we wanted to paint what is not beauty, how can one paint what is not beauty...?" (84)

And these lines from "Pietà":
 Do you hear it at
last, the spirit of
matter, there, where the words end - their small heat - where the details
cease, the scene dissolves, do you feel it at last, the sinking, where the
 meaning
rises, where the meaning evaporates, into history, into the day the
mind, and the precipitating syllables are free at last (72)

In other words, The End of Beauty paints "what is not beauty" by refusing to give the reader enough details to make sense of the scene so that we can only appreciate the words themselves rather than the image or narrative that they construct.

This is poetry for fellow poets and artists or for those who study poetry. It's not a collection for novices. In fact, the first time I read this collection a number of years ago in grad school, I hated it. Now, I appreciate more of what Graham is doing (hence the 3-star rating), but I'm still not wild about it because the reading experience feels like I've just acted out Waiting for Godot through poetry.