Rating: 4/5

This biography is not up to par with the author's biographical work on Joyce, considered to be one of the best biographies ever written, and with which I concur.

One of the reasons for this is that this book was written when Richard Ellman was much younger, and while he did have some funding in order to gather information worldwide, it was not near that which he received to write his work on James Joyce. Also, he had matured when the latter book was written; and had become more perceptive.

What is not to be found in this book are comprehensive accounts of Yeats's personal life. Even his own mother is dismissed in a sentence or two. The reader never gets to know her. His active love life is merely skirted around and even many of his friendships, especially those with Ezra Pound and James Joyce, are not even mentioned.

We do get a better look at his artist father, who seems to have raised Yeats rather severely (his mother died when he was young) and Yeats struggled for years to overcome feelings of incompetence, unworthiness and inferiority. All his life he fought his problem with timidity and lack of self-confidence.

We the readers do learn a lot about his artistic path that was always parallel to extensive seeking up to the end of his life for higher truth and reality, and the mastery thereof through the vehicles of Tibetan Buddhism (under Madame Blavatsky who eventually kicked him out of her organization), symbolism in the Golden Dawn (he was a lifelong member), occultism, psychic research and spiritualism (his wife was a medium), besides living a very active outer life as theatre manager, politician and involvement in nationalistic movements.

Yeats was always developing, altering and changing his personal philosophy. I found his writings about this subject in the book to become quite tedious. So did his wife who wouldn't read them because she said they were boring. She urged him instead to concentrate on his poetry. Still, even at the very end of his life when he knew he was dying because his health was fading so fast, he continued to reconstruct and reinvent his own philosoophy wherein he finally came to believe (but no doubt had he lived longer, this would have even been altered) that it is necessary for symbolic and outer reality to unite.

There are important insights in the book that make it well worth reading. But I would have liked to have learned much more about Yeats's personal life and relationships than I did.