Rating: 2/5

Gets better towards the end by moving away from the position that children are soulless demons who want to gain power over grownups for the purpose of making their lives miserable. The stronger finish is the only reason I gave it more than one star.

Here's a summary from the end of the book:

Ten Principles to Practise

1. Pay off correct behaviour, not misbehaviour. Reinforce polite requests, not whining, teasing and tantrums. Reinforce calm discussions, not arguments and power struggles.

2. Think before you talk. Say what you mean. Mean what you say. Follow through. Give yourself visual reminders. Reward yourself for being consistent.

3. Expect good behaviour from your children. Children must know what you expect from them and what they can expect from you. When children can predict how you behave in given situations, they make better choices.

4. Children believe what you tell them. Coach your children on ways to be successful. Teach your children that effort is essential to success. Use plenty of encouragement. When you encourage your children, they will see that you have faith and confidence in them. Encouragement will help your children face situations with more confidence.

5. Anticipate problems. Tell them the rules in advance. Be specific. Be reasonable. Once you recognize a misbehaviour pattern, establish a plan. Spotlight success. Provide support and encouragement. Use charts and contracts to strengthen your plan.

6. Use punishments that teach decision making and accountability. Children survive reasonable punishments, such as restriction and time-out. Do not punish when you are angry, or to get even. Relating punishment to your child's decisions teaches responsibility.

7. Begin teaching responsibility and decision-making when your children are young. Prepare your children to live in the real world. Be strict but positive. Children need limits and structure, ground rules and consistency. Children see these qualities as an expression of your love and concern.

8. Love your children regardless of their behaviour. Focus on your children's positive qualities. Teach your children to seek self-reward to feel good about doing the right thing. Look for praiseworthy decisions. Teach your children to like themselves, to understand their weaknesses and accept their faults. Use yourself as an example. When they learn to admit their shortcomings to others, their weaknesses will have less power in their lives.

9. Support yourself, even when others sit in judgment. Do not let your children push your buttons. Be strong. Control your own behaviour to be a good model. Your children learn from you.

10. Provide a healthy and pleasant family climate. Emphasize each other's strengths. Accept each other's weaknesses. Talk about values and goals. Your children will learn to come to you with their problems. This will come in handy when they are teenagers.

Don't buy this book. Don't read it if you get it for free. Avoid.