Rating: 4/5

This 1950s Pocket edition, purchased from a Sonoma used book store, presented today as a gift to my eight year old daughter (more on this later). After thanking me she asked me what it was about. I told her it's about a boy and his dog. She asked me if the dog dies. I told her he does, but that it is still a good book. She asked if I had read it. I told her I hadn't - only seen the movie. She asked me to read it for her first to make sure it wasn't too sad. She's on to me...

Our 14 year-old protagonist Travis comes of age when his father leaves him to be the man of the house while he does a cattle drive from Texas to Kansas. Gipson's frontiersy narrative and dialogue feels right, sounds right, for a book written for children in the 1950s about life in West Texas in the late 1860s. My memories of the movie are hazy, but it seems that the film action follows closely to the written word action, and while there is definitely sadness in the passing of Old Yeller, it doesn't feel like maudlin melancholy. As an eight year old it is the kind of book I would want to read about such weighty subjects as death, grieving, living. When I finished reading it, I handed the novel to my daughter and said, "It's not so sad. You'll like it." She's read the entire Laura Ingalls Wilder series. This book is a layup.

When traveling my daughter often sees me reading on a Kindle or an iPad. She knows I am reading a book - she also knows that I prefer to read a physical copy rather than an E but that our luggage can only accommodate so many books (here in Florida I've been walking around with Women and Men like a KJV Bible clutched heavily to my chest). She asks when she will be able to read a book on the iPad; I know that in her lifetime a library will be as much of an anachronism as if I had a shelf of VHS tapes - but I want to hold out for as long as I can and help her to experience the tactile enjoyment of the tree book over the ebook. This paperback copy of Old Yeller is 60 years old, in decent shape and is only just showing the ravages of time with yellowing paper and crackling spine glue. While reading the book I hand it to my daughter and ask her to flip the pages under her nose and breath in. She does so, smiles. "You'll never get that from an ebook", I tell her. I hope she remembers this.