Rating: 2/5

Along with Bud Hopkins, Professor Jacobs is a prime exponent of the hypothesis that extraterrestrials have been conducting breeding operations with abducted humans with the intention of creating hybrids capable of existing on, and ultimately controlling, Earth. Their work relies heavily on information obtained by hypnosis and, occasionally, holotropic breath work, both means of obtaining altered states of consciousness. While many, if not most, of his subjects come to him prompted by troubling recollections, these 'normal' memories are often exposed as cover memories of much more troubling (for Jacobs at least) experiences.

Having regard for material obtained in altered states, I am suspicious of such material being simply aligned with the facts of quotidian, communal existence. Although Jacobs goes to great lengths to differentiate his technique from that of inferior hypnotists, several of whom, such as Harvard psychiatrist John Mack, he cites as mistakenly believing the aliens to have benign intent, I remain unconvinced--unconvinced that aliens are abducting humans in this space-time continuum at all. I do, however, entertain notions of other 'dimensions', such as the Jungians' 'psychoid' or such as described in the Strassman studies of DMT or in Terence McKenna's theorizing, in which such events occur, existentially speaking. This is simply to say that such hypotheses should, if possible, be scientifically tested.

Further, given what we know about genetics, it's quite a stretch to believe that there might be an extraterrestrial species capable of productively mating with homo sapiens. 

Further still, following Jacques Vallee on this, it seems absurd to think that a species technologically far in advance of ours would have to use the primitive methods reported in this book. If, as Jacobs believes, they want this planet, surely there would be easier ways to wrest it from us and/or to cause environmental changes suited to their needs. So, too, wouldn't there be easier ways for an advanced civilization to deal with their infertility problems than a multigenerational rape-and-mate hybridization program with inferior hominids?