Rating: 3/5

This is an early example of space fantasy, esp. in a narrow definition of fantasy as a genre where god(dess)s operate. I read it as a part of the monthly reading for November 2025 at Hugo &amp; Nebula Awards: Best Novels group. The first part was initially published as a novella in 1949 and expanded as a novel in 1966. It was nominated for the Hugo Award in 1967 but lost to The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress.

The book starts like a classic SF – a captain Pausert of a space trade ship during his stay on a planet sees a girl aged like 14 in distress. She is a slave, and her master wants to punish her. The captain buys her to protect her, and to find out that her two sisters are also enslaved on this planet. He buys all of them because he is pure of heart, even if not a cunning trader.

As they leave the planet, he finds out that one of the girls stole some valuables, and despite Pausert returning the valuables to the owner, they are pursued. A strange thing happens – the ship jumps far ahead of the pursuers.

As the captain finds out, the girls are witches from the planet Karres. The witchery here formally means psionics, but it covers a broad range of usages from instant learning languages to tapping knowledge of older relatives to teleportation that it is magic in all but name, and the planet is full of such people. Pausert returns the girls to their planet, is rewarded by a lot of commodities (he is a trader after all!), which alas will be impossible to sell and leaves, just to find out that one of the girls, 10-year-old Goth, is a stowaway on his ship. When his ship gets into trouble, she transports it across the empire to the part where no one from his planet has been for at least the last century.

The rest of the book Pausert and Goth team up to travel and use their talents to move by dangerous and profitable routes, while governments and pirates send spies after them to capture their unique drive. Pausert becomes aware of other ‘magical’ beings, which remind me of djinnis and petty yet powerful gods. There are planet-sized ships, killer robots, sneaky agents and more – quite a delight for the youths reading it in the 1960s. I guess I would have ranked this book quite high if I read it in my teens, but now, knowing what was written in SFF after and myself much older, I see it as an interesting and back then a groundbreaking book, but which can hardly compete with contemporary SFF, either YA or adult.