Rating: 3/5

O’Brian’s Aubrey-Maturin series is a prime example of books that fulfil what is, for me at least, one of the primary purposes of historical fiction: complete immersion into an historical era (something I find not all, or even many, works of historical fiction are able to do well at all). This does, of course, present obstacles for the casual (and even not-so-casual) reader who may not be as well-versed in the period as is necessary for full appreciation of the texts. Add to this the fact that O’Brian apparently never met a piece of nautical jargon he didn't love and is infamous for having gone into explicit detail on specific nautical terms and processes and this lexicon becomes pretty much required reading if you want anything other than the most vague understanding of what is going on for significant portions of the novels. That being said, the definitions of many of these terms are so technical in themselves, and often (for me at least) hard to envision from a text description, that you may still walk away from some of the explanations scratching your head.

In addition to the lexicon of words (that goes far beyond naval terminology and includes all manner of historical references and allusions, as well as entries for important historical figures that appear or are referenced in the series) there are two useful essays that act as introductions to the book. One covers the makeup of the British Royal Navy coupled with a short historical overview of the era, and the other acts as an examination of the medical practices and beliefs of the day. These two subjects are perhaps the most appropriate ones that could have acted as an entrée to the book given the two main characters: one a dashing and efficient naval captain of known nautical expertise, the other a physician and natural philosopher (amongst his other more clandestine pursuits), both of whom are committed to ‘the service’ and the war against Napoleon which forms the backdrop to all of the events of the novels. There is also a fairly detailed timeline of the Napoleonic wars at the end of the book which gives an overview of significant historical events of the period related to the wars in which Aubrey and Maturin were involved.

All in all the book is a great resource and while, as noted above, some of the more technical elements of naval processes and procedures may still remain quite mysterious to me I found it to be indispensible. It’s very handy to be able to quickly jump in to find a term or obscure word and get its exact relevance (though to be fair to O’Brian many of them are fairly clear in general simply through context), not to mention its utility as an introduction to the time period overall and the relevant cultural aspects of the era for which it is an excellent resource.

Definitely recommended to both afficianados and neophytes of the Aubrey-Maturin series.