Rating: 4/5

3.5 stars.

What a hilarious, amazing and adorable regency romance written in a picaresque style !

The story revolves around our ne'er do well H, Viscount Warrington. He's the only son of a wealthy and powerful Earl. But unlike his respectable and dignified daddy, who campaigns for social reform in the House of Lords, the H spends all his time gambling, partying with his fellow rakes and socializing with all the fashionable impures. 

This is the H, Viscount Warrington ( aka Jack )

At the start of the novel, Jack's father is at his wits end because the H's profligate ways have resulted in massive debts owed to tradesmen and to fellow gamblers. The Earl finally puts his foot down and decides it's time his wayward son is taught an important lesson about the value of money. 

Jack's father challenges him to move out of London for one month and live anonymously on £50. If the H wins the wager, his father will pay all his debts; if he loses, then he'll have to marry a debutante named Lady Sophie and start producing his heir and spares. 

The H is stunned, because he's very entitled and egotistical. Jack thinks that his lifestyle is owed to him, because he's one of society's most eligible bachelors... 

Nonetheless, he accepts the wager because he really wants daddy to pay off all his debts. The H then sets off on his stallion, with just £50 in his pocket, with no fixed destination in mind. On the outskirts of the city, he's accosted by thieves who leave him lying by the roadside, after beating him and stealing some of his clothes, all his money and his horse.

He might've died from his wounds, but he's lucky that the heroine, Antonia, and an orphaned little boy named Jem, decide to save him. 

This is the heroine Antonia:

Antonia has been forced to work as a governess, after her mother died and her late soldier dad's pension is stopped. She's a sweet and optimistic heroine, despite her penurious and stress filled existence. Her late father's family refuses to accept her, because of her mother's Italian heritage, so she's thankful to be teaching the bratty daughters of Sir Harold Mansfield and his social climbing wife. 

The H is happy to be alive, but hides his real identity because he doesn't want to lose the wager and be forced to marry Lady Sophie. Sir Harold lets him stay and work as a groom, because he's the only man who's able to handle their prized thoroughbred horse, Caesar. Jack dislikes his new servile status and hates living in the tiny, ramshackle room above the stables, but he buckles down to his job and he even looks at the bright side of his situation: he'll use this opportunity to flirt with the beautiful young governess ! 

Life starts to look up for Jack, when he earns a few gold guineas riding Caesar to victory in a horse race. Jack thinks that this wager mightn't be that hard to win, after all. Unfortunately for the H, Sir Harold's son, Geoffrey, sees him as a rival. Geoffrey is not only jealous of Jack's handsome looks and horsemanship; he also resents Antonia's interest in the H. 

In fact, Geoffrey is even more envious because all the women in the household ( his stepmother and all the young servant girls ) are swooning over the hot H. Shit soon hits the fan after Geoffrey tries to force himself on the heroine. The H, who witnesses this encounter, reacts instinctively like a Corinthian and opens up a can of whoopass on the vile Geoffrey...

After this debacle, Jack realizes that he can't remain at the Mansfield home, especially when a visitor remarks on his uncanny resemblance to Viscount Warrington. The H, for once in his selfish life, puts another person first: he writes a note to her and encloses most of his winnings ( 3 gold guineas ), telling her to use it wisely just in case she's also fired from her job. 

It's at this point in the novel that the next set of adventures begin !

Jack literally traipses off, on his own, walking along the road and hoping that he might be able to hitchhike from a kind traveller. Meanwhile, Antonia is fired by Lady Mansfield, because the latter wholeheartedly swallows all of Geoffrey's lies. She's joined by the little orphan boy, Jem. 

Antonia and Jem soon encounter a hyperactive, dramatic little mongrel dog who's running with a hessian boot in his mouth. It turns out that the boot belongs to the H; the dog had stolen it from him, when he took it off to lie down and rest. 

All 3 characters are soon reunited and decide to stay together and pool their limited resources. Jack's even outvoted when the other 2 adopt the mischievous, homeless dog, christened Baldric, to join them. 

This is the cute mongrel, Baldric:

After this, the heroine's money is stolen so the mismatched gang of 4 encounter a travelling circus and accept jobs:

1. Jack becomes a trick horseback rider.

2. Antonia uses her musical skills as a singer and mandolin player.

3. Jem and Baldric devise their own little routine, where the smart little dog does tricks that even include dancing ! 

This part of the novel is filled with excitement, fun and memorable minor characters who all play a huge role in teaching the H to cherish the gifts that Life has bestowed on him. Jack learns the real value of money, now that he has to work hard and expend a lot of sweat to earn a few measly shillings. 

It's as if the H experiences his own coming of age experience, at this later stage in his life. He falls in love with the heroine and proposes, even though she doesn't know he's a viscount. His huge ego takes a beating too, when he's thrown in jail after his watch is stolen and a minor aristocrat's son lies and claims it as his own ! Jack is somewhat demoralised when he realises that cunning aristocrats can destroy a poor man's life - because the authorities always take the word of a nobleman over an impoverished person. 

This was the really wonderful part of the story, because at no point does the H reveal his true identity. He tolerates all the horrible treatment and, in so doing, he becomes a much better man. The MC's romance did experience a big speed bump at the end, when the H hears that his dad is ill and rushes off, leaving a note for the heroine - a note that she doesn't receive !

At the end of the story, Jack returns to the heroine after a couple of weeks, grovels, reveals the truth about his identity, proposes and takes her, Jem and Baldric back to meet his parents and sisters. At first his parents were a little unsure about the heroine, but they soon grew to love her and the H's mother became so fond of the dog Baldric, that he always accompanied her to the park when she went out on her daily social rounds. 

The short epilogue was the best, because the married MC's observe the social climbing Lady Mansfield and her wannabe rapist stepson, Geoffrey, at a ball during the next London season. The 2 provincial social climbers, who are trying to ingratiate themselves with important people, are stunned when they see their former stable groom and governess swanning around in the Ton, as the Viscount and Viscountess Warrington. The H snobs them by giving them the cut; thus ensuring that all the important members of the aristocracy will ignore them too... 

NB: The H gets his stolen horse again. 

Safety: No sex, no OW, a wannabe OM and both MC's are celibate during their short separation.