Rating: 3/5

THE STORY OF THE 1978 CALIFORNIA "TAX REVOLT"
 
Howard Arnold Jarvis (1903-1986) was an American businessman, lobbyist, and politician, who was best-known as the anti-tax activist responsible for passage of California's Proposition 13 in 1978.

He (or perhaps more accurately, ghostwriter Robert Pack) states in the first chapter, "For me, the words 'I'm mad as hell' are more than a national saying, more than the title of this book; they express exactly how I feel ... (about the) unfair taxes made all the worse by inflation and an energy crisis that the politicians and bureaucrats have not been willing to face up to." (Pg. 4) He argues that "If you destroy the residential property base, you destroy the country---and that was exactly what I could see taking place." (Pg. 6)

His three principles for taxation are: (1) we wanted taxes to be fair; (2) we wanted taxes to be equal for everybody; (3) the tax system should be "within the ability of the people who were taxed to pay for it." (Pg. 20-21) He states "I was glad that (Proposition) 13 had so much appeal to wealthy people. More often than not, the rich make more money because they're brighter---so far as I've observed." (Pg. 129)

He gives his perspective on his "break" with co-sponsor Paul Gann (who died in 1987 from transfusion-related AIDS), who said that Jarvis had been "an utter failure until Proposition 13," among other uncomplimentary things. (Pg. 142) Jarvis states, "The way he had it planned, (Gann) and I would run this operation and become highly paid officials in the tax movement. I told him I couldn't do that.... I had established ... that I was not going to be paid anything for my work on taxation..." (Pg. 144)

About the court challenge of Proposition 13, he said that if it had been ruled unconstitutional, "I was going to call for a statewide revolt against paying property taxes." (Pg. 147) Later, he said that "I would like to see property taxes cut out entirely, not just in California, but in every state that now has such a tax." (Pg. 283)

Jarvis was raised a Mormon in Utah, and notes, "I still consider myself a Mormon, even though I never go to church." (Pg. 233) He rejected Robert Welch's offer to join the John Birch Society, because "I thought they were too drastic and I didn't think a group like that had a place in partisan politics." (Pg. 267)

Jarvis's book is very interesting, and provides a candid look into the mind of an influential force in California politics.