Rating: 5/5

The final book in the Bracken trilogy is both the darkest and the best. When I first read these books around the age of 10, I didn't like sad stories, and this book stunned me because although it was SO sad, I still loved it.

The first two books of this series were about princesses. THE TWO COLLARS is about a child slave who has been abused all her life when she's bought by the wise woman who is the central figure of the whole trilogy, and raised to be her successor. Meanwhile, unspecified years after the books of the first trilogy, a war is brewing between the king and his cousin - and age is finally catching up with the wise woman.

As in the first two books of the series, there's a subtle stand of allegory running through the story, although it becomes a little more overt here - Krea's relationship with her Mistress, adopted out of slavery to be raised into maturity as her daughter is clearly intended to be an image of the believer's relationship with God. Indeed, the allegory has that inartistic characteristic, of only being understandable if you take the wise woman as being God. Krea's dependence on the old woman would be pretty troubling in any relationship between humans. Nevertheless, I give it all a pass, not just because of how novel and delightful it is to see an allegory where God is represented as a woman rather than as a man or an animal, but also because the symbolism is so poignant and for much of the story, so subtle. Even as an adult, I was tearing up throughout this book. By this time, Massi has learned how to shred your feelings with a few turns of phrase.

The main theme of the book has to do with authority. Where does authority come from? Krea's old master uses power, fear, and manipulation to control her. The kingdom of Bracken appeals to the Unchangeable Law carved on the foundations of the king's castle. And the old woman tells Krea that she must learn to serve others not from fear, but from love, and that she will attain to the wise woman's royal status not through high birth, but service. All this is of course straight from the Gospels, and has become additionally meaningful to me of recent years. To go back and find it all laid out in a favourite book from my childhood was pretty special.

Resonant, heartbreaking, and despite its flaws full of what CS Lewis called sehnsucht, THE TWO COLLARS pulls the Bracken trilogy beyond itself to a new level. It's been years since I last read these, but they have weathered nostalgia well.