Rating: 1/5

Apr 10, 11am ~~ One little project for 2023 is to read five of Wilbur Smith's stand alone titles, books that were not part of any series he had written. So far I have read just one, Hungry As The Sea. When I was finished with Chaim Potok's Davita's Harp, I decided to visit Ethiopia with Smith since one of the characters in Davita's Harp spent time as a nurse in Ethiopia. I thought I would be able to read a bit of historical fiction about the chaos that Italy caused in the country when they invaded just before WWII.

Smith usually starts his action right from the first sentence, dropping the reader into the middle of some adventure and then slowly showing us what we are doing there. In a way he did the same here, when he introduced the two alpha male characters who at first are rivals and then join forces. One is an engineer who can make any piece of machinery hum; the other is a presumed gentleman with a habit of living very much past the edge of the law. 

The world was waiting for Italy to invade and no one was helping the Ethiopians. There were embargoes against any guns being imported to the country since they would have to go through either French or British land territory to get there and neither of those countries wanted to appear to be against Italy at that point in history. 

Our two overgrown teenagers have a plan to supply guns and armored vehicles, but they won't get paid until they deliver the equipment and part of the deal imposed by the man they are in contact with is that a reporter must go along on their journey in order to tell the world what the country faces. 

And of course the reporter is a beautiful woman. What could go wrong?

I was okay with all of this while our two semi-heroes were rivals for the armored cars each wanted to buy at auction. But once they became business partners some fairly idiotic things began to take place, changing the feel of the story into something much less appealing to me. I decided not to finish the book. Maybe the grand adventure turns around later and morphs into something as heroic as its possibilities, but I didn't like any of the main characters enough to follow along.

DNF around page 100.