Rating: 4/5

I don't even recall now how I happened upon this short novel – I'd heard of neither it nor its author before. It must have been as I worked through the novels of another Japanese author, Yukio Mishima, that I read about this prize winning novel, the first of Okuizumi's to be translated. It entered my “must read” queue immediately.

Tsuyoshi Manase, a Japanese veteran of World War II, is still haunted by the horrors and suffering he witnessed on the island of Leyte in the Philippines, as the few remaining soldiers of the defeated Japanese forces fought malaria, dysentery, and malnutrition while trying to evade capture by American forces. 

Manase had come upon a small emaciated, exhausted group of his compatriots camped in and around a jungle cave, led by a ruthless captain who still dreamed of a final offensive. Many of the soldiers were close to death, and, by the captain's standards, a hindrance and a needless drain on limited resources. As Manase remembers it in his nightmares, the captain dispatched the dying men, one by one, with his sword.

One of these dying soldiers was a lance corporal who, picking up a stone, said to Manase, “Even the smallest stone in a riverbed has the entire history of the universe inscribed upon it.” A strange comment that would have great importance, echoing through Manase’s life.

The events that transpired in that cave on Leyte forever would torment Manase, but that comment from the lance corporal would send Manase on an obsessive journey of rock collecting, becoming something of an amateur geologist. 

But memories are unreliable, and we soon suspect that Manase's memories and senses are certainly unreliable. What really happened in that cave on Leyte? Events in Manase's life, his constant nightmares, flashbacks, his failed marriage, the unsolved homicide of his son, Hiroaki, and the estrangement of his younger son, Takaaki, all appear to be reverberations from that monstrous cave in the Leyte jungle.

What really happened in that cave on Leyte?

THE STONES CRY OUT is a meditation on war's casualties, on how the mind creates masks to hide emotional trauma. It's a meditation on blind obediance to authority versus subjective free will. It's a powerful book in a small package. This book will resonate with you for a long time after you've closed the cover. It won Japan's most prestigious literary award, the Akutagawa Prize, in 1994.