Rating: 4/5

Dusk and Other Stories includes eleven stories: "Am Strande von Tanger", "Twenty Minutes", "American Express", "Foreign Shores", "The Cinema", "Lost Sons", "Akhnilo", "Dusk", "Via Negativa", "The Destruction of the Goetheanum", and "Dirt". 

My overall impression of the stories... The author frequently relates the stories of American expatriates living in Europe. Although he wasn't exactly an expatriate, Salter spent his many years of military service (in the 1940s and 50s) in Europe, where he undoubtedly met many American expatriates and overheard a great many stories. Indeed, the stories of this collection have an "overheard" quality. The narrator may be omnipresent (if I remember correctly, the stories are all told in the third person), but important details are often conveyed from one character to another - rather than directly witnessed to the reader. This effect also creates an ambiguity that creates or contributes to one conflict or another. Indeed, there is always conflict. Salter's stories may be rooted in the exploration of character, but he knows as well as the best writers of his generation that the best outlet for revealing character is conflict. 

The author is deserving of comparison to Ernest Hemingway and Henry Miller. In many ways, he is Hemingway's equal. I consider him to be superior to Henry Miller, although he does sometimes succumb to a light version of the sexism and racism that characterizes Miller's work. The offensive material is minor enough that it did not detract from my reading. Irksome details that the stories would be better without. Details that contribute nothing. Unfortunate affliction of Salter's generation of writers (as well as the earlier generation that included Miller). 

Unlike Hemingway or Miller who, for all appearances, wrote stories predominantly or entirely from the perspective of men, several stories are told from a female perspective. Salter's female perspective, however, lacks the insight of a story about a woman written by a woman. Not surprising. I want to give him credit for trying. But I have reservations. For example, the themes explored in the title story, "Dusk", feel redundant. The story is about a woman in the "dusk" of her years. Not surprisingly, she is preoccupied by aging, by her divorce and the fear that her options for a new husband are dwindling. The story is well written, but the desperation of its character is a bit obvious.

A bit obvious, too, is the desperation of the woman in "Twenty Minutes". But this is a desperation we can understand. A desperation that transcends gender. The "Twenty Minutes" of the title refers to the twenty minutes the character believes she has to get help after sustaining a serious injury. ("She knew she had some time. Twenty minutes, they always said." - pg. 19) Indeed, a man or woman in this position would undoubtedly appear desperate. In both stories, this desperation serves to reveal character. We learn that one has seduced a married man (in "Dusk"), the nature of another's relationship with her father (in "Twenty Minutes"). But surely there must be another way to reveal the intricacies of a female character...

A cinematic quality may be attributed to the author's interest in film. Indeed, the author worked as a scriptwriter and a filmmaker in the same period these stories were written. His love of film is evident in the language, in the description, in the dialogue... More overtly, his love of film is evident in stories like "The Cinema" that deal directly with the cinematic arts, dropping names like Fellini, dropping references like The Bicycle Thief...

I found two of the later stories, "Via Negativa" and "The Destruction of the Goetheanum", to be somewhat indulgent. Although I enjoyed both stories, its a liability that a writer writing about a writer will come across as indulgent. Indeed, "Via Negativa" is particularly indulgent, following the kind of failed writer who believes "there is a great, final glory which falls on certain figures barely noticed in their time..." (pg. 105) What saves this particular story from succumbing to its own indulgences is the ambiguity of the author's portrayal of his protagonist. His "sad bones" may be made of literature. His opinions may be "cold but accurate". His favourite writers may be Robert Musil and Gerard Manley Hopkins.... But what does it all amount to if the protagonist himself can't publish? If he is cynical? If the woman he loves doesn't believe in him?

Does Salter believe, as his protagonist believes, that obscurity is rewarded? As it was upon Gogol? (who, as the protagonist points out, "died a virgin", thereby serving as the perfect role model for protagonist who believes in purity, whose chastity remains untouched by the corruption influences of mainstream audiences and mass market appeal.) That he lingers outside of closed shops and experiences "a great longing for money" and "a desire to be recognized" draws comparison to the protagonists of Brautigan's "1/3, 1/3, 1/3", desperate misfits who "pound at the gates of American literature". Unlike these misfits, however, Salter's protagonist must retain his pretensions by absolving his obscurity with quotes from other great misfits (like Cocteau who said: "There's a fame worse than failure." - pg. 111)

Ultimately "Via Negativa" falls short of "The Destruction of the Goetheanum" for one crucial reason... Salter is the champion of his protagonist in "Via Negativa". We learn of his loves and exploits through Salter, the objective and omnipresent narrator. When the protagonist tells his "big fish" stories we know they are "big fish" stories because Salter has told us otherwise. Whereas the writer of "The Destruction of the Goetheanum" is not the protagonist but the husband of the love interest of the protagonist. We are so removed that when the wife of the writer indulges his exploits, there remains all the ambiguity, all the mystery, and all the obscurity that the protagonist of "Via Negativa" lacks. And in this way, Salter sets up the writer of "The Destruction of the Goetheanum" for a fall, for a destruction comparable to the destruction of the "Goetheanum" - which was appropriately enough a structure built on ideas, the ideas of Goethe.

Here, the unreliability of our narrator (that is, the wife who is the narrator of her husband's literary exploits) is acknowledged. ("She quoted a few lines of Valéry which he later found out were incorrect. Afternoons torn by wind, the stinging sea . . . She adored Valéry. An anti-Semite, she said. - pg. 120) As if there's some virtue to being an anti-Semite, some credit to his literary prowess that he is flawed. When the protagonist finally meets her literary husband, he too proves unreliable. There is a sort of paradox when one unreliable character outs another character for being unreliable, as the husband does the wife. ("She sometimes tells . . . fantastic lies." - pg. 126)

A memorable scene, that summarizes the relationship of husband and wife, the conflict between her reality and his fantasy, is related by the wife to the protagonist... 

He was growing feverish. He could no longer read. He wanted to dictate some final things, Nadine took them down. He insisted on being buried with her photograph over his heart, he had made her promise to tear it from her passport.
"How will I get home?" she had asked.
(pg. 123)

My favourite story in the collection is the first story, "Am Strande von Tanger". Salter's spare description. The sort of snapshot or montage effect he employs in the early passages of this story. The characters. His description of the characters - that is, the details chosen by the author, their order suggesting importance decided by the author. Their relevance to the characters individually, interpersonally, and geographically (the location playing a central role in the story of three Expatriates)...

Barcelona at dawn. The hotels are dark. All the great avenues are pointing to the sea.
The city is empty. Nico is asleep. She is bound by twisted sheets, by her long hair, by a naked arm which falls from beneath her pillow. She lies still, she does not even breathe.
In a cage outlined beneath a square of silk that is indigo blue and black, her bird sleeps, Kalil. The cage is in an empty fireplace which has been scrubbed clean. There are flowers beside it and a bowl of fruit. Kalil is asleep, his head beneath the softness of a wing.
Malcolm is asleep. His steel-rimmed glasses which he does not need—there is no prescription in them—lie open on the table. He sleeps on his back and his nose rides the dream world like a keel. This nose, his mother’s nose or at least a replica of his mother’s, is like a theatrical device, a strange decoration that has been pasted on his face. It is the first thing one notices about him. It is the first thing one likes. The nose in a sense is a mark of commitment to life. It is a large nose which cannot be hidden. In addition, his teeth are bad.
At the very top of the four stone spires which Gaudi left unfinished the light has just begun to bring forth gold inscriptions too pale yet to read. There is no sun. There is only a white silence. Sunday morning. The early mornings of Spain. A mist covers all of the hills which surround the city. The stores are closed.
Nico has come out on the terrace after her bath. The towel is wrapped around her, water still glistens on her skin.
“It’s cloudy,” she says. “It’s not a good day for the sea.”
Malcolm looks up.
“It may clear,” he says.
Morning. Villa-Lobos is playing on the phonograph. The cage is on a stool in the doorway. Malcolm lies in a canvas chair eating an orange. He is in love with the city. He has a deep attachment to it based in part on a story by Paul Morand and also on an incident which occurred in Barcelona years before: one evening in the twilight Antonio Gaudi, mysterious, fragile, even saintlike, the city’s great architect, was hit by a streetcar as he walked to church. He was very old, white beard, white hair, dressed in the simplest of clothes. No one recognized him. He lay in the street without even a cab to drive him to the hospital. Finally he was taken to the charity ward. He died the day Malcolm was born.
The apartment is on Avenida General Mitre and her tailor, as Nico calls him, is near Gaudi’s cathedral at the other end of town. It’s a working class neighborhood, there’s a faint smell of garbage. The site is surrounded by walls. There are quatrefoils printed in the sidewalk. Soaring above everything, the spires. Sanctus, sanctus, they cry. They are hollow. The cathedral was never completed. Its doors lead both ways into open air. Malcolm has walked, in the calm Barcelona evening, around this empty monument many times. He has stuffed peseta notes, virtually worthless, into the slot marked: donations to continue the work. It seems on the other side they are simply falling to the ground or, he listens closely, a priest wearing glasses locks them in a wooden box.
Malcolm believes in Malraux and Max Weber: art is the real history of nations. In the details of his person there is evidence of a process not fully complete. It is the making of a man into a true instrument. He is preparing for the arrival of that great artist he one day expects to be, an artist in the truly modern sense which is to say without accomplishments but with the conviction of genius. An artist freed from the demands of craft, an artist of concepts, generosity, his work is the creation of the legend of himself. So long as he is provided with even a single follower he can believe in the sanctity of this design.
He is happy here. He likes the wide, tree-cool avenues, the restaurants, the long evenings. He is deep in the currents of a slow, connubial life.
(pg. 3-5)