Rating: 4/5

Working at Sector General – the sprawling, multi-species hospital in outer space – often means solving complex problems and dealing with inscrutable beings. And for Senior Physician Conway, his latest patient embodies both, as he finds himself attempting to diagnose the malady of a member of a previously unknown species. Reputedly immortal, its massive body is suffering from a skin condition that not only resists medication, but seems almost to be fighting to retain its disease. And even if it is cured, there is the possibly related issue of the crime of which it is accused, one that is abhorrent to every intelligent species in the Federation. Because Conway is asked as well to determine whether the illness might have been a factor in why the half-ton creature ate the other member of its crew, a missing being who was the entity’s physician.

It is with this premise that James White starts the second book in his Sector General series. Unlike the previous volume, Hospital Station, this one is not a fix-up of several short stories in the same setting, but of a single short story and a novella. This makes narratively for a more seamless work than his inaugural effort, as no sooner does Conway deal with his troublesome case then he finds himself assigned as a result of it to determine the medical issues plaguing an entire planet, one that is a member of an enigmatic “Empire” in an uncharted part of the galaxy. The revelation of the source of these problems is used by White to introduce a new element to his imagined universe: an armed conflict for which the peaceful Federation that sponsors Sector General is unprepared.

Thanks to its prominence, the Sector General station quickly becomes the focal point for the fighting. This allows the author to offer his own particular take on the wartime setting so common to space operas. With much of its staff and its eclectic collection of patients evacuated, Sector General becomes a battlefield hospital for the Monitor Corps, the Federation’s gendarmerie, as it resists the Empire’s attacks on the station. For Conway and the other doctors, nurses, and orderlies who remained, this means treating a seemingly endless flow of wounded survivors of space battles. Though White’s writing falls short of the greats of the genre, the pages of the book describing the staff’s efforts to cope with the problems with which they are confronted are more than effective enough to keep the reader moving through it.

While the resolution of the novel is abrupt and more than a little idealistic, it is one that is perfectly in keeping with the author’s pacifistic ideals. This element is what makes his series such a unique contribution to the space opera genre, and more than offsets some of the other issues with his work. As with his previous book, White’s vision of a multi-species galactic society embracing its diversity can be oddly schizophrenic to modern-day readers when contrasted with the gender roles in it that are more reflective of the times in which it was written rather than the ones in which it is set. Conway’s mid-novel mission is also a little eyebrow-raising, as it echoes the sort of foreign development projects popular in White’s day that subsequently became targets of criticism for their efforts to impose Western values on local communities. Admittedly the absence of such criticism within these pages is part of the book’s charm, as it allows it to radiate the sort of postwar optimism that can make the series such enjoyable reading. Much like Gene Roddenberry’s contemporary Star Trek series, it offers a hopeful vision for the people we might become in the future.