Rating: 4/5

This is the third installment of the Bastion Club series. This time it follows the story of Charles St. Austell, Earl of Lostwithiel who returned to his home town in Cornwall to escape the tedious atmosphere of London and his gaggles of female relatives who were too enthusiastic in helping him look for a suitable bride for him. So there in his own home the Abbey Hall he contemplated what qualities he wanted in his future wife.

~ He wasn't going back to society until he had a firm and definite vision of the lady he wanted for his own ~ Charles

~ He needed a wife to connect him again, a bridge between him and all around him especially back in the society ~ Charles

Poor Charles for over twelve years working as a spy in a foreign land he felt so disconnected in going back to his own home land esp. among the ton where he felt he still needs to put up a facade and cannot feel at ease among them even with his own family except with his mother who knew about his work. Then came in unexpectedly Lady Penelope Jane Marissa Selborne or Lady Penny for short, his childhood friend and neighbor. He thought she would be married by now but still she remained single and quite independent and still the same stubborn girl he knew back then. They were once upon a time before he got his marching orders in the army, they were lovers she was just 16 and he 20. But for some reason after that one time intimate encounter Lady Penny refused to pursue any further contact between them and so Charles after many instances that she avoided him took the hint and decided to let it go. But now after how many years has passed that same sensual attraction between them is still there and more stronger than ever. Meanwhile, Charles was also in town to investigate some sensitive matter for Dalziel his ex-commander regarding some smuggling activity in the area, and its so happens that it coincidentally involved Lady Penny and her family. A possible treacherous scheme has been discovered and a very determined professional killer is going about as well. While some murderous events were going down, Charles is also determined to keep Penny safe and aid her family. There was a considerable build up to the first sensual and passionate scenes and since then it was all just smoldering each time they come together. At first I was annoyed what is it exactly that went wrong between them in the past it was not explained so clearly early on it was just mentioned here and there so vaguely. Lady Penny wanted be love most especially by Charles since that first intimate encounter 12 years ago she knew then that she is in love with him but realize too that he did not feel the same way for her and that is why she decided to distance herself from him than risk being hurt any further. But now they are both more mature and a lot of things has changed in their life over the years and she again realize that she still loves him but what she also didn't know is that he also loved her before maybe not that strong for he didn't recognize it immediately and so fate has given them a different path but ultimately they were given another chance at love.

~ Whatever else the years had changed, this - their private madness-remained ~ Lady Penny

Penny is a very stubborn woman that she insist she will accompany Charles as much as she can to go about his investigation and yet she is astute also. She can also be wild in her desire and she might be doubtful of her feelings and thoughts about the kind of man Charles is now, she can sense that she still understand him more and better than most. 

~ Charles was the only man in her life she'd ever turned to, the only man, even now, she could imagine leaning on ~ Lady Penny

I also like the bit of the mystery plot about the killer. My first and only hunch was the right one. I was rather pleased about that using my power of deduction..hahaha like a young sherlock i'm not! Anyways, as both came to understand and realize their feelings and intentions towards each other I also became more intrigued about the mystery behind Dalziel's character. So perhaps when this series end I will get answers to this. This story is a bit longer than the previous books for the author really took time for the main characters to reconnect in all ways possible, no complaint here. I like that Penny did recognize first hand and responded to that need in Charles' difficulty in dealing with the ton on his own and so of course she was right there by his side to sooth his tensions away and you know that she is perfect for him and for each other.

"Whatever you wish, however you wish, I'm yours. Take me" ~ Charles
 ~ She wouldn't accept leaving him to deal with life alone, not anymore ~ Lady Penny on Charles
~ She is his anchor, his guardian and mentor in the personal sense ~ Charles on Lady Penny

It was only at the very end of the story that they ever utter the words I love you to each other the entire time they only ever express it to each other in many ways but never declared them in words so talk about a slow burn huh? but over all I really enjoyed this one the best so far.