Rating: 4/5

I have fallen in love with Elinore Pruitt Stuart. For one thing, she's witty and kind. For another, I love her philosophy of scaring off troubles with a belly laugh. She's a keen observer of people and loves and can describe natural beauty. She is independent, curious, loyal, likes to eat, is kind to children and animals, is not afraid of hard work, is open-minded, and is honest enough to laugh at herself when she is wrong. She seems to have made friends easily, which is natural probably for someone who is a cheerful, sympathetic listener, rejoices in the joys of others, and enjoys work. At a hotel where she happens to be staying once night with her young daughter, she meets an older male acquaintance who is meeting his fiancée of twenty-five years who he hasn't seen in as long. On finding out that she is going to be married on arrival but that no preparations have been made, Pruitt invites herself to the wedding meal. In the course of decorating a partially built room, arranging a feast, and seeking hot water for the dusty bride's toilette, she ends up helping in the kitchen of the hotel because the landlady doesn't have enough help and a full house. She loses track of the time because she's having so much fun. 

The woman is not perfect, nor are these perfect times, by any means, but it's an interesting picture of Wyoming society around 1910. At one point, Pruitt goes to a Mormon community and has a bunch of questions all ready for the 'bishop', but he is away. She and a friend end up staying at his second wife's home and being unable to bring herself to ask the questions because she has such pity for wife's situation. (The woman does talk about her husband and gives details of her domestic arrangements on the instigation of Pruitt's friend.) That she's not partial to Mormonism doesn't bother me. She's open about her opinions and is frankly interested in the phenomenon. It's a difference in belief. She is however horribly patronizing to and about "negroes." When she sees a black man on a train she guess he expects to be called "mister" and says that she'd learned after migrating to Wyoming from the South she could no longer call black people "uncle" and "auntie" as she had been used to do. It's disappointing how racist some of my homesteading heroines are. Laura Ingalls Wilder is also not free of prejudice and ignorance, though hers is directed toward native Americans. 

In the back of my mind while reading this was the thought that the holy homestead act that gave white women like Pruitt such opportunity for independence was destructive of native cultures as well contributing significantly to the environmental disasters of the dust-bowl and extermination of the bison. So there's that. 

But Elinore is some good company.

Side note: I had heard that this book was the basis/inspiration for the movie 1979 film Heartland. I loved that movie, but I remember it being a bit bleaker than I found the book. I'll be interested to see it again.