Rating: 4/5

I have read a lot of books about many different wars but none about the war in Bosnia which took place during my lifetime unlike the others I read about. I remember watching the news and seeing civilians, women, children, seniors, dashing across what was known as Sniper Alley as shots were aimed at them. Ordinary people just trying to go about ordinary lives in times that were far from ordinary. This book is written by an American journalist covering the war. It tells of how people who had lived together years, even generations suddenly decided they hate each other and under the current political climate its frighteningly relevant. Given the powder keg under America and other Western countries something like this could easily spark up and rhetoric from certain leaders appear to be egging people on toward such a fate. Much like Milosevic in the 1990s who stirred his own people to hate their neighbours.
The book talks about the evil and depravity of certain people in wartime including touching on the stories of people paying to shoot at civilians, tourists with too much money and a whole lot of evil as a rather recent Italian investigation uncovered. Modern day concentration camps and the absurd way they tried to cover it up. You saw one skinny man and focused on him only. Ignoring that there were many skeletal figures, most covered in burns or bruises and with a look of sheer terror in their eyes and who refused to speak to anyone because they are still afraid.
He writes of loss, of his colleagues killed, or people he met who died or disappeared. Also other losses, people forced to give up everything they worked for. Homes, furniture, clothes, safety, security, careers and friendships, whether through death, "cleansing" or because their friends became their enemies overnight. 
It is also a story of the absurdity of this war or probably any war. Staff at the Holiday Inn Sarajevo wearing their uniforms even as shots and shells whizzed by and the heat, water and power were cut off.
A fashion show held in the heart of Sarajevo, a pizzeria filled with humanitarian aid food stolen from those who actually needed it.
Serbs threatening at first, only to go on a random rant and forget he was about to shoot and kill the journalists he had been pointing a gun at moments before.
Serbs and Bosniaks going on the radios after their commanders turned in for the night in order to either threaten each other or to swap gossip about families as they were good friends before the war, or just getting drunk and singing Frank Sinatra songs.
Being shot at in a car and worried cause you forgot to turn in your hotel room keys.
What comes abundantly clear is how useless the UN was and probably still is. Despite cries of never again this is the second genocide I've read about that happened while they turned and looked the other way. Bosnia and Rwanda and I know there were and are many others. A quote stuck out to me, an old joke that echoed in General Romeo Dallaire's book. Two peasants are digging a hole, one says "why are you still digging? Seven feet is deep enough!" The other answers "if I dig deep enough I might strike oil and the Americans will care about us" 
This was a very dark, heavy read. I had a college classmate who came to Canada after the war, she lost a lot of family and her story was heartbreaking. Imagine one day you're living life as normal, wake up, go to work, come home, eat dinner spend time with your family and then suddenly you're normal life is turned upside down, you don't have a home, or are forced to give it up or be killed. While I would like to believe the never again mantra it's books and stories like this that make me realize the hypocrisy of those words cause as that old joke says, if you don't have oil, minerals, etc the world doesn't really care about you.