Rating: 3/5

The third 'Hawk and Fisher' novel is the sort of thing it feels hard to review fairly: because it's good enough for it to be frustrating that it isn't better. It's hard not to be harsh on it for its flaws - slightness, shallowness, lack of care and polish, and so on - and hard to make clear amid that just how many virtues it has - it's enjoyable, sometimes funny, clever, surprisingly complex (and different!) in its characterisations, genuinely well-written in its set-pieces, at times quite tense, and overall a great deal of fun.

As with its predecessors, The God Killer is an odd whodunnit-in-fantasyland genre mash-up, in which Our Heroes, the cynical but good-hearted married cops, Hawk and Fisher, investigate a murder in Waterdeep-with-the-serial-numbers-filed-off. This time, it's the little matter of the mysterious murders of three gods (well... beings...) in the city's mind-and-reality-bending Street of Gods, and as a result they have to co-operate with the dedicated 'God Squad' cops - a famous swordsman-adventurer, an embittered druid, and a socially-maladroit wizard. Oh, and there's also some business with a self-replicating sorceror, a brutally sadistic serial killer and a quite literal Hellfire Club.

It's great fun, and an intriguing, if not quite enthralling, little puzzle, which Green unfolds for us with an old-fashioned storyteller's dexterity. It perhaps lacks the core brilliant idea of the original Hawk and Fisher, but in all other respects this third installment is a considerable technical improvement on its predecessors. It may actually be a better starting point - although there are throwaway mentions of things related to the earlier cases, you don't really need to have read them to enjoy this, and this only very peripherally 'spoils' the earlier two (and then only if you pay attention and have a good memory for details). 

So it's a shame that it's not better. This is a very slight novel, both in thematic and in literal weight: less a through-written novel, it almost feels, than a string of great set-pieces that the author has reluctantly attached with hurried scene-changes and infodumps. The plot works, but for the novel to really hit home as hard as it could the author would need to have spent much more time fleshing out the details and allowing the tension and misdirection to build. It's frustrating, because in different ways both this novel and his more substantial Blue Moon Rising show Green's potential as a serious fantasy novelist, yet he seems to have chosen the path of least resistance, churning out novel after novel of fluffy bagatelle that wouldn't be objectionable in the least if he weren't clearly capable of something more. 
[That said, I've not yet read the sequels to Blue Moon, which I assume will lean in more to his strengths in characterisation and semi-horror].

What we're left with is a novel that's unlikely to show up on many to-read lists - "like Pratchett but not as good" or "a weird Forgotten Realms novel written by someone who doesn't know how Forgotten Realms works" aren't descriptions that throw a book to the top of the must-read pile for most people. And that's perfectly right: there's not much reason why, more than twenty years later, people would remember this book.

And yet that's also a shame. Because there's an important place for unimportant books. There's a steady stream of enjoyable-but-not-great fantasy churned out by the publishers, and a whole flood of it disgorged by the self-publishing sector, and a lot of readers who enjoy it. And the thing is: I'm pretty sure that The God Killer, for all its flaws, is better than a lot of those books. At the very least... it's more unusual! (in a sort of paradoxically cliché fashion).

So if you're looking for an Important Classic, stay away. But if you're a fan of fantasy, and perhaps a fan of murder mysteries or police procedurals as well, and you're looking for a quick read that's only a couple of hundred pages that's at once comfortingly familiar and pleasantly unexpected, you could honestly do a lot worse than pick up The God Killer. 

Fuller (or at least more meandering) review over here.