Rating: 3/5

This book opens where the last left off and continues on to New Year's Day 1813. Ross is settled into middle age and family life. He will be glad to resign from the House and stay home with his Cornish wife, his Cornish acres and Cornish mines. Wheal Grace is failing but such is the cycle of mining. They'll be OK and eventually, hopefully figure something out. The children are growing up and experiencing growing pains as they fall in and out of love.

I found the plot of this novel super slow going until the end. I really only cared about things that directly affected Ross and Demelza. Dwight and Caroline are hardly in the story while Drake and Sam and their wives are mentioned but don't have anything to do. I love these characters from the show and previous books and feel attached to them but the focus has switched to the now grown children. I think Winston Graham did the reader a great disservice skipping forward 10 years. We didn't get a chance to get attached to Jeremy and Clowance or see Bella born. I just don't care enough about them to be interested in their personal stories. Also, there's way too much telling. There's so much history of war news and political events I find boring. I know all that. Read War and Peace for a detailed history of Napoleon's attempt to fight a war with Russia. The history isn't relevant to the plot except Geoffrey Charles is on the Peninsula but even then the history is just plopped right in. 

Too bad Georgette Heyer died before Winston Graham got to the Regency period. He needed a lot of help with fashion details and feminine life. I need to know what Clowance is wearing, especially when she visits London and FitzMaurice. Don't tell me she's wearing red brocade because brocade was old-fashioned. It could be made over into a new style but it's still not what women were wearing. 

I was delighted to see Ross finally freely admitting his deep love and respect for Demelza and being romantic. It only took 25 years! He thinks he fell in love the night they went out to see the pilchards, early in their marriage but he sure didn't act like it. She's wise, sweet, sassy and a good partner for him. I think he finally knows Elizabeth would not have made him a good wife. 
He realizes he held her and the children to double standards and he relies on her and loves her. So much so... She's pregnant again! Baby #5! (This one is Henry, after an uncle of Demelza's). She's rising 42, pretty old for a gentrywoman to be giving birth. Ross is very very worried about her and not so excited about new baby because it's risky to have a baby, especially a middle-aged lady. He's worried because of what he thinks happened to Elizabeth. Poor Dwight tries to explain, without details, why it's different. Demelza survives, weak, with a tiny baby, but after 2 days Dwight is pleased with her progress and by New Year's, she's out walking on the beach and eager for Ross to return to the marriage bed.

Demelza is not as modern as in the show and that is hard to reconcile but she stands up to Ross and lets him know what she's thinking. I think it's great that she's the amorous one in the relationship now. He's being more cautious for a change. Demelza encourages Ross to stand for Parliament again even though Ross got bored with it and resigned. Her reasoning is to 1)see out the war and not let the Whigs sue for peace and 2)Keep Jeremy busy at the mines so he doesn't run away to war. I like her strategy. 

Their daughter Bella is 10 and a wild child. She's spoiled and bratty. So far I don't like her. 

George is so... stuffy and uptight. I keep expecting Charles Dickens to walk in (I know, he's just a small lad) and go a-ha and start scribbling down notes on the Warleggans, changing their name to Scrooge. Uncle Cary is Ebenezer to the life. George is concerned with money but also with appearing to be a gentleman. George is so... stuffy. George succeeded in his desire to wed a young widow. He lusts after her but sees himself as too much of a gentleman to propose an alternate plan. She's the sister of a Duke so hardly likely to entertain any ideas other than marriage. She doesn't seem as attracted to him as he is to her. She brings her animals with her. He is not so thrilled with that idea. Big dogs in the house!

I liked Lady Harriet at first but I agree with George that she's a bit unladylike. She's uncouth, she swears, her lets her animals run around the house without asking George if it's OK and is pally with Valentine. She spends his money and entertains lavishly. She's the complete opposite of Elizabeth yet I think she would be good for George if he let himself unbend and enjoyed life more. Elizabeth was such a cold fish- brittle with a polite facade. George worries about his wife spending his money. What is all that money for? You can't take it with you when you die and at the rate Valentine is going he'll lose it all anyway. 

Valentine is into sowing his wild oats with chambermaids and flirting with pretty young wives. He resents his father a lot. Ross and Demelza worry about him cultivating a relationship with their children. They do not want him to get too friendly with Clowance. Ahem. The children think their parents are making too much of an old feud. They have no idea the real reason that would be very bad. It drives me crazy that the children don't know the whole history of the feud. They do know some of it. Demelza does eventually share some details and they do tell the children briefly about the time of extreme poverty when they pawned everything of value they owned and Ross does tell Jeremy he wanted to marry Elizabeth and she chose Francis because her parents wished it. I wish the culture of time permitted Demelza to say something like "George set out to deliberately ruin Cousin Francis. He was always jealous and wanted Elizabeth for himself. When Francis died, George made his move and convinced Elizabeth to marry him. Your father was deeply upset that his biggest rival would now inhabit his family's home and Ross would be barred from seeing his family there. George's business decisions were made to ruin your father but we survived. They still don't get along and that's that. Watch out for his son who may not have your best interests at heart." 

Valentine is pretty awful. He's spoiled and has a devil-may-care attitude. He's young but is already a young man about town. Verity is worried about V's influence on her son, Andrew. History is repeating itself as a Warleggan beggars a Poldark. Also, she fears Valentine reminds her of .... Ross's father! She innocently thinks it's because he was born "premature" under a black moon.... inauspicious... he was brought up at Trenwith. She thinks it may be "psychical" like the house has possessed him. 

John-Conan Osborne Goldolphin-Whitworth is the most peculiarly awful boy. At 17 he acts like he's 12. He's stupid, lazy and a glutton. His father would actually be so disappointed! Lady Whitworth spoiled him rotten. This kid made me cringe every time he was on page. 

Love is in the air and there's plenty going around in the romance department and some new young people to share in the adventures.

I do not care for Stephen Carrington, the stranger from the sea. He has a chip on his shoulder because of his rough childhood. He resents the Poldarks and thinks Ross and Demelza are middle-aged fuddy duddies who clearly think he's not good enough for their daughter. His belief persists even after Demelza politely chides him for blaming his roughness on not having a mother. She tells him her own story and while he had no idea the whispers were true and she was a "miner's brat," he continues to want to cut Clowance off from her family. He wants to posses her body, her soul and her mind, curb her independence and cut her off from friends and family. This guy sounds like bad news to me. He's eager to bed her and she's eager but wants to wait for marriage. The course of true love ne'er did run smooth and I sincerely hope he makes enough money to go out as a privateer again and get killed by the French. I wouldn't feel sorry for Clowance. 

Clowance is a dopey teenager in the throes of her first romance. She's lovesick and loses her spunk. She's a Cornish girl through and through. She used to run barefoot across the beach and ride her horse across the moors. She loves the mines and the people who work them. Cornwall is embedded in her soul. Stephen can't understand any of this. He's a stranger from far-away Bristol. He wants to make Clowance submissive to him and start a new life together. Stephen is older and makes himself charming to the ladies. He has a past, maybe a present. Clowance is jealous and suspicious of his friendships with the village girls and with one gentrywoman, Violet Kellow. Stephen went into the church on midsummer eve with Violet so everyone assumes they know what was happening in the church. Dopey Clowance does not understand Stephen's relationship with Violet. She doesn't try to understand Violet. She improves by the end of the book when she gets her spunk back. I love spunky Clowance, just like her mother. 

Clowance's other suitor is family friend Benjy Carter. Remember Jim who went to jail for poaching, caught jail fever and Ross busted him out of prison because he was dying? After Jim died, Jinny married again for practical reasons. Ben stays with the mines, loyal to his godfather. He's a good man. Ben is introverted and a bit shy but a hard worker. Of course he knows he can't marry Clowance because of the difference in their stations but I d'believe he cares more for her as a person than Stephen. Ben knows the real Clowance and that's important to me. 

Violet Kellow, Clowance's perceived rival, has a reputation in the community. She's from a middle-class family who are a bit rough around the edges. Violet is a woman who knows what she wants but she is plagued by illness. I didn't like her at first because she seemingly made a play for Clowance's man but her story is heartbreaking. I really feel for her and the decision she made regarding Stephen. In her place I would probably be tempted to ask for the same thing but too afraid to ask. 

Violet's sister Daisy is interested in Jeremy. She would grant him favors if asked but with the expectation of marriage. These Kellow girls are a bit wild. 

Jeremy is also a disappointment. He lacks Ross's sense of social justice, that edge, that recklessness. He's safe and boring. Jeremy is passionate about steam power. I'm mildly interested because the site where I work had a backup steam engine for one of the mills built around the time of this story. I can imagine our engineer in Jeremy's role. Jeremy would be less boring if he wasn't lovesick. The woman he loves, Cuby Trevannion, is from an old Cornish family. I can't get a good read on her. She seems to be a woman of firm convictions and strong-willed. I think she might be good for Jeremy but unfortunately, the age old problem of money springs up between them. I don't yet know what's really going on with her but her sense of duty to her brother is misplaced and it is not her fault he can't live within his means. 

Wheal Grace is failing but Jeremy, Ross, Stephen and friends bought Wheal Leisure from George. Jeremy thinks a high-pressure steam engine will pump out enough water to allow them to continue working the mine. He throws himself into his steam projects to push away his broken heart.

History is repeating itself Warleggan vs. Poldark take 2. He really wants Valentine to be a gentleman complete with a country seat so... He draws up a marriage contract to marry his son off to the woman Jeremy Poldark loves. Here we go again!

Jeremy, Stephen and Paul Kellow are three young men in need of money to pursue their dreams. Paul helps his father run the family coaching business which is not doing well. I liked him up to the last section of the book. He's a better businessman than his father and actually seems to care about business. His father is rotten to make his son go around to friends begging for money. Paul needs money to save his family from ruin and he is willing to work but not trained for anything. Nursing a broken heart, Jeremy comes up with a plan. Finally, he acts reckless like his father yet this recklessness is not in pursuit of a moral goal, it's just plain STUPID. This plan is illegal and could get the three men hanged. How would that help Paul's family? That would hurt Demelza very much to lose her first born son that way. The shame would ruin his sister's chances at a good marriage too. I was deeply disappointed. I couldn't put the book down until the adventure was concluded!

Another subplot revolves around "Music" Thomas from the village. He's the village idiot- not quite a "simpleton" but not fully a man. Dwight is trying to help Thomas with his own romantic drama. Thomas is a quirky, fun character. I really like him and hope he succeeds. 

One thing I noticed in these last two books is the insane amount of sexism and double standards shown as a matter of fact. Reading romance written by a man from a man's point-of-view is very different from reading a female written romance. There's not a lot of actual romance. There is a lot of men taking advantage of women, even willing women. How willing are those women when they know that man is in a position of power to help them? How willing are those maids Valentine seduced? Every time Demelza goes into society she's sexually harassed. This is the big thing I really can't stand about this time period. 

I will plow on to find out what happens next. Geoffrey Charles has big news from Spain!