I'm really struggling to read this book -- the poor organization, the condescending tone, the wordiness. So I think if I can review it as I go with all my snarky thoughts I will enjoy the process more and possibly make it through. Because this has been recommended to me so much (and because I got a free copy) I am trying to be humble enough to finish it. I skimmed through this for both of my previous babies, but I'm now trying to read it thoroughly in preparation for my third.

So far:
I need to respond to one particular satisfied patient whose letter is included in the book because I pretty much hate her. She writes, "I am aware that the practice of toting your baby along with you on every occasion is the new social thing. No doubt it stems from the 'me' generation's philosophy that a baby should not be allowed to interfere with your lifestyle. So parents everywhere are seen with their infants: in grocery stores, restaurants, the homes of friends....The pressure is on to be a 'nouvelle' mom." The nerve of some parents to leave the house when we should be sitting at home with the shades drawn as if having a baby was a nuclear holocaust! If there is social pressure to bring your baby to the grocery store, it comes from CPS frowning on leaving your child alone, not hipster moms. And no, I don't think I should let a baby interfere with my selfish "lifestyle" of eating food. How does it help my baby if I starve to death? She calls it the "port-a-kid trend," as if I were visiting to the store just to be seen with my chevron car-seat cover and baby named JaeyDynn and not because this was my only chance in days to restock our empty fridge. 

That rant is done. On to others: 
The good doctor actually says: "Sleep and wake states are different but not opposite." I don't think he realizes what "opposite" means. (Inigo Montoya would have something to say about that.) His argument is that it's a different process to fall asleep versus wake up. It's also a different process to jump vs. fall, but up and down are still opposites. I was trying to explain his logic to my 9YO. "He must be drunk," my 9YO concluded. "Actually, he's a doctor," I said. "Then he must be a drunk doctor," he countered. I concur.

Those are really insignificant criticisms, but it felt good to get them out. My only substantial criticism so far is that this whole putting-to-bed-early thing just doesn't work like the testimonials say. When my brother and sister-in-law were coming to visit for a couple days, I implemented this advice on my then-2YO to ensure I impressed our guests with his well-rested behavior. Contrary to the doctor's assurances, putting him to bed earlier did not make him sleep longer. Instead, as most might have predicted, he woke up (and with him everyone else) early. I had so much faith in the words of this book at the time that it really baffled me why he was up so uncharacteristically early. 

Lastly, I LOLed when I read his supposition that parents keep their kids up too late because they enjoy their company so much. I thought he mentioned having kids himself, so I don't know how he came up with that.

TTFN!
____________
I've gotten a little farther. I'll start with something positive: Finding out that newborns should only be awake 1-2 hours (in my experience, it's the full 2) was a life-changing revelation. Learning the signs of tiredness was also critical to what was left of my sanity. I am kind of embarrassed that I had to read that in a book rather than figure it out through my supposed motherly instinct.

Back to whining. The doctor's solution for everything is more sleep -- putting to bed earlier at night, leaving baby in the crib longer in the morning, NEVER waking a sleeping baby -- except when you should. But in the extremely unfathomable event that the baby is actually getting enough sleep, you will know because “It is clear you have reached a too-early bedtime because your child no longer easily and promptly falls asleep.” I thought that was the sign for a too-late bedtime? And at what point (after the first week) does a baby EVER "easily and promptly" fall asleep? He is talking about a species I know nothing about. From what I'm reading, there is one perfect amount of sleep and one perfect sleep schedule for each baby, and it's a moving target as they grow, and if you screw it up it's because you so carelessly didn't follow the detail buried on page X (which probably involved some incarnation of putting the baby to bed earlier). 

Another observation: What was the point of including this cringe-worthy patient quote? -- "I must have Chinese breast milk; he gets hungry just one hour after nursing!" I assume the doctor thought this was funny, but I'm not even sure because WTF is Chinese breast milk? Do bodily excretions have nationalities? If so, I claim Belgian citizenship for my milk; that could be the secret ingredient in Godiva. Along similar lines, the book establishes the authoritative normal citing a study of what "white urban families" do. I'm just saying this to show what a sophisticated white girl I am. Look at me pointing out racism!

Lastly, I'm having a hard time sorting out what advice is for what age range. I've been taking notes trying to keep it straight (because I sure don't want to have to read this book over each time the baby grows). I noticed when I added "12 to 21 months: transition to 1 or 2 naps," it was right below my bullet for "9 months: usually 1 or 2 naps." Either I misunderstood something or the doctor can't keep it all straight either. I noticed upcoming chapters are split up by age range. Hopefully that will help me sort it all out.

I'm still pushing through, hoping for more nuggets like the 1-2 hour wakefulness window. The more I read the more I'm convinced this guy really is an expert in putting people to sleep.
____________
I am just too tired to finish reading this book, but here are my final angry  thoughts thereon, with the caveat this is based on my mommy-brain memory of what I read, which may or may not be what I actually read:

What is so magic about a 6:00 bedtime?  Apart from the impossibility of never going anywhere in the evening (how else will anyone who's anyone at Food4Less see his aqua and grey scandi-print PJs?), how is it possible that this is the ideal regardless of timezone or season?  So, Arizona babies should go to bed an hour apart (don't ask me to figure out if I mean before or after) from Utah babies just north of them during Daylight Savings (which Arizona commendably abstains from)?  Why struggle to get the baby to sleep at a time when it’s usually sunny just to have him wake up in the dark?  If it’s just the 12-hour proximity to 6 a.m. that’s sacred (O Holy 6:00 at Night), what if I don’t want to get up that early? (That's not actually a "what if" so much as a "h*** no!") My older kids don’t need to wake up until 8, and synchronizing their schedule with the baby’s maximizes my sleep and sanity.
  
The doctor is so smug in his belief that cry it out will work...except when he briefly mentions the fine print, that if it doesn’t you should try again when the baby is older.  It’s like an oily salesman trying to peddle a warranty after he went to great lengths assuring you that thing will never break down.  Or like an investment banker who keeps losing your money until she finally gets it right and says, “See, I told you I’m good at this.”   I’m not anti-CIO; I've just learned it’s not all it’s trumped up to be. I was a golden convert to CIO when it worked wonderfully for my 10-month-old oldest. Then I fell into apostasy when it worked not at all for my second baby at various ages. For nights and hours on end, he would cry until the magic hour of 6 a.m.  And, since you are instructed that picking him up will only reinforce his resilience in screaming his head off, you have to choose between reinforcing his willful rebellion and maintaining the Holy of Holies 6 a.m. wake-up.  

Why is the correlation between day and night sleep quality always (as in, not just by Weissbluth) interpreted to mean that more day sleep causes more night sleep? Could it not possibly be that the same factors interfering with day sleep are still at play with night sleep?  If there's a jackhammer going off 24/7 outside the nursery, you scream obscenities at the construction company and turn on white noise; you don't say, "Poor baby can't sleep because he took a nap at 9:15 instead of 9:00." The very, very best nights I’ve had are when we're overscheduled to the point that Baby doesn’t get enough naps and is therefore more exhausted than hungry.

I'm sure this book has helped a lot of people, and even I got some good stuff out of it, but...yeah.