Rating: 2/5

We heard this medieval romance had Laura Kinsale vibes but I don't see the comparison at all. It was an uneven reading experience thanks to the meandering plot, a TSTL heroine, and MCs who knew not how to communicate even if their lives depended on it. Oh, and some randomly appearing witches as a framing device. However, it was an interesting enough foray into Old School Romance that was a 3 star read until the last 75 pages, when the plot just plain turned ridiculous. 

A few moments between Gillian and Christopher that really tugged on my heartstrings. I enjoyed watching Gillian gain confidence and how satisfying it was for Christopher to watch that as well, knowing that her growing confidence also meant she felt more safe with him. Consent was handled well, especially for an Old School. Christopher lets her set the pace and does whatever it takes for her to feel comfortable. (The sex scenes are Fade to Black, FYI.) They both got bogged down in their respective insecurities far too much (and Gillian is dealing with trauma from her father's abuse) but I could at least understand where it was coming from.

Unfortunately, there were a lot of elements that did not age well. In addition to Christopher’s internalized ableism and characters being ableist toward him, the book’s depiction of his blindness is extremely ableist. It had a whole lot of toxic masculinity and gender essentialism. I might try something else from her catalog in the future—the blurbs for both Colin and Jason’s books sound promising and I enjoyed their characters the most here—but this isn’t one I’d recommend. (For more thoughts, please read Charlotte's review, as she lays everything out perfectly.)

Characters: Gillian is a 21 year old white lord’s daughter and a virgin. Christopher is a blind white lord around 9 or 10 years older than Gillian. He has a dog named Wolf. This is set in 1249 Warewick Keep and Blackmour Keep, England. 

Content notes: emotionally and physically abusive father (FMC has scars on back from floggings), blind MMC, ableism, internalized ableism, PTSD, brief contemplation of suicide, FMC contemplates getting MMC drunk so they can have sex (she doesn’t), self-harm (MMC cuts himself and puts blood on the sheets to fake consummating the marriage), fistfights, swordfights, murder including MMC killing FMC’s abusive father who had a long-time plot to murder MMC, attempted murder of MMC, MMC’s first wife cheated and left him because he was blind (later murdered), animal harm (Wolf lost part of tail in a fight but otherwise okay), vomit, fever, sexism, slut-shaming, homophobia, past death of FMC’s mother and brother, misogynistic and transphobic insults, brief Islamaphobia/xenophobia (“camp of infidels”), pregnancy, fade to black sex scenes, alcohol, inebriation (secondary characters), hangover, gendered pejoratives, gender essentialism, ableist language, mention that MMC’s father married his mother when she was 12 and he was 20

*Buddy read with Charlotte, Hannah, and Vicky!