Rating: 5/5

"The only good thing I've heard about the late Senator Joe McCarthy is that he was a practicing homosexual".---Gore Vidal
"I'm sure that the merits an honor badge in your book".---Roy Cohn
"I'll get to you in a minute".---Gore

Was Roy Cohn, closeted gay man and self-hating Jew, one of the most vile creatures to ever walk on American soil? That's the portrait we get in ANGELS IN AMERICA, the Pulitzer Prize-winning play by Tony Kushner, an openly gay man and Jew who thinks Cohn, who loved persecuting Jews and gays, incarnated evil. Long before ANGELS, however, we had this magnificent biography by Nicholas von Hoffman. Cohn needed no fictional embellishment to have horns put on him. His sordid life was on display for all who paid attention. Roy started out as junior prosecutor in the Julius and Ethel Rosenberg atomic spy case, demanding the death penalty for the couple. (The magistrate, Judge Kaufman, was Jewish too. We wouldn't want the world to think the federal government was prosecuting Jews, would we?) After that triumph Roy wormed his way into the senior staff of Senator Joseph McCarthy, hunting down non-existent Communist infiltrators and forcing U.S. government libraries overseas to remove subversive books such as HUCKLEBERRY FLYNN and the complete works of John Steinbeck. (A junior member of the staff was Robert F. Kennedy, a fact RFK lovers want you to forget.) von Hoffman makes it clear that David Shine, the other Senior staff member, for whom Cohn tried to secure special favors when he was drafted into the Army, was the love of Roy's life. Ironically, or by way of Nemesis, this touched off the Army-McCarthy hearings of 1954, which destroyed the Senator from Wisconsin on live television: "Have you no shame, Sir? At long last, have you no sense of decency?" For another man this would have spelt doom but not Roy Cohn, who parlayed failure into success by re-inventing himself as "the toughest lawyer in America", thus disproving F. Scott Fitzgerald's dictum that "there are no second acts in American life". Wasn't his homosexuality a problem in public life? Not for Roy, who as a lawyer knew perfectly well the art of evasiveness: "Do I look like a homosexual? Do you see me swishing and prancing?" and on why his private yacht was always filled with young beautiful men: "It just so happens I like young people around me". Cohn was willing to take on any client, from tax-dodgers to mafiosi, provided they were evil and he was highly-recompensed for both legal absolution and cleaning up their public image. Even when AIDS caught up with Roy he simply lied about his private life: "If the National Institute of Health says I'm HIV positive that's a mistake. I'll have that removed tomorrow".
The title CITIZEN COHN is well-chosen. Roy was not an aberration. He was one of us. Incidentally, you may have heard of one of his high-profile clients from the go-go Eighties: Donald Trump.