Rating: 5/5

“A barbarous alien empire ruled by primal brutality, intrigue, and fear,” declares the back cover of Samuel Delany’s 1979 sword-and-sorcery classic. “Here be dragons!” promises the front. A story from a forgotten age, before the invention of shirt or gun, when muscled chest and comely breast alike swung free with every thrust of sword or dagger. 

“Derrida, then, is asking us to change certain habits of mind,” declares Spivak in the epigraph on page one, “the authority of the text is provisional, the origin is a trace, contradicting logic, we must learn to use and erase our language at the same time.” What the hell kind of a book is this?

A Samuel Delany book, of course, what else?

As a fantasy novel, Tales of Nevèrÿon (ne-VER-y-on) works surprisingly well. It’s presented as a collection of five short stories, which prepared me for disjuncture and left me pleasantly surprised when it all came together in the end. The stories are loose and alive and full of wild philosophical digressions, some cleverer than others, but all presented as tall tales, fables, puzzles (the Book of Genesis rewritten for a matriarchal society in The Tale of Potters and Dragons, an anthropological account of the wearing of “rults,” a symbol of manhood in the mountain villages of Rulvyn, in The Tale of Old Venn).

If what you demand from a fantasy novel is rigorous world building you will be disappointed, because Delany is interested first and foremost in the unreality of his world. But Delany relishes his sword fights and courtly dalliances, moonlit escapes and swashbuckling sea voyages. He lingers where he will, taking pleasure in the world he’s constructed, unconcerned with any too-strict conception of what a story like this should be or mean. He spends an inordinate amount of time considering how the invention of money might change the rhythms of daily life in a barter economy; weighs both slave rebellions and advances in pottery manufacture.

Tales of Nevèrÿon might be the perfect post-modern novel. Why would a true post-modernist feel the need to build their playground of endlessly plastic language and meaning in the garden of high literature? Why bank on academia’s prestige and authority? Why not, in the midst of that first great “crisis of representation” (a term I believe comes from Foucault, and what does it matter if I’m wrong?)—why not write instead about castles and dragons? And if it’s true that, taken purely as a fantasy novel, Tales of Nevèrÿon is a little slow, and sometimes irritatingly arch (though also terribly rich in incident and accident), taken as a work of critical theory, it’s not only bursting with ideas, it’s also astonishingly readable.

Delany is interested, above all, in two not-dichotomies: slavery and sex, money and meaning. As is always true of fiction, if I could restate his ideas here, then how silly would it have been that he wrote a whole novel to say them? Real ideas in fiction—like so many of the truly beautiful and rare things in life—cannot be removed from their original context without being transformed, fundamentally, into something new. (This is why literary criticism can be so powerful—because to extract an idea from a novel or poem is, fundamentally, to have a new idea.)

Nonetheless, if Delany’s answers are locked away forever in a late-70s mass market paperback with a dragon on the cover, I will try to pose some of the questions I think he is asking:

Thinking, I imagine, about his own sexual proclivities, Delany asks: How can it possibly be that the language and paraphernalia of sexual slavery, between lovers, can feel so much like being finally and truly free?

How does power over people produce meaning, and how does meaning produce power over people?

How is it that trade in frivolous luxuries (like the little rubber balls children bounce in the Nevèrÿon port city of Kolhari) can have stakes no less than life-or-death for the people involved in it?

What does it mean to be free?
What does it mean to be a slave?
What does it mean to own a slave?
What does it mean to seduce, love, marry, or free a slave?

Is it true, as the beautiful bare-breasted assassin-for-hire Raven declares, that: “It is far easier to argue that something nobody believes in actually exists than it is to argue that something everybody believes in is unreal[?]”

And why is it, to quote the wise woman Venn from The Tale of Old Venn, that there are “certain thoughts, which, reflected by language in the mirror of speech, flatten out entirely, lose all depth, and though they may have begun as rich and complex feelings, become, when flattened by language, the most shallow and pompous self-righteousness[?]”

And might the reverse be true? That in turning rich and complex linguistic problems into stories, they might become simpler, easier to comprehend? And if those stories were about pirates and empresses, merchants and slaves and dragon riders—well, why not? But also—perhaps the mirror they turn on our world would be a little clearer, or a little cloudier, and perhaps either way it might make this reader’s life richer and wilder and more free?

This review is cross-posted at Scorpion Review: https://scorpionreview.substack.com/p...