Rating: 3/5

Young heroine and older hero are engaged. Heroine is fitful and reckless (as usually teenagers are) hero in serious and stark, and hates tantrum, but they are in love. She wants to have sex with him, he refuses to even touch her because he wants to wait until they are married. He wants to change her because she's too impulsive and reckless (usually these kind of marriages where a person wants to change his/her partner are never successful) and she thinks that he's cold and he doesn't love her/wants her. Eventually she gives a party at her house when her parents are abroad and he finds her kissing a boy. He's furious, afterwards she goes to him trying to ask him to forgive her and he refuses her publicly. She runs away to the United States (the story is based in England)Four years later she's back for her sister's marriage. It turns out that Their families quarreled when they broke up, each of them defending theirs son/daughter. To mend this drift the hero proposes her to pretend they are still together. Of course he wants to be again with her because he never stopped loving her. But his behaviour is conflicting until the end, when we all come to know he was always faithful to her and he have loved her for all these years.
It was nice and complex.
Both made many mistakes.
When the hero and the heroine were first engaged, the heroine was really young and immature, a juvenile teenager not able to manage her emotions (and her reactions)
The hero was unable to manage the heroine, he was too old for his age, too serious and too restrained. He kept his emotions hidden and was always in control, even sexually. The heroine perceived his control as a lack of true love and passion for her. It could be understandable, since she was deeply involved. When she tried to seduce him, he rejected her come ons, and that was unforgivable. He thought to protect her from herself because he thought she was too young and not ready for a physical relationship, but since they were engaged this resulted in an unbalanced relationship where he held much more power than her. He was not able to understand this risk, and pushed her to a reckless behaviour (she held a wild party and the hero found her making out with her ex). She tried to apologize, more and more times but he publicly rejected her.
Of course both characters had to grow up, and after four years they were both older and wiser, and understood their mistakes.
The hero deeply regretted his behaviour, but still he tries to control their relationship, risking again to lose the heroine, because she's older and doesn't want to be in an unbalanced relationship.
What can I say, I'm a sucker for faithful hero and this one was celibate for four years. He actually was in love with the heroine and never stopped, and it's quite clear that as soon as he sees her he tries as hard as he can to win her back.
The part where he shows her the old mansion he bought for her, the same old mansion they used to dream of, was really romantic and sweet.