Rating: 3/5

This might have been a four were I a Baby Boomer, but as a straddler of the Gen-X/Gen-Y lines, I found this read a bit tedious. Jane Clifford, the main character, is an academic stuck in her own head, who often compares her life to the Victorian novels she studies. Clifford has an affair with another academic. Gabriel Weeks, an art-historian fascinated by the Pre-Raphaelites, uses their art as the basis of a study on categories of human love, a study which the reader is left to believe likely won't lead to much. If this sounds rather like the vain attempts of Mr. Causabon to unlock the key to all mythologies, Godwin means it to. In fact, Clifford agonizes over this very similarity, although she seems to miss other ways in which Weeks resembles the aging scholar of Middlemarch. Clifford also draws parallels between her own life and the lives of the characters in The Odd Women, a truly bleak story about the narrow possibilities for women at the end of the 19th century. (Seriously, I read it in my early 20s when I was living in Austin and was convinced I was going to end up an old, lonely alcoholic crone--no matter all the changes to women's political and social status in the intervening 100 years.)

These analogies, while important for understanding Clifford's worldview, bog down the narrative down appear to be erudite grandstanding on Godwin's part. She gets mired in quotes and literary discussions, and her modest plotlines suffer as a result. Although Clifford is wrapped up in the drama of her affair (and the heroines that might offer clues for her own fate), the real drama, of course, is whether Clifford or her uber-feminist, politicized friend, Gerda Mulvaney, offer the superior example of actualized womanhood. Who will be better off? The meek academic who seems to be content with a part-time lover and a rich fantasy life? Or the assertive editor who publishes a bombastic newspaper meant to highlight the atrocities of the men that she and her fellow writers have renounced? While it's interesting to ask these questions forty years after the book was written, it's hard to sympathize with either Mulvaney or Clifford. In her attempt to counter the cynical "Zimmers" of the day, Godwin created an overwrought and rather dreary read about her contemporary odd women. A little levity or a little more action might have made this a more timeless story.