Rating: 3/5

Right off the bat, I'll admit that I'm not a huge fan of mysteries. They confuse me and I don't find them fun to read.

With that in mind, I didn't like this book. To me, the story was kinda whiny, which I guess makes sense when it's from the perspective of a girl who is in a family that definitely has a lot of money. I mean, she goes to a private school. That's obviously evidence enough that she's ridiculous. 
More seriously, the fact that people believed that she orchestrated the whole incident is completely stupid, but I wouldn't put it above some people.

Christina herself seems to be really childish at times, like when she was released from the house she was kept in, and news reporters were all up in her face, she threatened to sock one in the face, which attracted the attention of Skinny Legend™ Kelly, who seemed to be the only person who actually believes that she didn't kidnap herself. So that's nice.

Speaking of the resident Skinny Legend™, interactions between him and Christina only seemed to emphasize her childishness, to the point where even Skinny Legend™ was getting annoyed at her (which is significant because like I said, he was actually on her side). 

But the fact that she never seems to extend her thoughts to anything behind herself (like not wanting to go back to school for fear of the rumors that would stay on her until she died) was really annoying to read. It was realistic, but annoying. And the idea that her friend (Lorna or something) was posh, and *adjusts monocle* and all that, but Christina was probably more like an average girl, and my god it seemed at some points in the book Christina was just pitting herself against her friend, which in my very minimal experience is not what someone does with their friend. 

One other thing I loved, was the fact that she would keep going to the police station to search up records or whatever, and every time she left, the officer escorting her would tell her "Stop investigating. We got this, and if you keep looking you might end up getting hurt.", and for a few minutes, she would contemplate ditching the whole thing, but something else would occur to her, and she would think "Hell no I'm not dropping this! I have to be doing something during the day that isn't avoiding school!"

So that was nice. At least I'm done with it, and can move on to other books. Hooray....