Rating: 3/5

This book is a bit dated, particularly with some of its examples, but here are a few interesting and helpful thoughts about leadership. Here are some I liked:

"Success is more fun than failure--to write about as well as to live (p. 19)."

"It is not enough for a leader to do things right; he must do the right thing (p. 23)."

"Listening to the inner voice--trusting the inner voice--is one of the most important lessons of leadership (p. 28)."

"Leaders come in every size, shape, and disposition--short, tall, neat, sloppy, young, old, male, and female. Nevertheless, they all seem to share some, if not all, of the following ingredients... guiding vision... passion... integrity... trust... curiosity and daring (p. 31)."

"Leadership courses can only teach skills. They can't teach character or vision... Developing character and vision is the way leaders invent themselves (p. 34)."

"Good leaders engage the world (p. 36)."

"I tend to think of the differences between leaders and mangers as the differences between those who master the context and those who surrender to it (p. 39)."

"What is true for leaders is... true for each of us: we are our own raw material (p. 42)."

"To be authentic is literally to be your own author (p. 45)."

"To become a leader, then, you must become yourself, become the maker of your own life (p. 46)."

"Know thyself, then, means separating who you are and who you want to be from what the world thinks you are and wants you to be (p. 48)."

"Some start the process early, and some don't do it until later. It doesn't matter. Self-knowledge, self-invention are lifetime processes (p. 49)."

"You are your own best teacher... Accept responsibility. Blame no one... You can learn anything you want to learn... True understanding comes from reflecting on your experience (p. 50)."

"Reflecting on experience is a means of having a Socratic dialogue with yourself, asking the right questions at the right time, in order to discover the truth of yourself and your life (p. 54)."

"Nothing is truly yours until you understand it--not even yourself (p. 55)."

"To look forward with acuity you must first look back with honesty (p. 56)."

"Leaders learn from others, but they are not made by others (p. 57)."

"Until you make your life your own, you're walking around in borrowed clothes. Leaders, whatever their field, are made up as much of their experiences as their skills (p. 62)."

"Every great inventor or scientist has had to unlearn conventional wisdom in order to proceed with his or her work (p. 63)."

"The ingredients of leadership cannot be taught... They must be learned (p. 65)."

"Leaders are made at least as much by their experiences and their understanding and application of their experiences as by any skills (p. 66)."

"Innovative learning is a way of realizing vision (p. 70)."

"By examining and understanding the past, we can move into the future unencumbered by it. We become free to express ourselves, rather than endlessly trying to prove ourselves (p. 71)."

"'When was the last time you ran to a library and took home more books than you could read, like stacked loaves of bread, warm in your arms, waiting to be chewed? When, for that matter, was the last time you opened a book, placed it to your nose, and gave a great sniff (Ray Bradbury, p. 76)?'"

"If you want a concrete tip, learn how to speed read. People say they don't have time to read. My feeling is, 'When in doubt, read it.' I can read a book in a couple of hours (p. 77)."

"Travel is another kind of learning... It does broaden. It is revelatory. It changes your perspective immediately, because it requires new and different responses from you. Things are done differently in other countries (p. 81)."

"As much as we each need such regular respite, we need true engagement too; we need mentors and friends and groups of allied souls (p. 83)."

"Study, travel, people, work, play, reflection, all are sources of knowledge and understanding, but so, curiously, are mistakes (p. 86)."

"'Friends are vital. You learn from them, because they tell you truth' (p. 84)."

"'Even if you're pretty analytical by nature, you have to be willing to make a decision somewhere short of certainty' (p. 87)."

"'I started with the premise that we could accomplish anything we wanted to accomplish, if the people around me were permitted to do what they wanted to do (p. 88).'"

"'If you haven't failed, you haven't tried very hard' (p. 89)."

"Life has never been simple and is growing more complex all the time, yet we persist in attempting to reduce it to bumper-sticker dimensions (p. 93)."

"In any corporation, managers serve as the left brain and the research and development staff serves as the right brain, but the CEO must combine both, must have both administrative and imaginative gifts (p. 95)."

"I find it's better to put teams together of people who have different skills and then make all those disparate skills function together (p. 98)."

"I look for imagination and perseverance, steadfastness of purpose (p. 99)."

"We say daydreamers, we say inspiration, but scientifically what it is, is free association. It's the ability to be in touch with that. That's where you get the ideas. And then it's the ability to trust the ideas once you have them, even though they may break certain rules. And then it's the confidence and courage to carry out the ideas once you've found them and once you've trusted them. Then you can't be afraid to fail (p. 100)."

"Grace under pressure might be this group's motto (p. 103)."

"The point is not to become a leader. The point is to become yourself, to use yourself completely--all your skills, gifts, and energies--in order to make your vision manifest. You must withhold nothing. You must, in sum, become the person you started out to be, and to enjoy the process of becoming (p. 104)."

"Reflection may be the pivotal way we learn (p. 107)."

"The point is not to be the victims of our feelings, jerked this way and that by unresolved emotions, not to be used by our experiences, but to use them and to use them creatively. Just as writers turn experiences from their lives into novels and plays, we can each transform our experiences into grist for our mill (p. 109)."

"If you know what you think and what you want, you have a very real advantage (p. 113)."

"'Leadership revolves around vision, ideas, direction, and has more to do with inspired people as to direction and goals than with day-to-day implementation' (John Sculley, p. 130)."

"'When I see a need, I get people together to do something about it. My version of religion is 'You are responsible' (Betty Friedan, p. 130).'"

"'Character is vital in a leader, the basis for everything else. Other qualities would include the ability to inspire trust, some entrepreneurial talent, imagination, perseverance, steadfastness of purpose... Character, perseverance, and imagination are the sine qua non of leadership' (Alfred Gottschalk, p. 132)."

"The steps to leadership:
1. Reflection leading to resolution.
2. Resolution leading to perspective.
3. Perspective leading to point of view.
4. Point of view leading to tests and measures.
5. Tests and measures leading to desire.
6. Desire leading to mastery.
7. Mastery leading to strategic thinking.
8. Strategic thinking leading to full self-expression.
9. The synthesis of full self-expression = leadership.
Leadership is first being, then doing. Everything the leader does reflects what he or she is (p. 132)."

"Leaders are, by definition, innovators. They do things other people haven't done or don't do. They do things in advance of other people. They make new things. They make old things new. Having learned from the past, they live in the present, with one eye on the future (p. 133)."

"The leader does it better and better and better, but is never satisfied... Leaders learn by leading, and they learn best by leading in the fact of obstacles (p. 136)."

"'To be an effective leader, you not only have to get the group of followers on the right path, but you must be able to convince them that whatever obstacle stands in the way ahead, whether it's a tree or a building that blocks the view, you're going to get around it. You're not going to be put off by the apparent barriers to your goal (Norman Lear, p. 138).'"

"A number of them learned valuable lessons from difficult bosses--some even from bad bosses (p. 138)."

"Our leaders transform experience into wisdom and, in turn, transform the culture of their organizations (p. 143)."

"Empathy isn't the only factor in getting people on your side (p. 147)."

"'Movement leadership requires persuasion, not giving orders. There is no position to lead from. It doesn't exist. What makes you successful is that you can phrase things in a way that is inspirational, that makes coalitions possible. The movement has to be owned by a variety of people, not one group (p. 149)."

"There are four ingredients leaders have that generate and sustain trust... constancy... congruity... reliability... integrity (p. 150)."

"'The best people working for organizations are like volunteers. Since they could probably find good jobs in any number of groups, they choose to work somewhere for reasons less tangible than salary or position. Volunteers do not need contracts, they need covenants... Covenantal relationships induce freedom, not paralysis. A covenantal relationship rests on shared commitment to ideas, to issues, to values, to goals, and to management process (p. 152)."

"Ultimately, a leader's ability to galvanize his or her co-workers resides both in self understanding and in understanding the co-workers' needs and wants, along with understanding of... their mission (p. 153)."

"Trust is vital. People trust you when you don't play games with them, when you put everything on the table and speak honestly to them. Even if you aren't very articulate, your intellectual honesty comes through, and people recognize that and respond positively (p. 159)."

"All of the leaders I talked with believe in change--in both people and organizations (p. 160)."

"Instant communication and globalization are our new realities, and, as a result, the markets dance hitherto unheard-of rhythms. The character of work itself has changed, as more and more people have a string of careers instead of making a lifetime commitment to a single institution (p. 164)."

"Change cannot be viewed as the enemy--instead, it is the source of both personal growth and organizational salvation (p. 164)."

"Because the organization is the primary form of the era, it is also the primary shaper. The organization is, or should be, a social architect--but this means that its executives must be social architects, too. First of all, they must guarantee that their organizations are honest, ethical institutions. Then, they must redesign their organizations in order to redesign society along more humane and functional lines. They need... to be leaders, rather than managers (p. 171)."

"To succeed in this volatile environment, leaders must be creative and concerned, yet neither creativity or concern is high on the agenda of many corporations (p. 175)."

"Take advantage of every opportunity. Aggressively search for meaning. Know yourself (p. 176)."

"Leaders are not made by corporate courses... but by experience (p. 176)."

"Leadership opportunities should be offered to all... because they build drive, trigger a can-do spirit, and inspired self-confidence (p. 177)."

"New blood brings with it a fresh approach and new ideas, and so fix-its, slack areas, resistant personnel, may all be galvanized by the deployment of a young executive with the authority to lead (p. 178)."

"Job rotation is another means of affording would-be leaders an opportunity to learn more about the organization as well as to see it from another perspective (p. 179)."

"The higher the stakes, the more opportunities there are for learning--and, of course, the more opportunities there are for failures and mistakes (p. 179)."

"'There are two kinds of people: those who are paralyzed by fear, and those who are afraid but go ahead anyway. Life isn't about limitation, it's about options' (Brooke Knapp, p. 180)."

"All organizations, especially those that are growing, walk a tightrope between stability and change, tradition and revision. Therefore they must have some means for reflecting on their own experiences and offering reflective structures to their employees (p. 180)."

"Corporate vision operates on three levels: strategic... tactical... and personal (p. 181)."

"All organizations must provide for the growth and development of their members and find ways of offering them opportunities for such growth and development (p. 182)."

"Leaders are people who understand the prevailing culture (p. 184)."

"Ideas... are a leader's strong suit (p. 184)."

"Chaos is all around us now, but the leader knows that chaos is the beginning, not the end. Chaos is the source of energy and momentum (p. 185)."

"There are ten factors... for coping with change, forging a new future, and creating learning organizations.
1. Leaders manage the dream... 
2. Leaders embrace error....
3. Leaders encourage reflective backtalk...
4. Leaders encourage dissent...
5. Leaders possess... optimism, faith, and hope... Optimism and hope provide choices... 
6. Leaders understand the Pygmalion effect in management... 
7. Leaders have... a certain 'touch'...
8. Leaders see the long view... 
9. Leaders understand stakeholder symmetry...
10. Leaders create strategic alliances and partnerships (p. 186)."

"The next generation of leaders will have certain things in common: broad education, boundless curiosity, boundless enthusiasm, contagious optimism, belief in people and teamwork, willingness to take risks, devotion to long-term growth rather than short-term profit, commitment to excellence, adaptive capacity, empathy, authenticity, integrity, vision (p. 195)."