Rating: 4/5

A fascinating one-of-a-kind book. William Carlos Williams' groundbreaking classic, In the American Grain, is partly a primer on American history in which he focuses on certain select individuals who had some historical influence in shaping the nation of the United States or who came to represent the country in some iconic but not necessarily accurate way. Therefore, this book is also partly a historiography in which Williams goes back to the source materials (such as Columbus' journal) in an attempt to get a raw, 'warts-and-all' account of what really happened. 

Of course Williams himself, unavoidably, injects his own 'subjective' views of these historical figures into his chapters / vignettes, which automatically throws the veracity of these accounts into jeopardy, if not right out the window. However, his style of writing IS compelling and we feel Williams trying to embody these characters or the times (see the chapter on Cortez and Montezuma as a good example) in order to flesh out a more accurate and gritty portrait of what might have happened and what kind of person these people were. Williams does seem to portray many of these people, such as Sir Walter Raleigh, dispassionately, revealing both their strengths and inherent weaknesses, something which is often swept under the carpet (to put it lightly) or left out of traditional history textbooks all together. 

The major repercussions for the American reader upon reading this book, I felt, were that it would make you reassess what it truly means to be an 'American' and what is the true meaning of a 'hero' if such a thing exists in the first place. As I am not American and know very little about American history, this book would probably be less 'confronting' to a non-American to read than an American who has any drop of patriotism in his/her blood. 

I'm pretty sure that Williams pissed a lot of people off when he wrote and published this book but I'm sure he probably felt 'to hell with them all!' and I've got to admire that - his courage, his vision and his aim of revisiting certain moments in American history through a non-patriotic, more objective viewpoint. If I were on the Board of Education in the US, I would make this compulsory reading for all high school students - it's that important.

So why only four stars you may ask? Well, although I am usually a HUGE fan of Williams' prose (even more than his poetry - check out his fantastic White Mule for example and the rest of the Joe Stecher triology in fact), I did not always like the style in this book. It was at times repetitious and obscure and slightly tedious (especially the chapter on Salem and the 'witch hunts' that took place there). 

However, all things considered, the IMPORTANCE of this book far outweighs any flaws in Williams' style so I still highly recommend this book. I feel that this book should be read at least once in your lifetime, especially if you are an American and if you are interested in some of the key historical figures who not only helped shape the nation (such as George Washington) but who also came to definitively embody the so-called 'American spirit' (Daniel Boone is a good example).

Go get it and enjoy it! You won't regret it.