Rating: 4/5

In the first third of the book the story line remains rather humdrum, we're offered the trials and tribulations of a young man, of good pedigree, having to suffer the back streets of the East-End in order to find a specific type of rigging screw: from Carey and Neilson, size 1-3/8, galvanized. This errand worries the young man, he might be late for his train.

Having decided to venture along with this story, I realised early-on that a little forbearance was required. The story is set in the last days of the Victorian era (published in 1903) and would today be branded a 'Slow-Burn', probably by many as 'far too slow a burn'. In fairness to it, the prose is written in the style of the day, with lengthy, on occasions incredibly lengthy, scene setting and character analysis. In these times readers I'm sure were more open to be entertained by the delicacies of etiquette, politeness and behaviour: delving in this, I feel, was necessary. Britain's relationship with Germany was becoming more and more strained, with many wishing Britain to wake-up to what might come to pass, and with others urging the authorities to proffer tolerance, with the notion of wait and see. With today's reader of espionage this might be overlooked, but during the time and I believe why many see this as ground-breaking spy-fiction, people in Britain were becoming troubled by the thought of Germany's growing military strength, the growing tensions and the idea of all would come right in the long run. For me, all highlights how the plot is stood on authentic foundations and is a courageous attempt to rouse the unwilling.

Two young men happened to be exploring the shallow waters around the chain of islands off the coast of the Netherlands, Germany and Denmark. How that comes to be, I'll leave to one side. As I found, not being a yachtsman myself, these waters are no place for the inexperienced. We are offered pages and pages, I kid you not, of how testing (fatal if you are unlucky enough) these waters can be. A good many may find this boring, the detail the author goes for, could be off-putting. Those with any amount of knowledge in off-shore sailing would, I'm sure, get heaps of enjoyment from this. Before I came to the end of the story, I forgave the author for embroiling me in the difficulties of sandbanks, depths, tides, tidal flows and winds, the lengths of which might be considered an attempt to inject excitement into to the yarn, but I saw all this as most relevant when considering how the plotting of the Germans was tied so tightly to these intricacies.

The story ends rather suddenly, which might put today's reader off; again, I believe this can be understood. Germany's plotting has been exposed. Does the author need to take this any further? He's achieved what he set out to achieve:

rattle the man on the street
cause argument at the dinner party
gain the attention of the broadsheet editor
unsettle the war office

Little did anyone know, war with Germany was but a decade away. Publication of this book did force those responsible to revisit Britain's defences.

Some might argue the author had a chequered past and some years after this book found fame met his end in front of a firing squad. His last words were, "Take a step forward, lads. It will be easier that way."

Some might warn, not long ago, Gavin Williamson did, "Everything has a price."