Rating: 4/5

A set of short stories by Angela Carter from the early 1970s; some are based on Carter’s time in Japan from 1969 to 1971. She describes that time as one of change, transition and radicalisation and the stories reflect this. Carter says that the position of women in Japan and their repression drew her towards feminism. The stories cover awakening, abuse and the dynamics of relationships. One of the stories is an experiment with magic realism and there is a touch of the fairy tale about a number of them. 
There is a Garden of Eden story (Penetrating to the Heart of the Forest) relating to a brother and sister brought up by their father in a village on the edge of a forest. The village culture says there is an evil tree at the centre of the unexplored forest. The children, who have always done things together, set off to explore and find it. Things begin to change and after a carnivorous plant bites the sister; 
“Her words fell heavy with a strange weight, as heavy as her own gravity, as if she might have received some mysterious communication from the perfidious mouth that wounded her. At once, listening to her, Emile thought of that legendary tree; and then he realised that, for the first time in his life, that he did not understand her, for, of course, they had heard of the tree. Looking at her in a new puzzlement, he sensed the ultimate difference of a femininity he had never before known or any need or desire to acknowledge and this difference might give her the key to some order of knowledge to which he might not yet aspire, himself, for all at once she seemed far older than he. She raised her eyes and fixed on him a long, solemn regard which chained him in a conspiracy of secrecy, so that, henceforth, they would share only with one another the treacherous marvels round them.”
It is of course The Fall, with a new and sacred Eve (a theme Carter will return to). 
These stories aren’t consistently as good as her later work, but you can sense her finding her feet. The Loves of Lady Purple is about a life size puppet, whose puppeteer creates a story for her which involves poverty, abuse and a life in a brothel as a dominatrix and then an old age of poverty. When, of course, the puppet comes to life, she does and becomes the only thing she is able to do. A fable about the narrowness of the roles women are forced into.
Reflections is also about gender roles; a gothic tale with a mirror into another (reversed) world, a hermaphrodite who knits to keep the world in place, penises as guns and guns as penises with some analysis of rape in this world and the reversed world.
Some of the stories are about cityscapes and being in an alien city, or in the underbelly of the city; usually with gender relations as part of the backdrop. The prose is lush and heavy at times and there is great intensity in the writing. This isn’t Carter at her very best, but these stories are still better than most.