Rating: 3/5

Zoologist Desmond Morris looks at Homo sapiens as he would at any other animal: by observing the species, by seeing how the ‘naked ape’ (as Morris himself dubbed our species in an earlier book) behaves, creates, procreates, etc. Across a series of chapters (all with supporting colour photos to explain Morris’s theories), Morris examines various aspects of human life. He draws conclusions from archaeological evidence and other sciences to trace a prehistory of Homo sapiens (including the now mostly dismissed and always controversial ‘aquatic ape’ theory). He looks at how body language and gestures act as communication devices, both conscious and unconscious; he examines art, sex and romance, birthing and parenting, etc. 

In the process, Morris draws parallels (or contrasts, as the case may be) with primates and/or apes, or other animals. He shows how human behaviour mirrors (or differs from) that of animals, he tries to show what really sets us apart from other animals. There are interesting facts and premises here, points to make one ponder, and intriguing details that would probably not be known to the average layperson.

But, there are things I didn’t agree with. The biggest irritant for me was the obviously Western-centric perspective of the book (even though he does provide examples, photos, and so on from other parts of the world, it’s clear that Morris thinks as a Westerner). For instance, he talks of how the old are now abandoned and sent off to old age homes (not yet the norm in much of the Third World), or how almost all snacking is on sweets (as an Indian, I couldn’t get my head around this one!). 

Plus, given that this book was written in the 1990s, it’s odd how, even at this time, when women were already doing far more than just staying at home and being the stereotypical ‘good wife and mother’, Morris continues to talk of the workplace mostly in male terms. Hunting grounds for the man, who now converts his need for a ‘hunt’ into a need for ‘making a killing’ on the stock market, or ‘bringing home the bacon’. Morris, other than a passing reference to how workplace romances could affect marriages, completely glosses over the fact that women are now an integral part of the workforce. 

If you’ve never read a Desmond Morris book before, this one can be enlightening and interesting, and it could make you think. If you’ve read other Morris books (I’ve read The Naked Ape and Manwatching) this may come across as very repetitive. With some justification, given that The Human Animal was written as a companion book to a BBC series based on some of Morris’s books, including The Naked Ape and Manwatching.