Rating: 5/5

Where do I even start? This is the most informative and easy to understand book on demonology I've read. This is a VERY important book that every Christian needs to read. I'm glad I chose this book to review because I learned so much. Mr. Prince answered several questions I've had for years and confirmed convictions I wasn't sure about. I often wondered if born-again Christians could be possessed or demonized and if ongoing, never-ending struggles with certain sins could be due to demonization, after reading this book I'm convinced that the answer is a definite yes. 

This is my first book by Mr. Prince but I have listened to his sermons before, enough to know that his teachings are Scriptural and his heart was in the right place. I believe everything he has shared in this book is true including the testimonies of people who have been delivered. 

His educational background, his experience in deliverance ministry, plus his passion and love for the Lord, legitimatize his accounts and I believe anyone who thinks he's exaggerating or lying has no basis for such claims and/or does not understand how the Spiritual world operates.

 In order to get the most from this book, one must leave behind our preconceived ideas about demons, arrogant theological mind, and open up to the Holy Spirit. Forget that Mr. Prince was a Pentecostal, (demons do not work according to denomination) he even talks about an account where a Baptist minister sought his help in delivering a woman from demonization. I only say this because I've seen several reviewers complaining about his Pentecostal perspective and inadvertently shut themselves up from learning and growing. 

A lot of what he discussed I already knew and this book has helped cement my beliefs on demons. But I have also learned a great deal and I'm very grateful for this new knowledge. I will definitely re-read it, and buy more copies to give away. 

If you are looking for a book about demonic possession, demonic influence, how to be delivered, have any doubts or questions about the topic PLEASE do yourself a favor and buy this book! This book can literally change your life! Who knows, you might find the complete freedom in Christ you did not even know you were missing.

I received a copy of this book from Chosen in exchange for an honest review. All opinions expressed here are entirely my own.