Rating: 3/5

Well, this was not what I expected it to be. Casanova's memories are actually quite interesting. Yes, Casanova can be a little self-centered and he does brag about his love adventures a lot (that will not really be a surprise to any reader considering that Casanova's name is synonymous with womanizer- and his memoirs are the reason for it). However, when describing society and individuals surrounding him, Casanova has a very keen eye and is not without a sense of humour. 

Casanova’s frankness makes the study of that historical period very interesting. There is just something refreshing in how candid the writer is, sometimes even making fun of himself. Not too often though, he is not too humble. Always feeling an aversion to false humility (and true humility is very rare) I didn’t mind Casanova’s self confidence even if it borders on obnoxious most of the time. To me Casanova seems one of those people that get away with almost everything because of their charisma- and there are worse reasons for someone getting away with something. After all, charisma is a quality or some sort. The man wasn't without his qualities, it seems. Was Casanova enamored in himself? Undoubtedly, he was and yet he was also an interesting man. 

As I said, I’m not certain how much of what is described is actually true, in my opinion some parts of it are definitely fiction not memory, and by that I mostly mean his adventurous with women, they seem to me a product of an erotically imaginative mind. Nevertheless, what memoir is completely true? Humans are always subjective when it comes to judging themselves. Anyway, I would say that Casanova’s memoir is a mix of fact and fiction. You could also call it a mix between soap opera and genuine past events. Probably there are those who will especially like those episodes that I suspect to be a work of fiction and enjoy in this imaginatively interpreted part of his past. Probably there will be those who will be appealed by them. What I found interesting is Casanova's social commentary that seemed quite intelligent at times. 

Despite the fact that I can't possibly believe that everything written in Casanova's memoirs is true, I still enjoyed reading this first volume of his memoirs and I'll probably read the rest of them. It was better than I expected. This first volume deals with his childhood and early youth. As a child Casanova’s is very sensitive, marked by the absence of mother (an actress) that perhaps explains his constant need for female affection. As a young man, Casanova already has a very adventurous sort of spirit and a keen eye.…but that’s about as far as I have get. I’ll have to read the rest to see what kind of man he turned out to be.