Rating: 4/5

“Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry and narrow-mindedness, and many of our people need it sorely on these accounts. Broad, wholesome, charitable views of men and things can not be acquired by vegetating in one little corner of the earth all one’s lifetime.”

When in 1867, the American vessel Quaker City weighed anchor and started a six-month cruise towards the Mediterraneum, where passengers would have the chance to visit various places in Southern Europe, Northern Africa and the Middle East, probably the best-known man on board that ship was Mark Twain, who, at that time, was 32 years old and had still not written any of the novels he is remembered for today. Nevertheless, he had already made his mark as a humourist – you may be familiar with the famous jumping frog – and that is why a newspaper he was writing for in those days, the Alta California, was willing to send him on that voyage, paying his fare of $1,250, in exchange for weekly letters in which Twain was to pen down his impressions of his travels into the Old World. Two years later, the author would revise these letters, expunging sloppy language and adding some new material, and turn them into his first travelogue The Innocents Abroad, or The New Pilgrims’ Progress, a book that was to become the starting point of Twain’s career as a novelist.

The Innocents Abroad might give good insight into what would expect the traveller of those days and age in Spain, France, Italy, and Russia, as well as in the Holy Land and in Egypt, in times when travelling was still more of an adventure than it is today, but it is especially interesting for those who are curious to find out how an American citizen like Mark Twain would respond to what he saw and experienced during his various excursions. Although the author recommends travelling as an antidote to bigotry and prejudice, a lot of the humour to be found on those pages stems from the writer’s tendency to measure other cultures by American standards and his own obsession with cleanliness, comfort and what he regards as hallmarks of civilization. He was, for example, extremely annoyed at quarantine rules and measures taken by various countries in order to prevent the spread of cholera, and when he encounters these in Italy, we find a passage like this,

”However, they must keep epidemics away somehow or other, and fumigation is cheaper than soap. They must either wash themselves or fumigate other people. Some of the lower classes had rather die than wash, but the fumigation of strangers causes them no pangs.”

In France, Twain is not so much struck by the works of art he could see in the Louvre but more so by the perfect state of roads and pavements, by the spic-and-span conditions of houses and fences, and even though he regards Napoleon III. as a ruler whose very countenance must warn the on-looker not to trust him as far as they could throw him, yet he congratulates this ruler on his success at modernizing the country. By the same token, Twain is not at all impressed with the Old Masters, whose works he gets first-hand experience of in France and Italy. Standing in front of da Vinci’s mural of The Last Supper in Milan, he scoffs at his fellow-travellers’ praise of this work of art, which he regards as simply gleaned from the pages of run-of-the-mill guidebooks, and he simply states that the painting is old, its colours are faded and, all in all, it comes over as a bleak disappointment. Maybe, he was toying with the possibility of being taken for a boor, or he was poking fun at his fellow-travellers, whose cut-and-dried praise of what they saw was derived from books and not from their own thoughts and therefore branded them as Philistines – but I must confess that I went through a similar experience when years ago, I was able to clap eyes on another of da Vinci’s paintings, to wit the famous Mona Lisa in the Louvre. I had been looking forward for days to see this work of art and planned to be seduced by the mysterious hint at a smile of La Gioconda but when I eventually stood in front of it, trying to get a proper glimpse at it before elbowing my way through the crowd of loafers surrounding it, I could not help thinking that it was rather small and puny and did not offer half as much detail as the paintings by the Dutch masters I had seen before. I was unwise enough to share my thoughts with my travelling-companion, a woman who was charming, but who also possessed a guidebook, or was possessed by it, and consequently I had to bear her mild disdain for a couple of hours in the wake of my confession.

Twain also made another observation, which shows that he was a man of good sense:

” These ancient painters never succeeded in denationalizing themselves. The Italian artists painted Italian Virgins, the Dutch painted Dutch Virgins, the Virgins of the French painters were Frenchwomen — none of them ever put into the face of the Madonna that indescribable something which proclaims the Jewess, whether you find her in New York, in Constantinople, in Paris, Jerusalem, or in the empire of Morocco.”

Similarly, his jibes at religion turned into or pandering to superstition, are always great fun to read, and thought-provoking, too, as when he states that Christians from different denominations are not able to pray together in one of the holiest places of Christendom, the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, because they would immediately start to fight with each other – in the name of a religion of peace. Okay, that was not great fun to read, but thought-provoking. Funnier are passages like these,

”Among the most precious of the relics were a stone from the Holy Sepulchre, part of the crown of thorns, (they have a whole one at Notre Dame,) a fragment of the purple robe worn by the Saviour, a nail from the Cross, and a picture of the Virgin and Child painted by the veritable hand of St. Luke.”

”The strangest thing about the incident that has made her name so famous, is, that when she wiped the perspiration away, the print of the Saviour’s face remained upon the handkerchief, a perfect portrait, and so remains unto this day. We knew this, because we saw this handkerchief in a cathedral in Paris, in another in Spain, and in two others in Italy. In the Milan cathedral it costs five francs to see it, and at St. Peter’s, at Rome, it is almost impossible to see it at any price. No tradition is so amply verified as this of St. Veronica and her handkerchief.”

With such an over-abundance of relics, who could still doubt the gospel truth of their testimony?

Still, for all his cultural egocentrism, Twain was also aware of the impression that his group of travellers – he usually calls them Pilgrims – must have struck on the uninitiated autochthons, and he never tires of denouncing the Pilgrims’ tendency to chisel little memoranda out of the venerable monuments and statues they encounter. One of them even climbed the serene Sphinx in order to hammer away at the monument’s face, although the Egyptian stone proved too much for him. The following passage exactly voices my sentiments on these despicable people, who have nowadays taken to making selfies in front of the sights they encumber with their presence – the selfie being, luckily, a less annoying pastime of theirs to bask in eternity,

”One might swear that all the John Smiths and George Wilkinsons, and all the other pitiful nobodies between Kingdom Come and Baalbec would inscribe their poor little names upon the walls of Baalbec’s magnificent ruins, and would add the town, the county and the State they came from — and swearing thus, be infallibly correct. It is a pity some great ruin does not fall in and flatten out some of these reptiles, and scare their kind out of ever giving their names to fame upon any walls or monuments again, forever.”

Twain also shared another sentiment with me, and possibly with many another person, to wit that in retrospect, travelling is more rewarding and valuable than it appears while the traveller is on their way, because all the petty frustrations, the annoyances rising out of bad food and lodging or of the presence of nitwits in places you’d rather be alone in to muster up your thoughts and dive into your emotions will be forgotten, and what remains is the memory of having been there and seen it with your own eyes. Now, the same sentiment may apply to some books you read, let’s say classics like Dante’s Divine Comedy in that you will not necessarily enjoy every single page you are going through but that you are sure that nevertheless, the time invested in reading these pages is well-spent because when you lay aside the perused book, you will come out of it a different person with a mind richer in thoughts and reflexions than it went in before. This can also be said of The Innocents Abroad because some of the more descriptive passages do tend to drag on a bit, but having read the entire book will probably make you enter upon your next journey with a different mindset.