Rating: 2/5

This book very nearly became a rare DNF for me, until I realised just how quickly I'd be able to finish it (and because, god forbid, I appear to juice my 'pages read' Goodreads stat at the end of the year). So I soldiered away, miserably, for a couple of days to get it finished. 

The reason this book almost joined the rarified ranks of Did Not Finish is, very simply, that it is almost entirely dreadful (I'll get to that almost in a bit). This book has long been known to me. I've been seeing it in airports for years and, no stranger to the business paperbacks, I finally cracked one day and bought it. For its ubiquity and staying power I was not expecting how extraordinarily dated the book is; it should have been retired decades ago. Why? Let's get listing. 

Firstly, and most obviously, the business environment is today almost unrecognisable from the book's publication year, 1984, let alone the time period the book is actually related to, which is author Mark H. McCormack's heyday of the 1960s. Pages and pages are dedicated to office etiquette that just isn't relevant anymore, such as what sorts of suits businessmen should wear; or painstaking detail on how best to reach people on the phone; or on the relative value of telegrams versus letters. Even in the book's own time, the author's views would have been far removed from most businesspeople's experience doling out, as it does, advice on that oh-so general experience of jetting around the world to meet famous golfers and CEOs. 

Secondly, as hinted at above, the book is obviously and understandably biased in the sense that all businessmen are, well, men and all secretaries are women. In a historic work of literature (fiction or non-fiction) this need not be a problem; I'm not calling for this book to be banned or anything and I'm more than happy not to apply a modern lens to past works just to create a bit of controversy if the work itself still has value. But for a book marketed today to meet today's business needs this obvious dating of the book is not just anachronistically problematic, it demonstrably illustrates how the book is not geared towards today's challenges. 

Which leads to my third point: if the book had deep insight or value then, no, it being mildly dated would not have led me almost to put it down. The book's biggest problem is that (mostly) the advice it offers (mutatis mutandis to today's environment) is just not as insightful as it, or the title, makes it seem. For example, an early chapter on Creating Impressions offers the anodyne advice to avoid typos in communications and to personalise them a bit. A later chapter extols the virtue of knowing the facts to size-up a situation and another still on the value of silence in negotiations. None of this is bad advice but it probably isn't taught at HBS because that institution doesn't think it needs to teach its students to check their spelling or do their prep before a sales meeting. 

Lastly, and quite possibly the reason the book was so hard to get finished, was just how unctuously smug it is. I get it: you, Mark, know a lot of famous sports stars. These, naturally, date the book even worse. The references to Gary Player (who I just about knew) or Jean-Claude Killy (who I did not) do no favours in giving an impression of cutting-edge insight for the business leaders of 2024. The bigger issue with all this puffed-up name dropping is that it just looks faintly pathetic, like the author needs to demonstrate on every fourth page how important they are. It doesn't add weight to the point being made and most don't make for interesting stories either. They all also are written in a sort of stiltedly casual way too: I was just walking down the street with Bob Hope and Arnold Palmer and so on and so on. 

Why, given all these points, have I given this book 2 stars? There is a small amount of redeeming material in the latter third, when the author shifts to describing how to run a business. Generic as it is, there are a few gems, such as a very relevant comment about not scaling up before you've identified a route to profitability; introducing just enough corporate structure to enable growth but to continually challenge that structure (even as CEO) to prevent ossification; and I particularly appreciated the author's paean to minimising internal meetings. A few of the celebrity anecdotes are reasonably funny too, such as a story involving auto executive John DeLorean in which, at a company event he attended, he commented how a comically oversized fruit basket he received did not, somehow, contain bananas. Missing the sarcasm, his staff ensured from that day that their boss was never far from a banana, be it in hotels, meetings or aboard planes. 

The question I'm left with is why is this book still on shelves today? There are no deep insights; the book is not worth reading beyond what wisdom it attempts to convey since it certainly cannot pass on its merits as a piece of literature. So why am I constantly seeing this in W.H. Smiths well into the 21st century? Perhaps a more important question is: why was this book successful in the first place (which I assume it must have been in order still to be in print 40 years later)? 

My theory for why the book exists is that the author had hired one too many book-smart not street-smart managers from business school in the 70s / 80s era. This was a time when the efficient market's hypothesis was in the ascendancy - driven by Milton Friedman, Chicago Business School et al. - and there was, I can imagine, a sense that intuition-driven salespeople like McCormack were dinosaurs and everything could be reduced to analysis and logic. In this environment I can see why a book that re-centred the businessperson's view on common sense could have had been impactful at a time when financial engineering and management theory were increasingly viewed as the only means for growth.

Yet we no longer live in this time; we exist in a world where behavioural economics has established itself, Homo Economicus is viewed as a relic of the past and formal models and business abstraction are viewed with scepticism. Much of what I'm guessing drove the author to write this book is simply not relevant today. 

Which leads me back to my question: why is this still being sold? Frankly, I feel the book has simply benefited from marketing, a whizzy title and the snowball effect: I bought it so Smiths will buy more of it so some other poor sap will buy it. At least I know now not to buy the sequel (1990's What They Still Don't Teach You At Harvard Business School: Selling More, Managing Better, and Getting the Job). Fool me once, marketers, and all that ...