Rating: 3/5

Rather esoteric and scholarly for those who might be more used to a more accessible and popular form of writing about historical figures as has become the prevalent style more recently. To be fair, the title should be more along the lines of "A history of Boudica and the legend of Boadicea (and some subsequent Warrior Queens and how they relate to her)". The title gives the impression of a series of profiles, probably with comparisons drawn, but to have the whole book revolve around one woman's actions and legend really should have been reflected in the title. The author spends more than half the book in educated speculation about the historical and legendary British queen and distinguishing between what is known historically (practically nothing) and fictional use of her story and legend over about 1900 years. 

Following this first half are brief histories/biographies of women who fall under her category of Warrior Queen, such as Elizabeth I, Caterina Sforza, the Rani of Jhansi, and Margaret Thatcher. Thatcher was still in office at the writing, so besides her not being a queen in any sense, I think the author didn't have enough historical perspective to bring her into the analysis despite the advantage of relating a modern late 20th century example. Her other profiles were interesting but brief, and all analyzed in comparison to Boudica/Boadicea.

The scholarly language was a little thick to wade through at times, and the constant repetition of the primacy of the one queen got tiresome.
Given all of that, it is a good solid history that mostly manages to do its best to get the facts from primary sources and noting when those sources may themselves have been prejudiced. I learned about a few non-western queens I was unfamiliar with, and even some information and perspectives I hadn't considered on those more consistently written about (Elizabeth I, Catherine the Great, Isabella of Castile). But you better be interested in Boudica/Boadicea in some way or you'll never make it through the book!