Rating: 4/5

Eric Ambler has chosen "an everyman" to be the protagonist of this suspenseful novel. Graham is a nice, quiet, intelligent armaments engineer from northern England who has just finished a long business trip advising the Turkish navy. He goes back to his hotel room in Istanbul and is surprised by a man who shoots several times before disappearing out the window. Fortunately, he is not seriously hurt. Graham thinks the intruder might be a thief, but Turkish intelligence tells him that the Nazis are trying to kill him. It's just at the start of World War II, and the Germans do not want Graham to bring the classified armaments information that he has memorized back to his English employer. His travel plans back to England are changed, and he sets off on an Italian freighter. A small group of international passengers is on the boat. During the voyage, we are in Graham's mind as he tries to determine who he can trust. The tension and fear increase as the voyage continues, and the true identities of the passengers are revealed. Graham's fear intensifies as he is put in a no-win situation where his survival hangs by a thread.

One of the passengers on the boat is a leftist Frenchman who thought that wars were created by international bankers and armaments manufacturers who would profit from the conflicts. Ambler was known for his leftist views, especially in his early works prior to World War II. Another passenger is a Serbian nightclub dancer who remembers the atrocities of World War I and will not associate with the Turkish passenger. A French couple will not sit at the same table as a German archeologist as a political statement. Although the book is mainly an entertaining international psychological thriller, it is interesting to read the political messages too. When the book was published in 1940, at the advent of World War II, the author did not know exactly which countries would be allies, or the outcome of the war.

Eric Ambler is known to have been an influence on authors Graham Greene and John LeCarre, as well as filmmaker Alfred Hitchcock.

Thanks to my GR friend Judy for suggesting this book.