Rating: 5/5

Simone Weil’s Waiting for God was a Christmas gift for me in 2013, but one I received in time for Advent. As any serious reader knows, when one encounters a significant book/author—much like when you meet the right person—can be almost as important as the book itself.

Waiting for God is an unlikely but apt Advent read. It is improbable in the sense Weil lived a more vibrant Christianity than most who claim to be ardent members of any known Christian denomination and yet she stopped short of receiving the sacrament of Baptism. It is pertinent as in the first word of the title; ‘waiting’ is a function of Advent.

As the ‘arrival of something anticipated’, the Christian liturgical season of Advent is necessarily a waiting time. Weil was by nature as well as choice a lifelong wait-er. She was waiting literately on God, on His guidance and His instructions as she perceived them. 
 
This is a difficult concept for most of us to grasp. We get up in the morning and do what we’ve always done, what’s required by the day’s schedule or for those without benefit of discipline, whatever strikes the fancy. For the rest, if the routine varies it’s usually due to input from others, circumstances beyond our control such as accidents, emergencies, and other major events, good and bad, major or minor.

Weil’s approach to life and the writing she shares in this book is completely different. First of all, there’s intensity to everything she says and does. It’s as if she can never forget, not even for a second, the temporary nature of our earthly existence. She’s in a race with time and while you are with her so are you. And yet, at the same time, she is deeply contemplative. Nothing is superficial or insignificant to/or about her. She’s completely real and yet an enigma because as she continues to learn and grow, she constantly changes. I could sense these things about her in my reading but it was so intuitive that as I would go back over what I’d just covered, I’d often find it almost impossible to put my finger on exactly what it was that led me to these conclusions. Also, I felt protective of her. Perhaps I am wrong in this, but I found myself reluctant to share her writings with certain individuals who would dismiss her ideas outright simply because of her choices, especially her choice not to be baptized. Or maybe what I mean is that I lament my own inability to defend her choices because although instinctively I agree with her, I don’t understand her writings well enough to defend her against critics. And I couldn't bear the thought of her being criticized. Let them make fun of or insult me, but not her. 
 
Waiting for God is a collection of writings which are only loosely related. There are her six letters to Father Perrin, apparently a devout priest, friend and spiritual confidant who she entrusts with her reasons for loving yet refusing to join the Church. These all-too brief letters read like the most unusual and deeply moving love story I can imagine. Sometimes the situation reminded me of an arranged marriage between God and Simone, where she was only waiting to hear her dearly Beloved tell her He loved her and that would be enough for her to go ahead (with Baptism). Other times I had the feeling she really saw herself as God’s Missionary to those outside organized religion. Either way, she was content to be what He wanted her to be, because she belonged to Him and Him alone. 

The second part of the book is a collection of essays. These left me spellbound and changed me at every encounter. At some point in time I want to go back and try to summarize my notes on them—but after I have had some time to let the ideas Weil proposed gestate. As I was reading these essays, I would read for a while, then pause, reflect, pray or jot something in the margins or highlight a section. If pressed to say which was my favorite essay I would reluctantly choose Forms of the Implicit Love of God looking back wistfully at Concerning the Our Father, only because the former contained so many divine (no pun intended) mini-essays. 

I am thoroughly frustrated with this review, but then I know I would be disappointed with anything I could write about Weil’s work. But eventually I have to finish it and let it go. As to the book, well this is just an introductory read. God willing, I’ll be back!

Subsequent thoughts although not a final review – December 7, 2013: Have been reading Simone Weil’s Waiting for God in bits and pieces. (Interestingly enough as I was typing those words Oklahoma experienced a 4.5 earthquake. We also happen to be in the middle of the biggest college football game of the season (OU v. OSU)—which my daughter is watching in the other room—while our state is under a blanket of snow and temperatures below 20 degrees.)

Weil is both frustrating and deeply satisfying. She is frustrating in the sense that her extreme intelligence enables her to be so far ahead it’s not easy to keep up with her or know where you are when you get there and yet as/when her meanings come into focus, I enjoy that addicting ‘ahah!’ and resulting tremendous kinship with the one who gifts insight. So often I wanted her to be here so I could ask, “What do you mean by this?” or, “Where have you gone now?”

So far I’ve read and reread the Introduction, her letters to Father Perrin, her essay, “The Love of God and Affliction”—which is totally amazing – and prayed “Concerning the Our Father”*. I’ve also skimmed the other two essays but not actually sat and read them as the writing merits. I don’t believe it’s possible to do Ms. Weil’s philosophy justice in one perusal, well at least not for me. 

Her thoughts are not organized in any conventional sort of way. On refection I believe this to be because of her proximity to the Infinite, her total surrender in humble obedience to the God she is waiting for. How can our little words ever articulate the vastness of Eternity? Find clarity in a funnel cloud or a hurricane. Rather wait. She is telling us there will be total clarity tomorrow. Now there is only the whirlwind. His Power. Waiting for God.

But then I’m not finished either...

*Actually this is so powerful I haven't even managed to get all the way through praying the entire meditation at one time, so I'm working on just one phrase each day. 

This book is a gift from a friend here on GR and I cannot thank the kindness of that dear friend enough! 

&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;&lt;&gt;

Initial Impressions – November 2013: Waiting for God begins with Weil's letters. I have found it necessary to read and reread parts of these a number of times, her mind and thoughts being so much more subtle than mine. Clumsily my eyes follow along her words on the page but she has escaped me. So I go painstakingly back over the sentences again. Perhaps I have grasped her concept. Perhaps not. Still reading...