Rating: 5/5

In 2008 I wrote this: "I think this is the best detective novel ever written. That takes some qualification and explanation, but I mean as a detective novel, with the emphasis more on 'detective' than 'novel'. I think the wrap-up is perfect. I've read the story maybe four times in the last twenty five years, and just finished it again yesterday. Besides the marvelous plot, there is marvelous development of character, marvelous witty observations, and the beginnings of the deeper psychological themes that were to come in his later books, culminating in the masterpiece, Sleeping Beauty."

I just read it again. I'll expand that review.

All of the Lew Archer mysteries by Ross Macdonald are very good, and all but two or three are excellent. This one is in the top three of four, which means it is one of the best mystery novels ever written, and beyond that, it is an excellent novel, period. 

It is the tenth of eighteen, from 1962.

MacDonald started out imitating Raymond Chandler, and he was quite good at that. But as the years passed, the most overtly film-noir and hard-boiled aspects faded, as did the violence (though there was never very much of that by modern standards). Through his very strong middle period he combined elements of the hard-boiled with sharp clever writing and a wonderful ability to perceive and reveal people. Here, in this book, we have one of his strongest and most successful books.

It is very complex, and the reader would be rewarded by keeping a note pad and jotting down the first time and place a character is mentioned, and other key points. I’ve added a list below. But beyond the mystery story aspects, no other mystery novelist that I am aware of has so many clever descriptions, insightful observations, compelling similes, and such deep observations on the human condition. He is simply the best writer of all mystery writers.

Like most of the Lew Archer novels, the young people of today are haunted by the actions of their elders. That is not emphasized quite so much in this one as others. Recurring theme: art and artists.

It’s a great loss to the world that MacDonald developed Alzheimer’s at a rather young age. I would love to read a nineteenth Lew Archer novel.

The story begins, like many in the Lew Archer canon, with trouble in a wealthy family. Ex-colonel Mark Blackwell, a strait-laced army man, comes to Archer’s office to say that his only child, 24 year old Harriet, is about to run off with a penniless nobody who calls himself an artist, named Burke Damis. Blackwell is furious that Harriet would defy him and “ruin her life” in that way. He think Damis knows that when she turns 25, Harriet will inherit a lot of money. Isobel Blackwell, his second wife of a year or so, is more sympathetic to Harriet.

Archer takes a disliking to Mark Blackwell but agrees to investigate Damis to discover his background. Thanks to Harriet, Damis has been living in the Blackwell beach house at Malibu where he can paint. Archer finds him there and stakes out the house, sipping coffee at a small diner overlooking it. A group of teenage surfers driving a zebra-striped hearse come in. 

When Damis and Harriet drive off, Archer follows them to Blackwell’s mansion in exclusive Bel Air, where an ugly confrontation occurs. Harriet and Damis drive off. Blackwell wants Archer to track them down. He begins by returning to the beach house. A thorough search turns up one odd item: an airline ticket stub from Guadalajara Mexico to LA in the name of Quincy Ralph Simpson. It is now dark and Archer notices the same group of teenagers he saw before now camped on the beach below the house. One of the girls is wearing a dirty but good quality Harris Tweed overcoat.

Archer flies to Mexico where coincidentally(?) Blackwell’s first wife has been living in Ajijic (a real place) for ten years with her second husband, a retired dentist named Keith Hatchen. As Archer follows the trail in Ajijic we meet a wonderful collection of colorful, well delineated characters. This is perhaps the best part of the book. It turns out that Damis and Harriet met there about a month earlier.

I won’t attempt to summarize the plot much more, except to say that it is wonderfully complex but not bewilderingly so. Archer discovers that “Burke Damis” is an alias; his real name is Bruce Campion, and he was suspected of murdering his wife Dolly about six months earlier in San Mateo County, which is just south of San Francisco. A few months before that Dolly and Quincy Ralph Simpson both worked near Lake Tahoe where, surprise, surprise, Blackwell has another vacation home. Dolly grew up in the little town of Citrus Junction (fictional), which is apparently in the orange belt about fifty miles east of LA.

So we have a hexagon of key locations: Malibu, LA, Ajijic, Citrus Junction, Tahoe, and San Mateo County. 

The characters:

Mark Blackwell, ex army Colonel, the ramrod type.
Isobel Blackwell, his second wife, married a year or so. 
Harriet, daughter of Mark Blackwell and his first wife, Pauline.

Some teenage surfers at Malibu who drive an old hearse they painted with zebra stripes, and sometimes pick up interesting things in the surf.

Pauline (Blackwell) Hatchen, mother of Harriet, ex-wife of Mark.
Keith Hatchen, retired dentist.
 
Burke Damis. Rumor in Ajijic is that he murdered his wife Dolly.
Q. R. Simpson Quincy Ralph. Just an alias of Damis? No; in fact he was murdered not long before.
Vicky, wife of Q. R. Simpson.

Chauncey Reynolds, owner of a bar in Ajijic.
Claude Stacy, manager of a posada.
Helen Wilkinson, aging ex-actress, retired to Ajijic.
Bill Wilkinson, husband of Helen.
Anne Castle, artist and weaver, owns a craft store in Ajijic. serviceable.

Bruce Campion, aspiring artist.
Dolly Stone Campion.

Hank Sholto, Lake Tahoe, Nevada side; looks after houses.
Fawn King, friend of QRS in Tahoe.

Edmund B. Damis, art professor at Berkeley.
Evelyn Jurgenson, sister of Bruce Campion.

Mr. and Mrs. Stone, Dolly’s parents, live in Citrus Junction.
Mr. and Mrs. Jaimet, former owners of the house across the street from the Stone’s. Mr. Jaimet, deceased, was a respected high school principal. Mrs. Jaimet, well, I’ll say no more about her.

Several sheriffs and policemen.

This is a superb story, superbly written as only Ross MacDonald could. It doesn't get any better than this folks.

Examples of what I call good writing:

She jumped as though lightning had struck her, not for the first time.

I bumped my head on a low hanging fruit which was probably a mango. Above the trees the stars hung in the freshly cleared sky like clusters of some smaller, brighter fruit too high to reach.

The sky had cleared, and a few sunbathers were lying around in the sand like bodies after a catastrophe. Beyond the surf line six surfers waited in prayerful attitudes on their boards.