Rating: 3/5

Sons and Lovers is a 1913 novel by the English writer D. H. Lawrence. The Modern Library placed it ninth on their list of the 100 best novels of the 20th century.

In stark contrast, Goodreads reviewer Richard Derus has the most popular review here and one that made me laugh aloud, in which he begins: “The worst, most horrendously offensively overrated piece of crap I've read in my life.” He ends his review, ”If you, for some reason, liked this tedious, crapulous drivel, then goody good good, but if we're friends, I urge you not to communicate your admiration to me. It will not do good things for our relationship. I more easily forgive Hemingwayism than affection for this.”

Well! Can you sense the pressure I face?! (I do love Goodreads and well-written trashings of Canon-zed Authors, I really do, even though I often love said authors). 

Okay! Here goes! Lawrence is one of those writers you either love or despise. I loved him as a teenager and into my twenties, which is when I first read him, and I largely have loved him again as I return to him now. He gained his reputation as one of the Greatest Novelists Ever based primarily on the strength of four books—Sons and Lovers (1913), The Rainbow (1915—my favorite), Women in Love (1920) and Chatterley’s Lover (1928). Though there are many terrific stories, too. These works gained some press because they were in some sense clearly (semi)-autobiographical, and banned for obscenity, though in our time no one would blink an eye at much of it at all; in this book, Paul Morel remains a virgin for more than half of the tome (it took 18 hours to listen to it on audiobooks, augh!); I’m sure anyone looking for obscenity in the described loss of that virginity or anything else that happens after that would be pretty disappointed.
 
The plot can maybe be reduced to this: Paul Morel, a young painter (as Lawrence himself was also), born to a (rough, hard-drinking) miner and his quiet wife, is lifelong Oedipally "in love" with that woman, his mother. She disapproves of his early soul-mate Miriam and also of (later) sex-mate Clara, who is estranged from her (like Paul’s father, rough) husband Baxter. 

“Whenever shall you marry, Paul?” [his mother asked].

“I would be married already if not for you!”

Paul’s older brother died of pneumonia, but she had also been “in love” with him. Lawrence once wrote in a letter, “when they come to manhood, they can't love, because their mother is the strongest power in their lives.” Lawrence agrees this is the central theme of the book, the inability of young Paul to break free from his mother. As a subject, compared to Lady Chatterley’s passions, let’s say, this pales (or looses tensile strength?), but okay, it’s not boring. . . for the first 100 pages, let’s say. But I mean, can we not expect a little naked wrestling or frolic with a gamekeeper?!

At one point Paul fights Baxter over Clara, and they become friends, in the way that wrestling/boxing males tend to connect in Lawrence. There’s a death I won’t specify in order to avoid spoiling it for you, but let me just say that in the end, Paul is alone, forlorn, alienated. 

Sons and Lovers is a highly autobiographical and sometimes compelling portrayal of childhood, adolescence and tension between generations, but it is one (too) long book with fewer great scenes than in the other three great books, and less terrific, quotable writing. It’s a pretty good story, and I do think (sorry, Richard!) Lawrence is a sometimes great writer, but in my view this is not his greatest work. When I was twenty—the age to read it, maybe—I—also a kind of mama’s boy, like Paul—loved the book; now I think it is a bit of a slog in too many places, and I care less than I did years ago about his failed struggles with all these women. I say 3.5 stars, dropped down to 3 stars in part because I had to listen to an American reader mispronounce enough words to jar me out of my listening experience. I should have found an English reader who knew who to speak like the Nottingham locals a century ago.

Not to disrespect Richard, but the generally funniest reviewer to trash Lawrence on Goodreads is Paul Bryant; the best reviewer of Lawrence on Goodreads is Cecily, so if you read him, read her.

But here is my review of The Rainbow:

https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

and my review of Women in Love: can be found here:

https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/9...

and my review of Lady Chatterley’s Lover can be found here:

https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3...