Rating: 5/5

terrifying. Review coming (hopefully...)
OK I’ve changed the 4 stars to 5, mainly because I’ve been sat thinking about this again, and can’t get the voice, its insistence on truth and its brutal depiction of the world of the vagrant alcoholic out of my head. This is one of the milder episodes: ‘We could get no water to mix with it [surgical spirit], so we went in the church and filled a milk bottle out of the holy water font and started slowly to swallow it. But it’s hard to get down first thing in the day – any time for that matter. Bastard stuff. It either makes you dead sleepy and fit for nothing or drives you mad and ready to kill some cunt.’

When I started the book I felt reading non-fiction (which I rarely do) lacked the density at sentence level of fiction. Too many clichés I felt (eg ‘six months flew by’ and ‘we begged, borrowed or stole’). However I was wrong, the prose picked up a momentum and was actually quite beautiful in its pared-to-the bone way. I did have a slight issue with the way women were depicted, on virtually every page an ‘attractive’ woman passes by, with ‘shapely legs’ or ‘good tits’ or something and this did get a bit tiring. But that was just his direct honesty coming out, and really you wouldn’t want anything else. Besides it’s daft complaining about sexism when murder and mayhem are happening all around. The alcoholic is ruthless – anything for a drink; nothing else matters. Take this incident when a fight breaks out amongst his companions and Jock is stabbed in the neck with a broken bottle:

His shirt collar turned crimson.. his throat was bursting with it. It bubbled up into his mouth, nothing could muffle the sound of the blood gurgling out between his fingers.. he’d sort of gone to walk away, gone round in a small circle and then in a stumble changed his mind and began coming back towards us, blowing awful bubbles.’

Healey doesn’t help or even react much, he’s just happy there’s more to drink: I started drinking one of the bottles. Now he was in the road. The cars were swerving and hooting, just missing him whenever he blundered in the wrong direction. It was comical really. Blood splashed and exhausted, stumbling and jerking around, he was saved from toppling over by being bounced from car to car. .. I watched for a while but he seemed to be making no progress at all, so I just got stuck into another bottle… there was so much drink left you couldn’t really believe in death.

The book is stuffed with anecdotes about stealing, drinking, fighting, sexual desire (usually not fulfilled), and is packed with great characters. Healy’s recall is astounding, full of detail. He is a remarkable man, resilient, wiry, aggressive, incapable of dissembling. And an excellent writer. 

I remember seeing the film back in the 90s with Mark Rylance as Healy and it had the same raw amorality, its hunger for drink and its disdain for pretensions, I think. It’s a while since I saw it so I’m going to chase it up. 

Whitaker in his review has links to articles about what became of Healy after he replaced alcoholism with another addiction – Albailart in his superb review says he’d rather leave it up to the reader to find out what, so I’m following suit.