Rating: 2/5

I give up. I’ve tried to write this three times and I’ve lost it three times.

The next day:

Ready to try again. This book was published the year I was born. It shows. A lot. It purports to be an adventure story about a young girl who is travelling with her Uncle and pesky, genius younger brother Clark. There is precious little adventure in it until the final quarter of the book. Then it is by turns tragic and exciting. Poddy ends up getting blown up by a bomb set by her brother, Clark, she is badly injured in an ICU on Venus. In Clark’s defence when he set the bomb he was trying to stop a plot designed to thwart the free Will of the Martian people (sort of like Republicans). Anyhow, Uncle Tom gives a speech at the end of the novel, blaming her parents(particularly Poddy’s mother) for putting her in danger as they kind of neglected her even though they were 75,000,000 miles away at the time.That just pissed me off. Not only was Poddy refrigerated in order to give Clark emotional growth, Poddy was in Uncle Tom’s care at the time. Poddy’s mother is a high powered career woman, an engineer. She speaks several languages, she is a self defence expert, she is highly educated. (Honestly, Heinlein should have written a book about her). Poddy on the other hand dreams of being a pilot but is close to deciding against it and becoming a highly educated baby-minder because no one will hire her because she is a girl (?!?!). She isn’t allowed to take self defence classes on Mars because her father doesn’t want his little girl to know how to take care of herself (?!?!). Heinlein could imagine a world where we can travel through space but he couldn’t imagine a world where women and girls have agency. He creates a girl with a mother who has lived, who does interesting work who is capable but makes Poddy less interesting and gives her less to do (it is Clark who comes up with the escape plan, kills their body guard and sets the bomb). Thankfully this was short. I will add that I read this when I was about twelve and thought it was great. Back then most books written about young girls gave them even less to do.