Rating: 5/5

Eric Berne, the founder of Transactional Analysis, published Games People Play around 1964. This book gave a striking (and sometimes funny!) model for most of the undermining transactions people engage in day in and day out. Some ten years later, Claude Steiner, one of Berne’s close colleagues, wrote this Scripts People Live. It deals with the individual life projects (a notion probably borrowed from Sartre’s “projet originel”) people engage into unconsciously at an early age, mostly under parental pressure, that determine most of their later destiny.

This book is intended for professional psychotherapists, especially group therapists. But, as in almost any Transactional Analysis approach, it can be read by anyone. However, although the author takes the trouble in the first section to give a summary of the TA theoretical background, I would suggest tackling this book with some notion of TA’s concepts, such as ego states, strokes, games, rackets, stamps, power plays, scripts, etc.

The founding idea is that the Freudian “Oedipus complex” should not be so much interpreted as a universal model of children’s desires towards their parents, but rather as a comprehensive model for people's fated and ongoing destiny-aspect. In other words, the theory of scripts predicates that people take “decisions” for themselves, based on what their entourage expect them to become (“injunctions” and “attributions”). And these decisions deeply influence their life, sometimes with dire consequences. However, the goal of TA therapy is to provide the means for a script de-construction and a healthier re-decision, later in life.

Steiner highlights three basic “harmatic” (i.e. tragic) life scripts that reflect the opposite of the three dimensions of Autonomy as defined by Berne, namely: Intimacy, Awareness and Spontaneity. These three scripts are exposed in their purest expression. To be sure, they are actually always combined in different proportions within the character of a particular individual:

1. The first one is Depression, determined by a “No Love / No Intimacy Script”. In other words, the person has been taught, early in life, not to be close, to keep him/herself aloof. The consequence, in a nutshell, is that the person severs herself from intimacy with her fellow humans and ends up alone and depressed. What therapy suggests is that we learn to break the “stroke scarcity” (the Fuzzy Tale around the middle of the book is a beautiful story around what Steiner calls the “Stroke Economy”) and (re)learn to nurture, to give, to ask for and to accept or reject signs of recognition, attention and affection.

2. The second basic script is Madness, or “No Mind / No Awareness Script”. Essentially, this is a life course that leads to stupidity or to a mental institution. It is programmed through a set of “don’t think” type of injunctions, that translates in systematic “discount”, i.e. the lies we tell each other continually, by omission or by commission. This especially applies to schizophrenia. Therapy for this type of script consists of learning to be accounted for, instead of discounted, in ordinary transactions.

3. The third script is Drug Addiction, or “No Joy / No Spontaneity Script”. This stems from a “don’t feel what you feel” type of upbringing, and ends up in alcoholism or such kind of addiction. In other words, people with this script are split from their body (or parts of it) and would benefit from a therapy based on meditation, breathing, and enjoying their senses without the help of chemicals. On that note, I was especially interested in the “somatic component” aspect of scripts and the connection Steiner makes with Wilhelm Reich’s approach and bioenergetics therapy, see: The Function of the Orgasm.

Steiner adds two more basic scripts to the lot: Powerlessness, based on Karpmann’s Rescuer / Persecutor / Victim triangle; Inequality, based on individualistic and competitive education. He also provides (in a very Bernian way) a few typical and vividly described scripts that men and women live by, such as: “Mother Hubbard”, “Poor Little Me”, “Creeping Beauty”, “Fat Woman”, “Tough Lady”, “Big Daddy”, “Playboy”, “Intellectual”, etc.

All in all, this is a rather thick but extremely enlightening book that I would highly recommend to anyone wanting to reflect on themselves and their (often complicated) relationships with others. At times, it might feel a bit outdated, especially when dealing with Men / Women relationships (the book was written some 40 years ago). However, it contains still very valid thoughts, especially on consumerism, individualism, relationships within the family or at work and child-rearing.