Rating: 3/5

This book had been recommended to me by my spiritual director and a women's spiritual direction group I was in a fair number of years ago. I'd picked it up a couple of different times, but hadn't really resonated with it on first attempt. This time, I read through the daily readings to completion, but don't think I will continue with the recommended three times of reading through for a full year. Once feels sufficient for what I want to get out of it, even as I'm sure different depth and nuance could be picked up upon reading a second and third time through. 
 I've read other spiritual monthly themed books with commentaries by Sr. Joan Chittister and enjoyed her practical approach to religious themes and emphasis on application of Christian texts, both early mothers/fathers of church writing as well as bible and other faiths' traditions that intersect with themes common to all religious teachings. In the Rule of Benedict, she breaks down an old text that is the foundation, even today, of Benedictine monastic life. I found some of the original writing, as one would expect, to be a bit stiff in its theology and phrasing and tried to read with open mind and aware of context. There was, often enough to make it worth the effort and read, aspects of the teaching that felt like they could apply to my daily life and be reflected upon for what they might mean for a non-monastic liberal Christian today. To be sure, the rule is not liberal, but rather I can see application across gradations of Christianity. In particular, I found some of the sections on hospitality to resonate deeply with my own beliefs while I reflected deeply on the sections of authority and leadership, questioning to whom we submit and allow ourselves to be led and accountable to and under what circumstances/for what purpose. 
 It was at times a challenging read, but the daily format makes it easy to approach on this in small segments and allow it, much like a daily liturgical reading, to seep in a bit at a time and see what comes up and what correlations and lessons might be gained.