Rating: 4/5

[7/10]

 Of faith and hope, belief and confidence, there was nothing left. Just hate. Hate for the system, for the politicians, for the intellectuals, for the Algerians, for the trade unions, for the journalists, for the foreigners; but most of all hate for That Man. 

I have chosen this particular passage to start my review because I find it disturbingly still relevant in the world of today. I am seeing all around me Hatred in the ascendancy and Reason getting thrown in the dustbin, as more and more people become radicalized and some even believe they can resolve their fears of the future by indiscriminate killing, sometimes of innocents, other times of the people they believe are in charge or are opposed to their twisted worldview.

Frederick Forsyth started his career as a war correspondent in Africa. He saw more than his fair share of horrors there, but when he came back and wrote a non-fiction account of the civil war in Biafra it went largely unnoticed. So he decided to put his experience there and that in France as an investigative journalist to better use writing non-fiction. The result is "The Day of the Jackal", which became so successful it almost created a thriller sub-genre of its own. 

Combining amazingly detailed technical information with elaborate political analysis and informed police procedural techniques, Forsyth deserves in my opinion all the praise he received for this three part "anatomy" of a plot to assassinate the French president, Charles de Gaulle, by a group of disgruntled former army officers, enraged by his negotiations to bring the 'dirty' Algerian war to an end.

Yet, personally, the book was fairly disappointing to me. Of course, I admire the execution, the documentary style of narration and the carefully dosage of tension as the events unfold. But I failed to get emotionally involved with any of the characters, probably due to the same impersonal, cold, factual delivery of facts. And I found the accumulation of coincidences and lucky breaks toward the final days of the chase to be problematic towards sustaining my suspension of disbelief. That's the main issue I think with this type of extremely detailed thrillers: they open themselves to a much more careful examination of plot holes and literary devices than a novel that relies on emotion and temperamental bursts of action. The more careful you lay down the rules, the more they are open to interpretation.

 one example only. If the Jackal was so sure he had a foolproof plan, why did it pivot at a key entry on something as unreliable as the human element: that he would be allowed to pass a security barrier unchallenged before entering the building above the festivities? 

In his defence, the author is well aware of this 'deus ex machina' conundrum and my favorite passage in the text is a quote by the French inspector Lebel:

 The human element, always the human element. A taxi-driver goes to sleep by the roadside, a gardener is too nervous to investigate his employer oversleeping by six hours, a policeman doesn't remember a name in a passport. One thing I can tell you, Lucien this is my last case. I'm getting too old. Old and slow. Get my car ready, would you. Time for the evening roasting. 

Recommended! It's a really fast read despite its size, and I believe it's better to try the original mold, before searching for its numerous copycats / imitators.