Rating: 4/5

Hildegard von Bingen's Book of Divine Works is as an outstanding piece of medieval mystic writing; that is to say, it is work in which the authority relates her visions and thus she shares with the reader her personal encounters with God. In this it belongs on the opposite end of the spectrum of medieval Catholic writing from that of scholastic theology as typified by the writings of Saint Thomas Aquinas who dealt with logic, divine law and natural laws. Hildegard represents the experience of following a human God. The Scholastics deal with the rules emanating from this divine God. In recognition of the extraordinary quality of her work, Pope Benedict XVI named her a Doctor of the Church one of only 35 writers to have been awarded this distinction and only the fourth woman.

Hildegard emerges from this book as a joyous and intense Catholic. She believes intensely in the goodness of God, Jesus and the Holy Spirit as well as their divine creation (i.e. the world we live in.) Practicing Catholics should well consider reading this book as her enthusiasm is truly energizing and inspirational.

This book also draws the reader's attention to the fact that Hildegard was a multi-faceted person. It contains a number of her songs with both lyrics and music. I think the reader could well skip these and instead go to YouTube where many of her exquisite compositions are available. However, I do commend the editor who assembled this book 15 years before the era of YouTube for his intentions.

Hildegard was also a charismatic abbess who founded two convents. In this role she showed remarkable determination, political skill and leadership ability. The book addresses this side of Hildegard by presenting her correspondence. Her letters show her to alternatively diplomatic and pugnacious. She bluntly tells Pope Anastasius IV that she considers him to be a rank incompetent. With other correspondents she is diplomatic and at times syrupy.

All in all this book was great fun to read. Before reading it, however, readers might find it helpful to go to YouTube and watch Margaret Von Trotta's remarkable 2009 biographical movie about Hildegard von Bingen "Vision".