Rating: 5/5

My Friend Walter is a historical book which enticed me based on the cover. 

Bess is a young girl who has no friends. She lives in her family's farm, with her older brother, younger brother, parents, Gran, and not forgetting her cheeky dog! Then one day, and invitation comes in the mail, written in curiously messy handwriting, inviting the family to a gathering at the Tower of London. Her auntie has recieved an invitation too, so because her Gran has a medical appointment, Bess tags along with her.

Then Bess meets a man, who introduces himself as Walter Raleigh! She;s an ancestor of him, a descendent, and Bess then decides to bring him home with her. 

She had just made a friend in the ghost of Walter Raleigh!

Walter and Bess become very close, and go on all sorts of adventures and trips together.

They go fishing, Bess lets Walter ride on one of the family tractors (which he does love, he declares that tractors are majesties compared to cars or something), and they have all sorts of fun together!

But when Bess's older brother Will comes, it becomes hard to do that, and one day he finds his fishing rod tangled and messy in the state Walter left it after fishing. Bess knows he has because her gran found some fish in the kitchen in the morning, and Bess gets blamed, which she finds very annoying.

And one of the major events in the book, is when Bess's gran gets ill! She falls ill after the upsetting news that the farm will have to be sold. Bess of course is distraught. But Walter helps her out, making some sort of potion which will cure Bess's gran. One of the things Walter has done is go in Will's science lab set, and its in one of the bottles from that, so Bess now knows what he was making. Bess puts that in Gran's tea, and most miraculously, Gran is cured.

But then comes the day of the sale. Walter is in the tower of London. Bess, horrified at what is happening, goes to London alone, hoping to find Walter .Before Walter left, he told her everything would be okay. Bess wants to know when and how.

Luckily she meets Walter, who tells her everything will work out eventually. 

And it does. But that'll come later.

The family are staying with their auntie, Auntie Marie she's called, When they are taking the dog out for a walk, he nosedives into a bush, and discovers...the lost crown jewels!

The family are given a large sum of money as a reward for finding them, and with that money, they buy another farm. Walter was right you see. Everything did turn out all right!

I have skimmed through this review, and left out quite a lot of important parts. But the book itself is amazing, and educates us about the important historical figure. I've learnt there is a lot more to Mr. Raleigh than him putting a cloak over a puddle for Queen Elizabeth.

Whats your favourite Micheal Morpugho book?