Rating: 1/5

All I knew beforehand was that a Jewish man copulates with a tax-collector's wife, is castrated by an anti-Semitic mob, rescued by that same tax-collector, and has a "vision of Christ." But this all occurs within the first few pages. If you've read the Bible properly, you'll roll your eyes throughout this novel (if you don't DNF it first), as it's woefully clear the author did not. Words that come to mind in reviewing this book are: ignorant, misguided, disrespectful, blasphemous, pretentious, redundant, and positively delirious. It's redundant in the sense that it could've been half as long without losing anything; the author had the habit of repeating himself (e.g., "Suddenly there came flying towards me with a mouse dangling from its beak an owl, what is called a veiled owl, with a limp mouse dangling from its cryptic heart-shaped face.").
 
So, this random Jewish guy (Pilgermann) claims to have lived on for centuries after his death as "waves and particles" in owl-form... He narrates his story from 1096, when he committed adultery, to his eventual death in 1098. Evidently, he was a physician, though initially he claims not to remember his former occupation. There are frequent interruptions in the narrative, consisting of the main character's rambling musings. The subjects of which range from the dreams of some pope, to critiques of specific artworks, and his own twisted spiritual confusion.

The creep loiters outside a tax collector's home until he leaves, ascends a ladder to the man's wife, Sofia, and immediately considers her genitals and their subsequent adultery as "holy"... (This is also where the author starts using "thou" in the most annoying way conceivable.) Upon departing from the tax-collector's home, he is sniffed out by a sow, and his testes and phallus are removed and fed to her by a gang of racist out-of-town peasants. They stop short of killing him at the tax-collector's behest. This is the point where things take a turn for the hallucinatory; there's simply no other way to view it. Pilgermann sees and speaks with "Jesus," who, firstly, wouldn't have appeared to him (he's far from being devout, even in Judaism), and secondly, wouldn't deign to utter the refuse that spews from this hallucination's mouth. Besides, the year is 1096; Jesus had long since retired from making appearances. Ultimately, this Pilgermann character decides to travel to Jerusalem (from Germany) for no valid reason. On the way, he apparently kills a man (it wasn't too clear) after stumbling upon the tax collector's mutilated body hanging in the woods. He then meets his victim's partner (another "Sophia"). She explains how the two of them had been murdering pilgrims for their body parts and selling them off as "relics."

Chapters 7 and 8 are completely insane and must be read to be believed. Pilgermann encounters a personified "Death" character, who goes about copulating with everyone in sight (including thirty starving peasant children simultaneously; having multiplied himself for the occasion). He witnesses a man executing a bear by hanging it from a tree, all the while calling said bear his "God." He tries intervening, but "Death" prevents him from doing so. They next stop at an inn, only to find there the very peasant who made him a eunuch and the sow that gobbled up his man-parts. "Death" immediately begins raping the pig, and as he climaxes, Pilgermann slits her throat. "Death" then proceeds to rape the peasant, who dies instantly. Back on the road, Pilgermann walks alongside "Death" and all the deceased people (and animals) he's met along the way. Including the sow, who walks upright, her throat dripping with blood. For some perverse reason, the author chose to write this character as "erotic." (Anyone who's sexually aroused by an undead bipedal pig with a cut and bloodied neck has some serious issues, to say the least.) Everyone wants to have sex with the damned pig, even the main character, who feels the ghost of an erection. "Death" rapes her a second time on the road to Jerusalem as they discuss the sordid life stories of her and her owner/lover. Pilgermann experiences all of this with detached indifference.

He never makes it to Jerusalem. Instead, he's captured by pirates and "sold" to a merchant in Antioch. "Sold" is in quotations because the merchant pays double the asking price, the pirate then gives half of the earnings to Pilgermann, who then "buys back his freedom" by handing the money back to the merchant, and finally, the pirate also returns his half to the merchant because "Allah is watching." Pilgermann and his "purchaser" walk together to the merchant's home as "friends." The merchant then inexplicably commissions Pilgermann to design a geometric pattern to fill a plot of land he had purchased for the sole purpose of tiling it with just such a pattern. Pilgermann draws the pattern almost immediately, and the rest of the book deals with this "Hidden Lion," or "Willing Virgin" pattern being treated as something "profound," and later the Frankish crusaders' siege on the city. One of the last things Pilgermann sees is the headless, bloated tax-collector defecating repeatedly (and dramatically) in an already-overflowing bucket in the corner of his tiny cell... It's laughable and sad that anyone can consider this book to be deep and meaningful. It's also strange that some reviewers confuse the tax collector (in Germany) with the merchant (in Antioch); they're completely distinct, and the tax collector is long-dead by the time the merchant enters the picture.

The following is the only good morsel contained within this horrible and bizarre novel:
"All those ancient mouldering kings entombed with their murdered wives, with their servants and soldiers and horses, with their weapons and chariots, their stone bread, their stony dregs of long-departed wine! Imagine the burial of a mouse with weapons, an ant with concubines! The arrogance, the greed of it!"
...

Uses of "loom" (verb): at least 2
Uses of "here and there": 6+
Uses of "[this] here, [that] there": 2+
Uses of "to and fro": 2
Uses of "ponderous": many
Uses of "tawny": lots
-
Characters "blurt": twice
Characters "shrug": twice
Characters "whirl": once
...

Typos/Grammar Crimes:
"The tents and awnings... was snapping in the wind." (were) (p. 168)
-
"Those walls are not be knocked down..." (to?) (p. 168)
-
"... God knows what stocks and stones they offered to." (In this context, it seems that sticks was the intended word, but perhaps not.) (p. 196)
-
"You're got enough food here for a week." (You've) (p. 230)
...

My edition had an illustrated cover by Rowena (of all artists), depicting what appears to be a left-handed "Death" character riding his horse out of the central tower of the "Hidden Lion" pattern in a wisp of smoke with mountains in the background. An owl flies behind, in addition to the dead sow (her throat dripping blood) and a nude woman (presumably "Sophia"). There are 240 pages, but the story ends on p. 236.
...

2/10