Rating: 3/5

This is a historically significant book that began as a series of articles in the New Yorker. It caused a major furore in India when first published, even prompting a chaotic shouting match in parliament, where there were calls to ban it for defaming the "father of the nation". Were they justified? I had to find out.

What I found is a book of big virtues and big flaws. It is undeniably a brilliant piece of writing. Mehta was a master of the "New Yorker profile" style: you visit someone in their milieu, describe it vividly, chat with them intimately for hours, distil the chat into a few unguarded and revealing quotations, and arrange everything into a sardonic, wryly amusing portrait. Here some major Gandhians get the New Yorker treatment. 

They make a rather tragicomic group, it has to be said. The India of the early 1970s, under Indira Gandhi (no relation), memorialised the Mahatma obsessively while trashing his principles and values. Gandhi would have wanted his followers out in the streets protesting, not curating Gandhi museums. In a sequence of portraits rich with pathos and sometimes quite heartrending, Mehta captures the inaction and weakness of will of the self-styled custodians of Gandhi's legacy. This is juxtaposed with an account of Gandhi's own restless action and strength of will, to powerful effect.

However, the critique relies on extreme selectivity. JP Narayan, JB Kripalani and Morarji Desai were anything but inactive. They don't remotely fit Mehta's narrative, so they are either omitted entirely or mentioned only briefly. Mehta's thesis fits some prominent members of Gandhi's circle, but as a broader generalization it doesn't stand up to scrutiny.

And the book is at its most irritating when trying to stir up scandal. Mehta guarantees attention by making some huge claims about Gandhi's private behaviour. Mehta's Gandhi struggles to respect the boundaries of women. Indeed, he takes advantage of the power he holds over them. These are shocking claims but no solid evidence is provided to back them up. Mehta's contemporary critics were probably right to be angry about this. We shouldn't ban this kind of journalism, but we should expect better.