Rating: 3/5

On the back cover and the front one and even in the introduction inside, it has been emphasized that physicists and psychologists see in these tales the workings of mind and even complex processes. As much as it sounds fascinating, I don't think perceiving it in that fashion would help us in any way in utilizing the full potential of these tales. Whatever those physicists discover is their on unconscious revealation. I doubt that in a time when people were far more simple, someone would attempt to hide such elaborate and complex phenomena in these tales. That is how every intellectual see things like these. Unless it is complex, full of metaphors and god knows what, it cannot be meaning. So I would urge you to ignore all of that and SEE for yourself what it does to you. 

And that's exactly what I did. These tales provoke a reaction from you. They either make you laugh or they would make you go like, "Wait, wh-" and in either of these cases it makes you a little less serious and even makes you wonder that characters like Mulla Nasruddin were so free internally. Free from everything that is considered good in the society for example morals. It doesn't teach me but it plants the seed of unseriouness and playfulness within you. 

These tales are not the study of some complex phenomena but rather the study of a being like Nasruddin. Whether he existed or not is not an important question. What is he able to offer within us? Thats, I think is the important question. You almost have to go with a no-mind approach with this book. Things like this is designed in such a fashion that if you use only one faculty of yours, that is, in many cases our intellect, we wouldn't find Nasruddin, we will find our own unconscious expressions. 

If you have consumed Osho's discourses, you will realize these two are very similar. You will find Nasruddin In osho and Osho in Nasruddin. The arguments he makes, the way he lives, the way he snatches victory from situations which would otherwise traumatize a normal human being, all of this can done only if one is a fool. A fool is free and not bounded by morals or rationality. A rational man will not be able to argument with Nasruddin. And as you face Mulla Nasruddin, he will disrupt everything that is inside of you in a weird fashion. And while doing this, it remains to be absolutely unserious. 

Whenever religion gets too serious, tricksters like Nasruddin Or Osho are born, to add humor. To add laughter for in laughter lies a great freedom. Imagine being so free that you can be a fool in front of everyone. 

If Buddha had nothingness then Nasruddin had Humour.