Rating: 5/5

The Flight of the Falcon is an all but forgotten masterpiece, a late novel written in 1965 by Daphne du Maurier. Most critics never seem to have attempted to get beyond its superficial mystery story. The New Yorker called it “extraordinarily dull”, and it was not even mentioned in her obituary in “The Times”. Yet it is quite an extraordinary piece of writing, not my personal favourite, but her most ambitious and perhaps her greatest novel, comparable with one by Iris Murdoch. I come away feeling that I have only explored the surface of this deep, dark novel.

So why has it been so neglected? I suspect the answer is simple. It is not what her audience expected, or wanted. Stories redolent with intrigue and romance such as “Jamaica Inn” and “Frenchman’s Creek”, tended to attract a huge audience, of readers who wanted more of the same. But The Flight of the Falcon is a novel replete with layers of meaning, with religious and mythic significance. It is an allegory, exploring concepts of good and evil, predestination, sacrifice, and the essence of the human spirit, set against a backdrop of family secrets, murder, rape and incest, and brooding political unrest. In part it is a brutal and twisted tale of malevolence: 

“When accusation were made against him by the outraged citizens of Ruffano, Duke Claudio retaliated by declaring that he had been divinely appointed to mete out to his subjects the punishment they deserved. The proud would be stripped, the haughty violated, the slandered silenced, the viper die in his venom. The scales of heavenly justice would thus be balanced.”

Powerful stuff from a writer who was commonly thought to write “romantic fiction” — a view which Daphne du Maurier herself deplored. With The Flight of the Falcon she told with great conviction, how this excerpt from an imaginary ancient German text, “Lives of the Dukes of Ruffano” had resonance through the ages, serving as a template for current events.

In “The Rebecca Notebook: and Other Memories”, Daphne du Maurier stated:
 
“All childhood memories are visual. A face, a figure, somebody smiling or frowning, and the image stays forever. A moment in time, held captive”

This also informs every step of The Flight of the Falcon.
 
The novel hinges on two Renaissance paintings, which have haunted the narrator, Armino Donati, all his life. Partly this is due to his own imagination, and partly due to the forceful personality of his elder brother, Aldo. The two works of art, the “Raising of Lazarus” and the “Temptation of Christ”, an altarpiece in the San Cipriano chapel, become metaphors for the events which follow.

Yet the novel starts out simply, with a jokey exchange between two ordinary men following their daily routine jobs. Armino Fabbio, is a jaded and cynical courier, a tour guide for “Sunshine Tours”. At almost 32 he barely tolerates his monotonous job, ferrying the “beef and barbarians” (his words for English and American tourists respectively) who come to tour Italy, visiting Genoa, Rome and Milan. He remains polite at all times, though it is clear that he despises those to whom he shows respect. Armino feels unfulfilled, trapped in a worthless daily grind. 

At the beginning of the story, staying with his party at the “Hotel Splendido” he has a chance encounter with a poor old peasant woman, very ill and humped in the doorway of the church of San Capriano. She appears to be seeking sanctuary. He has a sudden flash of déjà vu:

“that bowed posture, the ample drapery spread, the arms folded, the head buried under the weight of shawls”

Something about her position and attitude reminds him of his childhood home, the ducal palace in Ruffano. He is provoked into action, planning to liberate himself from his self-imposed routine. Filled with memories, Armino dreams all night of his childhood home — and most of all of his elder brother, Aldo.

Aldo used to force Armino, or “Beo” as he was then known, to join in a role-playing game, acting out the story of Lazarus. He brought the painting vividly and horrifying to life in the young boy’s mind, swaddling Beo in his father’s dirty night-shirt from the laundry basket and bundling him into the linen closet, which represented Lazarus’s tomb-like cave. Beo would then have to wait for Aldo’s voice, as he represented Christ, beckoning him out: 

“The handle of the closet turned. The door softly opened. Aldo cried, “Lazarus, come forth!”
So great was my dread, so disciplined to his commands my spirit, that I dared not disobey. I came forth, and the horror was that I did not know whether I should meet with the Christ or with the Devil, for according to Aldo’s ingenious theory the two were one, and also, in some manner which he never explained, interchangeable.” *

Thus Aldo used manipulation and mental torture on his young brother, who feared and idolised him in equal measure. He also used to terrify little Beo with stories about “the Falcon”:

“His arms were wings, he had become a bird. He soared over the rooftops and the city that was his, and the people stared up at him in wonder.”

Yet Beo knew — his father, Superintendent Donati, had told him — that the cruel Duke had thrown himself from the highest tower and been killed.

However little Beo was no more. Beo was no longer “Il Beato, the blessed one”, and Mrs Donati had married a kindly American, and become Mrs Fabbio. Everyone of significance in his life was long gone now. Even little Beo had faded away, becoming subsumed into Mr Armino Fabbio. But the memories remained, as potent as ever.

Armino’s brother Aldo became a pilot, but was shot down in flames and killed in 1943, during World War II. Armino was carted around several countries by his mother, whom he says had friendships with various gentlemen. She initially left Ruffano as the mistress of a Nazi Commandant, and followed this by a spell living with an American Brigadier in Frankfurt, and finally a kindly bank manager in Turin, Enrico Fabbio, who gave Armino his name. He categorises his mother dismissively as a “whore”.

The woman in the church doorway preys on his mind, and he goes back to give her some money. She turns to thank him, and Armino is mortified to see that she looks like Marta, his childhood nurse. In panic he flees, only to find that his problems are compounded the next day when he learns that she has been murdered. Is this his responsibility? And how did she ever come to be in this position, a sad alcoholic, with no place to lay her head? He determines to return to his childhood home, to try to discover what had happened. By the end of chapter two, we are enmeshed in this story of intrigue, which rapidly begins to escalate. Skeletons begin to emerge from the past.

Armino arranges events so that he can return to Ruffano anonymously, claiming to be resident in Turin. There he finds the town has changed. The small university of his childhood has expanded, and the university is now the focus of the city. Ruffano is full of students zooming round on their Vespa motor scooters. These students are deeply divided. The Commerce and Economics department is set against the Arts department, and in a warped fashion, violence between the opposing factions seems to be positively encouraged by some senior members of the University. Installed in Armino’s former home is the Rector of the University, Signor Butali, and his wife. The Rector is the one person who might have been able to stay the aggression, but he is away from home, and ill. Armino is staying in temporary accommodation, and through a chance new acquaintance, Carla Raspa, he is given a temporary position in the University library.

An annual festival is fast approaching, when over a day, an historical event will be renacted by the students. For the past three years this has been orchestrated by the Director of the Arts Council, a much-respected and charismatic man. He seems to have chosen a strange theme for the pageant: “The Flight of the Falcon”, about the insane Duke Claudio, who, believing himself a deity, judged and punished the sins of the people of Ruffano. Despite the two stories Beo had been told, the adult Armino learns the historical facts about Duke Claudio, through his access to the original documents. He is filled with foreboding as he notes the similarity between the events of the early fifteenth century, and what may happen in Ruffano. Duke Claudio Malebranche, “the Falcon”, was trampled to death in a mad running of the horses through the walled city. That was his “flight”, and was to form the spectacle of the pageant.
 
Armino meets many people he recognises from his past, as well as encountering new ones, and is often shocked by the toll life has taken on those he knew as a child. Nobody recognises “little Beo” in Mr Fabbio, athough he is still very small in stature, only 5'5".
 
To his great shock, Armino learns that the Director of the Arts is none other than his brother Aldo, who in turn had believed for all his adult life that Armino and their mother had been killed. Not only is Aldo still alive, but he is just as manipulative as Armino remembers him to be. Aldo grotesquely seem to have taken on the persona of “the Falcon”, Duke Claudio Malebrache, and Armino suspects his sanity, yet is still in thrall to him. 

But Armino knows full well that he is often unable to tell where his imagination ends and the real world begins, and begins to suspect his own memories. This could not be his long-lost brother Aldo. Aldo was killed in a plane crash during the war, many years previously. It must have been his imagination, he muses:

“he whom I had just seen was indeed a living person, but wrongly identified with a man long dead. This was hallucination. This was what had happened to the disciples when they looked, as they thought, upon their Lord, the risen Christ.”

The latest brain research seems to indicate that when we remember something, we actually recreate the experience anew in the brain. This is why sometimes we have “false memories”, when we may be conflating different experiences we have had, thereby creating a new “memory”. The psychologist James Hillman suggests these images at first seem to be:

“hallucinations (things seen); then one recognises them as acts of subjective imagining; but then, third, comes the awareness that images are independent of subjectivity and even of the imagination itself as a mental activity.”

In a similar way, Daphne du Maurier explores the significance and origin of images and the imagination all through this novel. James Hillman said that any images relating to demons or devils seem to possess:

“prior knowledge (coded information) and an instinctive direction for a destiny, as if prophetic, prognostic.”

And in the novel, Armino himself questions whether this is:

“chance or predestination? … the scientists could not tell us. Nor could the psychologists, or the priests.”

As we learn more and more, we learn the mysterious workings of a secret society, complete with costumes and macabre rituals. There are twelve disciples, all convinced that through their strange twisted moral code they are administering justice, and purging their victims of their sins. These twelve also function as “Lost Boys”, with an archetypal Peter Pan at their helm. Every one of them has been rescued from horror and strife in World War II, and naturally each one is completely devoted and loyal to their leader as a result. Daphne du Maurier’s cousins, interestingly, were the Llewelyn Davies boys, who provided the inspiration for J.M. Barrie’s play “Peter Pan; or The Boy Who Wouldn’t Grow Up”.

Emotions are deliberately whipped up through a series of brutal and terrifying episodes. Armino is offered a part in the pageant, but he becomes increasingly concerned that it will result in bloodshed. It is over five hundred years since the sinister Duke Claudio, “The Falcon”, lived his sadistic life of debauchery, preying on the town people of Ruffano. Yet one character is determined to recreate some of this history, and as the novel proceeds with violent death and symbolic acts, the parallels between the present day and Duke Claudio’s cruel regime become more manifest. 

The novel is suffused with a great sense of menace and foreboding. Although events are shrouded in mystery, because of the skilful way the story is told, it is possible to deduce certain facts. Why are there two entries in the same name in the register of births, just a few days apart? Why was the humped figure so familiar? Was it the semblance to a familiar religious statue? We even have a suspicion of a big revelation which comes at the tail end of the story  that Marta was in fact Aldo’s birth mother. Yet this does not in any way impair the enjoyment for the reader. If anything, it increases the tension and sense of impending doom. The lines between good and evil are increasingly blurred. Identities are unclear, suspicion reigns supreme. There is scandal, intrigue and deep shame. Malice masquerades, as in the past, as divine justice. The atmosphere is gothic and heady.

It is not only Armino who is fearful of riots and a catastrophic outcome. We are too. Armino, the only one with full knowledge of all the facts, seems powerless to stop it. The last scene where  Armino and Aldo climb the high tower overlooking the city to alight on its narrow ledge, and a now-winged Aldo leaps to his death is the only possible ending. It is fantastic and weird (in their proper senses). It is both devastating and heart-wrenchingly inevitable.

Ruffano is an actual place: a town in Southeast Italy. There is a church built in the 16th century, above an early cave church from the 12th century. A castle dating from 1626, “Castello Brancaccio”, overlooks the town. There is a Crucifix Crypt and a grotto “Grotta della Trinità” in use since Neolithic times, although by the 11th century it became a religious place, with remains of Byzantine frescoes.

There is a Greek word, “ekphrasis”, meaning to describe a work of art, either real or imagined, as a rhetorical exercise, exploring and explaining graphic works of art. This novel is a modern example of this ancient device. It is a kind of extended ekphrasis of the two Renaissance paintings, “Raising of Lazarus” and the “Temptation of Christ”. Other novels have also used this device. In Oscar Wilde’s “The Picture of Dorian Gray” the beautiful young man Dorian Gray, is described as having “the perfection of the spirit that is Greek”. Yet as he becomes more and more debauched, his hideous and demonised self becomes manifest as the painting, and also in the title of the book itself.
 
Just as Dorian is haunted by his portrait, Armino Fabbio is also haunted by two graphic images: the paintings which have been overwhelmingly fixed in his imagination by the forceful personality of his elder brother Aldo. The two paintings are fictional, but probably based on Renaissance artwork found in the Ducal Palace at Urbino:

Daphne du Maurer was inspired by both this city and Ruffano. Her description of “Raising of Lazarus” could give anybody nightmares, never mind an impressionable boy with a manipulative and cruel brother.* The startling duality, and paradox is even clearer in the second painting, the “Temptation of Christ”, which showed showed Christ standing on the Temple pinnacle.* Later on Armino muses further on this painting:

“The tempter, Satan, was the same Christ in profile, suggesting, not a lack of models, but a rash attempt at truth. The portrait might have lost its power to terrify, but not to cause unease. I wondered that it had survived five centuries, to confound the vandals and to mock the Church. Today the tourist, with his eye upon his watch, the message missed, would pass it by unquestioning.”

Daphne du Maurier’s novels are palimpsests: they often contain meanings invisible to a casual reading. Her novels can be read as straightforward entertaining mysteries, but looking under the surface usually reveals much deeper significances. In The Flight of the Falcon, there are many references, images and hints of other myths and legends, as well as events from history. The story of Icarus, who flew too close to the sun is an obvious parallel and there are allusions to Hermes, an Olympian god, moving freely between mortals and the divine. He is portrayed as quick and cunning, and sometimes as a trickster. There is the Madonna, birth and divine rebirth, a recurring theme of womb-like caves and enclaves.
 
A decade earlier, Daphne du Maurier studied works by Carl Jung, about opposites in human nature: good and evil, lightness and darkness, and masculinity and femininity. Jung explored the dilemma of Christ and the Antichrist, citing the Gnostics, who:

“in contrast to the dismissive polarising of good and evil in the developing Christian Church, the Gnostics proclaimed that God includes the opposites, both darkness and light – that God is accountable for all of creation.”

Some symbols or allegories are used both to refer to Christ and also to the Devil. “Lucifer, the Morning Star”, means Christ as well as the Devil. There does not seem to be much about the Devil in the Old Testament. Some Judaeo Christians have even regarded Satan as Christ’s elder brother. In The Flight of the Falcon we have not one but two parallel sets of brothers - the twentieth century Aldo and Armino Donati and the sixteenth century Dukes, Claudio and Carlo. In both of these cases, it is the elder brother who holds the power over the younger,  and also has charisma over the imaginations of the people. In both cases, it is his younger brother who eventually inherits his power and political office. 

In The Flight of the Falcon, interestingly, Daphne du Maurier also seems to combine Christ with the Devil, or the principle of good with the principle of evil. They are presented as two halves of the same coin. She also references the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche:

“‘Your German Commandant should have quoted Nietzsche to you … He who no longer finds what is great in God will find it nowhere; he must either deny it or create it’”

The character is quoting Nietzsche, who said that for the Ancient Greeks and Romans, “all things, whether good or bad, are deified”.

Daphne du Maurier herself viewed Greek mythology as heavily influencial. In her essay “Romantic Love”, she says:

“These stories, savage, brutal, utterly amoral, are the foundation of our literary culture. They spread from Greece to Rome and so throughout Europe … the birth of a heavenly son to a virgin has a curious similarity to the Greek myth preceding it.” 

The good Christ then, could be shown to have his antecedent in an amoral mythology. Or perhaps everything comes back to predestination. The ending is deliberately ambiguous, leaving us with questions. Why did Aldo not pull his ripcord? Was he overcome by his own insanity? Or did he have a vision, an insight of some unknown plane of existence? Was he freeing himself from his earthly bonds?  Daphne du Maurier never wants to leave her readers entirely sure of the answer. 

As Jung said:

“Perhaps – who knows? – these eternal images are what men mean by fate.”