Rating: 5/5

I really wasn't sure what to expect but DAMN!
Yes, I realize I should have listened to all of you who for years have been telling me to get off my duff and read this. You guys were right and I will forever bow to the knowledge of my betters.
Until the next time when I ignore your good advice b/c I'm an asshole.

 

I'm not a Swamp Thing expert (obviously) and I certainly didn't know anything about what had been going on with this character prior to Moore's incarnation.
Apparently, he'd been shot up by someone or something like that. Yes? 
He was all half-dead when this opened and there were some vague references to some kind of a big battle(ish) thing that had taken place. Abby and her husband whatshisname were digging around in the swamp looking for Alec and talking about it cryptically.

And that might be the "worse" thing about this. You're sort of dropped into the middle of the story with Swamp Thing (Alec Holland) remembering past things, Abby running around weeping over her seemingly dead friend, and her husband just acting like a creep. 
There's really no backstory for the reader regarding any of that.

The big takeaway is that Swamp Thing finds out that he isn't Alec Holland covered in moss, but that he's a sentient plant creature who was created when he absorbed the memories of Alec Holland at his death.
WHAT?! That's kinda awesome. And I'm sure it was even more awesome if you were reading it as it came out in single-issue form in the 80s.
And let's not forget the Floronic Man. Or the freaky demon monkey that Jason Blood comes to town for.
These were excellent storylines with creepy, well-thought-out villains.

This is a horror comic done so well you almost miss that it's a horror comic. I'm probably not saying that right, but what I mean is that nothing here feels gratuitous. It's that the chills sneak up on you and just kind of linger riiiiight under the surface of the whole story.

 

Alan Moore is kinda hit or miss with me, but this was 100% a hit. 
Damn good stuff.
Highly Recommended.