Rating: 3/5

With any other hero, I might consider this the best of Heyer. As it was, I was torn between hating Lord Worth and being swept up in the story.
Judith Taverner and her younger, sillier brother Peregrine have been recently orphaned, and with spirited curiosity they decide to seek out their new guardian, the high-handed Lord Worth. They are quite surprised to learn he is a young, handsome man who is friends with the Crown Prince and the cream of society. With his help, the Taverners are rapidly enfolded into the bosom of high society. But even as they enjoy great social success, worryingly lethal "accidents" keep happening around Perigrine...and Lord Worth seems to be involved.
Judith and Beau Brummel are great characters, and their friendship was the highlight of this novel. I was enthralled by their attempts to both curry favor with, and rebel against, the society to which they are born. Judith has an especially refreshing take on high society manners: she understands which rules she has to follow to me a social success, but refuses to take them seriously. Unfortunately, this is not the focus of Regency Buck; Judith's contentious relationship with her infuriating guardian is. 

Speaking of which...SPOILERS AHEAD.
The Taverners meet Lord Worth when he, speeding along the narrow road at a tremendous pace, almost smashes into their little curricle. He refuses to apologize or get down to see if they're ok. When he runs into Peregrine later, he insults him again. Then Lord Worth sees Judith by the side of the road (she was taking a stone from her shoe) and picks her up, puts her into his carriage, and forcibly kisses her. The whole time she protests loudly and without ambiguity. And of course, he just laughs at her. Not realizing his identity, she warns him that her guardian, Lord Worth, will protect her, and he laughs at her again. From then on, whenever they meet, he needles her about the kiss. When they meet again, he reveals his true identity, installs the Taverners into a house of HIS choosing, and refuses to let them have their own aunt stay as chaperone--his relative will be chaperone, instead. Incidents like this continue throughout the book. Judith is a smart, fashionable woman with good instincts, and Lord Worth spends the entire novel manipulating events and people to make her do what he wants. 
Two terrible instances spring to mind. The Crown Prince is quite taken with Judith, and at one point in the novel, forces her to be in an isolated and closed room with him. Her chaperone (who Worth chose for her, against her objections) is off playing cards. When the prince tries to take advantage of her (in a scene novel to Heyer in its disturbing realism), Judith is so overcome that she faints for the first time in her life. She is awakened by Worth, who BERATES HER for embarrassing the prince. Then he lambasts her for being so foolish as to be in a room alone with him. When she tries to explain that she couldn't get away, he brushes off her objections. 
The second instance is less of a rape-apologia and more of pure insensitivity. As part of his plan to expose Peregrine's would-be-assassin, Worth drugs Peregrine and stuffs him on a yacht to keep him out of the way. After he's been missing for a few days, Judith begins to fear for his life. She goes to Worth repeatedly, literally begging him to look for Peregrine, and he dismisses her fears as overreactions. (Despite the fact that someone really is trying to kill Peregrine, and Judith herself has prevented at least one of the attempts.) Then, the real villain of the story shows up, and convinces Judith that he knows where Peregrine is being kept. Judith goes along for awhile, but quickly realizes that it's a trap, designed to make it look like she has eloped with the villain. Just as the scene reaches a fever pitch of ugly rape-y connotations, Lord Worth steps out of the shadows and punches the villain. Then he and the villain take turns explaining the villain's dastardly plans. There is no conceivable reason that Worth couldn't have clued Judith in to his suspicions, or told her that Peregrine was safe. Due to his high-handed douchebaggery, the "love of his life" spent days thinking that her beloved younger brother was dead, then thought she was going to be raped. WOW how ROMANTIC. Given how intelligent and level-headed Judith is throughout the book, I assumed Worth would eventually have a change of heart or realization that he has misjudged her and treated her badly. But no, he never suffers even a moment of doubt. 

To me, this book works very well as a close look at upper-class Regency life, and very badly as a romance.