Rating: 3/5

I went looking for a trainwreck and I found one! Our heroine has OW tendencies at the beginning of the story. She is beautiful, confident, wilful and selfish. The only child of a rich widower, she is 20 and has been in the party circuit for sometime. She is a virgin, only because she mows over all the weak men in her vicinity before anything can happen.
She sees the hero, a handsome self-made man, and decides she wants him. He gives her “the cut direct” the first time they meet and subsequent times. 

The hero is a black hole of animosity – and the heroine keeps getting pulled into his gravitational field whenever they see each other at parties – she won’t let up. Eventually the hero starts talking to her – and he’s also golfing a lot with the h’s dad. After he rescues her from a rapey guy at a party and insulting her, the heroine has decided she’s done with chasing him. And that’s when he approaches her father to ask her out. The heroine doesn’t want to go, but the h’s father thinks the H is better company for her to keep than all the rapey guys she’s been hanging around with. (He and the H walk in on the h’s date – yet another guy - kissing and groping her) 

They have a lovely time on their date. Hero keeps running off to Germany, so their courtship is a slow burn. Heroine waits around for him to call, and when she finds out he’s back in London without calling her – she goes out to a party with one of her rapey guy friends. The hero hunts her down (she’s pretty drunk and hanging all over yet another guy) and takes her to his apartment and rapes her because she had it coming after all of her teasing. He is shocked she was a virgin. Heroine is angry and hurt and hates him and questions herself about her conduct – although she never thinks she deserved it. **That whole scene and aftermath is brutal - don't read if triggering. **

The hero gives her a few days and then he shows up at the h’s country home. He is sorry for hurting her and wants to make it up. Heroine forgives him and they go to bed together (in the heroine’s childhood bedroom). Hero proposes. Heroine accepts. They will marry in a month. Her father is happy and reluctantly allows the heroine to give the H her shares in his company on their wedding day. 

So far I haven’t said much about the H. He is a blow hot, blow cold kind of guy. He’s obviously attracted to the h, but he shows her no affection except for asking if she is all right at different times and reluctantly complimenting her on her appearance. Something is up with him and that was part of the fun in reading this.

**Don't read the spoiler if you think you want to read this story. I was unspoiled and enjoyed the surprise. **

They marry and don’t have sex on their wedding night or any other night. The heroine moves into his apartment and tries everything to understand why the hero is so cold to her. The hero also starts blocking everything the h’s father does at board meetings. 

Finally, five weeks in to the marriage from the hell, the hero reveals his motivation for marrying her. Revenge. 

For once, this revenge makes sense. The hero was most certainly wronged as a young boy of ten and the heroine can see that and forgives him right away. Her heart breaking, knowing she is pregnant, she agrees to a divorce without telling him about the baby. If what the hero said is true, there is no way they can make a go of their marriage. The hero is taken aback that she doesn’t plead and argue with him. He even says that since she was his wife, he will provide for her financially. (After ruining her father’s business). It’s all very curious.

The heroine thinks so, too. She goes back to the country house to lick her wounds. Eventually she tells her father the story and finds out that the hero had the story wrong. He should have been angry at his own father and not the heroine’s. There is even concrete proof that  his mother didn’t abandon him to be the h’s father’s mistress in the form of returned letters and packages with his aunt’s address. 

The heroine decides she has to take the proof to the H in his country house in Yorkshire. She has an accident on the way and begs her rescuers to save the box of proof before she passes out.

Her father is at the hospital when she wakes up a few days later. Her baby is okay. He tells her that hero knows the truth now and is a changed man. All his hate is gone and he has no reason to live since revenge has been his motivation for twenty years. Heroine agrees to see him. He grovels and explains that at first he was cold because his revenge plans didn’t include her. But then the more he saw her the more he was attracted. By the time he had fallen in love with her and proposed, he still couldn’t let go of his revenge. He was very confused, which is why he stayed away from her during their short marriage. Heroine forgives him and declares her love and tells him about the baby. HEA 

This is one intense story and if the heroine’s OW-like behaviour doesn’t put half the readers off, the hero’s rape and coldness will surely sink the other forty per cent. The ten per cent of us who love a train wreck will keep reading to find out just what is making this guy tick. His backstory and how it was entwined with the h’s life and her country house is complicated but it did make me understand where his rage was coming from and why he desperately needed the heroine’s love and understanding once the truth came out. (He could also use some therapy, imo). CM did a masterful job of sprinkling clues about the hero’s true motivation. I was surprised when he told the heroine his backstory, but it all made sense once it was out. 

Is this a romance and do I believe in their love? Um. Not really? Amanda Browning managed to pull off a similar kind of revenge story in Savage Destiny, but CM needed more page time to show the H/h together and happy for me to believe the hero was a changed man. The heroine did change and grow in this story. I don’t think she became a doormat at all – she was desperately trying to make lemonade out the lemons the hero kept handing her. She had channeled her OW powers into something more productive and kind.