Rating: 5/5

This is the first yoga book that I used as a teenager way back when, and still my favorite. I had forgotten about it until recently when I wanted to do some yoga to reduce back and neck pain. Although I might never work up to some of the more rigorous asanas again, this book is a useful guide regardless of what shape I find myself in. 

Swami Satchidananda developed Integral Yoga himself, brought it to the US in the 1960s, and taught it extensively in New York, Virginia, and California, among other places. He describes it as a "combination of specific methods designed to develop every aspect of the individual: physical, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual." He wrote this book at the insistence of his students, so that they could use it as a study manual for his classes.

Each of a wide variety of asanas (poses) is presented, each with photo/s of Swamiji demonstrating proper technique. He describes each technique, its benefits, precautions to ensure comfort, special notes, and the amount of time needed to perform the asana. This last illustrates how well Sachidananda understood Westerners and their priorities. He also states that expecting his students to rid themselves of harmful habits before beginning Yoga is like "a doctor asking his patients to cure themselves of their ailments before receiving his treatment." So readers can begin practice regardless of their starting place. 

In addition to the asanas, Sachiananda gives hints for aged, beginning, women, and children practitioners, as well as specifics about how to practice (dress, diet, breathing, relaxation, etc.). Eye exercises, meditative poses, mudras (hand placement for quieting the mind) and a wide variety of pranayama (cleansing breathing) practices are covered. More esoteric topics such as chanting and yogic cleansing practices are also covered, but more briefly.

The main difference between this and other yoga references is the clear photos of Swamiji illustrating each technique along with a complete description. Most other references provide just one or the other. Some of the images of the 57-year old full-bearded yogi in his diamond-patterned skivvies in complicated asanas seem anatomically impossible, even with photographic evidence. Most asanas seem more feasible, and remind those of us fortunate enough to have made his acquaintance in his yoga classes, where he sometimes removed his robes to reveal leopard-patterned bikini briefs, ever aware of American cultural whimsy. In his late 60s then, he still looked (and was) remarkably fit.

To begin practice, follow Swamiji’s asana suggestions for beginning, intermediate, or advanced students. Listen to your body and proceed with such asanas as are comfortable, keeping in mind that even a little regular practice will improve your flexibility and balance as well as your ability to concentrate and relax.