Rating: 5/5

The Battle of Britain remains the most compelling story of warfare. it was one of the decisive battles of the Second World War. It was the first significant defeat of Nazi Germany.

I read the whole book carefully. The most telling passage was on page 338: "Inevitably the war grew larger and larger. Before it ended, the Luftwaffe was to lose, in one day's combat, the same number of planes that it lost in the whole summer of 1940." The German high command did not take the Battle of Britain seriously, for them it was a case of heads we win, tails it doesn't matter. They were wrong. Five years later Germany was pounded into submission, its armies destroyed, its cities in ruins. Hermann Goring was the worst. From page 341 "Galland described the log cabin made of huge tree trunks, with a thatched roof jutting far over the eaves. Goring came out of the house to meet me, wearing a green suede hunting jacket over a silk blouse with long, puffed sleeves, high hunting boots, and in his belt a hunting knife in the shape of an old Germanic sword. That night no mention was made either of the war in general or the Battle of Britain in particular." For the man in charge, Goring just wasn't that interested. The Third Reich seemed to raise up petty and vindictive men such as Erhard Milch who persecuted his mentor Professor Hugo Junkers. The German high command collectively bear responsibility for the German defeat. In agreeing to the Battle in the first place, for failing to take it seriously and ordering that the development of the jet engine be stopped. It was Milch who ordered that the production of the Messerschmitt 109 proceed at full speed even thought the Focke-Wulf FW 190 was superior.

In contrast the British commanders did take their job seriously. Notably Hugh Dowding and Keith Park. Both had a vision for defending Britain and did so at the cost of their careers. Astonishingly they were both sacked at the conclusion of the Battle of Britain.

A personal note: when I first started at Agriculture Canada the Director of the Land Division Pete Clarke made a singularly brilliant decision to acquire ESRI's Arc/Info software. The software was the basis of my career for the next 20 years and was widely adopted throughout the Department. Astonishingly like Dowding and Park, Pete Clarke was dismissed from his post once the software was acquired.