Rating: 2/5

This review is of “Texas Storm”, book #1 in the “Texas” loosely based series by Deana James.

In Texas, circa 1831, a man comes upon a dilapidated hacienda. The estate, known as El Rincon, now belongs, according to white law, to Reiver MacPherson, the hero of the book, who received the land as a reward from Sam Houston for bravery in the fight between the U.S. and Mexico over Texas. Reiver soon discovers that he’s not alone in the house; also there is Mercedes-Maria Anonia Feliciana Carvajal y Rey, hereafter known as Mercedes, the heroine of the book. Mercedes’ family owned the estate, but now all her male relatives are dead, leaving the land open for claim.

At first, Reiver and Mercedes argue over ownership, but soon begin working together to acquire horses for the ranch. They soon realize they have an enemy, the Catholic Church, which wants the land and will resort to any means necessary to get it, including threats of violence.

Mercedes and Reiver soon marry, and for a while, they are happy, including Mercedes discovering she is pregnant. Which of course means things will happen to threaten that happiness. These threats include: a former vaquero/thief returning to try to get back to the hacienda, and an attack on the ranch by Comanche Indians, who kidnap Mercedes. While in the Comanche camp, Mercedes is emotionally and physically abused. She makes a friend, however, in an outcast Comanche boy, Ten Bears. 

Later, while the tribe is on a buffalo hunt, Mercedes tries to escape, Masitawtawp, the Indian who kidnapped her, tries to kill her; he in turn is killed by Reiver, who just happens to come by at that time. In the end, Mercedes gives birth to a daughter, adopts Ten Bears, and she and Reiver have their Happily Ever After. 

Upside: For the first time in her books, Ms. James attempts to deliver an emotionally rich book with her characters feeling human emotions and trying to reach her readers. And for the most part, she succeeds. 

Downside: Having said that, Ms. James still falls short of making me care about her characters. One test I have for this: When I put a book down, do I think about the characters? If I don’t, then the author failed in making me care. Ms. James failed the test again in “Texas Storm”. I also didn’t like the fact that every time Mercedes got into trouble, she had to rely on Reiver to save her; that’s one of my major pet peeves with any author. 

Sex: Ms. James tries to create heat with her love scenes, and she creates a little spark, but nothing to ignite a blaze. The love scenes are mildly graphic.

Violence: Scenes of gunplay and assault and battery. None of the violence is graphic. 

Bottom Line: “Texas Storm” is FAR better than Ms. James’ “Love” series, but it still isn’t a good book.