Rating: 4/5

Primarily remembered as the author of The Sand Pebbles, McKenna's writing career lasted only ten years, and he had just attained mainstream success when he died at fifty-one.

He started out writing fantastic fiction, and never wholly abandoned the genre. "Casey Agonistes" was his first published story. 

I first encountered "Casey" many years ago in a Judith Merrill anthology. It moved me to tears. His first published story? Unbelievable.

Well, I'm now a more hardboiled character than I was in my 'teens, and it still strikes me as quite powerful. Today, however, I can also appreciate the finesse with which he makes the story's almost absurd premise work. I don't like giving away a plot, so I will just say that it's about a group of men in dire circumstances refashioning reality in order to make it bearable. The boundary between real and unreal blurs into non-existence.

The other stories in this collection are, for the most part, less stunning, but they're all remarkably inventive, and most share an appealing sweetness and gentleness which must have been core aspects of the author's personality.

In the novelette "Fiddler's Green" McKenna returns to the same premise which underlies "Casey", but develops it so extravagantly, and with such an abundance of clever ideas and outlandish imagery, that you almost suspect him of showing off. It's a complex tour-de-force which deserves to be much better known.

"Hunter, Come Home", with it's exploration of the conflict between machismo and sensitivity, probably emerged from McKenna's long years of service in the Navy, which he joined as a means of escaping the Depression. It's not hard to imagine McKenna himself as the main character, torn between the aggression and brutishness of his peers and his own tentative, carefully hidden love of beauty and delicacy of feeling. He does a nice job of projecting all this into a science fiction context, although some of the scientific exposition is awkwardly introduced.

"Mine Own Ways" takes "Hunter" and turns it on its head. Here the masculine rites of passage are, if anything, glorified, although the narrative is so compressed that I'm left uncertain of the author's intent. This is the only story in the book I would describe as a misfire; even so, it's lively and intriguing.

"The Secret Place" won McKenna a posthumous Nebula award. The location and nature of the titular secret place, when finally made clear, is breathtakingly unexpected, but somehow I don't feel McKenna successfully builds up to his big revelation. It's definitely an impressive story, but not as powerful as it should have been.

Altogether, I get the impression that McKenna was potentially a major fantasist, cruelly cut off just as he was fully mastering his craft. Despite a certain unevenness, this collection is well worth tracking down. I've read that the recent reprint edition has major textual flaws, but copies of the 1973 or 1978 printings aren't too hard to find.