Rating: 5/5

I’m having a very hard time with this review and it should not be reviewed dryly. Who Oe is doesn’t matter, or where he’s from or where this lies beside his previous works, or who the autistic musician or self terrified surgeon with the suicidal mother is. This is not a book to review from historical context.

You can. Religion, Japan by train, effigies, beer and whiskey beside saki, the desperate shame of a man dying of cancer tearfully pulling himself up to the first and only penis he’ll ever have inside him. Who is Patron, who is Guide, why the primary characters have so little to do with the God they’re parading around, what was the goal, was Jonah Yonah – these aren’t answered. And they stagger on a wrought stage of soliloquies, snowy boughs, a man’s stomach in the sun and improbabilities and farces.

The book is impossible. There is one dash, one interpretation in a book with page long monologues outnumbering one-liners. Then what’s going on here? I’ve told you before this is not the question. It is troubling, the sonorous seamlessness, the inexcusable boredom of reading this book. It is unforgivable.

But I read this and, yes, it is the snowy boughs, the half parted mouth, the hungry man pulling apart his ass as colon cancer pulls at his stool. That’s what it is. Yes, I’ve said, there’s more, if you need it. But don’t look for it. It will do you no good to compare wounds of absence and excess, repetitive Giis, or feudal Yakuzas in the guise of repentance. It is there. But it’s not what you get or what stays.

What sticks is the atmosphere, the ineffable. I know that sounds above. I’m sounding like Kizu maybe, or anyone really, lost in this book that’s so clear and so empty, so vast. There are pockets and small findings, dips in the savannah.

You’re right. I’m not clear. Let me be, then. It’s a difficult book to read because it’s boring and frustrating when no one responds in conversation as people do. Explanations and backstory are stumbled on like logs in tall grass and the story resembles so little a story. It sprawls slowly, thinly, with people who are real until they talk and places that are stronger than the people. Is this what he means when he discusses the ‘power of the place?’ I don’t know. I don’t think I need to know. Everything I need to know from this book, from Aum Shinrikyo to pianos and triptychs, is in the atmosphere, and the images that live beyond any of the rambles or the philosophy.

This book is a glacier – slow, clear, awesome, tedious and beautiful.