Rating: 3/5

A mixed bag - some concrete, helpful advice (though some of it repeated from The Gift of Fear: Survival Signals That Protect Us from Violence), mixed in with a lot of biological determinism and gender essentialism (testosterone makes you violent! a woman will always put more effort into helping a lost child than a man will!). I don't even necessarily disagree with the advice that a lost child should try to avoid asking (people who present as) men for help (most men are not child predators, but most child predators are men), but the book is very black-and-white about it. 

The book is also written from a VERY white perspective: cops are good, women are always safer than men (Black kids interacting with white women might disagree), the only kind of danger is gendered or sexual (no mention of e.g. racist hate crimes), men never even think about personal safety precautions, if you feel uneasy about someone there's always a good reason and you should always trust that feeling. It does not offer guidance on how to distinguish incorrect gut feelings from correct ones, like: Is that man actually dangerous or are you just racist? In fact it barely even acknowledges that a gut feeling might ever be wrong. I am a naturally anxious person who often feels fear or unease that turns out to be unfounded - for example, one time I came home and was struck by the fear that there was a stranger hiding in my bathroom, but there was no one. This type of thing is not addressed in the book. 

Reading in 2020, the book also feels pretty dated. To some extent this is probably unavoidable - I can't really fault a book published in the 90s for feeling like it was written in the 90s, or for not feeling like it was written 20 years later. But I laughed at the things the author cites as examples of controversial parenting issues: "whether mothers should work" and "single-parent households." (Yes, I am aware these are still controversial in some circles, and that most mothers are criticized by someone for literally any choice they make. But if you asked me to name controversial parenting issues, those probably wouldn't occur to me.) It's also mildly annoying that the author says things like "last year" instead of naming the year, like it never occurred to him that people might read his book years after it was published.