Rating: 4/5

The green-eyed monster so said the incomparable Bard, William Shakespeare which definitely applies here, stating it mildly first in Otello now The Winter's Tale. The usual situation of a husband not trusting his wife causing great love turning into passionate hate, suspicion, phantoms seem real, whispers in the dark believed, gossips spread until the ear of the king, Leontes reached. Queen Hermione though innocent but how can she prove this? The consequences follow heavily, the beautiful straight road turns crooked, and the thick fog falls for an indeterminate time maybe forever. In the kingdom on Sicily, wise Leontes becomes paranoid, things quickly cascading, the unreal becomes too real, loyal friends questioned, are they that? Leontes hurts and revenge is his sole thought, Polixenes the king of Bohemia, suspected seducer of Hermione never minds the two monarchs are childhood friends. Pride wins out and explodes into sheer madness when his former friend King Polixenes with help from surprise, Sicilian lord Camillo flees just in the nick of time back home. A man with a conscious, he could not kill a guiltless supposed bastard baby girl not even for his ruler. Meeting on the road the charming rogue Autolycus, love or hate him, a likable villain for some, conman for others, the victims particularly, are not of that rather dubious opinion,
 a thief for sure, no gentleman to be honest, will rob you without compulsion yet he dominates the proceedings. Giving needed laughs to an otherwise too serious plot is welcomed indeed. In Sicily Leontes jails pretty wife who just gave birth recently to his he thinks questionable daughter Perdita, as a result Prince Mamillius the heir to the throne becomes seriously ill not the last evil occurrence in court. Can you imagine a queen raised in luxury, with obedient maids all bowing to her, ending up imprisoned in filth. But things are unclear not quite solid in appearance the story could be a figment as Shakespeare manipulates the narrative and the clouds finally lifts, the sharp picture soon forms, and the reader understands. The play while it isn't the best or most famous from the master, however, still produces genuine entertainment and also an example of what not to do. Reiterating a work which has numerous unpleasant aspects nevertheless for many fans of the author is well worth looking at, as for a me a veteran who has consumed eighteen products of the playwright no big complaints.