Rating: 5/5

I have been reading historical works for over three years, and if I have to characterize the past as it is seen through the lens of history, I will say that it is a long string of mistakes committed, or, to quote a childhood fairy tale, "calamities with consequences." I have lost count of the times I, and no doubt many others, have exclaimed about this president or that policy-maker, "Ah, but why did he not learn from history? The same mistakes have already been made before!" Knowledge conveys wisdom; ignorance courts trouble. History has proven two things so far: first, that studying history is an absolute necessity if one wishes to spare himself many headaches in life and second, that no one, or at least almost no one, has ever learned from history.

Why do we never learn history's lessons? The most common explanation is that we humans are allegedly all too stubborn to learn from someone else's mistakes and always prefer to make our own. While this must be so for many people in many situations, it is nevertheless a narrow answer, which cannot be applied to all cases. There are so many instances in life when we rely on the bitter experience of others to determine whether we should do something or not. For instance, the majority of teenagers, thankfully, avoid doing drugs after they hear stories of other teens' lives gone down the drain because of drug addiction. There are, of course, also those who think they can do drugs and avoid the tragic outcome despite being aware that deaths from overdosing are frequent among drug addicts. But the majority still knows better. That is why I believe that inherent human stubbornness is just one aspect of the problem.

Neustadt and May's book led me to the conclusion that maybe we all have not learned how to learn from history. In Russian popular history writer Edward Radzinskiy's words, history is not a teacher; it is a cruel taskmaster. To paraphrase with my words and understanding, history will not be so kind as to guide you until you have learned the necessary lessons; she will let you figure them out on your own, and if you don't, she will punish you. Having heard the saying about history being a teacher a hundred times, many expect her to just offer them all the answers. But by reading a history book or two, or ten will not be enough for them to gain the wisdom they need. History is not How to NOT Repeat My Predecessors' Mistakes 101. Learning from history is an art in itself, it is a special approach that has to be mastered. 

In their book, Neustadt and May outline this approach with explanations and examples. To start learning history's lessons, one has to develop historical thinking first and foremost. Historical thinking in this context is the ability to adapt one's knowledge of history to the particular case one has to deal with, and at the same time to disregard the traditional notion that familiarity with history will be the automatic solution to the problem. A good example the authors offer draws a parallel between Thucydides's history of the Peloponnesian Wars and Lyndon Johnson's decision to escalate the Vietnam War. Athenian ignorance about Sicilian history, psychology, and capabilities was a strong warning for Johnson when he contemplated warfare at long distance with the North Vietnamese, of whom he and his aides knew next to nothing. Why did not Secretary of State Dean Rusk or McGeorge Bundy warn him? Considering their learning, there was no way they had not read Thucydides. Nevertheless, the idea of them invoking his book to President Johnson seems unthinkable. The enormous technological capability of America, and especially American exceptionalism, alienated them from the experience of Athens immeasurably much. The story of some ancients, armed with spears, propelled by oars, maintained by slaves, deprived of electronics, and knowing nothing of air power, could convey nothing to men managing a modern war. It would have not even occurred them to draw on the past and see all the similarities: the blinding, self-imposed sense of superiority, the rash or over-cautious tendencies of generals, the fickleness of the public, the faithlessness or self-interest of allies, and the uncertainty of luck. 

Furthermore, had they seen those patterns, Johnson would have still stumbled into the disastrous Vietnamese conflict. Because although most of us believe that to know history is to know what the decision to make, such knowledge is usually not enough to save us from a calamity. There is the issue of feasibility, as the authors call it. We usually do not choose the circumstances we find ourselves in. We may have learned from history which option is the good on, but what if this option is not available to us at all? By the time Johnson had become President, Vietnam was already a tragedy. He did not have much choice.

Nevertheless, history can be useful and applicable. History is a powerful placement tool. Placement means evaluating stereotypes and making sense of people and organizations – an absolutely essential ability in our society. For instance, the fact that Ronald Reagan voted four times for Franklin Delano Roosevelt can tell us volumes about Reagan's concept of the presidency and the federal government. When he campaigned for President, it must have been clear to all Americans who knew history that he would expand the federal government like FDR had done in the 1930s. Therefore, through placement history can help us predict the future to a certain extent, which also means that it can help us correctly evaluate the options that are available to us and choose the better one. Historical thinking would mean exactly that: analyzing the present situation, finding parallels with a similar case in the past, enumerating and evaluating the options available back then, deciding which one is better, or the best, and possibly applying it to the current situation.

THINKING IN TIME is written primarily for the use of decision-makers, who undoubtedly need to know how to properly utilize history. That is why Neustadt and May put such an emphasis on options and decisions. However, while decision-makers are charged with greater responsibility than most of us, each one of us is responsible for the decision-making in his or her own life. We all have had to make important decisions after evaluating several options. That is why I believe that every person will benefit immensely from reading this book. The authors also made use of the advice of a few notable decision-makers, Zbigniew Brzezinski, the Bundy brothers, Dean Rusk, and Theodore Selrensen among them. I highly recommend it.