Rating: 3/5

Five years ago, I read my first Nero Wolfe mystery, The Doorbell Rang, and was hooked. I started reading the series from the beginning in the order they were published. This book is generally considered the final one, number 47. It was published 10 years after Rex Stout’s death and collects three novellas from earlier in his career that were not previously published, at least in their current form, in books. It includes three novellas and a good 25 page introduction by Stout’s biographer.

“Bitter End” began life as a 1940 Tecumseh Fox novel called Bad for Business. A magazine publisher rejected it, but offered to pay Stout double to rewrite it as a Nero Wolfe novella. This became the first of many Wolfe novellas. Stout did not allow it to be included in any of his Wolfe novella collections, reportedly because of its bastard origins. Because the length was cut by two thirds, there is a lot packed into this story, which sometimes borders on confusing. It is good, but not great, 3 stars.

“Frame-up for Murder” started out in 1957 as the novella “Murder Is No Joke”, which was collected in the book And Four to Go. In late 1957, The Saturday Evening Post asked Stout for a longer version and he expanded it from 48 to 79 pages. The longer version was never previously collected in book form. The major change is a much more prominent role for Flora Gallant, who was reportedly based on Stout’s wife. Unchanged is the fact that a key clue will probably be incomprehensible to anyone who is not old enough to have used rotary telephones regularly in real life. The mystery is somewhat better than average, 3.5 stars.

“Assault on a Brownstone” was originally written in 1959 as “The Counterfeiter’s Knife” and was collected as “Counterfeit for Murder” in Homicide Trinity. His biographer says Stout “did no revision… the first draft was always the only draft”. But in this case, less than a month later and without any prompting by an editor or publisher, he discarded all but the first seven pages and completely rewrote the story. The unpublished revised manuscript was discovered in his archives after his death. The earlier published version marked the first time a character treats cops with undisguised open contempt, not merely the usual ribbing from Archie and Nero. She is Wolfe’s client, Hattie Annis, one of his most memorable, and her father was unfairly killed by police 15 years earlier. She hires Wolfe to make the cops “eat dirt”. That version is a solid 4-star story. In this later version, Wolfe kills off Hattie at the outset. Did he have second thoughts about the cop hate, but then let it be published anyway? In any case, this version without Hattie is decidedly inferior, 2.5 stars.

Having reached the end of the series, I would like to offer a few thoughts and recommendations. The sustained high point of the series is the Zeck trilogy: And Be a Villain (1948, #13), The Second Confession (1949, #15) and In the Best Families (1950, #17). I think Wolfe was at his very best when he was up against a criminal mastermind rivaling his own capabilities, a “Professor Moriarty” rather than a more pedestrian crook. It is a shame that this was the only time in the series that Stout created such a nemesis.

The other high point in the series is The Doorbell Rang (1965, #41), in which Stout trashes the carefully cultivated fake reputation of the then-sacrosanct FBI. Younger readers might be surprised to learn that that the FBI has been a lawless, corrupt Praetorian Guard since Hoover in 1924.

There are very good books scattered throughout the series. I think I have left brief reviews of nearly all of the books for anyone interested. There are only a few weaker ones, notably The Black Mountain (1954, #24), Death of a Dude (1969, #44) and Please Pass the Guilt (1973, #45), and even those have their moments. The latter two were written when Stout was in his 80s. He seemed uncertain at the end of his life about what to make of the social upheavals of the late 1960s, and it shows.

I did not imagine when I started the series that the sedentary, epicurean Wolfe would turn out to be one of literature’s more bloodthirsty detectives. Wolfe and company take the law into their own hands and arrange an extrajudicial killing seven times in the series. There is a lot of blood on those pampered fat hands, although the reader knows that the victims were guilty, notwithstanding the lack of a trial or even enough evidence for an indictment.

I got considerable enjoyment while reading the series from noting Stout’s observations in passing on contemporary life. Nero Wolfe and Archie Goodwin never get older, but the world around them does and Stout is a good observer. Adam Hall’s Quiller series is another good example of this.

I think Rex Stout deserves recognition as one of the very best mystery writers of all time. Of those I have read, he is surpassed only by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Dame Agatha Christie.