Rating: 3/5

3*
As the h likes to describe herself - it's a 'medium' book!
Could have been better, tighter, angstier and more engaging but levels up to be just a mild and medium story.
The author cleverly and quickly moves the (oh so sacrosanct) patient-nurse relationship to a more ethically relaxed housekeeper-employer one. But that conversely also decreases the touchy-feely part of the equation. And when the H loses his eye bandages, the h gets very conscious of her plainness and she never lets the reader's forget it as well. 

The book meanders slowly about the nuances of a very attractive but commitment-phobe guy and a plain but full of heart woman finding their way about each other. His vampy and glamorous ex keeps jerking their chains and successfully so, even while remaining in the background - his, for unresolved anger over being cheated on and hers, for her insecurity over her plainness. The h's almost obsessive envy/jealousy over the ow's looks rubs the wrong way. One time, she's shown as feeling envious of the H's 12-yo daughter good looks as well! 
“There is no justice, she thought as she turned over the first batch of pancakes. Logan’s daughter would probably get through high school without a single blemish.”
 All said, she's full of complexes and too insecure for me to enjoy her. Or maybe, she's just real life like. 

The H is portrayed as too sweet, kind and sorted fella to act the I-have-issue-so-won't-ever-trust-a-woman again. And I found the h's seething and bubbling over insecurities, and her presumptions more than a bit annoying. For a nurse, she sure missed the daughter getting pre menstrual/ menarcheal symptoms. And that too when they have spent weeks discussing sex education and first periods. And the girl running away over it was a bolt from the blue. Say what?!
And I wish the b*tchy ow was used more, and more effectively. Although even those very rare appearances of hers sent the h into miserable sob-fests. 
And as ☽ Rhiannon ✭ Mistwalker ☾ has mentioned, for all her self-doubts, the h very easily presumes that the H does indeed loves her and it's only his trust issues that are holding him back.