Rating: 5/5

Authored by the last king of Hawaii, David Kalakaua, and edited by the one time United States Minister to Hawaii, Rollin M. Daggett, this collection of stories and myths of Hawaii stretches back in time to the sixth century. Daggett, in particular, I think, influenced the readings of these narratives so that they indicate a common origin with Western religious beliefs and European origin stories from the Classics. Thus there are remarks of similarities to Abrahamic influences, Adamic parallels, and even mythological similarities with the Trojan War. Yes, there is a wonder barbaric splendor to Hawaii's tales but beneath it all is the inevitability, the book seemingly hints at, of Hawaii always destined to become part of the wider American story. In doing so, the authors anticipate the argument, for example, that Paul Lyons would make about "histourcism" and the coopting of Hawaii's culture and history into the United States in Lyons' book, American Pacificism.

All that is stuffy academic matter. And these myths and legends on their own are quite enjoyable to read. With plenty of armed combat, palace intrigues, melodramatic love affairs, and intercession of powerful deities, they are on a level the start of adventures found in Greek mythologies. Giants step across islands, Pele and her family lurk beneath volcanoes, and high ranking princes turn into shark gods. All against a luxuriant, spectacular landscape, wherein are contained epic wars and jealousies.

Just a couple of notes. I see several reviewers have already remarked upon the one drawback of the work for most readers unfamiliar with Polynesian/Hawaiian names and places. And it's true that sometimes the names of kings, princes, and princesses blur into a sort of sameness on the page to most readers in English. They do for me, too. But if you have some familiarity, there is a certain amount of fun in pausing to figure out proper pronunciation. If for no other reason than Hawaiian seems so lyrical. I'll also admit that years of watching Tom Selleck in Magnum P.I. also enabled me to spot many a place and person I had only heard mentioned before. At any rate, the series of kings, most of whose names seem to mostly start with the letter "K" shouldn't sidetrack readers. Push past that, because the stories and the adventures are worth it.