Rating: 4/5

Lucy Clough goes to stay with her Aunt Mabel in the village of Hagworthy for the summer holidays. She has fond memories of previous stays, and of the friends she made back then — sisters Caroline and Louise, and a boy called Kester — but that was five years ago, and now she finds Caroline and Louise mad about horses and little else, while Kester is caught up in friction with his uncle, the village smith, who wants his nephew to take up the family trade, while grammar-school boy Kester wants more from life. The village has a new vicar, ‘Frightfully nice man — full of ideas’, one of which is to revive the old Horn Dance of Hagworthy for a fête to raise money for the church roof. Oldsters in the village don’t like the idea — the Horn Dance ties in with legends of the Wild Hunt — but who listens to oldsters? Lucy senses something brewing, too, though, and when Kester’s playful banter with the village boys starts to turn more serious — and when those boys start to get a glazed look in their eyes when they’re practising the dance — she wonders if anything can be done to save Kester from a fate he seems only too keen on provoking…

The Wild Hunt of Hagworthy shares its main themes with Penelope Lively’s previous two YA books, Astercote and The Whispering Knights: a quiet English village becomes the setting for conflict between the old ways &amp; modernity when something sacred is treated without the proper respect. But I think Hagworthy works best of all three. Partly this is down to the characterisation being a little deeper and more realistic (there’s a teenage moodiness about Kester and Lucy, of a sort not present in characters in the previous two books), and partly because the clash between the old &amp; new, and its manifestation in the supernatural, is handled quite subtly (for most of the book, you can’t be sure there is a supernatural element at all). As with those previous two books, once the basic idea is established — that the Horn Dance is deeply linked with the supernatural Wild Hunt, but it’s going ahead anyway — the plot pretty much comes to a standstill. But where this was frustrating in previous books, here it feels as though the story is being given time to deepen its characters and build up the tension about what’s going to happen. That holding back of the plot didn’t feel like a flaw, here.

I enjoyed Astercote and The Whispering Knights, partly because I gave them a bit leeway for being YA books from forty years ago; The Wild Hunt of Hagworthy, I enjoyed without having to give it that leeway — the characters, the setting, the slow build up to a tense and exciting conclusion, the connection with a genuinely wild and dangerous-seeming folkloric supernatural, all worked really well, for me.