Rating: 4/5

I was curious about the controversy generated by the dynamics between genders that academics and readers have discussed for years in this early romantic comedy, which brought some memorable moments that hilariously reminded me of Much ado about nothing.

Sarcasm, bickering and jocular scenes abound in this play, but there is an extra dose of provocative innuendo. Even the title is condemnable for its lack of political correctness, as it implies that Kate, the female protagonist and eldest daughter of the wealthy merchant Batista from Padua, is known by her sharp tongue and in need of “taming” in order to be marriageable.

In the course of a relatively short but quite action-ridden plot with numerous identity swaps and plays within plays, we observe the drastic evolution of a woman who morphs from a free individual whose words cut like the most sharp-edged sword to the perfect role model of a subjugated, submissive wife held captive in a patriarchal system ruled by fathers and husbands.
Kate’s younger sister Blanca is the female counterpoint to Kate’s unorthodox defiance. Blanca’s traditional, more malleable behavior attracts suitors from all kinds and a very humorous mess ensues with no lack of piquant exchanges that culminates in a double wedding and the apparent triumph of male supremacy.

The contempt in which the male characters treat their female equals in this play is nothing short of abhorrent, but as I advanced reading, I realized that the female characters are the only ones to evolve throughout the course of the story. Their psychological portraits are much more complex, their states of mind are more delineated, and the reader gets a sense of the double meanings that impregnates their monologues. Contrarily, the men are presented as gullible buffoons who lose their bearings in useless competition, their minds when sex and drinks appear on the scene and who can’t help bragging without never fully registering what is going on.

Therefore… I wonder. I wonder whether Shakespeare meant to present the battle between the sexes as literal as he made his characters speak in this comedy. Couldn’t it be possible that Kate’s last monologue, which closes the play, is in fact a declaration of silent war where words are replaced by play-acting? 

“Why are our bodies soft, and weak, and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts
Should well agree with our external parts?”

The verses above suggest sneaky behavior, the kind of awareness fit for survival through cunning and constant scheming, using the female body as bait to ensnare and dominate while giving the false impression of complete subjugation. 
I might be reading this wrong, but Shakespeare was an impudent teaser, and I see the female characters in this play rule their male peers… in words, intelligence and action. 
So my advice: flip the coin and give this play a second reading!