Rating: 3/5

The last time I read this book, I was in high school (about 10 years ago (!) ), and I remember really enjoying it – a story about a wolf family, with magic and a prophecy to guide the way. And that there was a cameo from Clement-Davies other book,  Fire Bringer. The rest of the details I was fuzzy at best on. This time, it is a buddy-read with Julie and Ashley!

   I will say, this book reads a lot longer than it should – there is a lot of depth to the story, with many different elements tied in to create a certain atmosphere – elements and reflections of Christianity, of Roman mythology, of Carpathian/Romanian mythology, even allusions to a certain fanged creature of the dark. There are definitely parallels drawn, too, between not only the wolf mythology of Tor and Fenris with their daughter Sita’s sacrifice for the wolves to Jesus in Christianity (right down to small details, such as “[Sita] said that they should send her their children, for she knew that children can really see the truth and she loved children above all things” – page 74), but this parallel is extended even further into the active characters of this story, namely, Larka. I found the parallels very obvious, though you were not quite hit over the head with them despite the repetition (especially with how very closely Sita’s story reflects the life and death of Jesus… still can’t quite get over how her story is basically a copy of Jesus’ story).

   Another theme which played out just as loud as, if not louder than, the Sita/Jesus/character parallels was a theme of fear, and the evolution of the perception/reception of fear. Some examples of that evolution:

   “Fear is an instinct, like hunger or anger. We need it to help us survive, and it is nothing to be ashamed of. It tells us whether we should fight or flee.”—page 162

   “I love the wilderness, Slavka,” [Huttser] growled, “but it is hard too.”
    “Yes, Huttser,” she agreed, “as we must be hard. There must be no place for weakness or fear, for fear destroys thought. We must be strong, strong as the wilderness itself. […]” – page 260

   [Larka said,] “We must live free from fear, Jarla. Nothing can grow in fear, but hate.” – page 281

   There were more instances/moments talking and referring to fear and its benefits and detriments in life, but the above were some of the ones which stuck out the most for me. I found the evolution and changes in how the characters perceived fear interesting, because just as we do in real life, there would be back and forths about the benefits and the detriments of how much one lets fear affect one’s life, and there was a certain fluidity with the resultant effects of these shifting views.

   As I mentioned earlier, this book was also a lot longer than it really needed to be to tell its story. There were several contributing factors to this – the extended parallels between Larka’s story and wolf/human lore/religion, the nature of a vague prophecy and how it ends up being followed or rather how it ends up happening regardless of how invested the characters are in helping it to come true. Part of it was also what I found a strange balance of when scenes are told to the reader versus shown to the reader – there were some instances where events were roughly summarized which I think would have been better detailed, and other instances where we were given a play-by-play of some event which seemed less important and worthy of such detail. One example of this is It was the rebels who had captured them on the ice that night […] At first Huttser had asked for free passage through the mountains, but Slavka had laughed at him and told him that the free wolves were either for or against Morgra. That there was no middle way. – page 255 – there is a lot of potential in this interaction, which will set the stage for how future interactions between Huttser/Palla and Slavka play out. But we only get the summary of their first encounter, and thus miss out on seeing that crucial first interaction with all of its nuances, with Huttser/Palla hiding who they are from Slavka while still having to play at her game in order to survive.

   Contributing to the length of the book, though in a good way, were some of the descriptions of the natural world scattered throughout. From the very first page of the book, we get a crystal clear idea of how this world appears, and the beauty of it all. And these descriptions continue to be scattered throughout the book: 

    At last they came to the far edge of the trees, and the river lay before them. It was at its widest point here. They saw a perfect sheet of white stretching ahead and glistening brilliantly in the moonlight. Along the banks, willow and vine trees had bowed their heads over the frozen edge of the water, and their trailing branches were shawled with snow. Below them, the last residues of autumn grasses—strangling leaves and tilting bulrushes—had been seized into a static beauty by winter’s grip, glittering with tiny icicles and bulbs of frozen dew that flashed like stars. – page 167-168

   Clement-Davies definitely does an excellent job painting the world of The Sight, and infuses life and color and energy into even the coldest, darkest of scenes.

   Instead of rambling on about more aspects of the story, some of which are addressed in the quotes/commentary section below anyways, I will say that it was a nice read, though a simple, rather straight-forward story cloaked in complex images and allusions. I’ll read the sequel, though I hope it will better address one thing in particular that sort of bothered me about Larka – how she just accepted her role, rather slipped into it, with ease despite her misgivings and initial desire to have nothing to do with it – it was rather a case of the prophecy left her no choice, and she decided to accept that she had no choice and just go along with it after several trials even though she could have still railed against her “destiny” more actively. I hope that the sequel will delve more into the MC’s head and thoughts, so we get a clearer picture of the evolution of their decisions and preferences than we did with Larka.

Quotes/commentary/questions:

    [Brassa explained,] “She’s ready, Huttser, and she must do this alone. The law allows no Varg into the den during birthing. Don’t worry. Palla will summon you when she’s ready.” – page 25 – I found it kind of strange that it would be required she give birth alone, without even the elderly/experienced Brassa by her side to help…

    [Khaz’s secret that] Khaz’s cubs had been stirring inside her. The cubs that at first she had fought the river to protect, until she remembered that they would never have a father to love and nurture them. – page 122 – I found it kind of strange that Kipcha would just…give up like this without Khaz to father their cubs; I mean, her and Khaz and Brassa and Bran all contributed to raising Larka and Fell, so why wouldn’t the pack take over care of Kipcha’s cubs as well? Does this go back to how only the Dragga and Drappa of the pack are supposed to have cubs in this particular wolf family-structure present in this book?

    “And do not dreams tell us truths and secrets of the world before we recognize things with our waking thoughts?” – page 217

    “[…] The body can grow sick with guilt and shame and secrets. Or even by taking on too much responsibility.” – page 245

   “But here,” said Karma almost sadly, her growls reaching deeper and deeper, “Slavka will not let us talk of such things, or even tell our own stories. Not of Zostar, nor Tor, nor the Sight. She says we must believe nothing of faith, old or new, but only in fighting and survival. She thinks they are the same as freedom.”
    […] “But don’t you agree?” asked Palla quietly.
    “What freedom is it to believe in nothing?” snorted Karma.
    “But, Karma,” whispered Keeka, looking even more confused, “Palla believes in Tor and Fenris. While you believe in Zostar. They can’t both be true. That stands to reason.”
    “They may just be stories,” nodded Karma, “ways of naming and talking about the world. But my kind believe that in stories often great truths lie concealed, unconscious truths, if we only know how to interpret them.”
[truth a word for that which is not a lie – What about the slavery of knowing too much?] – page 266

    “[…] Enjoy your form, Larka, for you have a right to be what you are, as much right as anything else.” – page 293

   Page 295 – when Larka is far away and sees danger coming towards her new “pack,” she complains that the Sight is useless because she can’t use it to help/help warn them. But couldn’t she slip into Skart, even briefly, so that she could relay him the message?

   Everywhere, the rebels lay: at the edge of the trees, contorted into unnatural shapes, some still stirring as the life left them, others alive only in the energy that decay would return to the earth. – page 328

   Kar had lost the living pool of company in which to view his own reflection. He no longer knew himself or what he was becoming. – page 360 – Seems a little strange how this came about, but okay…

   Larka nodded slowly. “You must try and forget,” she whispered, “and forgive. That is the only way to be free, Gart. Or at least forget the hate your memories bring. We must learn to heal our memories.” – page 394

   Standing alone above the tree line, on a rocky outcrop, was a single red deer. – page 402 -- …Rannoch?!?! How could that even be possible, unless it is a vision for Larka maybe?

    […] in that moment, he had known that to kill the body was not the most terrible thing there was, but to kill and maim the soul with hate and lies, to kill the mind and heart that must be free. – page 435

   Because love takes responsibility, and in all experience, too, there is a pact between the seer and the seen, the listener and the storyteller, the judge and the judged. – page 448

   “I did not escape the legend, Kar. For it was its own kind of trap, as Man’s freedom will be if he doesn’t learn. But life is not a legend or a story. Reality is far more precious than a story. And to love one another we must begin to see each other properly. Besides, Kar, at times, the greatest courage of all is to live.” – page 459

Typos:
“The cave was low ceilinged, so that Huttser… -- page 13 – Opening quote unnecessary, as no one is speaking.

…share the secrets she was learning about the sight. – page 184 – “sight” should be capitalized, as it refers to the Sight.

…just as Larka had once done in the den Larka snarled at the sight. – page 220 – Could be just a printing error, but there should be a period after “den”.

… the [three] wolves panting breath steaming and smoking around the baby… -- page 277 I think it should be “wolves’ “? 

…fondly at her parents “I must leave you now […]” – page 368 – Missing a period after “parents”

…nuzzling the little Sikla toward him… -- page 463 – But previously, she had been referred to as a drappa…