Rating: 3/5

This was one crazy HP and for a few moments I thought I was reading an Anne Hampson (it was that mad!!) h Regan is a fresh college graduate who thinks she's taking up a job as a companion to a 'young lady'. Little does she know, the 'young lady' is daughter to her arch nemesis (her father's) and that the 'job' was actually setup to get her down to Cornwall and marry the bugger in the name of revenge. 

h shows definite spirit in the beginning and even tries escaping via a drainpipe, risking life and limb - and ultimately ends up injuring herself. Which is well and good for a while, because her injuries make it difficult for the H Andreas to 'claim' her as his wife. Another escape attempt later, the H promptly packs up from the south of England and returns to his island in the Aegean with wife and daughter; but not before some unpalatable family secrets are revealed. 

On the island, the hitherto hostile 'young lady' (who is almost 16 and expected to marry the boy chosen for her within a year) shows signs of thawing and makes friends with her new stepmother. Stepmother h in turn, finds herself developing Stockholm syndrome and falling for the H's dominating personality and exquisite physique. However, the H - who had so far insinuated and implied all the adult stuff he would like to do with the h- suddenly turns cold and starts talking about OW (who isn't quite an OW at all) just to get a reaction from the h for his own sadistic pleasure. 

Things come to a head when the h throws a perfume bottle at him and H takes it as provocation and justification for the forced seduction routine he subjects the h to next. h is then sent to England and its only a few paragraphs before H follows her there to declare his undying love and bring her home. 

This book features some of the most OTT characters in HPland. I liked the h in the beginning when she showed some fire, but that is quickly doused with her capitulation to the H's way of thinking. She worries about her red hair because the H says he doesn't like it. Even blames herself for the 'forced seduction' scene where she believes she 'contributed nothing to the union'. I lost my respect for her there. 

H was completely psychotic in my book. Older HP's have some super crazy, possessive alphas, but this man takes it to a whole new level. He's constantly suspicious of the h and thinks she's capable of hooking up with any man in her vicinity; he has major stalkerific tendencies and goes so far as to keep the h under surveillance from when she was a mere child and almost everyone around her is a spy of sorts and is employed by the H to bring her to him. And when he isn't doing any of that, he's busy trying to get his teenaged daughter married off to a boy who's barely out of adolescence himself, presumably to preserve the Greek way of life. Not a character I could respect at all. 

So why am I still giving this 3 stars? because it was entertaining, if nothing else. This may be a train wreck of a novel but there certainly wasn't a single boring moment in it. I would recommend this for anyone looking for a dose of vintage HP craziness.