Rating: 5/5

He was mastered by the sheer surging of life, the tidal wave of being, the perfect joy of each separate muscle, joint, and sinew in that it was everything that was not death, that it was aglow and rampant, expressing itself in movement, flying exultantly under the stars.
 The Call Of The Wild ~~~  Jack London

When I was younger, my mother bought me a copy of 
   The Call Of The Wild
. It was part of a series of books for boys. I wish I had read it back then. It is a marvelous book. I'm only sorry that it took me so long to get around to reading it. 

 Jack London seems to possess an intuition of this dog's life, and, more importantly the dog's heart, an insight which must have come from intimacy and communion with sled dogs during his time in Alaska; I can't help but think that John Thornton is partially based upon London himself. Buck's story is related with a simple, direct, dramatic force which enchains interest; and which is literature at its best. 

 The Call Of The Wild is the story of Buck, a great dog. Buck's father was a huge Saint Bernard, and Buck's mother, a huge Scotch shepherd dog; he was shaggy, big of body, strong of muscle and stout of heart. He was stolen from a California ranch and taken to live in the far glacier land of the North, where he was put in a team with work dogs and made to carry the Yukon mail. 

During his years as a puppy in California, Buck had lived the life of a pampered pet; he loved the hunt, swimming in the cement pond and hunting, but was ignorant of brutality, hardship and toil. Stolen and taken into the Yukon country, his character changed and he became hardened under the brutal conditions he must endure, a leader and master among dogs, turning back toward savage instincts. As time goes on Buck hearkens more and more to the call of the wild until, at last, he surrenders himself to his primitive instincts—to the call of the wild within himself as he regresses to savagery in the great. London's writing on Buck’s spiraling to savagery is achieved slowly and is written with absorbing interest.

 
 The Call Of The Wild is an absorbing tale of wild life, love, friendship and abounding in striking incidents of frontier town, camp and adventure.  Jack London explores society from a dog's perspective. However the deeper, darker messages of unbound greed, ambition and ultimately the necessity of adaptability to change are easy to spot.