Rating: 4/5

Rating: 4 / 5

"I put this question to her: 'Do you know what a sinner is?'...Without hesitation, she answered, '...A sinner is one who loves evil.'...That's quite a good answer. What pleased me is that she said loves evil, not does evil."

The above is taken from The Song of Bernadette, a 1943 drama film about the life of Saint Bernadette. Specifically, the quote is from a scene in which a doctor has been called upon to test Bernadette's sanity, and he is making his report to the authorities of the town in order to ensure them that the young girl is perfectly sane. Her answer, as mentioned above, is what pleases him most.

Odd as it may seem, I thought this quote strangely applicable to Elie Wiesel's story that I've just read. Namely, I would apply it most readily to the Judge himself, whom, as it is revealed towards the end, looks to evil as a means of solving problems in the world, as the "absolute end" in the place of death, an infallible power of some sort. He makes a speech about this to Razziel, who is, for all intents and purposes, the closest we have to being the main protagonist in the story. But Razziel, despite having undergone who knows what as a political prisoner, to the point of losing his memory, looks upon the Judge's proclamation with horror and insists to the contrary.

Consider me on Team Razziel.

You know, it wasn't until the end of the book that I really got around to hating and being frightened of the Judge. Oh, I knew he was serious about his "game" and whatnot, but I didn't know how far gone into madness he really was. But then, as soon as some cuckoo goes around saying that evil is man's true desire, to take away from the innocence and goodness of others for their own sick pleasure is the true way throughout life, and that evil outlives God himself, then you know that you've got a character with a pretty twisted mind.

I'll admit, for those looking to read a book that's psychoanalytical in nature or contains a lot of psychological elements to play around with, then I'm afraid that they'll be disappointed. The majority of the book, I would say, is made up of the recollections of the five people at the Judge's mercy, along with the philosophical lessons that they've learned as a result of those experiences. The characters that are the most in the limelight are Razziel and Yoav, with George as a close third. Claudia and Bruce, maybe because they're the two more flamboyant of the five, get less of a focus, but still enough to paint a pretty clear image of them. Add to this group the Judge himself, as well as the Hunchback as characters playing the "game", and you've got our cast of characters.

Of course, that's excluding the characters from memory, the most prominent of which is Razziel's former cellmate and life mentor, Paritus. Out of all the people mentioned in the five captives' backgrounds, this elusive yet philosophical-natured man is the most real to me, the most influential. With Razziel being placed in the middle, I saw Paritus as the exact opposition to the Judge, the statement of all things good and meaningful in life against all things of evil.

As such, overall, I judge the book to be of a philosophical nature. At first, I'll admit that I wasn't much inclined to reading it, given the poor ratings and reviews that I've seen on Goodreads. But I'd already purchased it cheap at a thrift shop because it's summary on the back looked compelling, so my thought was at least to chuck it off my "to-read" list by at least taking a look at it. I wasn't captivated, per se, but I was interested enough to go further.

As I got further along, I couldn't understand the low ratings on this book, and am prepared to defend it against criticism. It's really more brilliant than what people give it credit for, but, that being said, I haven't read any of this author's other works, which are presumably better. I'll have to take a look and see for myself.

The low ratings, I'll assume, have to do with people losing interest, most likely because of a mistaken area of interest. After all, with those expecting psychology receive philosophy instead, it's understandable for them to be a bit put out at the resulting text. For myself though, overall I enjoyed it.