Rating: 5/5

I loved this book! Actually, I read it aloud to my husband each evening and we enjoyed it very much. This is a book on everything you didn't know about the Beatles and everything perhaps you are really not sure you want to know about the Beatles. Peter Brown was an insider into the Beatles' beginnings, a manager at Apple and follows them through the dissolution of the group.
The book begins with their early lives in Liverpool, their Hamburg gigs and their entry into the London pop world. Brown really emphasizes each of the Beatles' unique personalities. John, the angry and often rude "working class hero", George the young, underage brat, Ringo the most normal of the four northern blokes and of course Paul.
Paul clearly was the most different of the fab four. He always aspired to be more cultured, more in tune with society and what was expected of him. Image was everything to Paul and he couldn't abide to have his image tarnished. After several pot busts with Linda, he still managed to maintain a fairly clean cut image.
There are so many juicy tidbits to this story. The section on how Yoko moved in on the married John and became obsessed with making him her own, the sexist manner in which George flatly refused Patty Boyd his wife to have a career and was just happy to have her cooking at home. Of course, along came Eric Clapton to steal Patty away from George. Then there was Ringo's wife Maureen who ended up sleeping with George!
It is clear that although the Beatles moved on to become one of the most famous bands ever, they could not get that "northern man" mentality out of them. After all, they still were products of the fifties. There was no taking the Liverpool out of these guys! It's sad toward the end when Paul tried to reconcile with John right before his death, that John flatly refused anything to do with Paul. He was so enmeshed with Yoko that if anyone rejected her, he'd have nothing to do with them as well.
Many people blame Yoko for the Beatles breakup. However, according to Brown, Paul and the Eastmans had a great deal to contribute to the growing animosity between the four. Paul really tried to take control, treated the group as if he were in charge and demanded his own way. So many things went right at times for the Beatles but so many things went terribly wrong! Mismanagement and greedy folks taking advantage of the Beatles as well as the ever present "taxman" of England wiped them clean time and again.
They were so young when they started off and it was amazing to follow their personal growth, who they were involved with and the book dispels so many of the Beatles' myths out there. This was truly an eye opener, a truly FAB read!