Rating: 5/5

In this deliberately and sarcastically controversial novel John Updike simply excels at dissecting biblical contradictions and pointing his finger at religious incongruities.
Alicia in bed was a revelation. At last I confronted as in an ecstatic mirror my own sexual demon. In such a hurry we did not always take time to remove socks and necklaces and underthings that clung to us then like shards or epaulettes, we would tumble upon her low square bed…
Where do the priests guilty of sin of adultery and fornication go? No, they don’t go to hell, they go to a remote retreat for recreation, contemplation of their sinful past and to take a rest from their tedious sins… And there they are obliged to write detailed diaries for posterity and all to whom it may concern…
And A Month of Sundays is one of those secret diaries. And the best things in this diary are sinful sermons.
“Of the two adulterous women Christ encounters in the Gospels, as we have seen, one is commended, and the other is not condemned. Indeed this latter woman was brought to Him, we may conjecture, by the Pharisees to trap Him into asking enforcement of a death penalty universally acknowledged to be absurd. For, as He repeatedly asserts, this is an ‘adulterous generation.’ So Jeremiah had found his generation, and Hosea his; for Israel ever breaks its covenant with the Lord, and yet the Lord ever loves, and ever forgives.
Adultery, my friends, is our inherent condition: ‘Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.’
But who that has eyes to see cannot so lust? Was not the First Divine Commandment received by human ears, ‘Be fruitful, and multiply’? Adultery is not a choice to be avoided; it is a circumstance to be embraced. Thus I construe these texts.”
Sins… Original sin… Deadly sins… Sins are as ancient as humanity and would there be humankind without the original sin?