Rating: 4/5

I came to this book having listened to I think all of Leonard Cohen’s music but not having read barely any of his poetry or novels.

Browsing through Stranger Songs, a compendium of his lyrics and writing, I was struck by an except from this book: “Death to this book or fuck this book and fuck this marriage. Fuck the twenty-six letters of my cowardice.” etc. I was struck by the blend of hostility and humor not to mention the liberal use of the word “fuck” which I don’t think appears in any of Leonards’s songs. The fact that the book’s title alludes to the crazy Phil Spector-produced Cohen album that appeared around the same time further enticed me.

Death of a Lady’s Man keeps with the mood of the Ladies Man album and the previous one, New Skin For the Old Ceremony. It’s the 70’s Cohen spirit in literary form. At times it was laugh-out-loud crazy, other times enchanting and poetic, other times mundane.

Many styles contained in here, from prose poetry to carefully metered verse. Also, there’s an interesting conceit where each poem has a companion “commentary” piece which is often elliptical and sometimes vague in its relation to its companion piece. There are some entertaining anecdotes of Cohen’s time with Roshi at Mt. Baldy, which I previously associated more with Cohen’s 90’s retirement period.

I recommend Death of a Lady’s Man as a complement to Leonard Cohen’s music, especially if you like the 70’s albums.

A few favorite excerpts-

Your adventure is the glass bricks of sociology. (p.26)

I asked him if he had any news of Henrietta, an English inn-keeper of mutual acquaintance who had a sad reputation for biting into cocks. (p.88)

The room is below street level and I have just fouled my trousers for some odd nervous reason. (p.201)

I want to go back to bed and get inside her. That’s the only time there’s anything approaching peace. And when she sits on my face. When she lowers herself onto my mouth. This feels like doom. This is a pyramid on my chest. (p.192)