Rating: 4/5

This one has been on my reading list for a very long time – over a decade actually. I am glad, however, that it’s taken so long for me to read, since I believe I understand the full import of what Franks was attempting to communicate. The emphasis is on the adaptability of the modern U.S. Army. His focus is not so much on tactical adaptability – though that certainly is a large part of his story – but on the long-term adaptability. Seeing how the robust changes that were necessary and rigorously pursued in the post-Vietnam era resulted in the resounding victory of the 1991 Persian Gulf War brought a lot of truths together for me. I had known it as a fact, having heard it from my own father many times, but seeing specifically how those changes were purposefully implemented was eye-opening. Why? Because since 1991, the Army hasn’t once ceased to transform. And MY Army has been actively transforming amidst a conflict, both as a response to the conflict itself, e.g. counterinsurgency doctrine and TTPs, but for the long term (modularity of force structure, intelligence architecture, etc). Yet reading this operational account of what is arguably one of the last true army-on-army conflicts that a developed nation has undertaken, my concerns that the Army has gone too far down the counter-insurgency rabbit hole and has lost its true warfighting capability has increased even further. As an artillery lieutenant, it was apparent that my generation was missing out on learning to fight the battery fight. Furthermore, any artillery office commissioned after 9/11 has only the slightest inkling of how to begin to create a true fire support plan at brigade or higher. As an intelligence captain, I recognize how my peers will have a huge mountain to climb to regain traditional predictive analysis of an enemy order of battle. And doing the above on the move in a highly mobile environment without reliance on the multitudes of network connections to which we are now accustomed is a frightening thought.
But one thing Franks makes clear. Our military has the determination to lead our country into its next challenges in every generation. And there are signs now, growing stronger with each month, that our leadership recognizes these challenges and will ensure our force is ready for whatever is over the next hill.