Rating: 3/5

Jim Qwilleran is a little anxious. He wants - needs - the job he is interviewing for with the managing editor of the Daily Fluxion, circulation 427,463. A recently divorced man in his 40's, on the wagon, he hasn't had a steady job for a long time. He is looking for a fresh start as, hopefully, the crime reporter, his speciality before he hit the skids. When he accepts a position on the newspaper as the Art feature writer, he's grateful for the job, no matter how rueful he feels about the demotion (past winner of the Publishers' Trophy). Luckily, he knows the feature editor, Arch Riker, an old friend from Chicago.

Riker gives him his first assignment: an interview with Cal Halapay, married local painter of popular pictures of apple-cheeked kids. It's made the 27-year-old a very rich man, despite the vicious reviews by the Daily Fluxion's real art critic, George Bonifield Mountclemons III. However, Qwilleran knows that since his job is the background feature writer - he actually knows nothing about art - all he needs to do is ask questions about the artist's family and life, while arranging access for the newspaper's photographer.

The interview leads to party invitations, where he meets many of the unnamed Midwest city's major citizens. Qwilleran discovers almost everyone hates Mountclemons, which becomes awkward, but not unmanageable, when the man himself invites Qwilleran to move from the rundown hotel where he is staying to Mountclemons' house, where he has a spare bottom-floor apartment. He decides he likes Mountclemons, especially after he meets Mountclemons' Siamese cat, Kao K'o-Kung, or Koko, for short. The art critic can be arrogant and nasty, but he also is a wonderful cook, and he has a house of beautiful art. He also loves his cat.

Soon, there are murders and Qwilleran ends up with Koko. The beautiful cat seems to 'know' things, and to this reader appeared to be the most intelligent character in the book. In any case, Qwilleran and Koko find that the other is a very satisfactory roommate.

I bought this entire series (up to a point) in the 1990's because I adore cats. I had no idea of what the series was like. Tonight I finished 'The Cat Who Could Read Backwards' (1966 copyright), which is the first book in the series. 

The big cast of characters is interesting, so there are a variety of suspects once the murders begin. It is a very pleasant, humorous read, with the action as gentle (and mostly off-screen) as floating fluffy seeds from flowering dandelions, despite any violence. The book is certainly fine as either a teen or adult read. I feel as if this is The Uber Book which may define the fun and enjoyable type of cozy genre for me. 

I have to admit that while Qwilleran is billed as an investigative reporter, I don't think he actually solved this mystery.  The murderer accidentally comes face-to-face with Qwilleran in his house. It was someone that Qwilleran had not suspected at all. Qwilleran also only had a vague idea as to motive.

I will continue reading about Koko not only because I have many books from the series sitting purchased but unread on my shelves. It will be good to fill my mind with stories that are mildly violent with cute characters instead of the usual grim gore, fetid filth and dark damage I usually indulge in. Right?!?