Rating: 4/5

True Believer by Virginia Euwer Wolff told the story of a fifteen-year-old girl who goes by the name of Verna LaVaughn. We follow her through her life with a single mom, being in love with her best friend, and being rejected by other friends. Jody has been her friend since they were kids until he moved away because his mom did not think their home was safe for them anymore. When they moved back, LaVaughn was surprised by how she felt when she saw him or thought about him. She was convinced that he was the love of her life, and she just had to make him realize it. At school, her friends Myrtle and Annie were a part of a very strict and exclusive religious group. They slowly grow apart from LaVaughn because they need to “know their limits”, meaning they cannot spend too much time with people who aren’t Christians. Another character, Patrick, is Lavaughns lab partner in her advanced science class. Patrick makes it clear to her that he cares for her and wants to be more than friends. Each time he does something for her, however, she automatically shuts him down because she believes she belongs with Jody, and she doesn’t like that Patrick wears the same two shirts. Lastly is LaVaughn's mom. LaVaughn's father was shot and killed when she was young, leaving her mom to take care of her on her own. I enjoyed the reality of LaVaughn's feelings throughout this story. We follow her thoughts as she develops feelings for a boy and then gets disappointed, as she slowly loses her longtime friends, while her mom gets a new relationship and then is alone again, and as she finds out something she doesn’t want to believe. I found it interesting how we could follow her thoughts and know how she felt in each of these situations, but she how she chose to react in reality. This is something I can connect with in my own life because often what I think is not what I say at the moment. The author accurately depicted her character’s train of thought by writing in prose. LaVaughn's thoughts seem unorganized and raw.