Rating: 2/5

After finishing the rather lackluster Elder Gods, I told myself I'd only continue on with the Dreamers if there was a significant price drop. Six months on I picked up the rest of the series for $1.99 each, so here we are.

I'm a big Eddings fan, but I can admit when something isn't working and that's clearly happening here. At 472 pages, I thought this would be plenty of new fantasy adventure to sink my teeth into, but that idea was quickly crushed when the author decided it'd be a great idea to just rehash the first book from the perspective of different characters. While I appreciated some backstory on guys like Narasan and Skell as to how they came to be in the positions the first book finds them in, going through the entire invasion of Zelena's domain AGAIN through their eyes is madness. You can discount about 100 pages of the Treasured One right there.

Just to rub salt into those wounds, the few new events that occurs here are also repeated ad nauseum. I'll never understand why Eddings feels the need to constantly have his characters tell each other what occurs in their absences in such excruciating detail over and over. A simple 'he explained what had happened" sentence could save pages of needless dialogue. As with the first book, characters use each others names in just about every sentence, even when there's only two people present, which infuriates me. Picture yourself talking with someone and using their name every time you say something - Yes I'm fine John. That's what I was thinking John. You've got a point John. That's a good plan John. Now imagine reading PAGES of dialogue like that. Crazy! 

I'm really struggling with this because I think there's a good story here, but it's bogged down by such horrible repetitiveness that its hard to see positives. If you removed all the rehashes of Book 1 and all the extra exposition, you'd probably be left with a 200 page book at most. None of the good guys ever seem to be in any danger and I'd be shocked if any of them were dead when this series is done. They spend their time casually building walls and forts while talking in what's supposed to be a funny, sarcastic manner that Eddings always uses in his books (and to be fair it's highly amusing in his earlier works) but it fails here because they ALL sound the same, even when they're from different lands. The bad guys really do nothing - they just mill around waiting to die. Rinse and repeat. 

I've never not finished an Eddings series, so I'm going to continue on and hope that there's something better waiting in book 3. At this point there's really nothing I can say to recommend this series though.