Rating: 4/5

Eltiron is having a rough month. First, one of his best friends, Jermain, was banished by the King, supposedly for treason. And Jermain thinks Prince Eltiron was part of setting him up for treason. Now, King Marreth's new advisor, the slimy Terrel has convinced Marreth to betroth Eltiron to the princess of Barinash sight unseen. Lucky for Eltiron his aunt Vandi shows up to help lend some sanity to a really crazy court. Vandi won't let anyone push her around, and she sees that something weird is going on. She also knows that Jermain is innocent and his claims of an imminent invasion of the Hoven-Thalor are based on good sources. She's determined to help Eltiron figure out what that weasel Terrel is up to and keep the kingdom safe. Meanwhile, the princess of Barinash, Crystalorn is on her way to Sevairn with her friend the possibly addled but definitely useful sorceress Amberglas, and Jermain is recruited by the Wizard-King Carachel to lead a massive army because he claims that the real danger threatening the seven kingdoms is not the Hoven-Thalor moving north, but what comes behind them, an ancient evil known as the Red Plague or Matholych. Some people are not what they seem, others are more than they seem, and all are important in figuring out how to save the seven kingdoms from the Matholych.

Wrede is one of my favorite fantasy authors, particularly her Enchanted Forest Chronicles, so I was quick to snatch up a title of hers I have not read yet. It did not disappoint. The plot wasn't simple, nor overly complicated. I managed to figure out some parts, but not all. The characters were diverse, and though some were predictable, several were not simple or flat and were fun to get to know. I absolutely loved Amberglas (especially reading that she was inspired by Sayer's Dowager Duchess of Denver and Jones' Christomanci), and Vandi wasn't bad either. Overall, it was a fun read with just the right mix between seriousness and humor. 

Notes on content: No language issues that I remember. There are no sex scenes. Some innuendo is alluded to but not stated outright, mostly involving wrong conclusions about relationships or obvious conclusions about the King's ever-changing ladies. An affair is also mentioned. There are a couple battles that are serious life/death confrontations and several people die. Some are rather horrible deaths at the hands of twisted magic; these aren't really described but the reactions of others to them give readers the picture they are horribly grotesque and sickening. Other people die via standard weapons or horse hooves or poisoning, none of those is described in very much detail. A couple wounds survivors receive are described, mostly broken ribs and bruises, but one profusely bleeding side wound and another shoulder wound.