Rating: 3/5

This is a strange book. If I am just looking at the book as history, it needs one star. The thesis will be laughable to most people - that the reason that the United States exists is that God had a plan to create a 'New Israel' in America. There is really no way to evaluate this thesis. The authors offer 'proof' of their thesis, which is that Columbus, the Pilgrims, and the Puritans all believed that they were called by God, therefore it must be true. All of the outrages committed by Columbus are a result of him allowing his pride and greed to pull him away from God's calling to bring light to the darkness of the new world. Everything bad that happened in Jamestown was because the settlers weren't sincere Christians and were just looking for gold, where everything bad that ever happened in Massachusetts was God's loving way of disciplining his children in order to accomplish his mission. Marshall and Manuel ignore the existence of Virginia once the colony is established and thriving - apparently there is no way to fit this into their thesis. In any case, the thesis is ultimately religious, not historical, so maybe it's not even fair to evaluate it as a book of history.

There is one other flaw - the authors use a lot of quotes, which does strengthen the book, and they are well documented. They also make up a lot of dialogue. They do mark this by writing things like this: '...we can imagine Winthrop saying...' They then go on to relate a long and completely fictitious dialogue between John Winthrop and Thomas Hooker in New England. It is sometimes hard to keep track of which dialogues are real and which are made up. 

On the other hand, I have learned a lot from reading this book. The details they give on Columbus were not new to me, and Columbus' story is laid out much more completely in the excellent book by Charles Mann '1491.' I actually learned a lot about Jamestown, Plymouth and Salem from reading this, however. The authors do a thorough job of portraying Jamestown as an unmitigated disaster, and contrasting that with the early successes of Plymouth and Salem. They give a much more nuanced account of the Puritans' exclusion of Quakers, Roger Williams and Anne Hutchinson than I have seen in standard US History textbooks that paint this very simply as examples of Puritan intolerance. The extensive quotes from various Pilgrim and Puritan leaders effectively paint the Puritans not as saints or as bigots, but as human beings trying and sometimes failing to create a more perfect society. 

I would have a hard time saying if I recommend this book or not. If you are interested in learning more about the religious roots of New England, and the lack of such roots in Virginia, this could be a good place to start. If you would like to understand the 'America was founded as a Christian Nation' argument, this book certainly lays the foundation for that particular thesis. If you think that a book based on that thesis sounds unreadable, you should certainly avoid this. I don't subscribe to the 'Christian Nation' thesis, but I like to understand other people's points of view, which made this book worthwhile for me.