Rating: 3/5

.??? from childhood: ok, why did i read this... twice? exactly the opposite from my usual sf fare, exactly the sort stanislaw lem probably hated, characterized as juvenile adventure, not remotely science fiction, a ridiculous, playful, illogical, pulp exemplar of 'space opera'... read this first when i was about twelve, or at least the first two chapters in sf hall of fame as a novella. remember it even then as rather fantasy dressed in science fiction clothing...

so as an adult read it as a book- twice- perhaps interested in nostalgia, discovered it as a novel, thought well it was up for a Hugo in 67, so maybe it is good, maybe i had missed something, maybe i would learn what works in sci-fi. no. but then i heard comparison with pratchett, tried it again. so it is an easy read. but it did not get better. also, i am not a big p fan either. thought of ways it might appeal to genre readers: fun, simple, satirical. certain unscientific aspects that might be 'space opera', like taking a few weeks to go from star to star, like unified 'empire' spanning stars, like blasting asteroids for fun... and then: slaves?...

romance is satirical. characters in total are comic. situations are comic. so maybe this is how it works, if you shut down your reasonable critical sf and literary brains: comic. just happened to be watching a sci-fi tv show called 'firefly' which is likewise of no sf value, but is fun. it is all about characters of recognizable human qualities, neighbours even, and the way they form a familial sort of group. there is some plot, some quirks, some borrowed genre elements... maybe this is what the book offers? am i missing out on some fun? am i asking to read another book? just tried an sf work that somebody said was like ac clarke... but it bored me in another way: it is a resolutely sf extrapolation of possibilities (application of prefix 'nano' so useful) but is not great on characterizations comic or not... so tried this book again, got a few chapters in, decided no i do not need to read it again...

well i should up the rating for having read it 2 1/2 times... just discovered the original novella is from 1949! so maybe this is interesting in a historical way, is actually innovative in comic tone that requires readers of the day to make satirical connections to other, typical, 'space operas'...