Rating: 4/5

Smelly Cats Can Save Lives

If this sounds rather odd to you, by the end of the book you will know that it does make sense, albeit probably not very often. A Mind to Murder is P.D. James’s second entry into the Adam Dalgliesh case list, and I liked it a lot more than its predecessor because the pace of the story was a lot brisker and there was quite some humour, mostly at the expense of psychiatrists, who are engaged in a vicious struggle between classical Freudian therapy, as exemplified by the petty-minded Dr. Steiner, and a modern LSD treatment pursued by Dr. Baguley. However differently these two doctors may act in their professional life, when we follow them home, we see that both their private lives are a shambles – a state of affairs they reassuringly share with most of their patients.

So, what is the book about? At the Steen Psychiatric Clinic, where they have specialized in treating the well-healed neurotics, one Friday night the body of Miss Enid Bolam is found in the cellar, stabbed with caretaker Peter Nagle’s chisel. Nobody considers this a wonderful start into the weekend although Miss Bolam, the clinic’s senior administrator, was not exactly popular among staff and patients, being too much bent on ensuring the house’s financial well-being and on enforcing rules. When Dalgliesh and his colleague Martin later investigate Miss Bolam’s private life, they will come to the dreary conclusion that nobody is probably going to shed any honest tears over her grave but the Girl Scouts whom she coached with a fair share of enthusiasm and devotion. In fact, there are lots of people who had a motive for precipitating Miss Bolam’s quietus and many leads to follow. Has the murder something to do with a phone call Miss Bolam made to Mr Lauder, her superior, on the day of her death? A phone call in which she told him that she had found out about something wrong that has been going on in the clinic for years and that she must break to him? Or was the murder an act of revenge for Miss Bolam’s meddling divulging the affair between Dr. Baguley and his colleague Frederica Saxon to Baguley’s wife? Did Miss Bolam’s cousin Marion have a hand in her death? After all, Marion would have come into a pretty sum of money, should Miss Bolam die, and there were rumours about Miss Bolam’s wanting to change her will. Or was it simply a matter of wrong place, wrong time because there was also a burglary in the clinic?

Be that as it may, A Mind to Murder deftly entwines the investigation of a murder with the description of the petty wars fought among the staff of the clinic, giving us examples of everyday plotting, opportunism and hostility fed by ambition. Unlike in Cover Her Face, James succeeds here in keeping up suspense throughout the narration and in not getting entirely carried away by her explorations into people’s minds and characters. The latter not only enlighten us as to what makes people tick but also insert powerful red herrings into the crime plot so that I am looking forward to the next novel, Unnatural Causes.