Rating: 5/5

The 17th in my re-read of the entire Discworld series and we not only get Rincewind again but also Twoflower! 

One reason why I decided to re-read the series is that I can never just indulge in one of the volumes. The other is that the audiobooks were newly produced and the casts looked amazing.

Reading this 17th book (in chronological order) are:

Oh, the silly little games the gods are getting up to! This time, Fate is being taught a lesson or two by The Lady. *chuckles* One guy who doesn't think it's funny is our favorite wizzard, Rincewind who had spent a lot of time being lost somewhere. But then the Counterweight Continent is sending a message to Lord Vetinari and he instructs Ridcully to send "The Great Wizzard", let's just say there is no escaping The Hex. ;P
Why they need a great wizard? Well, revolution is coming to at least part of the Disc and people are fed up with slavery and mindlessness ... at least some of them are. And it never hurts to have some muscle behind you when you go up against a torturous monarchy with a thousands-of-years' long tradition. Oh, if only they knew what kind of "muscle" they have been asking for. *cackles*

As is usual for the Rincewind books, the hapless chap isn't center stage. Yes, he's an MC but only "an" MC. I think that was a stroke of genius by TP since Rincewind alone can really get on your nerves (IMO). Here, Conan and his horde, UU, as well as Twoflower and his daughters make up the rest of the main cast. 

I loved how Twoflower's daughter, Butterfly, was so smart and capable and a warrior in her own right (I am particularly partial to the martial arts bits). But I have to admit that the way they were presented here and considering how loyal they proved be, I was also quite smitten with the geriatric barbarians. *lol*

And I'm happy to report that the new audio version was once again fantastic. Colin Morgan did a wonderful job once again and is pretty darn perfect for any story relating to the wizards. 

Therefore, a pretty great addition to the series though not in my top 5 (anyone knowing Pratchett and this series knows that even the worst of these is gold compared to anything else out there though). In fact, I enjoyed this so much and am appreciating it even more now than before so I upped my rating.