Rating: 3/5

Helen Nichols has a reputation for being one of the best pitchers, and worst readers, in the sixth grade. She's also known as one of the biggest troublemakers in school. At the start of the year, she's assigned to the classroom of Mrs.Lobb--"Blob" to those who know her--a teacher with very little tolerance and a lot of rules. Although Helen works for hours after school every day with her mother on her homework, she can't fake her way through reading assignments and tests all year, and soon she's in danger of failing the sixth grade. With the sympathetic guidance of some understanding adults (her father, uncle, and new teacher, Mr. Marshall), Helen makes the difficult decision to start taking special ed classes in reading--even if it means getting made fun of by her classmates.

Although many of the references in the book are more than a little out of date--the students talk about playing Van Halen albums and use Pee Chee notebooks--DeClements does an excellent job of creating a relatable pre-teen world. Her sixth graders talk like sixth graders, and act like sixth graders, without ever lapsing into the sort of self consciously good behavior that makes it obvious that they were written by an adult. This is important, not only because it makes the characters believable, but because it is an honest portrayal of the sort of power struggles that kids at this age have with the adults around them. They're not sure if they want to be treated like children or teenagers, and take a great deal of pride in pulling things over on adults (particularly their parents) when they can. Helen frequently does things at her friend's house that she knows her mother wouldn't allow--drive in her friend's brother's fiberglass car, go to a horror movie unchaperoned--and this seemed so wonderfully realistic to me.

DeClements also deals with Helen's bad behavior and reading difficulties with the same sort of empathy and realism. It's not difficult to see why she acts out so much, but the connection between her bad behavior and her disability is never belabored. Also, just because Helen decides to take special education classes doesn't mean that she suddenly loses all of her self-deprecating negativity. "Face it, Helen," she says in the next to last chapter. "You're dumb in reading."

Another facet of DeClement's realism is that the adults in the novel have their problems and short-comings, too. Mrs. Lobb is certainly a beleagured teacher, but she's also unable to find a way to connect with Helen and be a productive figure in her life. Helen's mother also means well with her refusal to let Helen take special education classes, but her actions are mostly motivated by her pride, and Helen's father even admits this to her. Adults aren't perfect either, and I think that demonstrating that shows a lot of respect for young readers.

The other standout aspect of this book is that it really underscores the importance of taking responsibility for oneself and one's actions. Helen not only decides of her own accord to pay back the school for her spray-painting vandalism, but also asks herself to be considered for special ed classes. Later in the book, she assures her mother that at twelve, she's old enough--and responsible enough--to stay at home without supervision after school. Learning to be responsible helps Helen begin to feel better about herself as a person, and I think this is an applicable message for any young reader.