Rating: 4/5

I finished this book a week ago and for some reason just started throwing together thoughts that grew beyond what probably should be a review, and won’t really be useful to anyone unless they read the book - or maybe they won’t be useful at all. For that reason, I’ll do a conventional review of the book, and then if anyone wants to read some vaguely philosophical meditations on the mental health industry, both presented in the book and out ‘there’ in the ‘real’ world, then they can.

So MISERY is a sequel to House of God, Shem’s bestselling take on the medical industry. HoG has been favorably compared to Catch-22, with the medical industry taking center stage instead of the military, and that’s an assessment I generally agree with. In HoG, Roy is a medical student whose eyes are opened to all the failings of medical school.

His mentor in that book, the Fat Man, presents a series out of counter-intuitive rules for treating patients. Misery follows Roy as, like many of his cohorts at the House of God, he’s gone into psychiatry, too damaged by working directly with the physically ill, and begins his rotations in wings of the hospital that focus, for example, on overprescribing drugs to make as much money as possible, or, elsewhere, an unquestioning worship of Freud.

The general structure of the book mirrors HoG. Roy has pals who suffer alongside him various ways, affairs with women he probably shouldn’t have affairs with, and a series of mentor figures who largely lead him astray with the ‘conventional’ wisdom of the establishment. Luckily, Roy has people like Malik, this novel’s Fat Man, who provides a regular dose of humanity to what Roy discovers is a tremendously inhuman, and sometimes dangerous, psychiatric industry.

The book presciently exposes failings in the mental health industry that were just blossoming then, but are now full blown crises: the strangle hold big pharma has on the mental health of the nation and how those in need are treated to serve the needs of Big Pharma; the increasing dehumanization of patients by algorithms, data points, and the presence of a cold, technocratic digital overlord; the endless proliferation of esoteric, postmodern theoretical approaches to the human psyche that become increasingly divorced from any sense of reality; and, of course, the demolition of any sacred cow presented as fact.

The book’s a bit unfortunate when it comes to its sexual politics, with more than a smattering of Roth’s Portnoy in Roy, but that’s forgivable. Satire like this isn’t vogue anymore, since it relies a on occasional caricature which, in turn, sometimes relies on hyperbolically working with stereotypes that we’d probably not put up with today. And ultimately the book is perhaps too long. But it’s a damning take on the mental health industry, and I felt like shaking my head from the future and telling Roy, wait a few decades, buddy. You think it’s bad now? Just wait.

/end conventional review

I don’t usually underline books I read for pleasure, but since I have a layman’s interest in the mental health industry, I found myself underlining passages to return to later. 

A lot of them center around the disconnect between theory and practice, and the best doctors in MISERY, as in HoG, rely more on the former and less on the latter. Put another way, Roy’s journey through the psychiatric industry is marked by a marked refusal of common sense and human decency.

On a technical level, Shem pulls off an interesting take on dramatic irony, where the reader knows more than the characters. Roy starts off like us, human and humane, and we follow along this Everyman as he navigates the psychiatric industrial complex. We learn as he learns. But at a certain point he falls off an ideological cliff - the ‘drinks the Kool-Aid’ and abandons things that readers recognize as fundamental truths of the human condition.

Malik represents those truths, and this split, and Roy’s arrogance [which also touches his intimate and familial relationships] transform him, midway through the novel, into one of its villains. Our hope is that he’ll realize the errors of his ways and step up to the so-called ‘authorities’ that have inexplicably gained power over the damaged, vulnerable populations under their care.

The satire here is scathing and of the best kind: while the happenings are funny, all we need to do is open our eyes in, what is it now, twenty twenty, to see that the seeds Shem sees and mocks have blossomed into a completely degenerate mental health system and a general social fabric that is, on a cultural level, incredibly mentally ill itself.