Rating: 5/5

This is an amazing book! Definitely one of my all-time favourites, and there wasn't even any magic in it (!). So this is a historical fiction that follows the charming Andrea Orsini in 16th century Italy during the time of Cesare Borgias. Andrea really made the story shine: the other characters (notably Mario Belli and Camilla Baglione) were great too, but Andrea was the real mind behind everything. Yes, Orsini could be quite the flatterer with his mellifluous words, but he's an actor (not as a profession, but he does it naturally) and is at the same time very honest (despite a few notable exceptions...). His transformation throughout the book was the highlight for me: it seemed so natural, but at the same time, I couldn't have foreseen how it would turn out (I won't spoil it though). Orsini and Belli also make quite the team, and it was captivating how we were always left wondering whose side Belli was really on, or if he was on no side but just went with whatever suited him best.
The descriptions throughout the book were excellent, and I got a good sense of the time period and the people (some historical, like the Borgias's) within it. And even though the main characters are those with high political power, we still get a sense of the life common people lived in this time, indeed, even though we don't see it first hand, we get a good sense of the transition Andrea made from peasant to high-ranking soldier/lieutenant who manages to best even Cesare Borgias. And this is one of the things that makes him so clever: he never underestimates anyone, and uses all means possible in his plots.
One of the main themes of the book focuses on what matters and what we should strive to do in our lives. Also, if we know what we want, what we are prepared to do for it: would we kill others, would we lie, would we live a life in which we have to pretend to be someone we're not? We first see these ideas with Andrea's mother near the beginning of the book, but it returns again and again, and there is a foil with Andrea and Cesare: both highly ambitious, but Andrea slowly deviates from Cesare's ideals due to his own morals (and love for Camilla, of course) whereas Cesare is undaunted in his mission to rule Italy.
I'm really surprised that this book isn't better known: I had such a hard time getting a copy of it at the library, and most libraries and bookstores don't even carry it. It is a classic that should be widely-read!