Rating: 5/5

4.5/5 Stars 

Really good. Well written book about Muhammad Ali's life in boxing.
 
I am not a boxing fan but I do like Muhammad Ali a lot. Our beliefs are different but I learned to respect him for the man he is for his fight during the Civil Rights Movement and his fight against joining the army to fight in a war he didn't agree with (more to it than that I'm sure but that was the top reason I always heard him give when I listened to him speak on why he didn't want to be in the military). The fact he was willing to be a "representative" for his people/someone for them to look up to...I admired as well.
 
I wasn't born until 1974 so naturally I didn't grow up during the era he did (Jim Crow segregation, etc) but as I got older, especially my high school years and 20's, my love for learning about the C.R.M. was strong and something I need to get back into again...that's how Ali really became a part of being in my "line of vision" when it came to learning more about him. When I saw this book in the thrift store, I had to grab it not reading the summary. It wasn't until I started reading it that I realized it focuses mostly on his career...I didn't think I'd like it but was determined to get it finished and I'm glad I did. It taught me how the term "rope a dope" started and where "Thrilla is Manilla" came from. His wins, losses, etc. I can't say I know everything about boxing now, but I can say I know more than what I did before going into it.
 
I learned, a supposed racist, gave Ali a robe that he ended up putting "People's Champion" on the back of it! That supposed racist? Elvis Presley! Mind you, Ali was a Muslim by this point. So, for two people who were/are racist...why talk to each other? During a time it was acceptable for white men to be so? I've always liked Elvis' movies and never thought of him as racist. Did many have prejudices? Yes! But having a prejudice doesn't = racism. I think to a certain degree, we all do, even if we don't realize it or we fight against it. But, I'm off of that rant! :-)
 
This is another book that has opened my eyes to some things and I love this book for that reason. :-)
 
(There may be typos because I typed this on my Kindle. I may come to check for them later but I was just ready to get this review up while it was fresh on my mind)