Rating: 3/5

So...I really wanted to dislike this book. I was determined not to allow myself to be one of "those girls." You know...the ones who plan ladies night out to watch Sex and the City. I've never had a desire to read Bridget Jones' Diary or The Devil Wears Prada (although I do hate to admit that I actually liked Devil as a movie) I mean, it's Chick Lit. Fluff without the smut. What fun is that?

Turns out, it's more fun than I was expecting. The book started out in such a way that I was expecting to give up before making it past a few chapters. I practically sighed with exasperation over the flighty, bumbling, office girl who embarrasses herself in front of her boss without knowing who he is. The thoughts in my head were practically burning a hole in the Nook. No, I don't care about what crappy fashion you're wearing to the office. No, I don't care that you're really a size 12 but tell people you're an 8. No, I don't care that you have a lame ass boyfriend who listens to jazz and likes bad movies.

Just as I was about to hit "delete" and ditch the book from my ereader, something happened. I started laughing. A LOT. Not the polite little giggly "oh that's cute" type of laughter. The snorting, choking, oh-my-god I'm dying laughter. My husband even looked up from his zombie like trance mid-video-game to give me a wtf? look.

It took several chapters for me to warm up to the book and truth be told, if I hadn't promised myself that I wanted to finish at least one chick lit book just to say that I had given the genre a shot, I would have quit out before getting to the part where it started to get good. Once I got past the mediocre parts revolving around the main character's office and family life, and got into the part where she was spending most of her time trying to figure out how to make a relationship with her boss work, I was along for the ride. It was quite the fun ride, too. I was pleasantly surprised.

Will I continue to read chick lit after this? Hmmm...I don't know. This book was fun and I'm completely glad that I read it, but I still am not fond of the office girl/modern day girl formula that seems to be pretty big in this genre. Even with as funny as this book was, I've browsed some reviews for the author's books and it looks like she tends to stick with a similar subject matter for most of her books.