Rating: 2/5

Robert Cormier basically seems to write two types of books: introspective novels regarding the world as it was while he grew up, in which he demonstrates the deeper insights about life that he has developed during the years following his youth in the mid-twentieth century, and the excruciating suspense novels for which he is more widely known. Other Bells for Us to Ring falls into the first category, and those who have taken the time to piece together Robert Cormier's personal philosophy from reading his many published works won't want to miss this important piece of the puzzle.

 Darcy, age eleven, has moved from town to town with her family for most of her life. She hasn't had much of a chance to make close friends, though it's also true that she's never really made an effort to get to know the kids in her classes; that is, until one of them makes the effort to get to know her, after Darcy moves to Frenchtown. Kathleen Mary is an unusual girl who takes to Darcy right away, and after finding out that they share an interest in poetry, the girls become friends. 

 On the surface, Darcy and Kathleen Mary don't appear to have a lot in common. Most noticeably, Darcy's family is Unitarian, while Kathleen Mary is from a Roman Catholic religious background in a town filled to brimming with Catholics who take their belief system very seriously. The girls' friendship with each other causes them both (but especially Darcy) to have new questions about the nature of religion and why their families believe what they do, but the difference in faith never causes much of a rift between them. Still, Darcy and Kathleen Mary are a quirky pairing as friends, not always seeing each other all that often and rarely planning to get together; when it does happen, it's almost always on a whim. Darcy isn't completely aware of what the friendship means to her until the night when everything changes.

 At the same time, in her home life, Darcy becomes sick with fear when her father reveals that he has been assigned for shipment overseas as a member of the U.S. military, to help construct temporary bridges for the Allied cause in World War II. He had already been an active participant in the war effort up to that point, right here from Frenchtown, but going overseas to where the actual combat rages is a totally different story. Darcy's father writes to her and her mother all the time after he's shipped out, though, and his constant stream of letters is a comfort that keeps them from worrying that something terrible may have happened to him.

 But then the flow of correspondence stops, and official notice comes that Darcy's father has gone Missing in Action. The stunning news affects Darcy and her mother in very different ways, causing Darcy to wonder at length about the nature of miracles, and her mother to become subdued and emotionally shut away from the world. For Darcy, it was her friendship and conversations with Kathleen Mary that has brought on the thoughts about miracles. Unitarians and Catholics may not have the same ideas about God, but what if a bit of Catholic influence could make the miracle that Darcy desperately wishes for come true, for her father to return safely from the war? When everything depends on it, how does one truly get through to God to petition for a miracle?

 Described in the book jacket as "Robert Cormier's first book for children", Other Bells for Us to Ring does read younger than most of the author's novels, but I'd hesitate to say that it is intended for readers much younger than twelve or thirteen. There are some minor instances of profane language, and one of the book's scenes in particular is quite jarring. Overall, though, I see Other Bells for Us to Ring as a worthwhile story that examines some hot-button issues more closely under the microscope of contemporary reason, and ultimately allows the reader to make the important decisions about faith and belief for him- or herself. I would definitely give two and a half stars to this book.