Rating: 5/5

“Love, genuine passionate love, was his for the first time. This he had never experienced at Judge Miller’s down in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley. With the Judge’s sons, hunting and tramping, it had been a working partnership; with the Judge’s grandsons, a sort of pompous guardianship; and with the Judge himself, a stately and dignified friendship. But love that was feverish and burning, that was adoration, that was madness, it had taken John Thornton to arouse.” 

In reading this book, I had my long standing belief confirmed that one cannot know how much one has loved another human being until the latter has been removed for whatever reason and that also applies to non-humans. And we are talking about a dog here:

“From his St Bernard father he had inherited size and weight, but it was his shepherd mother who had given shape to that size and weight. His muzzle was the long wolf muzzle, save it was larger than the muzzle of any wolf; and his head, somewhat broader, was the wolf head on a massive scale.”

Buck’s cosy lifestyle was to change forever in the fall of 1897, when the lure of gold with the Klondike strike had men rushing to northern Canada to take advantage of what they perceived to be instant wealth. The one necessity to achieve this was having sled dogs and consequently Buck was taken, subjected to very rough treatment, and ended up as one of them.

But Buck is no ordinary dog. He soon realizes that he has to fight for survival in his new unwanted lifestyle both with living on the meagre food rations he was given and the aggressivity of his fellow dogs. Nevertheless, this is a great dog and he soon becomes a legend in these northern lands with his prowess of pulling heavy loads and his sheer excellence as a sled dog. He even won his owners $1,600 (rather a lot of money then) when he pulled a load of 1,000 lbs a distance of 100 metres.

His primordial instincts, however, gradually come to the fore and I have no doubt that when he met the first wolf and spent a day with him, that he would have reverted to type but then choice unexpectedly had come into the equation with that one word “love” and that came in the form of John Thornton who had saved his life. 

And as a result with that choice there are two roads that he can follow and so what does Buck decide to do?

I don’t know why this book has had such a dramatic effect on me. Perhaps the era had something to do with it, the immense lands of Canada, and Buck’s continual fight for survival. How could one not admire and love this incredible dog? But imperceptibly he is changing too:

“The blood longing became stronger than ever before. He was a killer, a thing that preyed, living on the things that lived, unaided, alone, by virtue of his own strength and prowess, surviving triumphantly in a hostile environment where only the strong survived.” 

And finally the following poem states it all with ancestry, instincts, and history:

It is taken from "Atavism," a poem by John Myers O’Hara:

“Old longings nomadic leap,
Chafing at custom’s chain;
Apart from its brumal sleep
Wakes the ferine strain”

And Buck was indeed awakened.

I can never be more grateful that I came across this children’s classic. Where was I in my youth that I was never told about this spellbinding book? It’s not long but I actually browsed through the book again after finishing it. I didn’t want to let go of those incredibly moving words by Jack London.