Rating: 5/5

There are two ways to read a book such as this; the first way is to read it cover to cover and the second is to find entries about people you are interested in. I have the 1985 version with the blue cover, so I don’t know if they corrected these problems for later publication.

The Great Thoughts is a book of quotations compiled by George Seldes throughout his lifetime. When this book came out in 1985 Seldes was still alive at the age of 94, so I don’t know how much longer he went on living. There is a lot to like about this book. In some of the cases, Seldes was able to take quotations directly from the people who said them while they were still alive. The most notable one of this that I can think of was Albert Einstein.

The Great Thoughts is organized like an encyclopedia or dictionary. The entries are sorted by the entrant’s name. Generally, it is the family name if they have one, but sometimes it is their official name. When the book includes the words or writings of Popes, it goes by their Papal name and not the name they had before becoming Pope. Generally, when a person thinks of Great Thoughts, they think only of the good thoughts. Seldes had this pointed out to him by Aldous Huxley. As such, we have some writings and quotations by such ‘luminary’ minds as Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, Joseph Stalin, Vladimir Lenin, and Ruhollah Khomeini.

As I mentioned in the opening paragraph, this book does have problems. All of these problems are nitpicks, they are small enough, on the whole, to ignore or overlook because this book as a whole is quite good. One nitpick I have is with the organization of some of the quotes. For example, Marcus Aurelius is listed in the M’s rather than in the A’s as one would expect. The other nitpick I have is the weight that some of the people are given, or rather the amount of space some people are afforded. Freud has around three or four pages, while there is not one single mention of William Shakespeare. This is explained in the introduction though, so I don’t know what I should have expected.