Rating: 4/5

Who doesn't love the drama of a Judy Blume book? This was a different POV take on a lot of characters. The main was Margo, who after a divorce moved from NYC to Bolder, Colorado. She had 2 kids Michelle and Stuart. Her ex Freddy, a dentist, is remarried and in typical form plays the kids against her. I enjoyed the different POV and how what actually comes out of your mouth is rarely what you feel. I think A lot of Margo's behavior was more than honest. I think a lot of divorced woman hide their sex lives, boyfriends and tend to behave for the benefit of the kids. So, what I appreciated about Margo was that she was out for herself in a lot of ways. 

In addition to Margo there were her two friends, BB who was so troubled and Clare who was a real best friend. B.B. and Margot are casual friends, her daughter Sara was at the other end of BB's abuse. She was so manic and nobody saw it except Sara and she was too young to understand. BB and her ex had a son Bobby who was killed in a tragic car accident while Andrew drove him and two friends home from a baseball game. The fact that BB kept this a secret was really her downfall. She has feelings that were sealed up for years. Clare had a daughter "Puffin" what kind of a name is that? She was very successful and her ex Robin comes back. The two were never divorced. The cutest thing was when Puffin hooked up with Stu, Margo's son. Then they had a lot to deal with and that is a reveal and spoiler too! 

When BB asks Margo to help get her husband the rental next door for the summer, Margo helps. she and Andrew resist each other, I think Margo resisted more, eventually they get together. I know Margo promised herself she was going to be serious and resisted him for that reason.

Tons of drama and overall I thought it was a solid 4* book. People who wrote and reviewed made comments about the time and it takes place in the 80's. I really didn't see that many references and where some saw this as a negative I saw it as a non issue.