Rating: 5/5

***The review below is that of a very involved reader, please make allowance for any difference of opinions!***

4.75* for this Georgette Heyer book.

Regency Buck was a book I had been wanting to read for a long time and after having read it, well the least I can say is it was what a Georgette Heyer book is, prolific writing and a good story, considerable amount of intrigue and mystery with touches of romance. (Romance in RB was much higher than in The Reluctant Widow I must say!)

The story is about orphaned and filthy rich siblings Judith and Peregrine Taverner who are foisted upon a friend of their deceased father, who was careless enough in taking the effort to enquire whether that friend was even alive, and who in error allots the guardianship to this friend's son! And so begins a story of a forced and irksome guardianship and a reluctant and annoyed forbearance of the wards. The flow of the story is swift and there are many nuances which a skimming reader may miss, so when you are reading this book, read it closely. There is a good deal of mystery involved and at some places the reader is unable to decide what may actually happen and who may be the culprit. As the story is about the Regency era there is much weightage to high fashions and appearances. 

Coming to the characters. First, foremost and very happily I would like to describe the Buck on whom whole of the story is based, Lord Julian St John Audley, Fifth Earl of Worth. He is handsome, elegant and very clever. But those are not his only endowments! He is a dandy and yet not a dandy! He is very resourceful, steady, good natured, kind and patient but at the same time unimaginably rude and authoritative with an uncompromising finality of disposition. His wish is or rather has to be command! Especially when it comes to Judith and Peregrine. However much his behaviour may seem odious, but his forethought and promptness positively prove him correct, hands down. At some places he has been so portrayed as to be culpable of crime, but perusing his words, one comes to understand that there is more than one meaning to what he says, and GH has very cleverly sculpted these lines to force much suspicion in the reader's mind. His integrity and patience are things which display the strength of his character, though the way he initially behaves with Judith may very readily be assumed to be that of a rake, but the knowledge of his being Judith's guardian possesses him of much appreciable propriety and manners. The best thing I liked about him was he did not prohibit Judith from taking snuff, on the contrary he made it for her! Now that was something! Plus he let her drive his greys! He is very similar to Alverstoke (Frederica) but has a good memory, and I could also find traces on Wyndham (The Corinthian) and Lord Damerel (Venetia) in him, but he was still distinct and in many ways endearing. He was The Regency Buck I set out to look for!

Initially I found Judith Taverner's anger and indignation justified, but after sometime I felt that she was at some places unnecessarily very angry. Too angry heroines aren't what I much like. Her character is very similar to Sophy (The Grand Sophy) and Venetia (Venetia) in being frank and bold in many aspects but she also has a sensibility which the other two did not much display. She also admits her mistake when she actually feels she has done wrong but that is very reluctantly. Initially she is very naïve, but she really grooms herself into one eye catching and smart trend setter (what with the snuff and the phaeton!) For my part I was glad that a heroine was depicted so bold as to presume a chiefly male habit and do it with elegance too! Her errors of judgement do wring on her conscience, and I would have loved to see her planting a facer on Bernard Taverner (she thinks of it, but sadly doesn't pursue it). One fault she possessed was readily believing people where she ought to be cautious and also forming prejudices against people she clearly disliked. There is something ironical in her nature, she despises showy people especially men, and yet judges people based only on their apparent characters!

Peregrine, though much as he loved his sister was but very careless and I was annoyed at his reluctance to appreciate Lord Worth and his determined defiance of him was many times ingratiating. Even after he understands the part Lord Worth has played in safeguarding him, he is seen to be much negligent in his appreciation, though Judith tries in vain to make him acknowledge the facts and apologize for both their behaviours. He is not bad, but he cannot bring constancy of temperament in himself. And I believe GH did a splendid job in bringing out such a true to life character in words.

Mr Bernard Taverner is one villain who stands in the same part to Lord Worth and Judith as Wickham did to Darcy and Elizabeth in Pride and Prejudice, perhaps he is the more evil of the two because of the extent to which he goes to gain his ends. He left no opportunity to malign Lord Worth's image in the eyes of Judith with a dubious subtlety. For me, I began suspecting him right from the time he made his appearance with his father at Brook Street, and I was right! I wish GH described his hampering at the hands of Lord Worth, Such satisfaction it would have brought me!!

Mrs Scattergood was nice, a chatty yet dignified and propriety personified individual. Straight forward and yet loving and caring in her manners.

There were certain things which set this book apart. This is a book where from The Prince Regent to the merest tiger, everyone got involved in the story! Two characters which have been alluded to in many of Georgette Heyer's books (which I have read till now) - Lord Brummel and Jackson, for the gratification of the reader actually bore roles in RB; Jackson made a couple of appearances while Lord Brummel marked a further awe inspiring impression upon the ardent Georgette Heyer reader with his charming presence in his part as Lord Worth's good friend.

One thing I didn't like much was there were too many secondary (and some tertiary as well) characters which made me endeavour to remember all of them very tasking.

I really liked that Lord Worth and Judith have a justification of everything, of all events and feelings towards the end which undoubtedly gives a completeness to the book and doesn't leave the reader conjecturing.

A very well thought out book, good read and some extraordinary characters which will be carried in mind whenever any of Georgette Heyer's books are to be discussed.
A must read for any Georgette Heyer fan!