Rating: 5/5

When Irwin Shaw wrote Voices of a Summer Day, he didn’t mean it to be historical fiction, but it has become just that. Shaw captures the lives and attitudes of post-WWII Americans and makes it personal.

Benjamin Federov is experienced, a WWII veteran, successful with both business and women. He is a nicer version of Don Draper (Mad Men) or maybe it’s just that he doesn’t drink as much. He’s sitting alone in the bleachers of a small town ball park watching his son play a late summer baseball game in 1964, reflecting on his life. He’s joined later by a woman who also has a son on the ballfield; she’s Ben’s former mistress. 

To the outside world, Ben’s life might have seemed charmed, the son of hardworking immigrant parents successful enough to send him away to summer camp and later off to college. But Ben’s memories of summer camp are rife with discontent. He chafes at the racial injustices he witnesses, refuses to envy class privilege and shies away from sexist bravado.

Still bothered by it forty years later, he recalls a boy bragging, then making a ballad out of his conquest, “I took her cherry under a cherry tree . . . her, cherry, cherry, cherry, under the cherry, cherry tree.”

Ben found it crude to brag and he hated dishonesty. The first time he had sex he enjoyed it so much he vowed to be promiscuous his whole life, but to never lie to his lovers. When he met Peggy, he knew he would marry her and she knew he would wander.

“They made love three weeks later, on a Saturday night, in the warm dark garden behind the tennis court. Peggy was not a virgin. ‘Remember,’ she said later, enjoying her own candor, ‘I have a BA from Stanford. They don’t give degrees to virgins in California. It’s a state law.’”

It was 1942. Their college degrees didn’t matter. After a quick wedding and brief honeymoon with Peggy, Ben went off to war. It would be three years before he saw her again. By the time he returned they were strangers to each other, groping forward but committed.

His reverie in the bleachers hit one snag after another. All of them are about the stupidity and injustices he’s witnessed in the world. Of his experience with war and the Vietnam conflict just beginning, he says, “War does not teach you much as one would like to believe. The guns fall quiet but the soul trembles on.”

When asked why he’s not more riled up about the prejudice he suffers as a Jew, he admits that it bothers him, but points to those with bigger fights on their hands, noting the Civil Rights Movement he’d been quietly cheering for since the mid 50’s.

All his thoughts are balanced by the pleasant late summer day watching a pick-up baseball game. “His tall son glided like a stranger, ageless, a memory, across the green grass; his own father for a moment or two in a vanished September was alive . ..”

But in the end, after the baseball game is over, he’s pushed to the breaking point. On a twilight stroll, nearing a Long Island beach club, he sees two boys too far out in the rising ocean waves. They can’t hear his warning, so he rushes into the club – a place that has never allowed Jews as members. All he wants is the oars to the boat on the beach so he can rescue the boys. The club manager looks out, squints to see that one of the teen boys is black. He claims they have no responsibility for such people, “They are not members.”

All the sour memories come rushing back, all the people who were not members and all the people who had joined the club and given up their souls in the process.

The last pages of Voices of a Summer Day made me cry. I don’t know why. Perhaps it’s the knowledge that there are good men, and better women, in every age, but always far too many who have joined the club.