Rating: 4/5

Ms Atwood is as magnificent a reader as she is a writer. And she's read more Canlit than I probably ever will. Perhaps I'll read less than I might have done after this: she doesn't make it sound terribly cheery.

A point that she freely acknowledges. For example on page 281 she asks the question; " What happens in Canadian literature when boy meets girl? And what sort of boy, and what sort of girl? If you've got this far, you may predict that when boy meets girl she gets cancer and he gets hit by a meteorite...." And then, endearingly, admits that this is more than just a bad joke, it indicates the danger of cliché writing once there is a defined tradition. And what is this tradition, as she discovers and defines it? She detects a pattern in the poetry and fictional prose of Canadian writers of the earlier part of the twentieth century: grim and bare survival, a failure to do anything but stay alive. Unrelieved gloom. A disproportionate toll of death and failure. "Given a choice of the negative or positive aspects of any symbol - sea as life-giving mother, sea as what your ship goes down in; tree as symbol of growth, tree as what falls on your head - Canadians show a marked preference for the negative." (p.45)

Actually, it's hard not to just go on quoting great wads of her wonderfully muscular, smoothly flowing prose that contains the occasional bright rip of a self-deprecating sardonic remark - so superior to anything that I might cough up. And it is extremely hard not to stand in awe of her intellect: here she was in 1972, six years before Orientalism, which is generally seen as the founding text of post-colonial theory, and yet she sees the key pattern of Canadian literature in terms of its position as a colony, and therefore as exploited - a colony as (more quotation I'm afraid) " a place from which a profit is made, but not by the people who live there: the major profit from a colony is made in the centre of the empire." Thus a victim: of economic exploitation and of cultural oppression, first by the British and then later by an invading Americanization. And then the other key feature of the model she proposes is that Canada never had that American idea of the Western Frontier, the push westwards to escape the confines of governmental legislation and discover freedom. When Canadians pushed westwards the Mounties were already there. The push west was into exile (outside) or the garrison (inside).

It's a seductive theory that she proposes and naturally she has chosen the novels and poetry that support her theory. It will add title after title to your TBR list, as long as you have a taste for the morbid, but even if your interest in Canlit is minimal, it is at the same time a magnificent exercise in how to read, how to see the larger pattern behind the minutiae of narrated events, how to recognize the patterns of metaphor and language. And it is also a stirring encomium for the value of national literature in creating identity and a sense of self in the world.