Rating: 2/5

This is a Faust retelling that is partially about a review of a Faust retelling, I wanted it to be both deliciously meta and creepy. To that end, there are some early sharp foreboding moments like:

‘It was probably for only a few seconds that neither of us spoke, but quite suddenly the silence became oppressive. It changed with the rapidity of focus in a film and the effect on me was like one of those terrifying dreams from which you cannot free yourself; you lie, conscious and impotent, beneath a great weight of fear, your soul- if that’s what it is- fluttering like a stricken bird. I tried to speak and it seemed that for a long time I couldn’t, though it may have been for no time at all. Finally, I said how quiet it was, and felt my heart thumping in my chest as if I had escaped something’. 

I just wish there were more memorable moments like this. Unfortunately considering this novella is so short it feels like this book takes a little while to get going. There are several moments when the narrative pauses so the protagonist can warn the reader of the horror that’s to come. This undoubtedly a genre staple designed to add dread but the frequency of it, especially in such a short (less than a 100 page) novella led to this feeling a little repetitive and distancing.

E.g: ‘I shall not relate all of what follows in the sequence in which it revealed itself to me. If I did, you would read in the very fog in which I myself lived for so many years.’ 

‘Throughout this account, I am trying to record what happened, or what appeared to happen, because it may be happening still. But after all these years I cannot always be clear of what did happen, especially as it was not clear at the time’.

Just because the book is not as creepy as I would’ve liked is not in of itself a dealbreaker in that is supposed to also be somewhat satirical. In the way that this book is both a Faust based ghost story and a satire of the literary scene, remind me a little of Velvet Buzzsaw. Unfortunately, my reactions to both this book and that film were similar in that I didn’t really feel like either of them let themselves be either fully developed satire or horror pieces. Perhaps it was unfair to think a book this short would be able to parody the literary world effectively. But in actuality, the critiques of literature seem to be less a satire and more of an argument about style the author is trying to persuade you on, which is just less interesting to me personally.

A related problem is that the main character is a little unlikable which would be fine except I’m not sure the book knows he’s unlikeable. The biggest example of this I can think of is when the narrator assumes his marriage is failing because of early menopause and refuses to listen when his wife tells him it’s not. (Perhaps this is the work showing its age but misogyny isn’t going to get me on the protagonist’s side.)Most of the protagonists of these sort of horror tales that are narrating someone else’s story are a blank everyman type (Susan Hill’s Printer’s Devil Court comes to mind) but he isn’t relatable enough for that. As I say an unlikable protagonist isn’t necessarily a bad thing but when the author uses him to share a thesis about style in novels and postmodernism it is. Generally, when someone is trying to be persuasive I find its better if you at least want to hear his side.

With most Faust retellings I’ve read/watched a big part of them is watching the character be seduced by the life they are buying into however because this is being related by a different character with the power of hindsight we miss out on all of that. I can’t help but feel like a book about Edward being seduced into the style over substance literary world would’ve made a more compelling read and a much more interesting satire. Although it had its moments, unfortunately, I can’t say I recommend this book.