Rating: 1/5

#69 - 2010.

A review book from Loyola Press that I received some time ago. I've been interested in Ignatian Spirituality for a while and this has a more general take so far than some books I've read. However, that is not a negative thing. Silf's overview is highly interesting and makes a lot of sense. 

UPDATE
This is a really wonderful book thus far. Silf has a way with imagery and of helping one mentally "enter" the situations she presents. All this helps to get a clear view of where we stand, where God is (yes, everywhere), and how we can better connect. I have tried the Creighton University weekly retreat which attempts this same thing and it has never worked much for me ... so very similar to what I already have experienced through Christ Renews His Parish retreat and formation. This, however, puts it on new ground so that I can revisit spiritual formation and feel there is something to help me dig deeper, rather than revisit the same ground that I am well aware of from one angle.

FINALLY
Although the imagery can be helpful, as I have mentioned previously, I hit a spot in the book which made me wonder about the author's ability to truly pass it on well. At one point she retells God and Satan's conversation from the beginning of the book of Job, which is what begins Job's suffering. However, her portray of God is so very ... human ... God hasn't thought of something that Satan mentions to him, He wonders and doubts, etc. Really? This makes her the world's absolute worst reteller of that story. Read it for yourself and see that there are no such motives for God as she ascribes. Since she is essentially retelling us Ignatian spirituality from St. Ignatius's work, it makes me wonder if she is doing a similarly careless job filtering it for us. Therefore, it makes her entire work suspect in my eyes, until I am able to compare it to St. Ignatius's writings. Which, obviously, is where I need to turn if I am interested in further pursuing this course. Not sure if I am, actually, as I read this because it was a review book ...