Rating: 2/5

Loving it. The plot turns are awfully convenient, but I love the language, and then there's useful stuff like this:

"I'd backed up against that grove on purpose. Looked at from down below no smoke would show against the white of the tree trunks and the gray-green of the leaves...

There's no prettier place than a stand of aspen. The elk and beaver like the bitter inner bark, and you'll nearly always find them where there's aspen. There's no thing that provides more grub for wildlife than the aspen grove.

There's usually wood around. The aspen is self-pruning, and as it grows taller it sheds its lower branches, just naturally reaching for the sun. Those branches dry out quickly and make excellent kindling."

***

Well, my initial enthusiasm dimmed. The book had some problems I found hard to ignore.

The "useful stuff" I admired above was an instance, I came to see, of L'Amour's tendency to cache gobbets of undigested research here and there (how's that for a disgusting image? undigested research, ew!).

The convenience of the plot turns was annoying ("What, there's no way into the ranch, you say? Well, here's a girl who know an old secret trail that no one else knows about..."). And, L'Amour has a bad habit of telegraphing the plot, too-- in one paragraph he'll be all, Oh, no! I hope the bad guys don't catch us on fire! and then, two paragraphs later, what do you know! The bad guys set fire to the place.

The hero, Logan Sackett, keeps saying he's "mean", and is supposed to be some kind of outlaw-- but we only ever see him being noble (okay, he kills a bunch of people, but in context it's noble). He's also distressingly invincible.

I don't know if I'll read the other L'Amours I found, after all.

But there were a couple of things I really like about this book:

The phrase "since who flunk the chunk"-- a beautiful, mysterious phrase! It means "for a long time", or "a long time ago", but I can't figure out where it comes from.

The term "back trail", which can be a verb, meaning "to follow", or a noun-- and the idea of tracking or trailing in general. I like the idea that wherever a person goes he or she leaves behind signs.