Rating: 4/5

Here at The New Yorker represents a catalogue of memories covering more than half of the long history of The New Yorker magazine, a formidable beacon of American culture &amp; manners. The late Brendan Gill sold his first story to the magazine in 1936 when he was 22 and The New Yorker was 11. 

Gill began working at the magazine shortly after his graduation from Yale and over his long career there, edited the "Talk of the Town" column and also did book, film &amp; theater reviews as well as Profiles, Reporter at Large pieces &amp; even an occasional obituary. 

Thus, the author intersected not only with Harold Ross, founding editor of the The New Yorker &amp; his successor William Shawn but with virtually every important writer who passed through New York or contributed to the magazine over a period of almost 50 years.

Brendan Gill's book includes countless examples of pithy humor, the clever covers and cartoons The New Yorker is famous for + some interesting photos of a very young John Updike, William Maxwell (who mentored Updike &amp; many others), John Cheever, A.J. Liebling, Louis Mumford, Truman Capote, Lucius Beebe, James Thurber, Katherine White, E.B. White &amp; Joseph Mitchell among others. 

The images of the old offices cluttered with galley-proofs &amp; other papers &amp; with various writers hunched over typewriters now seems quite nostalgic but was much less so when this book first appeared in 1975. There is even a photo or two of the esteemed tables reserved for privileged members of The New Yorker at the venerable Algonquin Hotel on West 44th Street, a short stroll from the old offices of the magazine. 

Gill speaks glowingly of many authors but less so of others, including Sinclair Lewis, the first American to win a Nobel Prize for Literature, who struck Mr. Gill as:a great roaring, raging &amp; boring drunk with a vile temper, a generous disposition, immense energy and a notable--often a tiresome--gift for mimicry, matched only by his ability to turn friendly gestures on his part into an occasion for making lifelong enemies of everyone who came within reach of his scalding, vituperative tongue.Of James Thurber, Gill mentions that late in life Thurber began treating him in a friendly manner but Gill eventually concluded that this was probably a manifestation of Thurber's belatedly discovered brain tumor. That said, The Years With Ross by James Thurber, also about the early days at The New Yorker is very humorous &amp; quite worth reading. 

Even Mr. Gill and the most formally elegant of contributors to the magazine had to come to grips with the legendary Miss Gould &amp; one or two other unyielding, authoritarian administrative assistants, for whom grammar &amp; syntax had an almost Biblical significance. 

Their corrections often caused long, drawn-out battles over a single comma or semicolon and highly esteemed staff writers &amp; contributors always seemed to come out on the losing end of the discussion. However, it seems that Dorothy Parker was seldom intimidated.

This book is not likely to appeal to anyone who feels the magazine is elitist or overly formal but The New Yorker is an iconic part of the cultural history of the United States &amp; is very well-regarded abroad as well. 

Where else could someone like Joseph Mitchell continue to come to his office daily for 30 years after he'd written his last piece and have the magazine continue to allow him space, attributing his laxity to just a rather severe case of "writer's block"? 

There are some areas where times have definitely changed and we no longer refer to people such as Lucius Beebe as a "wealthy bon vivant and a homosexual", as Brendan Gill does in his book. Nor do we seem to refer to anyone today as a "man of letters", as was often said of Mr. Gill. 

As a personal footnote, I began reading the magazine ages ago on an Illinois Central train en route to college in New Orleans, at a time when the cost of a weekly issue was 25 cents and have continued to find it an almost indispensable part of my life. 

I had the magazine mailed to me via sea freight when I taught school in East Africa and though the issues often arrived months after publication, there is a timeless quality about most of the articles as well as the cartoons. 

I once missed a train because I was foraging around a newsstand for a copy of the latest issue prior to being a full subscriber but it seemed a worthwhile pursuit to delay travel in search of a magazine I've taken with me on almost every journey since my initial encounter with The New Yorker. 

Reading the magazine on a flight or while in a sleeping car compartment or on a voyage seems an important component of the journey. For this reason, I savored reading Brendan Gill's book.

*Within my review are two images of Brendan Gill, one of James Thurber + two of older covers of The New Yorker, including the magazine's debut issue.