Rating: 4/5

While I enjoyed Comanche Heart, I didn't like it anywhere near as much as Comanche Moon. It just didn't have the same power as the first book in the series.

Comanche Moon is a multi-dimensional story in that it wasn't just about the romance, but also about the struggle between Native Americans and whites, the lives affected, the morality of who was right and wrong...the book just had a very well-rounded feel.

Whereas Comanche Heart comes off for me as a bit, well, superficial. Not in a shallow, air-head sense, but in that it didn't dig very deep. The story was almost wholly about Amy, and Swift trying to convince Amy to give him a chance. There wasn't much else to give the story the same kind of depth that Comanche Moon had. There was a bit about Swift trying to overcome his past, but it almost comes off as a side-note despite what happens at the end. I just would have liked there to have been more to the story than there was.

To that end, I was rather disappointed with Anderson's neglect of Loretta, and especially Hunter in the book. Not that I wasn't surprised by it. It's something I've noticed in other books of a series by Anderson - she doesn't utilize past characters as well as she could have. In this case, it bothered me a little more than usual. I wanted to know more about Loretta and Hunter - how they came to settle where they did, why Hunter took up the job he did, how he dealt with the change in cultures , etc. There wasn't anything like that and it left me feeling a little short-changed.

Like some others who read this book, I was rather annoyed with Hunter's reaction, or lack thereof, to the incident surrounding his daughter Indigo. He pretty much didn't react at all and that seemed really wrong for the character we got to know in Comanche Moon. It didn't fit at all for me.

It sounds like I didn't like the book, but I did. Reading it, though, and having read the first book in the series. I thought Comanche Heart just could have been more. The potential was there, but it didn't quite make it. For me, it was a nice romance, but not the powerful drama that Comanche Moon was.