Rating: 5/5

This is Dale Brown’s first in his Air Battle series using his protagonist, Patrick McLanahan. The book was published in 1987, however I believe the technology is new enough, and dense enough, to satisfy readers of tech thrillers. Make no mistake, this is a high-tech thriller pitting the US against Russia in a high tech, strategic battle using air force and space force technology to destroy or minimize each other's early warning systems. 

Russia has developed a powerful land-based weapon that can destroy strategic weapons at any place in the rocket’s trajectory. It can also destroy any satellite in earth orbit allowing Russia to destroy all US early warning satellites prior to any nuclear war. Russia has destroyed a US military airplane over 100 miles from the Russian coast and several satellites whose role is monitoring eastern Russia for potential rocket launches, leaving the US blind. The Russian weapon leaves no wreckage and no bodies.

A plan for destroying the Russian weapon using modern fleet aircraft and the best modern weapons is laid on. However, as US planes are nearing the Russian border, they are put on hold. At the same time, Russian special forces are attacking a US air base. Dreamland is where next generation tools and weapons are tested on the ground and mounted on a B-52 (the Old Dog) for testing on the ranges. A random group of USAF pilots, crew, and civilian workers expert on next generation weapons and tools manages to get away with the Old Dog, fully fuelled, and with a full load of weapons.

Battle begins and rages on for 200 pages to the end of the book.

Brown does a great job of the action scenes. The weapon systems are well described. Their use is also described, their impact, and any opposition the foes might use against them. This is one of Brown’s strengths. This book is excellent for battle, offensive and defensive weapons. However, as Brown adds more and more to the future Air Battle series, non-battle aspects consume larger and larger shares of the books. McLanahan begins to have enemies in the USAF. Subordinates, peers, and bosses begin to pirate his work and his career; all looking to promote themselves at his cost. While a full-fledged protagonist needs human emotions and characteristics, the books begin to be more tedious. 

In general, the major characters are developed enough that we understand their behavior and have some care for them. This makes the book and the plot more plausible. However, this book is the best of the series that I have read. I enjoyed reading it immensely and it went by quickly. Lots of interest, lots of tension, lots of action. Dale Brown tells a good story.		Five stars.