Rating: 5/5

Bo, Teena, Julian, and Lisa are four teens who would never be together if it weren't for a project for school. Things only get worse for them when Bo's car breaks down and they are forced to pull into an old home to use a phone for help. They soon find that they are alone in the house waiting for the auto club, but a storm outside may delay their rescue. Soon odd things start happening in the house, things that are making the four teens realize they need to help each other and stick together to make it to the rescue from the auto club. Lisa discovers things in the house that shouldn't be scary, but are just down right terrifying when the setting is so dark and dreary. All the teens want is to go home, preferably soon and even more preferably alive. Someone seems to be in this spooky house, but they never really show themselves. Who is in the house and do they mean the teens harm? What about the little old lady that owns this house? Is she really stuck in town because of the weather or did she come home and come to some harm by the mysterious someone in her home? Is the someone in the home a hitchhiker or are they someone more mysterious than that....more other worldly?

This book had me from the first word on the first page all the way to the last word on the last page. I was absolutely sucked into this book and story. This author absolutely nailed the bullseye in the writing and flow of this book! I was so into this book by the wonderful descriptions given that I found myself jumpy as I read because of how focused I was on what was going on in the book. A noise would happen in my own home as I was reading and I jumped thinking I was in the story. The characters were so realistic and fun and so well developed that I felt they were real people that I knew of. They all were so different, yet all so much alike. I loved the bonds they started to form as the book progressed. This was a bit different than most mystery books I've read, but in a great way. It wasn't this .... so and so was murdered and now we must find who done it.... it was a what is happening here and what is really going on in this house and with these teens mystery. I loved every minute of it! Nice change of pace in my reading. The ending was a bit of a disappointment to me, as it left some things unanswered, but all in all my love of the rest of the book outweighed the way things ended.

If you like mysteries with a twist, this is the book for you. This is a great book for young adults and adults and is a great easy breezy read. I highly recommend this book!!!

5/5 Stars!!!!