Rating: 5/5

"Life was such a gamble, and the safest, sturdiest man existed on such a tightrope of circumstance that the merest vibration could throw him. We lived, belonged, felt solidly based, important in the world – and then, flick, and we were nothing."

The Angry Tide was another splendid chapter in the Poldark saga. At number 7, it also marks the beginning of the last half of the series – something I don’t really want to think about too much! I will certainly be very heartsick when this glorious journey to late eighteenth century Cornwall has ended. However, I’m getting ahead of myself… I’ll stick to the bright side and try to remember that there still remain five more highly regarded installments I can devour. 

It’s difficult to review a series without giving away plot pieces that may reveal what happens in earlier portions. So I will stick to the basics. Winston Graham continues to write with such care for his characters, the result of which causes the reader to become wholly wrapped up in the lives of each and every one. As in ‘real’ life, no one here is painted as a perfect individual. Your favorite characters will make you angry at times and yet you know that they are very human. You love them like family despite their flaws. The ‘bad guys’ are not just caricatures of your typical villain. They too are sketched with subtle shading that lends them an air of solid authenticity. Some of the ‘regulars’ continued on the scene in this book, while others that I adored from earlier books made brief appearances for which I was grateful. Once you get so absorbed in a saga like this, you do tend to miss them when they disappear for a book or two! Once again, characters get caught up in their emotions, with their feelings taking hold of the reins. Choices are made from the heart rather than the head, the results of which we know can be good or bad. You just never know. "…now and then you do not have all the control of your feelings that you should have – and then thoughts and feelings surge up in you like – like an angry tide. And it is hard, sometimes it is hard to control the tide."
 
Hope is sometimes restored; and on occasion tragedy strikes once again. There were some shocking developments in The Angry Tide! Winston Graham is like a magician – he never fails to astound! You cannot guess what may jump next out of that black hat. I enjoyed a little jaunt to London with Demelza and company in this book. A little change of scenery is nice, although Cornwall is still my preferred retreat. Learning about London society causes a bit of consternation on Demelza’s part… of course, trouble ensues. Additionally, a casual remark by a young man leads to a revival of old suspicions, thereby causing a choice that will have a ripple of effects with staggering consequences. I cannot wait to get my hands on Book 8!! 

I can’t say enough about this magnificent and addictive series. If you have any interest in historical fiction and like the idea of getting hooked on a saga that will oftentimes leave you shouting for joy or weeping with remorse, then you really should get started… right now!

"The past is over, gone. What is to come doesn’t exist yet. That’s tomorrow! It’s only now that can ever be, at any one moment."