Rating: 5/5

“Evil never goes unpunished, Monsieur. But the punishment is sometimes secret”--Poirot

#8 of 39 completed! [And I add, after completion of the whole series, it's one of the best!] 

While on holiday in Cornwall, Hercule Poirot, the elderly Belgian detective who just can’t seem to retire, meets flapper Nick Buckley, who has recently survived three near-fatal mishaps, including just narrowly being missed by a falling boulder, having her brakes fail, and having a heavy painting fall on her bed, and when they are discussing these occurrences, a bullet piercs her hat! Coincidence? Non, Poirot suspects, non non non! This Poirot mystery involves a missing pilot, two Magdalas and a gang of Nick's "friend" suspects. And fireworks on one fateful night, just in case we need noise to cover up . . . ahem! 

And the idiot Hastings, who is comically clueless all the way through as Poirot castigates him for his failings and vapidity.

Hastings: “It’s always darkest before the dawn.”
Poirot: “No! Not another proverb! I can’t bear it!”

And another example, a zinger:

“Poirot," I [Hastings] said. "I have been thinking."
"An admirable exercise my friend. Continue it.” 

And yet another:

“You have a tendency, Hastings, to prefer the least likely. That, no doubt, is from reading too many detective stories.” 

That is a nice touch, because this is what we have a tendency to do through reading Christie's mysteries, to suspect the least likely suspect! So Christie through Poirot turns us around and around, manipulating us throughout. 

In Peril at End House we get, from time to time, actual lists of suspects for us to consider, thanks to Poirot, complete with motives, just so we can keep score and keep track of shifts in the evidence. Poirot’s process in solving mysteries is 1) to apply logic and order to all we think we know; 2) to apply psychology—to see if we can understand all the characters and their possible motives, and 3) something different from either of these two things, “thinking,” which usually involves an all-night sit-alone in a chair. We revive one earlier image here, too, of Poirot making a “house of cards,” in typical meticulous fashion, as he “thinks.”

Reading through each Christie mystery novel one by one, you see her development, she’s trying out new things. In this one Christie is back on her game, after having gotten through her deepest grief from the loss of her mother and the deception and desertion of her first husband, a period which produced a couple relatively bad books. In End House, Christie tries this new idea out: Instead of (at least initially) solving a murder, Poirot goes through half the book trying to keep (the attractive) Nick (he likes his attractive women, our Belgian, and possibly puts in a little greater effort for them?) from being murdered (which involves a different, more pro-active skill set, of course). And Poirot, typically confident and sauve and meticulous, is in this one sometimes nervous, less than confident, beating himself up for his failures, all of which is Christie trying to tweak Poirot’s limited emotional palette.

There is a murder, at one point, of course, and we try to outsmart Christie, knowing what Poirot knows, but until nearly the very end we have no idea whodunnit. I defy you to say you predicted it! One nice touch is that the new playwright Christie, fascinated with plays, has Nick suggest that End House would be a great place for a play, then has Poirot enact a play and a play within a play for the finale! This is one of the very best of Christie’s mysteries that I have read thus far, and I was happily surprised because I had never even heard of it before.