Rating: 5/5

4.5 stars, rounded up for the wonderful friendship between Marcus and Esca. Hallie has been bugging me encouraging me to read this for a while, and I put it on the list for the 31-day reading challenge. When I finished reading The Bone Clocks, I needed something lighter, and as it happens, in the last section of The Bone Clocks the kids are reading The Eagle of the Ninth. I took it as a sign.

Marcus, a centurion posted to Britain, is severely injured in a battle that ends his longed-for career in the military, following in his father's footsteps. His father achieved a sort of immortality as the leader of the Ninth Hispana, a Roman legion that marched north into the wilds of Britain and never returned. When Marcus gets the chance to go north in pursuit of what is believed to be the lost legion's Imperial Eagle, he jumps at it.

It really is that simple a story. What makes it outstanding, aside from Sutcliff's remarkable ability to make you feel like you're there with Marcus and his friend Esca, a British slave (again, as with everything in this book, so much more than that), is how wonderful it is to see the friendship that builds between Marcus and Esca, two young men who ought to be enemies. Contrast this with Marcus's brief acquaintance with the British charioteer Cradoc; Marcus believed they had the potential to be friends, and yet Cradoc betrays him and the rest of the Roman legion stationed at Isca Dumnoniorum, and is indirectly or directly the cause of Marcus's laming. Based on this, Marcus and Esca ought never to have become friends, since Esca has even more reason to hate Romans. And yet...

I see now how this book might have influenced Megan Whalen Turner's Thick as Thieves, which also features a strong friendship between two men who ought not to be friends, one of whom is a slave, and a long journey. There's no resemblance otherwise, but I'll probably mentally shelve both as books about friendship. The Eagle of the Ninth falters only in depicting the romantic relationship between Marcus and his neighbor Cottia, which requires a bit of filling in the blanks. But the ending is deeply satisfying, with Marcus realizing he loves Britain, and Esca becoming a Roman citizen in recognition of his efforts in retrieving the Eagle, and I'm certain I will read this book again.