Rating: 3/5

Agatha Christie wrote this over a period of fifteen years,from 1950 to 1965. When she was seventy five years old,she finished the book because "it seemed the right time to stop." She would live on for another eleven years.

In the preface she acknowledges that the details of her life could be boring for other people.She is right,it is a rambling book. I did find parts of it rather boring and had to do a fair bit of skimming.

But it has its share of interesting moments as well.She lost her father when she was eleven years old and even before his death the family had run into financial difficulties.After a lengthy account of her childhood,she also goes into a lot of detail about courting various young men and refusing offers of marriage.

She eventually married Archie Christie and kept his name even after their divorce. She became a nurse during World War I,caring for the war wounded.Later,she went to work in a dispensary.It was there to kill time that she wrote her first book,The Mysterious Affair at Styles.

It was after two years and various rejections that a publisher agreed to publish it.She didn't get much money for it and was committed to a five book contract on unfavourable terms. 

Later,as she and her first husband ran into financial difficulties,she was compelled to write in order to make some money.

Although she talks in detail about facing financial hardships,she doesn't talk about her financial success and how much money she made when her career took off.

She continued to write during World War II.During the war,her son in law was killed and her house was taken over by the military.

Before that,she had married an archeologist Max Mallowan.They spent a lot of time in the Middle East.

A famous episode in her life,when she disappeared,is not touched upon in the book.

Although Christie describes her travels in a fair bit of detail,I didn't find this part of the book all that interesting.She wouldn't have made a great travel writer.

She does write about some of her famous books,particularly being proud of Ten Little Niggers and The Murder of Roger Ackroyd. She wasn't too fond of The Mystery of the Blue Train even though it sold well.

For a long time,she didn't consider that writing could be a full fledged profession for her.She writes that the best things that happened to her were owning her own car (a Morris) and having dinner with the Queen !