Rating: 3/5

Just like Emily Dickinson said, "There is no frigate like a book," and surely it's never been more nearly literally true of any other book for me than this one. My understanding of early California history has been vastly expanded by this account, published in 1840, written by a Harvard student who sought to relieve eye strain brought about by measles by taking a berth as a common sailor ("before the mast" refers to where most of the crew sleeps). This was an unusual choice for a well-to-do, well-educated young gentleman, but Dana seems to have been an extraordinary person. His voyage was on a merchant ship bound from Boston to California, a round trip which ended up taking two years, 1834-1836, but could easily have taken more. Pre-gold rush California is presented as a God-forsaken coast, a foreign country (which of course it was at the time) good for nothing except raising cattle, and loathed by the sailors for the heavy surf breaking on its beaches, which made the ships' boats almost impossible to relaunch after a trip to shore.

This is one of those titles that one sees in pretty much every used bookstore that doesn't disdain older books of the not particularly valuable variety, often in the children's section -- even though it certainly wasn't written for children! It's so ubiquitous that it was one of the candidates for the used bookstore bingo game my sister and I envisioned creating back in the day. When such a book falls into my lap, I generally give it a try, because it often turns out that they were republished in so many editions over the years for good reason. Two Years Before the Mast (and I'm glad to have finally shaken myself of the conviction the "the mast" was some kind of event with a two year build up) is indeed interesting and worthy. It is very alive for a book that was published so long ago, and must surely be one of the very first "how the other half lives" sort of book. That said, while I'm glad to have read it, I'm equally glad to have finished it. A sailor's life can be rather monotonous, perhaps especially when a good part of "Jack's" time is spent hauling unwieldy leather hides in and out of ships. Still, fans of Patrick O'Brian and the like, who just can't get enough of shipboard life might well find this appealing.