Rating: 4/5

4 stars

 It is probably slightly odd of me to have decided to read a biography of a band of which my knowledge extends only to their most well-known musical efforts. After all, while I do love what I have heard so far, it would be a severe overstatement to state that I am a 'fan' of the Pet Shop Boys. But after having read Chris Heath's account of their experiences during their first tour in 1989, it is hard not to want to delve deeper into the discography of a duo whose artistry is simultaneously lofty and lowbrow, who delight in leaving their listener with myriad answers and yet none at all.

 Heath's writing is concise and detailed, packed dense with as much information as possible but never becoming boring or bloated. In a sure testament to what must be an impressive memory he has managed to note down what seems to be apparently everything, from anecdotes about people the band only meet a few times (Eko, their most dedicated Japanese fan, keeps cropping up) to the details of every single meal they eat and every single club they go to. To some, such details may seem uninteresting, but they do reveal an awful lot about how Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe interact with the world around them, with other people, with each other, and, most importantly, with themselves. All these little threads come together to weave a whole which is by turn frankly introspective in its questioning of what an artist really is and cheekily, even bitchily irreverent in its humour.

 The good thing about 'Pet Shop Boys, Literally' is that, while it does ask some hard-hitting questions of its subjects, like them, it never takes itself uber-seriously. Thus, the direct interview segments with Tennant and Lowe which are peppered throughout the book unfold rather naturally, going from light to deeper to lighter again. Heath is under no illusions of grandeur - he simply reports and ask questions, with the result being a biography that does not adulate its stars nor denigrate them. Instead, it has the maturity to treat them as human beings, warts and smiles and all. It is sure to leave any reader with a desire to find out more about the Pet Shop Boys and their music, if said reader hasn't made the admittedly-right decision to have already done so.