Rating: 4/5

I’m not a parent, and Protecting the Gift came out over 20 years ago, but this was an interesting read for me nonetheless. I was drawn to it because of my interest in psychology and true crime but also just from the perspective of a person who was a kid myself once. And a lot of what he talks about is timeless advice, so it's just as relevant now as when the book was published in the 90s—although I'm sure some crime stats he cites have changed a bit. 

De Becker covers a lot of ground in this book. He consistently tries to put the most time and energy into things that pose the most common social dangers to children, so it's all important stuff. That said, there were a few sections and ideas that particularly drew me in:

Be wary of worry.
If you worry about everything all the time, you will miss it when you get a true intuition of danger or not-rightness. Learn how to listen to your intuition and what situations are truly higher risk, but don't worry about things that are not statistically likely.
At the same time, you shouldn't teach your child things like, 'Never talk to strangers.' Kids will end up breaking this rule, because it's not practical (too many exceptions) and it's not actually the safest solution.

Talk to Strangers
Along these lines, de Becker makes an interesting observation in the "Talk to Strangers" chapter about the way society functions and the way we learn how to move safely through it. It's probably my favorite passage in the book:

Children raised to assume all strangers might be dangerous do not develop their own inherent skills of evaluating behavior. [...] Fear of people is really the fear that we can't predict their behavior.
Recognize that for every person you encounter who might hurt your child, there are literally millions who will not. Does it make sense to treat everyone as if they are in the dangerous group? That's exactly what modern Western society has done. Ironically, adults end up being more loyal to The Rule [Don't talk to strangers] than children: We, unlike people in many cultures, pass each other on streets and in hallways without acknowledgment.
Yet communicating with strangers is part of the test human beings are built to use to confirm that strangers are of good will. [...] We have a complex system for evaluating the intent of those we encounter. In less fractured cultures, strangers exchange signals as they pass each other, signals that usually communicate, 'I mean you no harm.' It might be a nod, a slight smile, a wave, or a greeting that puts both people at ease, but millions of Americans don't participate.
That's why being in the presence of a stranger can be uncomfortable or even frightening. [...] That discomfort you feel in the elevator with a stranger is natural. Your body is waiting to be put at ease when the stranger passes a test. The tension is instantly broken when your nod solicits a smile, or when a comment initiates a cordial exchange of words.
[...] Bottom line: *The issue isn't strangers, it's strangeness.* It is inappropriate behavior that's relevant. [...] Though the smile on its own might not reassure us, or might even be sinister in some contexts, I'd rather have it to evaluate than have nothing to evaluate. And we get something when we acknowledge strangers, most often by speaking with them.
Children who communicate with strangers are exercising their intuition. They learn what feels comfortable and what does not.

Predators often start out seeming nice.
Listen to your intuition if something about an interaction with a stranger feels off.
Don't think: 'This person is charming.' Think: 'This person is trying to charm me.' Sometimes that's harmless, but sometimes it's not. Be aware of it either way: being charming is a decision and a behavior, not an indication that someone is a kind person.
De Becker writes, "We must learn and then teach our children that niceness does not equal goodness. Niceness is a decision, a strategy of social interaction. People seeking to control others almost always present the image of a nice person in the beginning."
The problem is responding to this kind of behavior. "A woman is expected, first and foremost, to respond to every communication from a man. And the response is expected to be one of willingness and attentiveness. Women are expected to be warm and open, and in the context of approaches from male strangers, warmth lengthens the encounter, raises his expectations, increases his investment, and, at best, wastes time. At worst, it serves the man who has sinister intent by providing much of the information he will need to evaluate and then control his target." 
De Becker recommends women get more comfortable with being assertive, especially asserting their No, and valuing standing up for their boundaries over making a strange man comfortable.

Someone you choose is probably safer than someone who chooses you.
"No matter how engaging a stranger might be, you must never lose sight of context: He is what he is, a stranger who approached you." At the same time, the story he tells you about who he is and why he's talking to you is just a story until you can verify it. A predator might try to tell you details that make you more comfortable with him, but in the end, the result will be that you 'know the con, not the con man.'

The idea that we shouldn't shelter children too much from 'adult' topics.
A child who doesn't know what's out there is a victim in waiting. Ignorance can make a child more vulnerable. Yes, talk about these things in a way that won't make the child needlessly afraid of the world, but do talk about them. Give your child the language to report problems to adults, and give them the context to recognize when someone is being inappropriate or they should just be wary.

His advice to teen girls as an especially vulnerable target population.
De Becker observes, "Dangerous men are the very ones most frequently seeking to ‘prove’ they aren’t dangerous... Men who will not harm you needn’t persuade you to trust them; they simply act appropriately from the moment you meet them and for as long as you know them.” 
Be wary of men who try to get you alone in private (in a car, a hotel room, any deserted or low-traffic area where there aren't witnesses) and who try to exert control over you, for example by acting persuasively and making you uncomfortable with saying No to them.

Pay special attention to someone who doesn't respect consent.
If you say No and someone ignores it, even if they're still acting charming, that's a warning sign. For example, if a man offers a woman his help and she politely declines, it's not good if he smiles and offers again or keeps trying to persuade her to let him in. That should make you wary.
De Becker points out that culturally, women are facing an uphill battle with consent. “Understand that when a man in our culture says No, it’s usually the end of a discussion, but when a woman says No, it’s the beginning of a negotiation.” 
And: Hollywood romanticizes men interpreting a rejection as, "Try harder," but in real life, it's not romantic when a guy keeps coming even after you reject him. It could escalate to something dangerous. “What starts as persistence often leads to unwanted pursuit, stalking, even date rape." 

To adults: 
Listen to children when they tell you something is wrong. Let them know they CAN talk to you. Take action when a child confides in you instead of dismissing it or categorizing it as a problem every child goes through and has to solve on their own. Empower child victims by emphasizing to them that they did the right thing: they survived a difficult situation.

To society:
I like that de Becker ends his book by looking at society more broadly and what safety nets we can provide to help children grow up in a safer world. For example, he praises organizations that try to give teenage boys a sense of community and mentorship. These organizations benefit society as a whole by helping kids grow up on the right path instead of letting childhood problems and abuse fester until children become criminals as adults. 

A dated book?
A new edition of this book would probably put more emphasis on Internet safety (instead of just including a one-paragraph appendix about it) and expand the discussion of school shootings. I guess this book came out right before Columbine happened, because he doesn't mention that as an example or think that school shootings are statistically likely. I imagine they were less statistically likely before Columbine, and less deadly on average. Still, I'd recommend this book for everyone. For one, because everyone lives in a society full of children and parents: even if you aren't a parent yourself, at some point you'll probably be a witness to something and need to know what to do. For another, a lot of his advice is good for adults just as much as children, ALTHOUGH if you're just interested in safety for adults, I would highly recommend you start with de Becker's earlier book, The Gift of Fear: Survival Signals That Protect Us from Violence.