Rating: 3/5

If you think one rake is very like another, perhaps you have never attempted to befriend one, with no intention toward reform or romance. Well, put it on your bucket list and, perhaps, we'll compare notes someday. In the meantime, this heroine, secure in her own lack of appeal to the opposite sex, is able to converse openly and artlessly with all those boys your mama told you were only after one thing. The result, of course, is that she becomes bosom buddies (and please know that I employ that expression in the most innocuous manner possible) with the most notorious of rakes and she even offers to assist him in finding a bride. Although, I have never given my assistance in a matter of marriage, I did once offer to help a gentlemen purchase a Christmas gift and it was an unmitigated disaster, which I hope never to repeat...but, I digress. Anyhow, through a sense of misplaced pride, which was inexplicably absent throughout a long history of drunken debauchery, he neglects to tell her that his most crucial criteria for his future bride is a substantial fortune. Our heroine is rich and emotionally vulnerable (can I get an amen from the unscrupulous males out there?). Further crimes of miscommunication ensue followed by bouts of truly reprehensible behavior that would have many a modern day man becoming quite familiar with his living room couch (apparently, we have lost our appreciation for rakes somewhere along the way, ladies) and, another suitably fun, though not, to be fair, spectacular, novel takes its due course. This rake was a bit of a puzzle at times and, I cannot say that I did not have a few moments of wondering if the heroine might have hit her head at some point, damaging the portion of her brain I shall simply refer to as the a-hole detector. Perhaps, as my options grow slimmer and I start to see merit in a real life rake, assuming he is willing to have me, as well, I shall opt to have my own detector surgically removed and find my own happily ever after, but that, my friends, is fairly irrelevant in relation to this review and I would need to see if it is even a covered procedure under my current healthcare plan.