Rating: 3/5

Lady Cassandra Cresswell, the former hoydenish little sister of Lady Frances Cresswell, is all grown up spends her days studying Ancient Greeks and playing with her impish nephew Teddy and his assortment of animal companions. Cassie seems happy, though those closest to her believe she lost much of her sparkling personality when her twin brother Freddie and best friend Ned Mainwaring went off to India. In order to help revive Cassie's spirits, a family friend invites her to London to help catalog the Parthenon friezes (known as the Elgin Marbles). Cassie enjoys her work and the scholarly discusses with her co-worker, the Honorable Horace Wilbraham. Secretly, Frances feels that Horace makes Cassie too severe and that Cassie would be better off enjoying the delights of the Season. Freddie and Ned return from success in India causing a sensation and Cassie can hardly believe how grown-up and full of finesse her old pal Ned is, nor how handsome he has become. Cassie, Freddie and Ned's former childhood playmate Arabella Taylor is the belle of the ton and determined to have Ned by her side. Ned happily plays Arabella's game, using his new found skills to flirt and charm the lady, which annoys Cassie. Cassie believes she dislikes the Season and all London Society and what it stands for. She longs for the carefree days of childhood until, like her sister, she receives help from her nearest and dearest to realize her feelings and bring her to the notice of a certain gentleman. Cassie is an admirable character and I liked her and what she stood for and happy that she was appreciated for her mind before her beauty. Frances is unfortunately too busy to appear in much of the novel and instead the reader is subjected to her rambunctious five-year-old-son who speaks with a lisp. I think the author made some mistakes in titles and inheritance which need to be overlooked in order to follow the plot.This sequel is worth a read to find out what happens next, but otherwise is slow moving and almost identical to The Education of Lady Frances.