Rating: 5/5

Carl Rogers, a giant of psychological history, has here written personal essays - which read almost like a diary - about his way of being which center on authenticity, openness, empathy, gentleness, and love. It is a book about being human, loving oneself, loving others. It was absolutely wonderful and has undoubtedly changed the direction of my studies. Rogers calls his approach a "home-brewed" brand of existentialism that follows in the footsteps of Kierkegaard and Martin Buber, two of my philosophical heroes. This book articulates, in intimate language, Roger's search to feel, to truly feel, what it is like to be a human. He wants to open up space for each of us to actually let ourselves feel all of the things that everybody around us - family, friends, society, school, church, state, government, culture, etc. etc. etc. - teach us we need to suppress, ignore, evade. When we make eye-contact with another human, we're not looking at an object of study, a thing to be fixed, a test-subject, we're looking at a human being; a human with feelings, hurts, desires, fears, aspirations, and everything else that we so often overlook about ourselves. Rogers calls for a complete transformation of how we think about ourselves and others - what we truly desire, underneath the surface, who we are, what hurts us, etc.

My favorite chapter was entitled "Do We Really Need 'A' reality?" In it, Rogers argues that there is no such thing as "a" reality - as if "reality" was a stable concept, the same for all persons, static. He argues instead that there are as many different "realities" as there are humans. We each see and experience things differently. This is a necessary realization we must have in order to think rightly about what's going on in our relationships. People don't see things the same. Things impress themselves upon each person in slightly, often radically, different ways. And this isn't just okay! It's a good thing. It makes life diverse, interesting, risky. We shouldn't force all people to assimilate to one view of things, since that's intellectual dictatorship, but should rather seek to jump into different points of view, growing, changing, learning with one another. Rogers thinks that all we know is what we feel at each moment - and that's the best we can claim. His Pyrrhonian skepticism, and Nietzchean Perspectivism (both of which I've been influenced by, emerge here.

Enough philosophy for now... The book ends with a view toward the future: "The World of Tomorrow and the Person of Tomorrow," as the chapter is called. Rogers calls the Persons of Tomorrow those who are open, willing to learn and change, accepting of others, risk-takers, questioners of the status quo and traditional authority, those who make decisions based on their own thought-through convictions and experience and not the authority of persons or books outside of them, individuals who want to be themselves and to help others be who they are too. It's a beautiful picture, and I have unknowingly been moving in these sorts of directions in my own ways over the past couple of years or so.

Read this book if you want to become yourself. Like I said before, it's far from scholarly - it read like a diary, like a man who is journaling late at night by himself, feeling, with his whole heart and mind, what it is like to be a human being.