Rating: 2/5

I'm more than 3/4 of the way through this book and I only avoided one story. I started reading these stories hoping to get some really good plots and interesting descriptions because normally I like short stories. I have to admit that many of the stories were disappointing. I expected to read dated accounts and unusual usage of the English language compared to nowadays. Some of these stories are older than 100 years. 
The fact is some of the authors went on and on in their descriptions. I assume it was to create atmosphere but many got to be boring. 
Brer Rabbit, Brer Fox, and the Tar Baby / Joel Chandler Harris I found interesting because of the vernacular though. I found The lost boy / Thomas Wolfe way too nostalgic and would fall asleep while reading it. Imagine kissing Pete by John O'Hara reminded me of an updated (to the 1920s-1940s,) F. Scott Fitzgerald even though he's represented here with Babylon revisited, I've read his story but really don't remember it. The one story I didn't read was Jack London's To build a fire it bored me too much and I was never a big fan of his anyway. I did enjoy Rip Van Winkle ; The legend of Sleepy Hollow by Washington Irving but I've read that before in school. I always liked The lottery / Shirley Jackson so I have something to look forward to reading. 
There is a good selection here but this book is ungainly. I take it to bed at night and it flips and flops over. I've been reading it since my Mother went into the hospital for her cancer in 2013 and I am actually so close to the end of it that I'm proud to have read some of the stories that didn't entertain me. I find it sad that I remember so few. All that time and not a memory left of them.

So 2 years to read this tome. I skipped The Lottery just because I've read it more than a few times and recently. If you have nothing else to read it is still not a book I'd recommend. I wonder if it was created for an english writing class. It would be good for that kind of a class considering the different kinds of writing in here. Don't waste your time on all of it though. Pick an author you might recognize (I was surprised that John Updike's story bored me. I was thinking of picking up on of his novels.) and read it.