Rating: 3/5

Is love all, nothing else matters , no rules, customs, loyalty and the old-fashioned if you excuse me, word, morals. In Lady Chatterley's Lover this is the presumed subject of the 1928 controversial book by the British writer D.H. Lawrence, banned as too explicit and censored for forty years in America and numerous other nations. However the world never stops but it moves forward or backwards depending on your point of view but it moves. Today the novel would not cause a small ripple on a smooth , clear pond. Sir Clifford Chatterley an aristocrat, a wounded soldier of the recent World War 1, paralyzed from the waist down living in a Manor House , a beautiful wife Constance , plenty of money and servants during the roaring 20s, the age of Jazz and the Flapper, what glorious luck and happiness he enjoys...except for a little malfunction, life with be perfect. Enter our third main character the lowly gamekeeper a peasant and ardent nonconformist Oliver Mellors. He resides in a slight but comfortable shack alone, employed on Sir Clifford's estate with his dog Flossie, female naturally, still a persistent visitor eases his isolation. The unhappy, bored Lady Chatterley, starts a strange liaison not her first, and instantly commences with a lower class individual, scandalous not a proper choice , a married sensual man whose slutty wife left to be with another, a messy situation, a secret for how long? Hilda, Constance's older sister is not pleased, disgusted even but is powerless. Mrs. Bolton a widow becomes nurse to the disabled husband and soon admirer. Sounds like a silly soap opera but the real object by Mr. Lawrence is ostensibly sexual freedom, still wrong again folks, it's a male fancy of licentious indulges , silly laughable sex scenes where women become things to play with and love banded about to make them feel liberated from the outside, appalled world. The taboo is gone so is the merits of this, the philosophy doesn't compute in modern times or make sense. This classic is not that anymore but an obtuse narrative which embarrasses.