Rating: 4/5

This was my first novel by GGK, and I definitely agree with those who recommended it to me that it is an excellent starting point. The prose is really purposeful and engaging, without being overly dense. 

It is often said that GGK's "genre" is historical fiction with one quarter turn to the fantastic, and I would definitely say that description fits here. There's an air of mystery and magic in the air of this alternate world, based in familiar world history while taking on a life of its own. 

What I really loved about this story were the themes and inter-character development. I love military fantasy, and the two military figures pitted against each other in this story were both intriguing and impactful, with the additional anchor of our female physician protagonist. I'm a sucker for "two sides of the war" kind of storytelling, where the emotional impact is more focused on the reader rooting for two characters and knowing that things are going to be messy. 

The worldbuilding was a fairly good backdrop for the character work, but there were a few aspects that left me feeling a bit let down. Religion is a major foundation of the cultures in this story, each with its own traditions and place in the conflict. However, I didn't feel like GGK utilized them at all once he'd brought them up. The characters didn't seem to have any sort of real connection with those religions, and it made me wonder why they were even necessary. 

My biggest gripe with this story is that GGK should not be allowed to write spicy scenes, generally speaking. Some of the descriptions were so incredibly cringy that I almost put the book down despite it's other fantastic qualities. And the festival scenes later in the book? Solid wish fulfillment and the minor plot points that were hidden away in the locker room fantasy could have easily been accomplished without it. 

However, I will come back to my earlier comments about the character work, because overall I was impressed immensely by the way that GGK wove the stories of each individual together, the way the characters grow and change throughout the story, and the powerful emotional connection that he establishes with the protagonists. That was far and away the best part of this novel, and immediately made me understand why GGK's writing is so beloved by so many readers.