Rating: 5/5

This is a truly epic book. It covers food from every relevant angle: gastronomically, biologically, chemically, historically, culturally. It's exhaustive and, as a result, can be exhausting sometimes. It took a month of fairly regular reading to finish, and I skipped some parts. But if you read this book from cover to cover, you probably should skip some of it, too. It covers so many aspects of nourishment that while you're basically guaranteed to find parts that are interesting or intriguing to you, you're also likely to run into parts that don't grip you that much. So skip the latter and dwell on the former to get the most enjoyment. And it makes for a good reference book, if you ever feel like learning about some given food or cooking process.

The main takeaway I got from this book is the sheer magnitude of how much we as a species shape our food for our diverse and often competing needs and desires, and have for thousands of years. Animals and plants evolved to survive, not to nourish us. But between breeding, cooking, and various other tricks, we have optimized or otherwise significantly altered almost everything we consume, with some trade-offs but largely for the better. Plants as common as cabbage, lima beans, potatoes and lettuce have had some of their old wild, natural toxicity bred out of them. We cook them to draw out or disable more undesirable toxins and enzymes and to unlock nutrients, and we dilute toxins in the case of spices and herbs to the point where we find them enjoyable. Or we simply learned to love them, such as with chili plants which literally cause us pain. And for any two foods that technically come from the same plant or animal, in reality they come from different varieties that have been bred specifically for those foods (corn for eating plain vs for popping, grapes for wine vs for raisins, cows for meat vs for milk, etc). Strictly speaking, then, there's very little you could say is purely 'natural' out there no matter where you look. So it's not about whether or not you want to eat food taken straight from the bosom of mother nature, it's about in what way and to what extent you want to modify and control the food you eat. Organic vs processed is such a gross oversimplification, and means very different things from one type of food to the next.

I read the ebook on my Kindle Fire, and there were some issues with the formatting. I hope whoever is in charge of that cleans it up someday. That said, the issues were minor, mostly just chunks of text where they shouldn't be. The links and most everything else was fine.