Rating: 1/5

SPOILERS BELOW. YOU HAVE BEEN WARNED.

Okay. I'm going to have to say something controversial here. This book is downright horrible.

I realize that's practically blasphemy, since it was written by Terry Pratchett (whose work I generally love). I know that Pratchett was a satirist. I am aware that it was spoofing books like James Clavell's Asian Saga (Shogun, Noble House, King Rat, etc.), in which a white guy handles Asia better than the Asians and ends up in charge. I remember Clavell's books and the miniseries made from them. I realize what Pratchett was going for.

But Interesting Times just isn't funny--unless you like jokes about rape; jokes about paralysis and deafness; jokes involving ageism; fat jokes ("ARRGH!" = "your wife is a big hippo"--why not make it "your hat is a big hippo"? It would be even sillier!) China and Japan being smooshed together in a fantasy conglomerate (the cultures aren't the same! Seriously, Pratchett, you couldn't just pick one?); scenes in which the tonal quality of Asian languages is mocked; scenes in which freed Agatean captives call an old white man "Master" (because THAT doesn't have any invidious connotations); young people who want a revolution but who are trying to be polite about it are derided as useless and are shown to be in need of a Mighty Whitey who can teach those Agateans how to rebel; revolutionary slogans are treated as roughly as meaningful as advertising slogans; the very style of writing in Agatea (pictograms) is treated as inefficient and a waste of time (and lets not even get into the running gag of "picture of a dog pissing = exclamation point"); the antagonist has a severe boner for all things Ankh-Morporkian and despises his own people--both of which are treated as correct opinions; the Agateans do not end up ruling themselves--instead (spoilers) an old white barbarian does, and it's implied that this will be much better for Agatea; on and on and on, stereotype after stereotype. Kite fighting, tea ceremonies, the names of Twoflower's daughters (Pretty Butterfly and Lotus Blossom), the homophone "Auriental" (punning on a word that a lot of people of Asian heritage consider offensive)...it never stops. 

And most of this is not being filtered through characters. The narrative, which is filled with Orientalism, states it as fact. To quote Reappropriate.co: 

"In Orientalism, Asia is not defined by what Asia is; rather, Asia becomes an “Otherized” fiction of everything the West is not, and one that primarily serves to reinforce the West’s own moral conception of itself...Orientalism purports to be a faithful recreation of Eastern traditions and peoples, but actually draws upon real practices and traditions to create an Eastern construct that is largely exaggeration and myth."

And that's pretty much what we've got here. 

I've read this book in the past and, while it was never one of my favorites--I am not a Rincewind fan--I somehow managed to miss all of the problems. I liked the golem army. I liked Ronald Saveloy getting carried off to Valhalla. But this time? I flinched at every stereotype, every mocking word. I felt ashamed that I was reading the book at all. And this is Pratchett, Pratchett, who gets praised for being so perceptive and for humanizing people. I was appalled. I expected Pratchett to satirize bigotry and ignorance and to show how both can be damaging. Not this.

I do believe that Pratchett did better in other books, and that he will be remembered for those works. But this is going to be a blot on his record...a book that scholars will be eager to ignore.