Rating: 4/5

So apparently Alan Berg was one of the first men to use the microphone as a weapon against his listeners. It's a formula we've seen quite a bit over the last few decades. A toxic environment, over time, will create an antipath, i.e. someone who's as 'mad as hell and not going to take this any more.' Berg got his start as a bigtime attorney for the Mafia, then after guilt consumed him, a suit salesman and finally, a confrontational voice on the airwaves. He believed his sole function was to entertain, and one of his go-to mechanisms for entertaining us was by pissing us off, something he did with great ease. Radio is a hotbed of volatile talents, from Howard Stern to Phil Hendrie to Michael Savage to Bob Lassiter, etc.

But no one else has ever agitated their audience so much that it drove one of their listeners to kill them. That's what happened with Alan Berg.

As far as the book goes, I get that it's supposed to be a procedural of sorts, but I went into this expecting a straight biography, so I was disappointed that several chapters are given over to Berg's murderer, a member of white supremacist group The Order. I found myself not caring about the man who took Berg's life, because I was too busy admiring the man who pissed someone off so much that he had to die for it.

With that being said, this is the ONE boon I will give to Berg's murderer as he leveled a criticism against the entire United States Congress a few months before committing to Berg's grisly homicide:

"All of you together are not solely responsible for what has happened to America, but each of you, without exception, is partly responsible. And the day will come when each of you will be called to account for that responsibility."

After reading that, I'm a bit baffled why a small potatoes talk radio personality was their target and not a politician, if they were so bristly about the state of American affairs.

As a podcast host myself, I learned a lot from reading this about how to present myself on the air, not to be so caught up on being 'professional' but to be compelling and engaging. Everyone in America is WAY too preoccupied with a totalitarian Code of Professionalism and less with truly expressing themselves. Now, I can't wait to follow the example Berg set!