Rating: 4/5

This is my second Beryl Bainbridge novel in as many months and in my opinion a more successful one. The novel is narrated by three separate voices who all have some relation to the titular Master Georgie whose inner voice we never hear. Myrtle is his adoring, one could say obsessively so, adopted sister found in poverty and given a leg up in life, Pompey Jones another one who lives in poverty and makes his own way up through his interaction with George, and Dr. Potter who marries George’s sister. 

The story begins with a secret that all three share with George and secrets are added as their lives progress. Most of the novel is set as Myrtle, George and Potter, initially accompanied by family, journey along the Mediterranean to Turkey and then to the battleground of the Crimean war. George is a doctor and the others are more or less bystanders although Myrtle does help with some nursing. Pompey Jones is there as a photographer, a passion that he shares with George and Dr. Potters role is classified as ‘observer’ although one has to question what the usefulness of this role ultimately is. Potter’s voice, however was the most successful for me, the way in which he will go off on random tangents about the history and geology of the places they visit while all the way being insightful as to the relations between George and the other two narrators, keeping secrets close to his chest and eventually pining over and imagining he sees his beloved wife as life gets harder. 

Pompey Jones’s voice is also distinctive and he is as honest as Myrtle is in what he wants and how he will get it. Jones is still very much a man of the streets though and does what he has to survive while Myrtle is driven on by her love for Georgie –it is only she that calls him this – a love that eclipses all else and seems entirely emotionally unhealthy yet manages to sustain her in conditions that would drive many others mad. 

Berly Bainbridgre effectively creates a picture of these conditions, showing the way that more men were dying from sickness than fighting, the horrific injuries and lack of medical facilities, the incompetence of those supposedly leading the soldiers and the lack of communication to all. I was surprised how many wives and mistresses, as well as children were allowed to accompany their soldiers but as my knowledge of this period in history is virtually nonexistent I can only assume this was true to life. Her language is simple and very easy to read and I found myself engrossed in this tale of how three people are connected to one and how he changed the lives of all three.

Some favorite lines

‘Standing there, listening to the melancholy gurglings of roof-top pigeons, I dwelt with pleasure on the unstable and transitory nature of life, seeing I was fortunate enough to be alive.’

Man himself is so buffeted by shifts of thought and mood, not knowing from one day to the next what he truly feels, that a shifting earth is well-nigh the last straw.’

‘Dr Potter holds that speech was invented to conceal thought, but I kept that to myself. Georgie’s not one for talking, at least, not to me. Nor would I wish to be his equal, for then I might find him wanting.’

‘Perhaps chance and destiny are interdependent, in that the intervention of the latter cannot be fulfilled without the casual intervention of the former. A craggy rock placed at a distance from water will never be worn smooth.’