Rating: 4/5

Shannon from Texas meets Cody from Alaska during her search for her missing fiance, Pilot Rick, who went to Alaska for a job then mysteriously disappeared. Did Pilot Rick ditch Shannon? Was he leading a double life? Did he get involved with a cartel? Is he languishing in prison somewhere? Shannon from Texas turns to Cody from Alaska for help and he gleefully obliges since he’s been pierced by Cupid's arrow at first sight of the delectable Shannon and will use any pretext to spend time with her, even if it is on a quest to find her missing fiancé. 

Cody's hilarious father Noah throws a wrench in his son's courtship, acting as the unwanted but lovable chaperon at every turn. In his never to be humble opinion, it isn't right for Cody to move in on an engaged young lady while her fiance is missing and unable to "look after his assets." Once Rick is found, then Cody can go after Shannon and try to steal her from the other man "fair and square." Noah honestly made me LOL and provided great comic relief. Hurray for Noah!

Yaddi yaddi yadda, lots of amateur sleuthing later, it turns out that Pilot Rick did get a job in Alaska piloting a plane for a local tycoon. But on his very first flight, Pilot Rick encountered a storm and crashed the plane. Pilot Rick and his passengers all miraculously survived, albeit it took them many days to make it out of Alaskan wilderness and back to civilization. During this ordeal, Pilot Rick fell in love with his boss’ daughter, the beautiful, blonde, Nepo-Baby Beverly. But Pilot Rick is too honorable to dump his fiancee Shannon from Texas especially after she schlepped all the way from Texas to Alaska to find him.

You know who’s not so honorable though? I mean, aside from Cody, the would-be fiancée stealer… None other than blonde, beautiful Nepo-Baby Beverly! Beverly has hardly recovered from her plane crash, trek in the wild, and dramatic rescue, when she shows up at Shannon from Texas’s hotel room in her best designer duds and a cloud of French perfume, and bluntly announces that she is going to fight Shannon from Texas for Pilot Rick. Another fiancé stealer from Alaska! Must be something in the water.

After that dramatic announcement, Shannon from Texas first looks bewildered around her hotel room to pinpoint where exactly Nepo-Baby Beverly has found THE AUDACITY. But thankfully for everyone concerned, Shannon quickly remembers that she has already fallen out of love with Pilot Rick and she is now irrevocably in love with Cody from Alaska. So Nepo-Baby Beverly and HER AUDACITY have actually done her a solid. All is well that ends well for a double Texas and Alaska HEA. And also for Noah, the happy father-in-law of course! :)