Rating: 2/5

Well, that sucked.

I read it because: A) Hughes had a weird/memorable life, 2) I love the film The Aviator and it's supposed to be based on this book. Well, this is an all-time great case of a movie being better than it's source material.

In two different ways, Higham writes like a gossip columnist. First, he focuses on the most salacious details. The first half of the book, for example, is primarily concerned with what famous names he's sleeping with (or that Higham at least alleges he's sleeping with). Higham is also prone to wild speculation, like when he ponders if Hughes was dying of AIDS in the 1970s. (The phrase clickbait didn't exist when this book was written, but man is it ever clickbait). Second, Higham's tone is frequently as smug and smirking as you'd imagine a particularly smarmy TMZ Zoom meeting to be. There are times when Hughes clearly deserves to be looked down on, but cackling is often Higham's default approach. He'll make needless insults of others, too, like when he cavalierly calls Ava Gardner an untalented slut. 

As a result, even when Higham makes some valid points, you're not sure how much credibility to give him. For example, he makes a good case that Hughes's "Spruce Goose" was a rich boy's pipe dream that would never make a functional wartime aircraft (too huge a fire hazard risk; and so slow it's a sitting duck for any enemy aircraft). I mean, his points sounds reasonable, but given that it's Higham saying it, I wonder if I'm missing a counterpoint on behalf of the plane. 

Compared to the movie, Scorsese cleans up Hughes's private life. In the movie he goes from Katherine Hepburn to some teenager to Ava Gardner. Here, he's routinely cheating on whoever he's with to the point where it's often hard to say if he has a real relationship. The movie has Hughes fall into his infamous isolated germphobic life right after his second plane crash only to rally for the big dramatic confrontation at the end, but in the book that isolation doesn't take off until a decade or so later. 

Oh, that big plane crash he nearly died in? He wasn't supposed to flying over inhabited areas. You're never supposed to do that in test flights. But Hughes did because that's Howard Hughes for you. One final thing: Hughes committed vehicular manslaughter once. Hughes didn't care, and Higham only slightly cares. 

It's a crummy, sleazy book.