Rating: 4/5

Certainly a bit dated (pub 1999) and while the story is truly enjoyable, main character Val Denning made me sigh a lot; her assumptions, neediness and anger she still nurtured even at the age of 31 about her terrible childhood--being totally ignored by her mother. Yes, we discover why near the end of the book but so many things colour Val's life and choice of career--war photographer in places like Kosovo--instead of the family business her mother ran--fancy creams and such.
In our current world calling a woman 'honey' or 'darling' is unacceptable and happens with frequency in Where You Belong but in the era, perfectly fine. Val is widely accepted by all journalists, camera men and fellow photographers, she's good at her job, personable and liked. As the book begins she is in a relationship with Tony Hampton, one of their trio, the third being Jake, all photographing the latest horrors in Kosovo, 1998. Bradford nails the setting and characters, all the mains plus a fabulous authentic supporting cast. At times the language seems stiff, dated but, again, we must be mindful of the era, the culture and society's values. 
Terrible events unfold on this media mission and as a result, secrets are revealed to Val, Jake, Val's brother Donald, and more sub stories intersect with the main tale--Val discovering Tony was still married when he was killed, Jake's feelings for Val come to the fore, sub stories involve domestic abuse, Val's mother's explanation for not being motherly to her. So much happens in Where You Belong and Bradford skillfully peels back each character's flaws, strengths, inner demons to a satisfying ending. Val finally confronts her demons by the book's finish and comes to terms with them. She has fully grown up and finds the place where does really belong. 
Ironically, and, sadly, much of what Bradford writes is still the same in our world, "Don't say these days like that, Val, there's nothing new about wife beating. It's always been with us. We just hear about it now...in the way we know more about everything, from wars and other disasters, to the infidelities of politicians. Chalk it up to the age we live in, the media age...Yup, the age of information...and misinformation." How spot on is that? page 172-173