Rating: 5/5

"Mildred Pierce" is perhaps best known as the character that won Joan Crawford the 1945 Best Actress Academy Award. Those expecting noir crime fiction like in Cain's Double Indemnity or Postman will find that Mildred Pierce is not exactly crime fiction, but it shares quite a bit in common with those other famous Cain novels. It, too, is set in the Depression-era and involves an emotionally-charged character, but it is more of a life-long character study, a novel-length portrait of the rise and fall of a woman of the Depression-era. 

Mildred first comes to our attention in the novel as a pie-baking stay-at-home wife of a well-to-do real estate magnate, the head of Pierce Homes, a new housing tract in Glendale, California. But, times being what they were, business has kind of grinded to a halt and the husband, Bert, spends most of his time hanging out with his mistress and away from the hen-pecking of his wife. The house is mortgaged to the hilt and, after a final spat, Bert packs his bags and moves down the street. Now, Mildred suddenly realizes that she only has a few odd dollars to feed her two kids and get by, let alone pay the bills. What follows is her going to an employment agency and getting offered a maid's job, one she could not possibly take. What if her precocious older daughter Veda would find out? And, that, my friends, foreshadows the mother-daughter relationship to come as the proper prim upper-class child has her mother's eye and heart.

Mildred eventually becomes a waitress in a hash house and manages to sell pies to the owner and makes it on her own to become a force to reckoned in the restaurant industry. But, what is telling is not her successes so much as her fear that her proper daughter will look down on what she does and that she is not upper class. Indeed, when Mildred finally becomes involved with a new man it is another layabout, a rich playboy who doesn't work, plays polo, and lives off the family money until like many great fortunes the Great Depression plays havoc with it. 

The heart of the story is Mildred's relationship with this man who she ends up supporting and her daughter who she promises the world to and can never really deliver. Mildred is an amazing character and Cain's novel portrays her as so multifaceted that you feel her struggles and understand her failings as she clings to this man and to her hard-to-please daughter. Of course, there are some shocking scenes in it that come up somewhat unexpected. Cain is an amazing writer and Mildred Pierce shows the breadth of his talent.