Rating: 3/5

3.5 stars for this stand-alone epic fantasy complete with wizards, bloody butchery, and a touch of bittersweet romance. I had never read Janny Wurts before, but based on positive reviews, decided to give it a go. She's a whiz with words, that's perfectly clear. A masterful writer. She also crafts some very clever plots — particularly the tricks the hero Korendir uses to defeat various über-powerful banes. 

Most of the book portrays Korendir fighting various evils that imperil the eleven kingdoms. Especially memorable are the tricks he used on the weather elemental (Cyondide?) at White Storm Cliff, and the subterfuge employed to reel in the Demons of Mathcek.

In some sense, this fantasy — while grim and dark — has a happy ending, but by no means should a reader expect a feel-good story of conviviality among comrades. And even though there is a heartfelt love affair, this doesn't read like a love story.

Quibbles:  For me, there's not enough character development or relationship development. Various heroic, highly-intelligent endeavors (against wereleopards, witches, demons, dragons, etc.) carry the book, not the characters. It took too long to get to know and love the heartbroken, compassionate hero — Master of Whitestorm. He transformed overnight from galley-slave to brilliant strategist and sword fighter (did he learn that at home, before getting enslaved at age 17?). But I did eventually care about him, and I liked the heroine, Lady Ithariel the Enchantress. I gradually lost interest in the blacksmith, Heldrith. His role in the story diminishes midway through the book. 

I felt the relationship development between Korendir and Ithariel was rushed. So, bottom line, I wasn't especially moved by this book. When bad things happened to various good people, I cared a little, but I didn't shed a tear. I liked the scene at Whitestorm Fortress, when all the wizards came knocking. 

Good narration by Simon Prebbles, but he employed a gruff tone of voice for the hero that -- compounded with his accent -- was hard to understand.