Rating: 4/5

“It was as if she had slowed down her thoughts, her breathing, everything. Even the blood in her veins seemed to have slowed down in response to being jailed, to have somehow adjusted to this new condition.” (107)

Janet Campbell Hale's narrative of Capture explores this theme on three main tiers: that of class and incarceration, gender and matrimony, and indigeneity and settler law. These tiers intersect across the text, but they carry distinct registers as we follow the protagonist, Cecelia, as she recalls the life experiences that accumulated prior to her DUI arrest (which is followed by welfare charges). For its brevity, this text is loaded with thematic threads to pull at, and the relationship between racism and erotic desire is one of the more intriguing to look at. In particular, I was intrigued by the novel's play with race, and especially Cecelia's relationships with white men as juxtaposed with her relationship with Raul and Thomas Running Horse. This interest is provokes by the text, with Cecelia occasionally self-consciously probing her experiences with white men, feeling comfortable with Running Horse (and his 'Indian face') as someone who could relate to her reservation upbringing, and the juxtaposition between finding it humorous when white men mistake her for Mexican compared to her noting of Raul's "Spanish accent" when describing his rough sex (almost 'mechanical,' if I'm recalling Cecelia's exact language).

Perhaps, once I've finally gotten around to Sharon Holland's Erotic Life of Racism, I will have a more precise way to analyze these aspects. For now, I will say that Hale's text reads as an important touchstone for literary representations of urban alienation as experienced by Indigenous women. When recalling her time on welfare in San Francisco, Cecelia recalls leaving an Indian bar, feeling ashamed of those she viewed as “hopeless, displaced people. No longer Indian, yet not white either” (112). Moments like this pry at the text's complicated depictions of whiteness and Indigeneity, no doubt related to Cecelia's angst at appearing more visibly non-white than her mother, who tells her daughter stories about her Irish heritage while requiring her to stylize her hair to appear less Indigenous. Cecelia’s anxious inquiry into what her mother’s relationship to Ireland would be if she had looked more Indigenous (81) highlights the overburdening nature of racialization in the context of familial relation.

The novel's ending comes fast, and some readers may be disappointed at the writer's tendency to raise more questions than see them through for potential answers. But I like getting a shorter text here and there. I can see that the narrative comes to a somewhat disorienting stop, but that is perhaps indicative of various narrated histories of legal recognition and articulations of (gendered) Indigenous identity as managed by US law. These histories - of tribal affiliation and, more specifically, sexist treatments of outmarrying as a practice that forces some women to forgo their tribal identification - lurk in the underbelly of the text. Anyone familiar with the history of gender and tribal law in the US and Canada may be especially interested in this short narrative of academic precarity in the context of legal studies.