Rating: 2/5

I wanted to like this book. It has a lot of things I like: trippy dream sequences, vision quests, interesting alien monsters, ancient myths. But it just has too many problems. The entire first half of the book is one unnecessarily long build-up. An alien character who is hyped up as a major threat for half the book is done away with in one page like its nothing by the titular "Cat" alien, then the conflict between the Navajo hunter guy who is the main character and the titular cat alien takes a backseat to the Navajo hunter guy's psychodrama which was not interesting. The conflict between him and Cat was most interesting part of the book, but there is not enough emphasis on that. There are lots of little "Navajo myth" sequences that read almost like dreams and those parts were also enjoyable, but they do not advance the main narrative at all, and because of how much more interesting they are than the main narrative, I found they actually made the main narrative seem even more boring by means of contrast. There are 5 (or is it 6?) psychic characters who are given a big chapter to have introduced in the second half of the book, and they all have such bland personalities, they are hardly distinguishable from each other in fact, and they do nothing but slow down the story. They could have not been in the story at all and it would not have made a difference. The worst part though: too many dream sequences. I don't mind dream sequences in a book, but you can't promise me wild action and then interrupt that with a dozen dream sequences right in a row that barely advance the story or even add flavour to it. 

I have read a lot of Zelazny books so far and this is by far my least favourite of all the books of his I have read. The only book of his that comes close to the quality of "LORD OF LIGHT" (which is a masterpiece) is "ISLE OF THE DEAD" (which is a seriously underrated book, I can't believe I don't see people talking about it.) All the other books of his I have read are quality mid-tier: THIS IMMORTAL, CREATURES OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS, THE DREAM MASTER. But this was the first book of Zelazny's that I just can't recommend. Really a horribly disjointed book.