Rating: 4/5

Great read for Regency Lovers, I was bored at my Grandma's house and read it in one sitting. 

I grabbed this book (not knowing it was the 3rd in the series, but understood it and think it works as a stand alone well.)

Miss Trumble the governess with a secret (obviously coming from a wealthy family) cares for the 6 Beverly daughters and each book follows the scandals and troubles they have getting each one to the altar. I love her character, she's my favorite narrator as she's like this magical fairy godmother not afraid to use her secret connections to get invitations to balls, social events, and give motherly marital advice. 

This book focuses on the twins Abigail &amp; Rachel as well as the hot newly returned for war bachelor Lord Burfield. Of course there's the nosey jealous spinster Prudence (similar in many respects to the Bridgerton series Prudence), the town rake Henry Denver come to conspire trouble, and a classic twin switchero. 

It's got old english, but is easy to understand and just a good regency romance book with kinda comical plot events that build and build. It switches perspective frequently and is just funny light material, but I'd recommend a mature rating 18+ as there's the rake Henry Denvers and when I mentioned his actions in conversation to my mother-in-law about how he accosting women she felt scandalized. Also, there's a brief description about the marriage night. 

Spoilers below (I just wanna rant about my favorite parts of the book below)
The fact how often the twins Rachel &amp; Abigail visit their old home Mannerling is kinda comical to me. The meet cute with Lord Burfield is sweet and I like that he recognizes the age difference, which is my only complaint about the book, but at the time that was normal that the young men would h*e it up till they were ready to settle down with a family or joined the army/workforce until they could afford having their own estate. I love that they have a 1 legged cook, Josiah he's just such a fun addition. The mother Mrs. Beverley is insufferable similar to Mrs. Bennet from Pride &amp; Prejudice, and in denial about her dwindling fortune. The fact that Rachel falls prey to Henry's schemes is frustrating, and I was even on board about the switchero until it went to the part of after 'I do', and then Abigail freaking out that he was coming to bed in a nightgown. Like she really didn't think it through, why not wait till @ the altar and call him out for not knowing the difference between the twins appearances. Prudence is just a funny antagonist and I love that she actually got into a physical fight with Abigail that had me cackling. One of my favorite moments was just the level of pettiness when Henry went to the opera and the soprano refused to sing for the audience because he was there, so he got escorted out, priceless. The petty trope of flirting with other people at dinner to make another jealous had me rolling my eyes in annoyance, and was frustrating when Lord B. kissed Lady T. on the hand and was seen with her a few times, like he could've played the hero a bit better by avoiding that, but I like that he's flawed but noble gentleman. Also, the fact that our heroine Abigail wasn't a helpless damsel but used a knife to try to get out when kidnapped, and straight up scaled out of the chimney to get to her wedding was amazing. I thought it was so funny when there was a quote about how Lord B. noticed her dress being too short to see her ankles, and later the fact about Abigail being all nervous for the wedding night wanting to ask her married sister for advice, but then being to shy to even say such a vulgar word like 'legs' had be dying of laughter. I love that Henry died! I didn't think he was that horrible at first thought he was just an alcoholic frequently drunk horney teenager who hated being apart of the army and made dishonorable seducing attempt on the oldest sister Jessica, but then when you read his internal dialogue seeking to manipulate others or when his history of getting a maid pregnant, threatened to kill Abigail and later locked her up, desires to have the entire family suffer becoming spinsters/ ruined socially etc.