Rating: 3/5

This was truly a disaster. I don't even know what I just read...it felt like two books combined into one. Something divided into "before" and "after" which can easily be described as the good and the bad. 

I was so excited with the first 100 pages of Move Heaven and Earth. It was such an excellent premise. Grumpy, wounded war hero meets fiery, stubborn nurse...let the drama and passion begin. Rand was certainly an extremely sour hero, but he had a wolfish charm that was appealing. Sylvan was all fire and spirit yet haunted by her own ghosts and memories. At the beginning of this story, she was not a woman to cross. I loved their relationship and how Sylvan supported Rand. You could tell there was something special about them. The way they acted together it was almost as if one could hear what the other was thinking. The family was a pleasant surprise. They were constantly bickering, but it was from a place of love. You could see they were a strong family unit. 

You find out our couple has met in the past...Dodd really doesn't explain it well. I was extremely confused as to why their first meeting was omitted. Sylvan made it sound like this meeting changed her life and Rand...barely remembered her? This isn't the first thing that's omitted. Dodd continually jumps around in the timeline which drove me crazy. One month as passed...then two months has passed. At some points I felt I was just supposed to use blind faith to believe these two were in love rather than read it happening. You never really get enough juicy details about them falling for each other. And speaking of which...these two never said "I love you" to each other! I'm sorry...but that bugged me. I wait for those moments and this book totally denied me that joy. 

Here's the problem...Dodd creates a tragedy in the middle of the book that broke my heart. I didn't like it at all. Did she break a historical romance rule?? Technically, no....I guess. But I can't tell you how much is disappointed me that she went there. The climactic ending and the villain wouldn't have been the same had the tragedy been changed, but the book for me went downhill from there. 

The worst part was the chilling decline of Sylvan's spirit. The hero does something extremely stupid in an effort to protect the heroine but of course he's not honest with her about it and lets her think the worst. After that happens Sylvan flops like a wet noodle. Rand just crushes her and as if that wasn't bad enough is it takes him FOREVER to realize what he's done to her. Honestly, though he doesn't come to this conclusion on his own. His mother has to help him realize what an ass he's been. There is a scene in the carriage were they first try to reconcile. I was cringing in disgust as Rand convinces her that they are both to blame for the misunderstanding and she should just forgive him. I didn't even want to think it was possible for a hero to manipulate a heroine to that degree. 

But it is what it is. I wanted to give it two stars but I really, really, really enjoyed the first half of this book. The ending was just so disappointing and any love I had for the protagonists in the first half was crushed.