Rating: 3/5

Enough Is Enough!

At least, this is what Arthur Conan Doyle himself must have felt when he published The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes, a collection of twelve stories that were written between 1921 and 1927 mostly for the Strand Magazine and Liberty. In the preface to this collection, we find the author express his firm resolution to have done with Holmes and to finally let him go the way of all flesh in order to dedicate his time and power to other literary projects. He even seems to regret having once given in to the public’s desire for more of the mastermind’s adventures and having allowed his resurrection after his deadly struggle with Professor Moriarty at the Reichenbach Falls and he stresses that another revival of his long-lived creation will be out of the question.

Here is a quick overview of the twelve individual stories – spoiler-free: 

The Adventure of the Mazarin Stone: This is a rather unusual adventure in that we do not see so much of Holmes’s skills of reasoning and deduction but are treated to a rather stale coup de théâtre at the end. Holmes basically has an entire case against the dangerous criminal Count Negretto Sylvius, who has stolen a famous jewel, the eponymous Mazarin Stone, with the help of a rather simple-minded accomplice, but he does not know where the jewel is hidden. In order to find this out, he meets the count face to face and sets him a psychological trap. – Since Watson does not play a major role in this adventure, we have here one of two tales that are written in the perspective of the omniscient narrator, and while the story itself is not really very mysterious, it has at least a suspenseful encounter between master criminal and master sleuth on offer and shows Holmes at his best in terms of wry humour, as when he says, shortly after divulging to Watson that he expects to be murdered, ”’[…] But we may be comfortable in the meantime, may we not? Is alcohol permitted? […]’” Holmes also excels as a master of disguise in this story, and the red herring he uses will be familiar to the avid reader from the 1903 Adventure of the Empty House.

The Problem of Thor Bridge: This is a murder case that seems to be very clear against the governess Miss Dunbar, whose mistress is found shot on a bridge, with a note in her clenched hand showing that she had an appointment in that very place with Miss Dunbar. The police also find a pistol in the governess’s wardrobe – but her employer entreats Holmes to prove the young woman’s innocence. Holmes is disgusted with his client’s morals but he still agrees to help because he believes in Miss Dunbar’s innocence, and he soon unravels an extremely sophisticated murder riddle. – Not only is the story extremely clever, but in its introduction we also learn something we might never have surmised, namely that Holmes, for all his astuteness, also has to look back on a number of cases he actually failed to solve – cases which are so mysterious that they border on the supernatural. Especially one of them did whet my curiosity, the one of ”Isadora Persano, the well-known journalist and duellist, who was found stark staring mad with a match box in front of him which contained a remarkable worm said to be unknown to science.” Boy, Mr. Doyle certainly had a deft hand at throwing his readers hints to stories he had never written and at making them ardently wish he had! This odd reference may also serve to remind you that Doyle was the author of several gripping tales of the supernatural.

In The Adventure of the Creeping Man Holmes and Watson are called for help by the private secretary (and future son-in-law) of Professor Presbury because that eminent and learned man, always a bit on the irascible side, has started to behave very strangely of late. To give an example, he was surprised creeping on all fours by his secretary – yes, you are reading right! Is he under the influence of some strange drug? And if so, why did his own dog repeatedly attack him? – If pressed upon to select the worst Sherlock Holmes story ever, I’d lay my finger on this selfsame tale for the same reason as Watson, who, at one point of this half-baked and simply ludicrous yarn, cries out, ”’Surely, Holmes, this is a little far-fetched’”.

The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire may sound like another story in which the author goes beyond the limits of likelihood in a sensationalist desire to impress his readers, but it is actually a decent little family mystery, which starts when an old acquaintance of Watson’s asks the detective’s help after finding that his Peruvian wife has repeatedly attacked her stepson and been caught in the act of sucking blood from her own baby’s neck. Its introduction gives yet another example of how Doyle teased his readers’ imagination by casually mentioning cases that have yet to be recorded as when Holmes talks of the Matilda Briggs, ”’a ship which is associated with the giant rat of Sumatra, a story for which the world is not yet prepared.’” I can’t speak for the world, but as to myself, I’d say, Here I am, and fully prepared!

The Adventure of the Three Garridebs is yet another clever and entertaining story although it has to be confessed that, strictly speaking, Doyle rehashes the plot of one of his earliest Holmes cases, albeit to some good effect. Holmes is supposed to track down a third bearer of the unusual name of Garrideb so that a will promising 5 million dollars to each of the three Garridebs can be properly executed. Too good to be true? 

In The Illustrous Client Holmes pits his strength against yet another arch-villain of the Moriarty style, and this time it is an Austrian nobleman, the Baron Adelbert Gruber, who has dedicated his life to crime without sullying his own hands too notably. Holmes’s task is to provide material that will prevent a young infatuated lady from giving her hand in marriage to the Baron, who has already killed his first wife. What follows is a dramatic tug-of-war between the detective and the scoundrel, but experienced readers of the canon might feel that Charles Augustus Milverton is looking on from around the corner.

The greatest mystery lying in wait for the reader of The Adventure of the Three Gables is probably the question why the story came to be named The Adventure of the Three Gables. The house in which Holmes’s client lives does happen to have three gables, but none of these gables plays any role in the story, and all we get is a burglary tale with a rash and dissatisfying ending. Easily one of the lamest stories in the entire canon.

A similar thing can be said about The Adventure of the Blanched Soldier, where Holmes has to find out the real reason why a young man and former soldier should be hidden from the world by his family and all the world be told that the young man is travelling through Europe. Holmes has little to go by and from that little he draws the most remarkable and far-reaching conclusions. What makes the story really disappointing is the absence of Dr. Watson, a melancholy fact that deprives the story of what makes Holmes tales so enjoyable, namely the interaction between those two friends. To make matters even worse, Holmes, who takes on the role of narrator here, starts with a rather disparaging and, one hopes, out-of-character remark about his loyal companion: ”The ideas of my friend Watson, though limited, are exceedingly pertinacious.” This thankless arrogance made a very bad starting-point into the tale for me.

The next story is set in 1907 and it is also told by Holmes himself, who has now withdrawn from active life and taken up beekeeping on the Sussex seaside. When I first read The Lion’s Mane, the surprise ending made me rank it among my favourite Holmes stories, but my recent re-reading showed that the absence of Watson is sorely felt: One has the impression that the visit to the family of the dead man’s love interest just serves the purpose of filler and that the tale is eked out to postpone the solution for as long as the author deems it necessary to make a tale out of a good idea, which is, however, poorly executed.

The Adventure of the Retired Colourman has the making of a good tale in it – Holmes is asked to look into the elopement of a retired colourman’s wife with her neighbour and part of her husband’s savings –, but there is one major point in this story, not to be given away here, which just does not sit straight with me.

The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger begins with yet another of those famous Doyle teasers, namely Watson’s threat to disclose the ”whole story concerning the politician, the lighthouse, and the trained cormorant” and then gives us a dramatic yarn about a wild circus lion, which is entertaining as a story but gives Holmes no opportunity to display his skills.

Luckily, the last tale in this collection, The Adventure of Shoscombe Old Place, – as far as I know, it was also the tale with the latest publication date, shows Doyle return to his old standards and – if you want – tricks, in giving us an intricate case about the irascible Sir Robert and his sister, who seem to have fallen out with each other, which leads the brother into a series of rather unusual actions. In this affair, Holmes and Watson are back on deck in their full glory.

All in all, one can say that the stories in this volume tend to be played more for effect than to give insight into Holmes’s faculties of reasoning and drawing his conclusions, which, in some cases, is quite annoying. One can also surmise that Doyle was struggling for new forms of telling these stories, albeit with limited success. I also had the impression that Watson himself changed from a man of normal mental faculties, but one still of value to his partner, to a mere admirer and idolater, as becomes obvious in the following quotation:

“He was a man of habits, narrow and concentrated habits, and I had become one of them. […] I was a whetstone for his mind. I stimulated him. He liked to think aloud in my presence. His remarks could hardly be said to be made to me – many of them would have been as appropriately addressed to his bedstead – but none the less, having formed the habit, it had become in some way helpful that I should register and interject. […] Such was my humble role in our alliance.”

One passage is extremely gushing in this context, and it occurs after Holmes shows some serious concern when Watson receives a gunshot wound during one of their explorations. Here Watson gushes forth:

”It was worth a wound – it was worth many wounds – to know the depth of loyalty and love which like behind that cold mask. The clear, hard eyes were dimmed for a moment, and the firm lips were shaking.”

One might definitely ask what is wrong with Watson and why he more and more begins to hide his light under a bushel: Holmes does not appear any the greater, the smaller Watson makes himself – but the detective’s fascination is derived from his ability to evaluate the clues he collects in the course of an examination. Unluckily, some of the stories in this collection give our sleuth little opportunity to do this.