Rating: 3/5

This was quite a quick read. I chose to read because the number of pages suggested a quick perusal. It was after I started that I realized the book is actually a result of the movie. It's usually the reverse in most cases.
Regardless, the story is a simple, true story of two athletes competing for Great Britain and their struggles to maintain their principles in life. One, Harold Abrahams, is Jewish, trying to establish himself in the WASPiest of countries, England. The other, Eric Liddell is so devoted to his faith that he refuses to run the 100-meter heats on a Sunday, as scheduled.
Harold meets and courts Sybil Gordon, an opera soprano, to further complicate his situation as he wants to beat Eric Liddell in the 100-meter race so badly that he doesn't see straight.
Eric L is so adamant that he won't violate the sabbath but he gets tremendous pressure from the British Olympic Committee and English royalty to reconsider his situation. Add to this pressure is his sister who insists he should quit the running career and devote his time and energy to the Christian ministry in China.
Eventually, a teammate suggests that Eric run the 400-meter race instead. As this event doesn't take place on a Sunday. The suggestion is agreed to by all parties and Eric even wins this event, in record time. 
In the meantime, Harold, while not able to race Eric L again, beats the heavily favored Americans and wins his own gold medal in the 100-meter race. All are happy. Especially, the Prince, the British Olympic Committee, and the running coach.
Both runners retired after this 1924 Olympiad in Paris, France. Eric made his way to China and was captured during the war, WWII. He died in captivity late in the war, unfortunately. Harold went on to marry Sybil Evers and lived a long life until his death in 1978.
I remember watching the movie. A feel-good yarn about keeping your dreams and your principles. It received an oscar for best film. And, of course, the sound track was a big hit.