Rating: 1/5

I'm not sure I could hate Cord McBain more if I tried. What a jerk! He's cruel to Jonty for no reason and tells himself it's so he can make her "man up". Jonty's grandmother has just died (and for some inane reason makes Cord Jonty's guardian. Clearly she was going insane in her old age.) and Cord doesn't cut her any slack. He gives her so much do and not easy tasks either that both his friends insist he's being to hard. Maybe Jonty is too much feminine for a boy but how is that any of his business? Why does he feel the need to toughen her up? 

Cord is disgusted when he sees her hugging a guy. A guy she repeatedly tells him is her "Uncle Jim" and yet Cord is convinced she is sleeping with him. Why? I have no idea, maybe it's because he's such an idiot. Uncle Jim, himself though isn't very smart, despite knowing that part of reason Cord is so hard on Jonty is because of what he perceives as their unnatural relationship, he does nothing to clear up his misconception. Would it kill him to tell Cord that he views Jonty as a son and nothing more? Apparently it does because he doesn't reveal this until the very end.
How much more stuff is there to come? (you're probably wondering). A lot more and none of it is any better.

Cord puts Jonty through more hell, yet again for absolutely no reason and then, when he discovers that Jonty is a girl, he falls madly in lust with her. Sleeps with her and then, deciding that he doesn't want to marry her, acts like the prick he is and pretends that he's having an affair with Tina.
At this point I was pretty mad at Jonty for sleeping with him after everything he did to her.

Anyway, Jonty is heartbroken and runs away to uncle Jim. Cord goes after (for, I don't even know what, reason). Months pass, Jonty finds out she's pregnant and gives birth to a boy. Cord finally find Jonty and sees her with uncle Jim. Gets jealous and thinks the child is uncle Jim's. He then proceeds to, I don't know, rape her? I mean, Jonty doesn't want him but eventually he seduces her (even though she keeps saying no) until she finally says yes. Afterwards he basically calls her a whore and tries to pay her.

More sh*t happens. More problems, miscommunication and back and forward between Jonty and Cord. I got so sick of it. I honestly don't know why I kept reading.
All of this mess would've been avoided with some very simple truths. 
▪️Uncle Jim telling Cord that he has no interest in Jonty (at least not that way). Admitting that he's her father would also work. 
▪️Cord telling Jonty that he was never interested in Tina and only pretended to like her to make Jonty jealous.

That's it. Those two sentences would've avoided all that unnecessary crap. Miscommunication is in nearly every romance I've read and I don't blame the authors for using to further the plot but when an author uses it to such a degree, its just being lazy.

All in all, this book was a huge waste of time. And if I ever write a novel, at least I know exactly what not to make my hero like.

Also that ending was awful.