Rating: 2/5

So this story was….sufficient. 

Boogenhagen has all the main points in her review https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

For me the story didn’t make the angst o’ meter tremble much. It really had all sorts of possibilities, but I felt like there were so many things thrown in without much development. 

I was attracted to the story by the fact that it is told only from the hero’s POV. Unfortunately, his POV was a little too basic. 

Hero and heroine fell in love 13 years ago when she was 16 and he was 20. They never shared that tidbit with each other. She goes to seduce him when she is 19, he rejects her because he is being gallant. She is hurt and mad, says some offhand comment to her dad. He fires the H and has the H beaten up by a few thugs. You know how bad the mean streets are in this small Canadian village. Her father basically forces her into a marriage with a no good scoundrel, and the hero leaves for the next 10 years traveling around the world, making his fortune, and engaging in sex with woman who won’t get attached. Meanwhile the h pops out a couple of daughters and avoids getting an std from her philandering husband, who in the end resorts to hitting her because he wants her to push for the divorce. They divorce. He moves to Texas, gets remarried and basically writes a letter saying it’s best if there is no more communication between them. (Basically, abandoning his duties to his daughters by not even providing financial support. The h’s father supports her by disowning her and her own mother has to sneak around to see her daughter and granddaughters. 

The H comes blazing back to town well off(although not greek millionaire well off) and still carries a hatred/loving/lusting for the h. The h still has feelings for the H, but she avoids him as her own circumstances are not the best( She is divorces, mother of 2, small apartment, second-hand clothes, emotionally scarred from abusive husband etc…) However, she does have a hot bod as she now teaches aerobics to earn some money. 

 

He takes one of her classes to try and get to know her better. 

 

The story continues from there. They have hiccups along the way. They finally make love. They have a couple of more hiccups. Then they have their HEA with both girls ready to have a new dad and move to the Oceanside. I really wish the story would have had 1 less hiccup so there was an epilogue in the end. 

This was not a bad story. It just didn’t give me the thrills and chills I look for in a book.