Rating: 5/5

Alan Moore comes as close to legendary rock-star status in the comic book world as any comic book writer has ever come. If Grant Morrison is Mick Ronson, Moore is David Bowie.

With legendary titles like “The Watchmen”, “V for Vendetta”, “Miracle Man” and “The League of Extraordinary Gentleman” in his resume, Moore also wrote one of the all-time best (in my opinion) Batman graphic novels, “The Killing Joke”. He is also credited with writing one of the best Superman stories ever written, “Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?” (which I have not read yet).

He also resurrected another DC comic book series, originally created by Len Wein and Bernie Wrightson, that had been floundering somewhat in the mid-‘80s: “Swamp Thing”.

The tragic story of Dr. Alec Holland, who is murdered by a greedy industrialist but is resurrected as a giant green plant-creature that roams and protects the Louisiana bayous is, perhaps, well-known to fans of Swampy.

It was Moore, though, that re-invented Swampy’s origin story by famously making him “a plant that thinks it’s a man”, bringing a darkly existential twist to the story by questioning the very notion of humanity and its ecological place in the world.

Book One of the “Saga of the Swamp Thing” compiles issues 20-27, the issues in which Moore was brought on to be head writer.

Issue #20, appropriately entitled “Loose Ends”, carries on and completes a storyline started by the previous series writer, Martin Pasko. Moore essentially kills off or dismisses every character deemed secondary or ultimately unnecessary to the continuation of the series, and the issue also ends with Swamp Thing’s “death” and eventual removal from the swamp by the Sunderland Corporation. Issue #21 literally starts with a “rebirth” of Swampy. (Think Baby Groot only slimier and a lot more bloodshed.)

The villain of the series is Jason Woodrue, a.k.a. The Floronic Man, who has the capability to talk to plants. Purposely ingesting pieces of Swamp thing, Woodrue’s powers are increased tenfold. He is now bent on world domination by turning all vegetation on Earth against humanity.

The cameo appearance of the Justice League of America (Issue #24) has the potential to be cheesy, but it surprisingly works, mainly because Moore wisely uses them to reshape Swamp Thing as a very different kind of superhero.

Moore would go on to write for the series for several years, revitalizing it and making it one of the most beloved lines in the DC Universe.