Rating: 4/5

I don't really read a lot of high fantasy. In fact, I'm not even sure what makes something high fantasy. 
I have my ideas, though...

I've been reading Butcher's urban fantasy series, Dresden Files for a long time now, but I've avoided reading his Codex Alera stuff because it sounded too weird for me. Even the name Codex Alera is just...?
Ehhhhh? Seemed like there would be too much funky Lord of the Ringsy world-building for a fantasy-lite reader like myself. Some of us don't do well with that sort of thing, you know?!

Plus, this book has a lot of mixed reviews among my friends. There's not really an overwhelming Yes! This! Read this! vibe happening, so I never felt any pressure to pick it up.
But I was always kinda curious...

Ok. You know what?
After all that worrying, it turns out that I liked it. I liked it a lot! I mean, sure there were a whole bunch of things about the world itself that I could have used more explanation on. Especially those elemental thingies that (almost) everyone seemed to have. Like, sometime around puberty, most of the people get a connection to an element (earth, water, fire, air), but they vary in their powers. 
Kinda like Avatar if the elements were sorta like pets? Ish.
I'm not explaining it well. sigh
Anyway. I could have used a bit more help when it came to understanding what they were and how they came to be...obviously.

But other than not quite being able to pin down how the world worked (which was my original concern, in case you missed it), I didn't have any problems staying engaged in the plot. The storyline was interesting and well-written, and the characters felt three-dimensional and very real. 

Basically, this kid screws up and loses his (and his uncle's) sheep because he's busy getting some flowers for a snotty, ungrateful (unsurprisingly hoish) girl. Cuz he's hoping to see her big boobies.
And trying to find those damn sheep is going to land him (and his family) in the middle of a conspiracy to not only overthrow the current king but potentially get his friends and neighbors eaten by a group of savages across the border.
Good stuff!
I've already grabbed the next book in the series, and I can't wait to see what happens.

2021
This turned out to be what I would consider one of my favorite fantasy series ever, so I thought it would be fun to listen to the audiobook version. It was fantastic! I have to say that this book is even better the 2nd time around because I knew all the secrets and saw some of these characters in a new light.
Highly Recommended!
Buddy read with Chad.