Rating: 4/5

In this epic work, Norman Mailer shows the complexity that is Lee Harvey Oswald and leaves the reader to determine: Did he have the soul of a Killer? 

Mailer begins with Oswald’s trip to Russia and works backward through Oswald’s early family life, then forward with through his return to the US with his Russian wife. I took this book on a long flight (next trip I’m digital), so If I hadn’t been a captive audience, I wouldn’t have finished it. The early part is almost straight reporting, covering in more detail Oswald's Russian life, previously covered in Marina and Lee. The book gets a lot better and held my attention as it progressed.

The text is comprised of excerpts from the reports of the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee on Assassination, transcripts from the FBI and Russian intelligence services (some are conversations from Oswald’s bugged apartment), interviews by Mailer and Larry Schiller, the work of Priscella McMillan, Norman Posner, and Edward Epstein and a few other sources. Each is introduced with a pithy narrative using the “royal we” that sets the stage or interprets what is to come. 

While Mailer does not give an opinion on whether Oswald did the deed, he does have an opinion on its aftermath: for the intelligence establishment, a trial would be explosive since Mafia-CIA-FBI links would be revealed. Mailer notes, throughout, that while the 26 volume Warren Commission Report (which relied on FBI and CIA staff) leaves too many loose ends, it does provide a wealth of information on people and life in the US at this time. There is important but spotty documentation of dates and activities but, as Mailer notes more time was spent investigating everyone on the public bus Oswald took to Mexico than Oswald’s pro and anti Castro associates in New Orleans.

There is material I had not seen elsewhere. For instance there are interviews of Oswald’s acquaintances in Minsk that Mailer and his associates had in the 1990’s showing how just knowing Oswald affected their lives and careers. There is insight into the dilemma Oswald’s presence in Russia and his later “fame" posed for the KGB. Oswald’s stint in the Marines shows possible early on intelligence involvement in Japan. While Mailer says too much is made of Oswald's dubious sexuality Mailer shows possible roots of it in the Marines. 

The intent of the book is to assess the character of Oswald but you also get interpretive portraits of his mother Marguerite, his “friend” George de Mohrenschildt, Marina’s uncle and aunt in Minsk, her friend Ruth Paine and of Jack Ruby. The description of talk show host William Kirk Stuckey’s treatment of Oswald is one of the many short personality profiles that deliver wider perspective.

The book badly needs an index. On p. 703 Allan Dulles seems to be questioning Oswald while in custody in Dallas. I flipped back but could find no context. Maybe this was an editorial glitch and the questions were from the Warren Commission a year later. (Dulles later appears at a small dinner party given by Jackie Kennedy’s mother and stepfather along with George de Mohrenschildt. What it means for a daughter when her mother invites a known friend of her daughter’s husband'salleged assassin is not explored). Dulles’s interest in keeping a lid on things would be apparent, particularly to anyone who read The Brothers: John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles &amp; Their Secret World War.

I am not sure where this fits in the mountains of material on this topic. It hardly makes a notice in material on Mailer and his body of work. It is the Mailer voice with his Mailer take, and while 20 years old, the prose is not dated. This book unites many primary sources with insightful commentary. After the first 200 pages, it kept me occupied on a long flight.