Rating: 3/5

My first purchase from the local independent book store near my university and my first taste of the Black Britain: Writing Back collection (from which I hope to read many more novels). 

The book's premise enticed me, I LOVE a good crime story and with the elements of class, race and gender clearly also playing a role in the plot, I just had to read it. Williams crafted some really interesting characters, and there were definitely some moments that left me shocked, but overall my response to the book was...meh. 

I felt a bit let down by the end of the book. It seemed there were so many more plotlines to explore and so many more characters that I felt were underdeveloped. I understand that you cannot write detailed life stories for every character and follow their every move without writing thousands of pages, but I found a complete understanding of all of the characters was still slightly outside of my reach by the end. Perhaps this is enjoyable to some readers - it definitely fit Williams' style of storytelling to uphold some mystery - but personally I wanted more. There were too many strands to the story, some felt unnecessary or, as aforementioned, incomplete. Other plot points were built up just to turn out to be disappointing.

Adding to this, Clive Omartian seemed the obvious villain while his threats on David's life and Lee's career felt as if they were nothing, resolved all too quickly without the book every really climaxing. Neither was there much of a denouement.

Something I will commend Williams for though is her easy-to-read writing. I read both halves of the book across a few hours each on separate days, this owing to the enjoyable plot and likeable characters. I also thought that the mainly covert expressions of classism, racism and sexism by some characters were very well written. The kind of squirm-in-your-seat comments espoused by Giles and George Amery really hit home in exactly the way Williams seems to have intended. Lee was also a greatly likable character. Flawed and relatable - two staples of a great protagonist. 

Ultimately, I've given Without Prejudice three stars, not because I found the book boring or the writing bad, but because my final emotions about the book were rather lack-lustre.