Rating: 2/5

I’ve been thinking about this book for several days now, and I’m not sure that’s a good thing. My poor family…

I picked up this book hoping for a really cute adoption story, and I wasn’t at all disappointed in that area. Ricky and Luke are ADORABLE, and the author did an amazing job writing three-year-old little boys accurately. (Even down to how they said “chocolate”. &lt;3) Sandy was also a super cool character. She had quite the personality, was protective of her older sister, and was a trooper despite being confined to a wheelchair. I kinda wished she was in the story more. 

Marie was a sweet character. I really loved her conversation with Laura, sharing the Gospel and discussing pain. The way she took care of her son was really sweet too. And the darling parallel between the beginning and the end totally made me tear up. &lt;3

Unfortunately, Peter Hallock, a.k.a. "Most Hive-Inducing Fictional Man of the Year" (and a couple of content issues) got this book two stars.

(This review is gonna contain a lot of quotes and spoilers, just so you know.)

I don’t have any respect for a guy who pragmatically asks a woman to move in with him (to solve a problem) and won’t let the idea drop for ten pages even when she tells him it’s morally wrong and she’s uncomfortable with the idea even if it is perfectly platonic and someone else is living with them. (This is the first week they’ve known each other, by the way. Their second visit in person.)

Late in the same day, he mentions that his son (really her biological son since their kids were switched) can stay the night. Then this happens. 

“You’d let him spend the night here with me?”

His mind whirled. “Why not? I’d be here too.” Something in her expression made him lock eyes with her. “You can’t exclude me, Marie.”

I understand that the way the story is set up, they don’t quite trust each other yet not to steal both kids and run away, but after a conversation about not living together, the way he just invited himself to spend the night didn’t seem cool. He could afford a hotel… A few pages later, he’s noticing her figure and then in the middle of the night, he almost kisses her “by accident”. *bangs head into wall*

Earlier in the story, same visit, we have this conversation. 

”Why don’t you look at me?” He didn’t understand her aversion to him. It stung. 

Swallowing hard, as if trying to dislodge the huge ball in her throat, Marie confessed, “You look too much like Ricky. I love his dear little face, and when I see you…” She shrugged. 

“It’s confusing,” he finished softly. He gently set the shirt aside and folded her hand between both of his. “You look so much like Luke, it takes my breath away. Because of it, I feel as if I already know more about you than two short meetings would yield. My impulses to protect, keep and touch you probably come from that.”

“But you can’t be that way. You can’t act like an authoritative parent and dictate what happens. I won’t accept it. It’s a struggle to wait for God’s will, but that’s far better than rushing to make decisions I’ll regret later.”

And I guess that pretty much sums up my biggest problem with this character. He acted like he was Marie’s parent. I have no problem with a man being a protector and planner (in fact, I want mine to be like that), but he was manipulative, pushy, and sometimes even forceful even before he had a romantic claim on Marie. :(

His overprotective pushy side was really cute when Marie was sick and earlier in the story when he was afraid that she had wrecked. And it was almost cute when he was shopping with her, though buying her a trousseau felt a little creepy at that stage since they were still very platonic and I think he should have listened to how uncomfortable she was with the prices of the clothes he bought her. (I personally couldn’t bring myself to wear something that expensive. :P ) But it wasn't very cute other times...

His character especially rang all my alarm bells with one small episode. I’m not sure why. The author may have meant for his motives to be pure, encouraging, and sweet, but because it was a little more personal than all the other instances, I found myself really uncomfortable. 

Marie, Peter, the nanny Anne, and both boys were on a vacation at the seaside. 

”You’ll practically live in your swimsuit, Marie. Other than that, all you need is one dress. I’m sure you managed that.” When she didn’t reply at once, his features twisted into a scowl. “Didn’t you?”

“Just about.” Marie coasted over to the sink and busied herself scrubbing off that smudge. The task seemed amazingly interesting and complex, for all the effort she put into it.

“Marie,” Peter growled, “tell me you brought a bathing suit.”

A quick glance in the mirror let her know guilty color filled her cheeks. She tried to play word games. “Okay. You brought a bathing suit.”

“Woman! What were you thinking? We’re by the ocean. What person in their right mind wouldn’t bring a swimsuit?”

A few pages later…

The next morning, Marie groaned again when Peter handed her a box and announced, “I got you a swimsuit.”

“You expect me to fit into this after you stuffed me with chocolate torte and half a box of truffles last night?”

Peter glanced down at the swimsuit she’d dropped back into the gift box. She’d acted like it was a viper. “I called Brianna. She advised me. Mrs. Reccaut opened the gift shop early just for this, and she promises it’ll fit. There’s even a cover-up in this next box, if you’re worried about getting a sunburn.”

“I’m comfortable in what I have on.” She perched her hands on her hips and gave him a disgruntled look.”

He arranged events to make it so she just perfectly has the time to change into the swimsuit. She even hinted at him being manipulative, and he denied it with a joke. She changed into the one-piece swimsuit, wasn’t quite satisfied with her slightly mom and chocolate lover body, and decided to wear the cover up all day. Then this happened...

Peter tugged her back inside the cabana. His eyes twinkled. “You need to leave your cover-up in here. The boys’ shells are in your pockets.”

“I’m going to have to teach our boys to start laying up their treasures in heaven.” She took off the cover-up.

Peter winked at her, then growled, “I’m going to get the boys little bags so they can carry their treasures. I refuse to give you an excuse to wear that thing anymore.”

*shrugs* She was obviously more comfortable wearing it, and I didn’t like how he did his best to get her not to… And all this growling and scowling? Not really my thing...

Another thing I didn’t like was how he was constantly touching her, not in a creepy way, but holding her hand, touching her shoulder, and the like when they were really just strangers. Somewhere in the story he starts calling her honey and sweetheart just because. *shrugs* Kinda possessive or presumptive, maybe?

I’m honestly not looking for the hero in a book to be perfect, worship at the heroine’s feet, or give in to her every whim. I do want to see respect and growth away from negative behavior, however, and the fact that there didn’t seem to be any problem with Peter’s actions, except for a few complaints from Marie, had me uncomfortable. 

Just a note, there are mentions of pregnancy, details of a hard birth, and breastfeeding. A child was kidnapped way in the past and never found. There were also allusions to “intimacy” (and some words related to that), an unfaithful wife, and suspicion of an affair. 

Altogether, I was hoping for a sweet, Christ-filled romance and adoption story. This was a disappointment.