Rating: 4/5

Taking his title from the description of Dante’s Ninth Circle of Hell, Michael Nava has added to the literature depicting Los Angeles as a hell on earth and has shown us a culture rapidly decaying as fear, alienation, and hatred become habitual aspects of our lives. 

With this sixth Henry Rios mystery, Nava’s skill at writing takes a leap forward as he presents readers with a more complex plot, allusions to Dante’s Inferno, and sharper dialogue. He even makes the sprawling city of Los Angeles a character in the novel. 

The Burning Plain opens as Henry Rios, a gay and Latino criminal defense attorney, battles with the parents of his former lover, Josh Mandel. Josh’s parents wanted their dead son buried in a location of their choosing even though they had little to do with their gay son while he was living. As happened all too often during the height of the AIDS epidemic, many parents gave up all contact with their gay child until that child died. Then they swooped down, erased their son’s friends and lovers, and buried their child in an unknown location. 

Soon, the grieving Henry Rios becomes briefly involved with a young man, Alex, whose appearance reminds him of his dead partner. Then, after an emotional and violent night together, Alex turns up murdered and police think Henry is the prime suspect. 

As Rios feverously works to clear his name by finding the person who murdered the young man, he finds himself drawn into the search for a serial killer preying on gay men in West Hollywood. 

As he finds himself pitted against a homophobic and corrupt cop, a hostile DA, and the head of one of Hollywood’s great film studios, Rios uncovers an elaborate cover-up, corruption, and the power the Hollywood elite hold over government and police officials.

Yet, despite the plot line which twisted its way through so many possibilities, it was Nava’s depiction of Los Angeles that attracted me the most. Though he occasionally overwrites his description I often found myself thinking of the LA noir novels that were so popular in the 1940s and 50s. 

Yet, what sets The Burning Plain apart from the others is Nava’s focus on the particular hell gay persons faced during the worst decade of the AIDS epidemic. As Nava wrote in the afterward, “It would be a long time before those dreams from the pit began to lose their power for my generation of gay men. And still we carry the names of our dead with us and we will carry them into our own graves. This novel was meant to be a memorial for them.”

Of the six Henry Rios novels I’ve read, this may be the most ambitious and even the best of them. 
Though it is possible to read Nava’s mystery novels and pay attention only to his satisfying and believable plot lines, that would be to miss his point. Yes, he seeks to entertain, but more than that, he wants to help us see the hell that arrives on the tailcoat of bigotry, religious extremism, and the fear and hatred of “the Other.” He wants us to see the social ills we allow to infect our world and understand that those ills necessarily lead to murder.