Rating: 4/5

The fifth Nero Wolfe book should probably come with a warning for modern readers. Of course, it's not fair to apply modern sensibilities to previous generations, although that is fairly common to do. But because of modern sensibilities there are going to be many readers who will be shocked at the causal use of, now derogatory, terms for Asians, various Europeans, and African Americans, that can be found in this book. 

I recommend you read it anyway and substitute whatever words you find appropriate inside your head. 

This is a rare Nero Wolfe story that does not take place in New York City. This one takes place in the wilds of West Virginia, which to me sound park like, but I live in Utah and anything back East is easy to imagine as over populated and over built up. The interesting part about this being set in an unfamiliar location is that the story becomes much more of a character story as Nero and Archie delve into the mystery before them. 

The cast of characters is extremely varied. The premise is that a group of famous chefs have created a sort of club of the 15 best chefs in the world. Every four years they meet to have talks, take care of club business, and cook and eat things. Also they argue. And they all bring guests. This time Nero Wolfe is invited to be a guest speaker to this club on the contributions of American cuisine to the world. 

Along with the use of terms no longer acceptable, it was also interesting to see how the various characters in the story approached each of these various groups. The local law enforcement were depicted as uniformly dismissive of African Americans, to the point of insisting that they not be called by Mister, but by boy. Archie takes a more urban view, but still considers the foreigners and African Americans somewhat as lesser people, and he frequently uses derogatory terms, especially when frustrated. 

The approach of Nero was quite egalitarian though, and it was very refreshing to see. Nero, of course, is a romantic and cherishes intellectual ideals. When confronted by Archie and locals regarding his treatment of those from foreign countries, and those with different colored skin he states: "The ideal human agreement is one in which distinctions of race and color and religion are totally disregarded; anyone helping to preserve those distinctions is postponing that ideal; …." 

The interplay of Archie and Nero in this book is much more balanced giving both of them chances to display their own distinct areas of skill and the final resolution of the mystery was both subtly telegraphed and satisfying to see. I would also like to note that this is the first book that delves into the relationship between Nero and his long time friend and chef, a member of these 15 best chefs, Marco Vukcic. They were not entirely friendly in this book but the interplay gave some interesting views into Nero's youth and formation of the reclusive genius he becomes.