Rating: 5/5

Surely, when it comes to writing book reviews, excessive rules and strictures should be avoided. After all, in general, the artsy-fartsy literary jet set tends to be more or less of a centrist or overtly liberal bent, and one could definitely argue that we creative types do tend to skew towards agreeability, an often (though certainly not always) decidely feminine trait.

Therefore, when it comes to the thoughtful "grown-up" appraisal, or nostalgic reassessment, if you will, of a much beloved multi-generational children's picture book such as Drummer Hoff (which I must say is one of my life long personal favorites) I gather that there are generally two ways to approach the aforementioned.

First, one is naturally inclined to cite their own personal childhood impressions of, and experiences with, Barbara and Ed Emberley's timelessly entertaining, ever poignant, and deceptively simple little classic, that, secondly, and perhaps most interesting of all, many adult aged commentators often seem particularly wont to reexamine via the prism of a more or less newfangled, perhaps even rather trendy, "new age," or dare I say, "woke" moralistic view.

In other words, it seems that many "big people" (aka "grown-ups") of an often literary and artistic bent (you know, us thoughtful, analytical, and almost always well-meaning reader types) often appear to be entirely reticent to simply acknowledge that, when we were yet still quite young and infinitely impressionable, we were actually incredibly captivated by a beautifully illustrated book that depicted... gasp... soldiers.

And German soldiers at that. Mein Gott!

But how could such a thing be? Why, as altruistic (minded) creatives, are we not the enlightened ones? Are we not the righteous "peaceniks," the "make love not war," "flower power" proverbial "hippies" of (or at the very least the gentle "flower child" progeny of) Vietnam War era fame? Did we not comprehend, even when we were as yet entirely innocent babes, that soldiers and uniforms and military drill and order, with its often singularly and damnably blind resolve, and all... all THAT "Nazi" type stuff, did we not yet comprehend when still so fresh from swaddling that all that highly programmed militaristic fervor was just plain bad, bad, bad, and more BAD?

Well, if we didn't, it's surely because we were just poor dumb kids way back when some nasty authoritarian "adult" tossed that lovely old picture book at us to hopefully amuse and shut us up for at least a quarter of an hour or so! Actually, come to think of it, no one told me I had to read that particular book. No one. I chose it. Or maybe it chose me! If such a thing is even possible anyway.

The point is that, as the hippie era classic tune (which was, interestingly enough inspired by the Biblical Book of Ecclesiastes), so aptly put it, "To everything turn, turn, turn. There is a season, turn, turn, turn. And a time for every purpose under the heaven."

Yes. Yes, "a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace."

Imagine THAT, John Lennon. So, forget Virginia Woolf. Who's afraid of the big bad Germans? Hmm. I suppose... all of us artsy-fartsy peacenik types who may not be of fully ethnic Germanic heritage, but we are, the vast majority of us anyway, inheritors of the broader Anglo-Saxon-American cultural and historical heritage that still, like it or not, characterizes... nay, BUILT Western civilization as we know it.

Yes, that ancient Fertile Cresent-Greco-Romano-Celto-Germanic (and even Slavic) martial spirit, that not only brought faith, then scientific reason, out of the Middle East, up from Northern Africa, all across Europe, and then from sea to shining American Sea, and then all the way to the continents of Oceania and Australia, and finally, all the way back to the southern tip of South Africa.... Yes, THAT civilization.

Yet lest we forget that the Chinese, Mongolian, and Japanese (just to name a few) of Far East Asia have their very own version of conquest/divine providence. For that matter, so do the Indians ("red" AND "red dot"), and the once mighty (but equally bloodthirsty) precolumbian empires that now lay entombed beneath "New World" jungle and... flowers. Lest we also forget the Killing Fields of Pol Pot, the countless MILLIONS who died because some unkempt, unemployed 19th century contrarian European scribe named Marx decided it was time to burn it all down and start all over again using his very own highly theoretical, utopian style, so-called "communal" rules and strictures, etc., etc., etc., et ALL.

So, who's afraid of the big bad "Nazi" Germans (aka "WHITES")? Who's scared blind and stupid of the all too often unfairly persecuted Jews (ALSO "whites," who were often so racially indistinct that they had to be forced to wear a Star of David so the REAL Nazis would know who to KILL), with their pesky ancient, Divinely derived Laws and societal strictures? Not me. Hells nah. Because:

"To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:
A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;
A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up;
A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together;
A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;
A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away;
A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak;
A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace."

But a civilization, especially one like ours, with roots dating all the way back to the ancient Middle East (and before that, AFRICA, "the cradle of human civilization"), "is a terrible thing to waste." Surely.