Rating: 5/5

I should explain some of the background of the history behind Last Go Round. In 1911, the Pendleton Roundup, held on the Columbia River prairie in Oregon, was heavily promoted as the World Championship Rodeo of all time. Colorful characters such as William Cody (Buffalo Bill) were in attendance as well as all of the genuine rodeo elite of the time. Much like the author, Ken Kesey, I was introduced to the Pendleton roundup in the 1960s as the premiere annual rodeo event. We went in our western wear and watched it all, horse races, roping, bulldogging, and of course bronc and bull riding. It was a spectacle and some of the participants were truly amazing athletes. Obviously, I have some nostalgia about this topic. I also know some of the families who are related to characters in the book. I am sure they have concerns about the Merry Prankster's treatment of them in the book especially since there are obviously events that are created or exaggerated by Kesey. 

The book is a modern tall tale woven among historical fact and the rumors, recollections of old timers, and a hefty dose of loco weed to spice up the story of the legendary contest. The facts are that three contestants were in close pursuit of the overall prize. George Fletcher was a flamboyant black cowboy and local favorite to win in Pendleton. Jackson Sundown, a working cowboy and Nez Perce Indian was a quietly confident competitor and a master horseman. The wildcard in the contest for the crown is young Jonathan Spain, a new face in western rodeo; he looks a bit like Harry Connick Jr. The newcomer arrived from Tennessee on a big horse named Stonewall with the intent to win. The adventures of these three principal characters and the events that transpired are at once sweet and tragic, told in classic Kesey style. It is a story about the passing of the old west, of our nation's struggles with racism and the treatment of Native peoples, and it also captures the essence of the thrill and excitement of rodeo.