Rating: 4/5

So rather than reviewing the book as a whole, I thought I would say a few words about each of "The Labours" and then give an overall rating. So taking the average we get 3.67, so 4 stars it is. An enjoyable book with some good stories and some average ones.

The Nemean Lion  4 stars
An enjoyable short story in which Poirot investigates the theft of a Pekinese dog !!

The Lernean Hydra  3 stars
A fun but obvious story in which Poirot delves into rumours and gossip against a local GP

The Arcadian Deer  3.5 stars
An interestinting tale whereby Poirot races all over Europe to discover the whereabouts of a Ladies maid for a garage mechanic.

The Erymanthian Boar  4 stars
On holiday Poirot is cajoled into investigating the disappearance of a ruthless killer called Marrascaud, and is trapped on a mountain

The Augean Stables  4 stars
Poirot is called in by the Government to clear the name of the retired Prime Minister.

The Stymphalean Birds  4 stars
On holiday, Poirot is called upon to help out an Englishman involved in family issues, murder !

The Cretan Bull  4 stars
Poirot is called upon to convince a man he isn't mad, despite all evidence to the contrary.

The Horses of Diomedes  3.5 stars
An adventure in which Poirot is called in by a young Doctor friend to help one of General Grant's four daughters.

The Girdle of Hyppolita  3.5 stars
Whilst on the continent investigating an art theft, Poirot is asked to lend a hand with a missing British schoolgirl that somehow disembarks a train that hadn't stopped.

The Flock of Geryon  4 stars
In this short story we see the return of the redoubtable Miss Carnaby to assist M. Poirot in the investigation into a dodgy religious sect, that supposedly conned wealthy elderly women.

The Apples of Hesperides  3 stars
An ok story in which Poirot tracks down a stolen Goblet, not much more to say.

The Capture of Cerberus  4 stars
And the final story sees the return of the Countess Rossakoff, and an investigation into drugs and jewel robberies