Rating: 4/5

"She was wakened in the night by the bells calling the sisters to the night office. She had gotten up and was out the door before she realized that there was no longer a place for her in the choir. Slowly, she returned to her bed. She lay awake a long time, clutching the ivory cross until the pattern of it was etched into her hand."

The life of the Paraclete is behind Catherine, who has followed the earthly call of her desires, but the splitting of her ambitions leaves her at a crossroads. In this second installment of the series, misogyny, property rights, and deeply repressed family secrets are at the fore, in a plot that focuses squarely on how badly people are willing to treat each other for power. Catherine and Edgar intervene, as they will, and it's intriguing to see how Sharan Newman repurposes the previously non-carnal, spiritual devotion both characters had before encountering each other. Now, joined as they are, their quest for unearthing inequity seems to burn as brightly as their commitment to God and all the saints. The external drama, which supplies the meat on the bones of the narrative, felt very pointed and symbolically freighted throughout: the injustices against women, against the poor, against those damaged by both Church and State, these felt not only solidly, but pointedly established. At times, I felt myself drawn out of the concerns of the book by this insistence, but I was pulled back in, every time, by what I feel to be the slower-build, the careful and detailed braiding of the entire series, taking place behind the front-facing concerns of the primary plot. Which is not to say the plot doesn't concern me; it does -- but even then, I'm more swept up in the wake of what I can imagine about these players in Newman's tableau (particularly Sister Paciana, whom we may not meet beyond the boundaries of this book, and Abbess Héloïse, whom we certainly will) than what is explicitly explored about them on the page. 

Still, nothing at all compels me to abandon Catherine LeVendeur. I want to know more about her, and the times that made her, and the faith that both enthralled and could not contain her, and I want to learn it from Newman. So onward to The Wandering Arm!