Rating: 3/5

I have to confess I was somewhat confused as who the actual H was in this one to begin with…the boss/fiancé or the shameless pursuer- a car racer. And since I hadn’t even read the blurb so I was understandably wading in very confused waters. Of course the mystery dint hold itself too long unlike the one I read a while ago..Under the Stars of Paris which quite shocked me as to who got the girl in the end. ☺

The first page or so- the fiancé was definitely the H to me… 
‘Her soft brown gaze swung to the man sitting opposite her. For the thousandth time Susan studied his aloof, almost arrogant features, the firm jaw, the thin hard mouth, the aristocratically straight nose, the impassive dark, nearly black, eyes beneath thick brows of an equal shade. His hair was as dark as hers, but in this light it had a raven black sheen without the red casts hers possessed.’

Then the racer enters with.. 
‘The lean, handsome face held deeply grooved lines around his mouth and eyes that said he smiled often. Boyish was an initial adjective that Susan wanted to use to describe the man, but he was much too virile and too masculine. That faintly boyish charm she detected was really the rakish air of a rogue. The stunningly handsome face and devastating smile had probably overwhelmed many women.’
(Okay..lean, roguish, virile is good but boyish? But never mind..)

Indomitable strength was roughly and arrogantly carved in Warren's features. Mitch Braden possessed the same strength, but in him it was tempered with determination and consideration. Mitch did not overpower people with the force of his personality. He charmed them to his side.

Of course things are (or the H was) pretty clear by now but still let me build my case on the confusing signals vis-à-vis how a harly H is supposed to be described or not. 

At this point the racer seems the clearcut winner as the fiance was shown as somewhat stuffy and boring.
But the fiancé fights back with his ‘imposing, masculine features’ and his behavior..‘Her elbow was seized in a rough grip and she was propelled toward the outer door. His hold didn't lessen as he nearly forced her to his car in tight-lipped silence. The crackling tension remained through the entire journey to her home with neither of them uttering a sound.’ …and…'The whole argument was silly,' he murmured, taking her into his arms and crushing her tightly against his chest.

The h is running confused and scared and her family doesn’t help much with their open and clear preference. To give her credit she is not cold snippy lady but a genuinely confused one. An emergency clears all her confusion and she goes running to her man. Quite the Indy girl!