Rating: 3/5

Welp, this certainly was a book i read. 

It's been a while since i read my last book in the myth series. I took a breather because i really didn't enjoy the last "Myth inc" Side story and knew this would be another one. Thankfully, this one wasn't as bad as the other one. Still though, that doesn't make it great. 

This book is pretty much entirely from the point of view of Skeeve's 2 bodyguards Guido and Nunzio. It takes place during the events of the last book. However, unlike the last "Myth inc" book, this one is just one story, not a bunch of little ones. Which makes it lucky that this story wasn't terrible like a few of the last myth inc book had. 

Short version is the two bodyguards try to infiltrate an army to try to create discontent and take it down from the inside. So it's their adventures through going through basic training, being posted at different places etc. Not a great story, but not terrible either.

I assume maybe Robert thought people liked the short story in the previous myth inc book where the two bodyguards worked from the inside to help a union and he thought people would like an entire book like that? i don't know, but it didn't seem like a book anybody was clamoring for.

*Spoiler warning*
Especially because, at the end, it turns out that all their work amounted to nothing and nothing came of it*
*End spoiler warning*

The weird thing was, this was the longest one of these i've read so far. I know 240 pages doesn't SEEM like a long book, but when the average Myth book is 175-200 pages, it's weird to see that the longest one so far is the side story with two tertiary characters. 

The language was still funny and i enjoyed the characters well enough, but i couldn't get the whole idea that this book was unnecessary, and, having finished it, like i said, it didn't really amount to anything to further the story, except for the last 2 chapters, which, by that point, already wrapped up these two guy's story. 

I didn't DISlike this book, and it definitely was better than the previous Myth inc book, but that isn't saying much. I can't wait to go back to a Skeeve book where the plot actually moves forward. A weird little side trip that Asprin decided to do. As long as you understand walking in that this book doesn't really have a bearing on the plot except for the last 15 pages, then you'll have an okay time.

3.5 out of 5, rounded down to a 3.