Rating: 4/5

This compelling and original YA historical fiction novel details the conditions of forced labor camps in Eastern Europe during World War II. The novel begins with a mass kidnapping where a group of Italian school boys viewing a Western cowboy film are rounded up by soldiers and forced to board a train headed for a labor camp. The teen protagonist Roberto is separated from everyone he knows except for Samuele, a Jewish friend who must keep his religious identity a secret in the work camp. The novel was written for young adults, and will excite readers of all ages with its original story and gripping tale of Roberto’s escape. While the novel is almost 20 years old, the story is relevant and enlightening, not only as a work of historical fiction, but as a coming of age text whereby one young man finds hope and purpose in his life.

The strength of the novel is that it offers a different portal into the World War II story. It covers a little known detail in history of the Axis Powers forcing children and teens into labor. It sheds light on the Holocaust from an Italian teen’s perspective, examining what it means to be friends with a targeted minority and exploring how far one will go to protect the oppressed and persecuted. There is strength in the book’s final message as Roberto finds a purpose for his life after his escape from the camp. Napoli’s writing is excellent. Her compelling storyline is loosely based on real life events of Guido Fullin. Her characters are authentic, the dialog is satisfying, and the introduction of foreign words in German and Italian are defined contextually in the narrative. Finally, the pacing of the action is gripping. One you get started, you don’t want to put the book down.

Weaknesses: The book would benefit from a map. It would be good to see Roberto’s starting point in Italy, the train route to the labor camps, and a general outlay of his escape route. In her acknowledgements, Napoli refers to her archival European research. A historical note about forced labor camps at the end of the book is wanting and would have enriched the book, as would have the inclusion of archival photographs of camps, trains, soldiers, etc. Finally, a photo of Guido Fullin, for whom the story was loosely based would have been a treat.

Special Considerations: There is violence in the book that illustrates the brutality of the war (physical abuse, cruel acts, starvation, and death), but it is not too graphic. The descriptions are authentic, but not overdone.

Verdict: In 1998, Stones in Water was an ALA Notable Book, an ALA Best Book for Young Adults, and the Winner of the Sydney Taylor Jewish Book Award. Trust me, trust the accolades, and include this book in your library media center collection. Students will find Roberto’s story compelling now and for years to come. And if you have Stones in the Water, you will also want to have the sequel Fire in the Hills that focuses on Roberto’s work for the Italian resistance.