Rating: 5/5

One Night turned out to be quite an amazing book. When I first started it was hard to determine if I was going it enjoy the book or not. Although first impressions last, by the 29th or so page I was head over heels in love with this book. Reading it seemed to be an enjoyment rather than a burden. I completely and utterly loved this book because it told a story in the eyes of the person directly in the moment along with their exact thoughts and feelings. It took one whole day and night and stretched it into a wonderful book packed high with details. The author took this book, which you would expect to be just a book, but it was like TV in your head! Who wouldn’t want to read it?! 
	“It’s very nice to meet you, Ms. Carpenter. By the way, I’d like to marry you niece, or kill her.” This quote to me, putting aside its bluntness, related to both the book and life. Throughout the book the two main characters Kelly and Prince Tom had such a relationship the quote said it all. The night they spent together was filled with bickering but in a way they helped each other discover something about themselves that would help and change their lives forever. It’s just like in life sometimes. Certain people you meet can bring out the best and worst out of you, showing sides you had no idea were in you. A lot of times it changes you and your mindset for the better showing you how you can improve and make things better. As much as these people make you want to downright kill them, because we all know that when people tell you what to do or annoy you it is beyond irritating, it can sometimes make your thoughts shine a little brighter and improve. Although as much as you want to kill these people why not marry them. I mean they brought out something that was hiding in a dark corner of your soul that actually benefited you and others. The pain of irritation may be a detriment but the positive side is beyond replaceable.
	Lastly, I would like to proudly give this book 5 fat stars. It really showed me things that have motivated me and gave me something incredible to read. It was a non-stop page turner with a useful moral, which also kept you on your toes constantly thirsty for more. Well you honestly can’t get better than that. Along with the details and imagery the author gave you the book deserves nothing less that a 5 star rating.