Rating: 2/5

My victory over ‘Victory’ by Joseph Conrad was last-gasp and hard-fought. Unfortunately, I am not going to build any triumphal arches to commemorate it.

I feel like a veteran. For a few weeks I have been bombarded with boredom. Stabbed with a bayonet of disappointment. Outflanked by the characters I didn’t care about. Shot with conversations which led nowhere. 

To cut a long story short, ‘Victory’ turned out to be almost a defeat. It doesn’t comfort me much to realize that one of my brothers in arms was Vladimir Nabokov, who almost fell in the field of glory too. He felt irritated by ‘souvenir-shop style, and bottled ships and shell necklaces of romanticist cliches’ in ‘Victory’.

Mind you, I'm not a recruit. It was the fourth novel by Conrad I've read after  Lord Jim,  Heart of Darkness and  Almayer’s Folly. All of them were masterpieces, each in its unique way. I have been always impressed by Conrad's style, his ability to depict far away places and express moral dilemmas. The quality of writing in ‘Victory’ is exquisite too which sadly can't be told about the rest, though the novel operates on an interesting premise: Malay Archipelago between Java and Borneo, a girl stolen out of orchestra, romance, 'solitude, shade, and gloomy silence'. Mostly solitude.

If we could distil the beauty of Conrad's language, of his descriptions and observations, it would taste like nectar of the gods. I'm astonished every time I realize that Joseph Conrad was Polish and started to learn English in his twenties.

Chances are my musings are being read now by somebody who is about to start his or her literary acquaintance with Joseph Conrad. I’m begging you on my knees: don’t begin with ‘Victory’. This novel may give you a false image of the truly wonderful writer. Have it for an eccentric, exotic dessert, which will accentuate the taste of the nourishing main dishes you’ve had before. Conrad himself seemed to be a bit embarrassed by this novel. You will sense it for yourself while reading his preface. By the way, if you are a literary kamikaze and decide to embark on ‘Victory’ anyway, please don’t read the introduction before the novel, as it reveals too much. 

I was a literary kamikaze myself. Orsodimondo, whose dazzling review was my inspiration, warned me that this is not Conrad’s best novel. Moreover, Orsodimondo's three stars twinkled alarmingly, but I was so determined to experience the author's sense of humour and see the portrait of woman so different from his other female characters. 

It looked as if Conrad took into consideration some complaints of his readers and critics. As if they approached him and said ‘Look, Mr Conrad. You write great books, we like them a lot, except for two things: they are utterly depressing and misogynistic. Could you please do something about that?’ This is of course an imagined situation and its possibility is less than scarce. But I had the impression that Conrad was doing his best to fulfil such a request. 

There are sparkles of humour in ‘Victory’ indeed: 'What an impenetrable girl you are, Lena, with those grey eyes of yours! Windows of the soul, as some poet has said. The fellow must have been a glazier by vocation.' Nevertheless, I found the overall impression devastating. The humour exists but only on the surface. Conrad’s ironical remarks are like rare fireflies in complete darkness. Darkness as black as the dress Lena had to wear to be invisible in the forest.

As for women, Alma alias Lena is definitely the most profound and complex female character I have encountered in Conrad's novels so far but I’m afraid nowadays some readers might get slightly infuriated with excerpts like: 'Women can deceive men so completely. The faculty was inherent in them; they seemed to be created with a special aptitude.'

I appreciate Conrad's attempt at a more ambitious literary form. ‘Victory’ resembles two other genres: a parable with a clear moral and a melodramatic love story. The contrast between them is an abyss and being constantly stretched over it, I wasn’t having the time of my life.

Will I read anything by Joseph Conrad after Pyrrhic 'Victory'? Time will tell but I'm willing to take the risk. My wounds weren't mortal, after all.