Rating: 4/5

‘You must first suffer pain / to join the ranks of the brave and true.’

Struggling through life trying to find yourself amidst a battle with your own ego snapping up vices like a crow with shiny objects is always much more interesting when wrapped in the packaging of a surreal allegory. One of these is going to get way more traction: I’ve been drinking too much caffeine (fraught with a mysterious poison) and having a panic attack (caught in a battle of wills against an evil sorcerer trying to choke the life out of you with magic) while responding to a polite and 3 weeks overdue work email (plunging your sword in the the heart of a snarling dragon). Writers have picked up on this neat trick centuries ago and Sufi poet Faridoddin Abu Hamed Mohammad Attar Nishapuri—for the sake of brevity he was down with the name Attar of Nishapur—delivered the epic poem The Conference of Birds as a sweeping epic on the soul’s search for meaning. Described by Rumi as ‘the Master’ of Sufi poetry, Attar of Nishapur was true to his name of “Attar” meaning “apothecary” and delivers some medicine for the heart and soul through the sublimnity of his verses. Feeling directionless and leaderless in a world caught in the cross-hairs of suffering and tyranny, a conference of all the world’s birds decides to set out and find Simurgh, the mystical King of legend, to lead them. Led by the Hoopoe bird who serves as a wise, Sufi master, it is a story made up of hundreds of small stories addressing vice and virtue and the arduous quest for understanding and unity. A masterpiece of Sufi literature translated from the Persian to English in my edition by Sholeh Wolpé, The Conference of Birds is an epic adventure pulled along by gorgeous prose and contemplative themes and messages.

'All that you have uttered
All that you have heard.
All that you knew,
And all that you have seen,
All of it from the very start
Is just the beginning of the fairy tale.

Disappear. This ruin is not your abode.
What matters is essence of truth,
Independent and pure.
What does it matter if truth branches or not?
When the True Sun shines eternal,
Does it matter if here is an atom
Or here, its shadow?'

I came to this poem having read Czech-born artist and author Peter Sís’s magnificent retelling bursting with his signature artwork and had to take a peek at the original. It is a long poem and takes many side-quests in spiritual pursuit of purity for the soul, but it never feels bogged down and the humor really keeps you moving with a lightness of heart through this epic work. Each bird becomes a sort of stand-in for humanity's seemingly endless vices and foibles and the Hoopoe addresses each in turn with a message for them as to their wrong-doings and spiritual counseling to attain greater unity with the self, community, and the divine. 

'You who are drunk on love of treasures,
Suppose you come across one.
You will guard it until you are dead,
And while your life slips away, you gain nothing.

Love of treasure is for the foolish.
Worshipping gold is for pagans.
Make idols of gold and you are
No different from Abraham’s father.
Or are you from the tribe who made the Golden Calf?

If your heart is flawed by love of gold,
You will enter eternity with a face ugly with greed.'

This ugly face, we learn, is the face of the rat. The poem progresses through many parables, including a parable about Jesus himself telling parables, and the stories of the Old Testament such as those of Moses, Abraham, and Joseph are frequently cited in the Hoopoe’s speeches. There is a bit of an affinity between him and many prophets or wise figures of many religions and, like Jesus, he advises that ‘not until you forsake all you possess / can you start this journey.’ The quest for the divine is one that transcends earthly values and the physical realm and it is only through non-existence that eternal existence can be discovered for those who are able. The ending in particular, with the name Simurgh being revealed to be si--meaning ‘thirty’--and morgh--meaning birds--is an excellent note on the idea of holding divinity inside one’s self and community if spiritual purity is obtained.

  

Art by Habiballah of Sava from a folio of the poem dated 1600

Attar’s The Conference of Birds is a bit of a challenging yet very rewarding read. An epic poem of an epic adventures across epic valleys each full of pitfalls, tests of faith, and more, this is an excellent allegorical tale on spirituality that has understandably lasted through the ages with its rather broad and universal messages on purity and the pursuit of the self. An excellent read that is as uplifting as it is empowering.

4.5/5

‘Leaving yourself is annihilation.
When awareness of this annihilation
Is annihilated, you’ll find eternal life.’