Rating: 5/5

The Rosetta Stone of the JFK assassination conspiracy. I believe this is the seventh or eighth book I have read on the assassination, some for the lone gunman, some for conspiracy, and this one, the very first critique of the Warren Commission, settles the question entirely. Tom Hanks, in adopting the lone gunman theory for his HBO show Parkland, is doing a discredit to history and himself. There is this kneejerk reaction in our culture to the very concept of conspiracy, marginalized as nothing more than fringe ideas by fringe characters. I have to think this impression is one sustained by a lack of curiosity, a lack of understanding of the human condition, and a lack of research. Power corrupts, power finds a way of usurping the means of control to its own favor, and in collusion throughout time immemorial, people in power conspire for their own interests. It is the height of naivete to think that people are fundamentally benevolent and selfless, especially politicians. 

In this book, Mark Lane pulverizes the official record of what happened on November 22nd, 1963, in Dealey Plaza. Does he rely on some clever rhetorical flourish, or like Bugilosi a penchant for ad hominem attacks, or grind the examination to a halt with inconsequential minutiae? No, he lays out the deluge of evidence of a cover-up within the Warren Commission by looking at the actual testimony given and comparing it to that which was reported, over and over, and with such drastic revision of facts that it ceases to be a question of sloppy paperwork. The fact of conspiracy is inescapable. Read the testimonies of key witnesses firsthand, observe the vital witnesses accounted for that the Commission chose not to interview, note the key questions that were never even asked, and at times observe a combatant nature to the questioning, at times bullying the witness towards one particular perspective. Look at the charade of the rifle tests conducted by the Warren Commission, the statistically improbable mass destruction of evidence in the days after the assassination. Not to mention Mark Lane's book was written a couple years after the assassination, and positions he made so early in the investigation are substantiated long after with the declassification of some (but not nearly all) of the JFK government documents. 

If that is not enough listen to debate between Mark Lane and Joseph Ball of the Warren Commission, and observe who relies on facts and who relies on name-calling (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mrudke...)

The minutiae of what the conspiracy consists of, that is debatable; that there was a conspiracy and it was not just a lone nut with a gun, is not.