Rating: 2/5

If you were around for the microhistory fad of (e.g.) the late '90s you'll have heard of this one: at the time it was often held up as either the first microhistory or at least a pioneer of the genre, and more than one microhistory writer spoke positively of its careful account of cheesemaking and the miller's life in the 16th century.
In actual fact, it's an account of the two heresy trials of an Italian named Menocchio (who was indeed a miller), written by someone who finds it much easier to see the point of view of the Inquisition than that of a simple country heretic, and thinks you do too.

Most of the book deals with the first trial and Menocchio's beliefs as revealed through the trial's documentation. His idiosyncratic morality, which is based around loving your neighbour and following your own judgement, is charming and naïve, and more or less accidentally cuts to the core of a number of specifically Catholic hypocrisies, which is also why the Inquisition got involved; it's also entirely his own, which seems to genuinely baffle Ginzburg: he devotes a bizarre amount of space to trying to trace the literary origins of Menocchio's beliefs and spuriously compares it to just about every contemporary heretic movement he can think of. In the end, he has to admit almost all of these excursions are dead ends, frustrated—he can't wrap his head around the possibility of real independent thought, and the fact that an undereducated but bright dude with access to a handful of very random books and too much time on his hands could, perfectly innocently, come up with an elaborate and slightly weird cosmology on his own doesn't even seem to occur to him. (Didn't he go to high school?)
Menocchio is inevitably found guilty and sentenced to life in prison, but he's released after a few years and resumes his old life. Though his imprisonment did put the fear of the Catholic Church if not God into him, he runs foul of the Inquisition again after a while, and this time they execute him. This section is shorter, presumably because the interrogation (with torture this time) was too. Possibly due to a lack of materials, Ginzburg now leans heavily on the accusations rather than Menocchio's own testimony, quietly taking them as factual representations of Menocchio's beliefs even though some of them seem to be wildly out of character for him and almost comically stereotypical for a heresy accusation—calling the Virgin Mary a whore and reading the Quran. Throughout, the actions of the Inquisition are presented as obviously intelligible (even the torturers themselves get a very "nuanced" treatment: the fact that the torture "only" lasted half an hour and their questions seemed rote and uninspired must be evidence that they felt disgust with the process), while Menocchio's largely remain impenetrable to Ginzburg.

So I do think it is fair to call Ginzburg a pioneer of the microhistory genre—he certainly set the tone for the level of care and competency exhibited by his successors. It would have been a better book if it had been about cheesemaking, actually.