Rating: 5/5

James Cook led three world wide expeditions of exploration in the Pacific Ocean.

Cook was renowned beforehand as an excellent surveyor and map-maker. Prior to his Pacific journeys he had already travelled to present-day Canada and did some very accurate map-making of the St. Lawrence River and what is now Newfoundland and Labrador (he also played a minor role when James Wolfe (British) defeated Louis Montcalm (French) at Quebec City in 1759, a significant event in Canadian history).

His first expedition took him to the Pacific to make measurements for the eclipse of the sun which was done in Tahiti. Another aspect was to shed light on the ongoing hypothesis that there was an undiscovered continent somewhere out there, namely Australia. And in doing this he also discovered, explored and mapped New Zealand (both North and South islands). In Australia, along the Great Barrier Reef, Cook’s boat “The Endeavour” almost sunk when it hit a coral reef which damaged the hull of the boat. The boat needed to be fixed and patched up – and then successfully navigated out of these treacherous waters.

The intrepidness and resiliency of these men is astonishing. They were truly “out there” in a vast unknown – thousands of miles from home and any form of assistance. Think of the events of “Apollo 13” who had the help of hundreds of technicians and engineers. Not so for these explorers who navigated strange waters and encountered native islanders who at times were friendly, and at other times less so. They had to rely upon the leadership of Cook for the navigation of the oceans and unknown peoples.

Cook’s first expedition lasted close to three years, the second over three years, and the third was also over three years, but in this one Cook was killed in Hawaii. 

They had to deal with extreme weather conditions, isolation, various health issues from scurvy to STDs. By the second voyage Cook had solved the blight of scurvy on his boat by imposing a special diet on his crew; by contrast the captain of the second boat accompanying Cook on this voyage was less strident at enforcing the diet and several members of the crew had the ill effects of scurvy.

This second voyage, this time consisting of two boats, was to explore the Antarctic with sojourns in the winter months to New Zealand and Tahiti.

Page 235 Charles Clerke on the Resolution with Cook, December 21, somewhere near Antarctica

Very cold. The sleet as it falls freezes to the rigging which, in the first place, makes it exceedingly disagreeable handling and, in the next, makes it so thick with ice that ‘tis with difficulty we render the ropes through the blocks.

Later John Mara wrote: “Icicles frequently hung to the noses of the men more than an inch long… the man cased in frozen snow, as if clad in armour, where the running rigging has been so enlarged by frozen sleet as hardly to be grasped by the largest hand.”

There were always plentiful negotiations with the different indigenous peoples encountered during these long voyages. Each Island would respond differently, ranging from hostility (the Maori in New Zealand) to indifference (the indigenous of Australia). There was always much trading for the required food and fresh water. Sometimes the boat would be swarmed by hundreds of indigenous people, like at Tahiti, who were curious about these newcomers, and inevitably theft would take place.

Until the last voyage Captain Cook was quite successful at dealing with the different native islanders. This third voyage, again with two ships, was to be sadly Cook’s last. 
The purpose of this third voyage was to explore the possibility of finding a Northwest Passage via the Pacific side. On the way he discovered the islands of Hawaii. Cook then went all the way up the West Coast of North America, entered the Bering Strait, found impenetrable ice fields and headed back to Hawaii.

The author speculates that Cook had medical issues – as he was inordinately testy with his crew, was at times indecisive, and most significantly lacked diplomacy and foresight in dealing with native islanders. I also got the feeling that they had over-stayed their welcome in Hawaii, but they were forced to return for repairs when their boat was damaged by a storm. When returning to Hawaii after this Arctic exploration Cook was killed during an encounter onshore. Significantly it would seem that not all the native people of Hawaii were onside with the hostility of the group responsible for the death of Cook and some of his crew members.

In this book we are provided with an exhilarating view of this explorer and his exciting life. The man could not sit still! We are also given numerous colourful accounts of those who accompanied him. The maps of his voyages were not particularly good.