Rating: 3/5

2.5 stars rounded up
This novel is quite an oddity; a very early example of the spy genre and very influential amongst later writers like Le Carre, Follett and Fleming and comparable to Haggard and Buchan. Its author a traditional example of the “stuff that made the Empire”. Of course, nothing is that simple and Childers went from being an ardent supporter of the British Empire, serving in the Boer War and being decorated in the First World War; to being an ardent supporter of Irish independence and member of the IRA and was shot by the British in 1922. 
This novel was written in 1903 when Childers was still in his Imperial phase and at the very start of the novel there are a couple of instances of the contempt for other races displayed by imperialists of a certain type; it reminded me of Kiernan’s arguments in “The Lords of Human Kind”. 
The plot is fairly straightforward. Carruthers is a minor official working for the foreign office; stuck in London when everyone else is away. He gets an invite to go sailing on the German coast by an acquaintance called Davies. When he arrives Davies has a tale to tell; he suspects the Germans are planning something shady in the area. This was in 1903 when war with Germany seemed unimaginable and the thought of invasion preposterous. Childers constructs a story to show it was possible and how it was possible. If you’re looking for an action-packed spy thriller this is not it. If you enjoy sailing and its technicalities (I don’t) then there is plenty of that. The relationship between the two men is developed quite well and Childers does build some tension quite effectively. 
The novel was very influential after its publication and had an effect on British naval policy and the decision to build new naval bases, including the one at Scapa Flow. I must admit I was more interested in Childers’ own story and his move from supporting the establishment to being a member of the IRA. 
There is a lot of sand, water, mud, cramped living conditions on small boats and descriptions of tides; you have been warned.