Rating: 3/5

Taking place ~12,000 A.D. our time (the "golden age"), the Empire of Linn is a Dynasty. The daughterinlaw of the Leader gives birth to a "mutant." His mother has somehow been exposed to radiation while pregnant with him. The usual would be to kill it, but it's decided to let it live. Nothing is wrong with the child's mind, but its body is defective.
This boy is taken under the wing of the "atomic scientist" Joquin, who spares none of the grandfather's money in hiring tutors to teach him. 
Atomic scientists are those who study and guard the remnants of the golden age, whose power mankind had used to destroy (our) civilization. They believe that the radiating materials are gods. They, the atomic scientists, are revered and sometimes protected.
Clane grows up to be a good-hearted genius, and because of political maneuverings on the part of his grandparents (who constantly intrigue with each other) he is made Chief Scientist at the age of 16. This is the beginning of his rise to power over the Solar System.
Curiously, the Empire has spaceships and spacescooters, but when the Linn dynasty is in battle against Venusians or Martians or Europans, they shoot arrows out of the spaceships 🤣.
Towards the end, there's a puzzling part:
1957 Hardcopy Shasta Publishers
P.187:
" 'guards,' he said, 'bring that box over here.'
it was soaking wet when they brought it. It left a dirty trail of water on the priceless rug, and a pool began to accumulate immediately in the place where it was set down. there was a delay while sweating man pried off the top. Even the guards at far doors strained to see the contents. A gasp of horror broke the tension of waiting. 
what was inside was about 8 ft long. It's width was indeterminable, for it seemed to have folds in its body that gave an impression of great size. it had obviously died only a short time before it was packed in the ice. It looked fresh, almost alive, there in its case of ice, unhuman, staring with sightless eyes at the ornate ceiling.
'where did you get it?' clane asked at last.
'it was found on one of the moons - hours after a strange ship was sighted.
'how long ago?' the mutation spoke in a steady tone. 
'2 years, Earth time.' "

This somehow assists bringing to a stalemate the barbarians' from Europa conquest of the dynasty of linn. If anybody figures out what it's significance is, would you enlighten me?