Rating: 5/5

The attraction of reading the RTF trilogy for me comes from one of the clearest television memories I have (easily rivalling some of the scenes from Quatermas and the Pit). It comes from the acclaimed 1970 BBC dramatisation which, for thirteen weeks, had engaged millions of British viewers in Mathieu Delarue’s efforts to define the scope of freedom in a France that was stumbling into world war.

The scene dealt with Mathieu’s lonely night-time walk through a Paris that expected to be told at any moment that France was going to war in order to save Czechoslovakia from dismemberment. The philosophy professor crosses Pont-Neuf and his inner voice narrates his personal plight. The entirety of his world is a ‘permanent moment’ in which he exists like light gliding ...”over the surface of stones and water.” In this condition he is ungraspable by the substances he passes over, never to be absorbed by the world which is outside him. “Freedom is exile, and I am condemned to be free,” he grimly deduces from this intuition, and his attention moves to consider the condition of his own body, with his own hands appearing to him as parts of the external world from which is profoundly apart.

For a moment he plays with this idea by leaning his body across the bridge, saved from plunging into the Seine only by these hands grasping a ledge. Will he live or die? He has reasoned that he is in a position of powerlessness with regard to the external world, and his hands are a part of the world of ‘stones and water’ rather than his own consciousness. Yet he asserts the will to live. His hands take a firmer grip on the ledge and haul him back to safety, albeit of a meagre sort given that the world is about to plunge into warfare.

But this is a book thickly populated with scores of characters stumbling towards their own versions of reprieve. It is structured around free-flowing accounts of several days in September 1938 when France mobilised for the prospect of a war with Germany which it knew would lead to the slaughter of millions and which it could not hope to win. The character we were introduced to in The Age of Reason – Boris, Lola, Ivich, Daniel, Bruno, Marcelle, as well as Mathieu – appear in more fragmentary roles whilst a dozen or so others take their place in the narrative.

The scenes switch from villages to Marseille, Casablanca, a Mediterranean cruise ship, Parisian bars, a hospital in the processes of evacuating its patients, street scenes involving violence and confusion, and bedrooms offering the first, or possibly the last chance to make love, as well as fleeting visits to the councils where Chamberlain and Daladier and their lackeys consider the stance they have taken towards Mr Hitler’s ‘final territorial demand’. The switch takes place mid-paragraph, and often mid-sentence, with an action taking place in one space being topped off by a thought generated in another. 

Perhaps you need to have the memory of those weeks in 1970 when we were all being brought up to speed in the subtleties of existential thought to push ahead with a book which is often difficult. For the 18 year old I then was it offered up many fragments of thoughts and intuitions about life which have been with me ever since. When others walk across Pont-Neuf they might see the view of the Isle-de-la-Cite on one side, or the quais to the west and the Eiffel Tower in the distance: I’ve always seen Mathieu Delarue hanging on by his finger-tips, wondering whether to live or die.