Rating: 5/5

Dubin’s Lives by Bernard Malamud

Wonderful, 10 out of 10

After The Assistant and The Fixer this is the third book by Barnard Malamud that I enjoy so much that I took time finishing it.

As opposed to the first two masterpieces, where the characters had little in common with me, in Dubin’s Lives I identify with the main character.

We have about the same age, and many of the issues that disturb him have been present in my life, especially recently.

That does not mean that I agree or understand the important decisions that Dubin takes and the choices he makes.

The main aspect that is hard to comprehend has to do with his marriage and the affair that he has with Fanny.

The marriage has a weird debut, with Kitty and Dubin deciding that they should love each other and marry.

- How do you do that?

- Well, this is somehow another shared experience…

To some extent, I understand this moment, for I have also said to myself that I need to settle down and give up the tomcat life.

Then there are also times when I wonder if my spouse likes me or she thinks that I am a no good selfish male pig…

Which I may be, I have not determined yet.

Kitty is very disappointed with her husband and this is again a familiar feeling, for I had my own occasions to depress my wife.

That being said, the people in the novel are fictitious and their complications do not find their way here, in this house.

For instance, Fanny is off to Venice with the philandering fifty five year old and things fall apart after a promising debut.

When Dubin returns to the hotel room, Fanny is having sex with the gondolier and this does not stop here.

However awkward and surreal, this casual sex is followed by yet another intimate relationship with the captain of a small boat.

The captain of the small boat that takes tourists to the airport has enough appeal to get Fanny to bed and this is already promiscuous.

At least from where I see it, but that is probably a different background an education and a culture that permits affairs for the macho male- only.

I did not like these two escapades even if I still felt that Dubin should have made a clean break with his spouse and settle with the (much) younger woman.

For a long time, the writer and his wife seem to do not much else but fight each other and make one another miserable.

They seemed to have good moments but the time spent with Fanny appeared to be sensational, without the negativity of the troubled marriage.

Dubin comes to the point where he offers very little to his wife who is unhappy, enters therapy and has an affair of her own.

- Why go on like this?

- One personal answer is that marriages have ups and downs and it is worth fighting for a long relationship

As for other answers, regarding marriage- the bible is written by John Gottman, the Supreme Guru who predicts with 90% accuracy which marriages will work, after only some minutes of listening the conversations- his amazing book- 7 Principles of Making Marriage Work

As for Dubin’s Lives –it is an amazing book