Rating: 4/5

"But I, being poor, have only my dreams; 
I have spread my dreams under your feet; 
Tread softly because you tread on my dreams." 
 
I have to confess that every once in a while, reading news about what "conventional morality" makes people do to other people, I get into a quite real rage against Frank Wheeler, so many years after I read his story, his fictional psychological bullying of his wife, trampling her dreams with his feet as hard as he could. There are a few pages well into the second part of this heartbreaking story that still make me shudder. Those pages where April is fighting for her right to develop and grow out of the conformity prison that Frank wants to keep her in. She has a dream, and she is expecting a third child by accident. And Frank is fighting a campaign or a self-proclaimed war, using the meanest possible weapons of psychological warfare: playing on her "damaged womanhood" to convince her that she needs a psychiatrist instead of an abortion.

I know I am supposed to understand both positions, and to see the reciprocal trap they set for each other, the Wheelers, and how "mainstream opinions" are joining the standard marriage to the point of making it a polygamous affair - "what will the others think?" being a vital part of discussion within the conventional couplings of small town life. But I can't help thinking that April was right, and that Frank trampled her spirit with his feeling of ownership. Did he want that baby, or did he want to prevent another kind of life from happening? Whenever you hear the indignation in the voices of people thinking of abortion as murder, do they really want those babies? Are they thinking of life and freedom for a future human being, or are they thinking of punishment and control of a woman currently in trouble? Would they be willing to sacrifice all to the wellbeing of those babies they want to be born at any cost (for the pregnant woman)? Or do they want to chain the person whose pregnancy is a visible banner in the fight for traditional roles in society?

The Wheelers are an example of what we do to each other in the name of "love and happiness", of "morality" and "maturity". 

I am with April: those are just words, and the responsible thing to do is to listen to your dreams and act upon them, not to let others trample on them, claiming it is for your own good.

All else is tragedy.