Rating: 4/5

Othello is one of Shakespeare's popular tragedies. Its main themes are jealousy, treachery, and revenge, but race, too, plays a vital role. Othello is a Moor and he weds the Venetian Desdemona against her father's wishes. Since Othello is a trusted general of the Duke of Venice, the only objection between the union of Othello and Desdemona is race. It's incredible to think that people are generous enough to bestow honours on a man based on merit despite his race, although ungenerous to ally through marriage. 

Othello's race forms part of Iago's jealousy because he feels that his superior is inferior to him in race. 

O, beware, my lord, of jealousy; 
It is the green-eyed monster with doth mock. 
Iago utters these famous lines, the man who sowed the seed of jealousy in Othello's mind. The irony is that he who warns Othello is also driven by jealousy and turns treacherous. Using false accusations, Iago poisons Othello's mind against Desdemona. The result is that once a blissful and loving marriage ends in tragedy. 

Iago is a vile but a clever villain. He well understands the character traits of his victim and deceives him accordingly. With vile actions and far-fetched accusations too painful to read, Iago guides Othello to his doom. Though a victim himself, I disliked Othello more than Iago. He is so gullible - a "credulous fool" as Iago calls him. Othello is a fool indeed - a weakling who couldn't honour a woman's trust so lovingly placed on him. Desdemona chose him, giving up her family and country, and he couldn't honour her sacrifice. Unfortunately, we see too many Othellos today and Iagos in both male and female forms. 

Reading the play was painful. The injustice done to Desdemona was too much to bear. The only way to vent my frustration was to curse the villain and his imbecile victim, which I did quite generously. Having said that, I enjoyed the play since it was full of drama and poetry. Othello is both beautiful and tragic. Can a tragedy be beautiful? Yes, it can. Read Othello or Romeo and Juliet, you'll agree. 

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/