Rating: 5/5

I really enjoyed reading this, I found myself thinking about it when I wasn't reading it, and as soon as I had time, jumping back into it. 

Mellody explores how trauma in our childhood can impact our relationships, specifically our romantic relationships. Although it was quite technical in laying its therapeutic groundwork, it was still digestible that you could take practical advice away.

I thought her take on boundaries was amazing. Often boundaries can be quite superficial, and hard to define, and implement. Mellody provides numerous examples of situations where healthy boundaries exist, and the likely outcome of that situation. For someone who has had fewer boundaries in the past, it few likes I'm learning a whole new language. Ever since reading it, I've been thinking about how I can apply it in my life, and almost see her framework in every conversation. 

I've listed out a few quotes I liked below...

“When we are in a relationship, we are called on to give body, thoughts, and emotions to our partners and to accept body, thoughts, and emotions from them.”

"Where there is hysteria, there is history."

"You cannot “nice” someone into a relationship. When you are being nice to a person instead of being real, you are not in the truth of who you are. You are being manipulative, creating the illusion of a relationship disguised behind the “mask of nice.” Since the mask of nice does not offer truth and intimacy, it is nonrelational."

"We choose our behavior. The world chooses our consequences. We do not know what the consequences of our behavior will be, and we cannot control outcomes, only inputs. The consequences come as a result of whatever the people around us think about what we have done and how they act in turn. Chance also enters in, and we can control neither others nor chance. The expression “Let go and let God” has the truth of this maxim at its center, and so does the concept of “surrender.”"

"Date only the people you admire enough to criticize. Dating should be about finding out who our potential partner is. But when we date and find someone we really like, rather than putting in the time to find out who he or she really is, we spend our time ignoring that. We focus only on the parts of our date that we find pleasant and try to dismiss the rest. As the relationship ages, the opposite happens, and we focus on what we don’t like and ignore what we do."

"Setting up a boundary with those who are boundaryless makes them feel abandoned. Boundaryless individuals are used to getting too close, used to being in another person’s face, so that even the healthy moderate distance of a boundary threatens them. At the other extreme, when you ask persons who habitually use a wall for a boundary to let go of that wall and move into contained vulnerability, they feel too naked, too vulnerable."

"Sex is not the equivalent of a handshake or emptying your bladder. Since it is easier to be sexual without vulnerability than with it, object sex can become a pernicious habit and infect lovemaking even with someone about whom you care deeply. Using sex to introduce yourself to somebody is not good self-care, because you don’t know the person well enough to be doing something that intimate. Becoming emotionally vulnerable with someone you don’t know is dangerous. It is also spiritually cynical to use sex like a convenient discharge of effluents."

"A relationship with an unconscious person is impossible. This maxim is true in two senses. In one sense, no relational health will ever be achieved if one member is an active substance abuser. The other sense in which being unconscious precludes relationality is when dysfunctional people remain ignorant of their traumatic past and are, therefore, incapable of freeing themselves from its compulsions."

"Nothing in a relationship is improved by marriage. Marriage tends to intensify problems. Marriage is about committing to a person and a relationship. It is not about improving things. The obverse wisdom is “Everything in a marriage is improved by a relationship.”"