Rating: 4/5

"It's never too early for Venice"....... 

Fabbio ( or "Beo," short for beato or "blessed" in Italian), is engaged in a "flight without purpose". 
Fabbio, was the courier of Sunshine Tours...in Italy. His group was about to begin their second day of morning shopping -followed by lunch - refreshed from a night sleep 
when it's discovered that there has been a murder off the via Sicilian..... within 100 yards of the Hotel Splendido where they were staying. 

A woman was found stabbed on the church steps at 5 AM in the morning. Two English teachers from London on the bus tour, were upset because they feel they could've saved her, because they saw her sleeping there at 9 PM the night before. 
The night before, just before everyone was retiring to their rooms for sleep, a Mr. Bloom slipped Fabbio a note saying "come to my room", with ten thousand lire. 
Fabbio wasn't ever interested in going to a clients room --so he walked outside and slipped that note and ten thousand lire into the pocket of the old women on the church stairs. 

His bus tour is suppose to be headed to Naples.... however he's begging his supervisor to get transferred. He tells him he's in trouble, doesn't tell him why or what... says he want to be transferred on a different tour- ( with a different set of clients as well). He wants to to be put on a northern route. Annie two were going towards the Adriatic. 
His supervisor, Giovanni, tells him it's too early. Fabbio is still begging...."well, then, not necessarily a coach, a tour, a private client who might consider Ravenna, Venice"
Giovanni finally fixes this situation...Fabbio gets his transfer: "Two Tedeschi in a Volkswagen going north and they want an interpreter who speaks German, which Fabbio does". 
Fabbio is running for his life. What he will soon discover is that what really matters--is not running from the past, but the future. 
Sound GOOD??? ...... this is just the TIP of the iceburg. This story is just beginning!!!

-----------------BOOK DISCUSSION INVITE: 
For anyone who would like to read this book with a group of members here on Good Reads we will be discussing it the entire month of April. 
Sara will be happy -- ( cough cough) --- calling for Sara --- to come in here and post the link of where to find the discussion group. 
The discussions are low - key - with great people. I bought this book on Amazon for $9.99 - Kindle download. 
It's possible to read this book pretty easy in 1 or 2 days -- but even if you've only read the beginning- it's enough to join the group. Not everyone will have finished it by the start date, April 1. 

QUOTES:
 "I went on walking up the via dei Sogni, and so out into the via dell' 8 Settembre, in front of the University. It was like walking into another age. The young were everywhere, pouring out of lecture rooms, laughing, talking, getting onto vespas. The old building which had always been known as the House of Studies boasted New wings, windows glowing not only with fresh paint that with vitality". 

 "The via Della Mira surrounding the whole city of Ruffano stretched before me, curving gently, while immediately to my left where the steps leading up to the palace and to the city above". 

 "The room was illuminated by flares and torches, which throwing monstrous shadows upon the fluted ceiling and saffron walls, gave to the whole eerie, somber, flavor, medieval and at the same time, exciting." 

 "The piazza was crowded with morning shoppers, and with the inevitable group of worthless individuals who, idle not from choice but from the necessity, came to the city center to stand and stare. Students were everywhere, arguing, loquacious, most of them streaming out of the piazza up and northern hill to the piazza del Duca Carlo. 
Rumor, floating from one hill to the other, and then converging from all corners to the
piazza Della Vita, emerged in the small space like smoke from a steaming cauldron."
 "There was a Communists plot to blow up the University… There was a Fascist plot to take over the municipality... Guests at the dinner-party at the Hotel Panorama had been poisoned... The private residences of the Head of Departments had been burgled... A manic from Rome, having murdered one of Ruffano's inhabitants, poor Marta Zampini, in the capital, was now loose in Ruffano itself, and had made an attempt on the life of Professor Elia..."