Rating: 3/5

Seven years after losing the love of his life to death, well-admired Corinthian Sir Gareth Ludlow is ready to find a wife. Not for love, mind you. Love isn't likely to strike his heart again, but because it is his duty and responsibility to settle down and produce an heir. Lady Hester Thale is quiet, sensible, a steady friend and long on the shelf at age 29. Surely she will be more then happy to escape her domineering family and settle for placid security with her friend Gareth. But Gareth doesn't account for the fact that spinster Hester has nursed a secret, and won't settle for anything less then love, even if it means turning down one of the most eligible members of the ton, and the love of her life.

Had Georgette Heyer delivered a tale of how Gareth woos, loses, and eventually wins Hester's heart, I know I would have given this story 4 or 5 stars. Problem is, in a book 18 chapters long, Heyer only accords the story of Gareth &amp; Hester approximately 2 chapters near the beginning and exactly 4 chapters at the very end. The bulk of the story rests in the (frankly) boring tale of a young, silly, annoying miss by the name of Amanda. Sir Gareth meets the beautiful girl in route to pay his addresses to Lady Hester. She is alone, a runaway, and trying to keep her identity a secret. Gareth, a kind man, is unwilling to let the girl get herself into any trouble, and takes it upon himself to protect her from her folly and return her to her family. Problem is, Amanda refuses to reveal who she is and where she came from.

And so, for over 150 pages, the reader is treated not to a story about Gareth and Hester, but to a romp and farce about the exploits of Amanda and all the mayhem and trouble she continually gets herself and Sir Gareth into. Readers who particularly enjoy this type of silly, coltish Heyer heroine, and a more mad-cap escapade storyline will probably like this book alot. Personally, neither one does as much for me, so I spent a good long time being bored, exasperated and ready to fling Amanda and her exploits off the page and get back to what I felt was the main story (Hester and Gareth). It wasn't until Chapter 15 that the tale really took off for me, and Heyer partially redeemed herself (and the story) with an absolutely brilliant final 3 chapters. It had farce, it had humor, and it almost, 
  almost
, made up for the previous annoying two-thirds
that came before it.

Almost. Hence the 3 star rating.

This book had its moments, but isn't destined to become one of my favorites. 

Thanks go to my buddy read partners Leslie and Jeannette for encouraging me with their comments to persist with it. Luckily, they were speedier readers, and gave me hope that the story would turn the corner and get better.