Rating: 3/5

If you're a reader who loves asshole, arrogant tycoon heroes then you will adore Jarod Colby - the H of this novel. I didn't really like the guy at first and he got on my nerves as time passed but I still enjoyed this romance. I loved the heroine Amanda. She was the epitome of sweetness and feminine beauty plus she was a wonderful daughter, sister and friend. This girl was one of Janet Dailey's most endearing heroines. She took a lot of shit from the H and some will call her a doormat for her behaviour and I suppose that, to some extent she was a doormat but it was difficult to dislike her. I wish I could be such a goody two shoes like this girl ! 

I loved the way the author used the old North vs South civil war theme to show how the heroine's family were so culturally different from the hero's. Amanda was a true southern belle; her grandfather was so funny with his old fashioned patriotic belief in the "glory" of the old south. I laughed at how he was distrustful of the hero because the latter's relatives were all northerners. In spite of their social, cultural and economic differences though, Amanda had developed an insta-crush on Jarod Colby the first time she saw him. He became the man of her adolescent and teenage fantasies but her illusions were shattered because the first time he spoke to her he was rude and arrogant.

The second time they meet at the cotillion ball, the H is filled with insta-lust for Amanda because she's now a woman and not the adolescent he had been rude to previously. I loved the scene from the cotillion. It was so romantic ! And Amanda's gown was gorgeous. They soon start dating for a short while. Poor Amanda thought that Jarod's feelings for her were as strong as hers for him but he soon disabused her of that notion by telling her that he only wants a sexual affair with her.

When she tells him she's a virgin he gets mad. What a jackass ! It's inconvenient for him that she's a virgin because he thinks she will expect wedding bells. She then refuses to see him again and there's an occasion or two where he tries to make her jealous by bringing around one of his old flames. The rude bitch OW insults Amanda repeatedly and when Amanda loses her temper and replies, Jarod gets mad because his former slutbunny is apparently an important guest. Wtf ? I really wanted to strangle him after this happened. 

Amanda still refuses to have anything to do with him and he leaves her alone for a while. I assume that he has been dating other women in the mean time but Amanda hasn't been seeing anyone. The whole situation comes to a climax when Amanda's dad, who works for Jarod, gets a heart attack. The dad is the sole breadwinner for the family and they have lots of bills because of the number of kids in college. Jarod decides to help them out by offering to marry Amanda; he thinks her family will not be too proud to accept his help if he's an in law by marriage. I think the bastard just wanted to get into Amanda's panties and knew that marriage was the only way she would let him. 

Amanda was skeptical at first but her old starry eyed romantic fantasies soon return in full force after they marry. She deludes herself into thinking that her love is so strong that it will be adequate to sustain the marriage. Jarod is very uncommunicative as a husband. He openly tells her that he only cares about her wifely duties in the bedroom and nothing else. Apparently his parents had had an awful marriage and he had never been exposed to love in his life so his level of cynicism is quite sky high. I just think he acted like the spoilt rich bastard that he is because he was so mean to Amanda. Things worsened after she got pregnant. He positively loathed the idea of a baby. I was hating him at this point, but didn't want him to die yet because he wasn't cheating on her. But poor sweet Amanda plodded on in the marriage, being as kind and gracious as ever even though she was hurting inside. My grandmother would have loved Amanda's old fashioned gentility and ladylike behaviour. 

After the birth of their baby boy, Jarod became more distant. He didn't even care what she named the child. Wtf kind of father is that ? I think he was extremely jealous of the attention the baby was getting from Amanda. Things became so tense between them that the housekeeper decided to intervene with a little plan of her own. She fooled Jarod into believing that Amanda had taken the baby and gone home to her parents. That caused a sudden change in Jarod because he realized just how much he had been taking her for granted. I don't know if I believed his sudden change in attitude but he did really grovel when he went get Amanda and the baby. 

The ending was sweet because he apologized in a sincere way and his new open affection for his wife and his son was very obvious. It was a beautiful scene. He seemed almost close to tears when he held his baby son David in his arms and told Amanda how much he loved her. It was only then that I stopped hating the sexy bastard.