Rating: 4/5

As promised by author- he did manage to come up with just a "primer", as would the Greeks say: "Pan metron ariston." As a libertarian myself, I do find for imperative to we all refresh the ideology we've chosen to live according to, from time to time. What is the better way to do it, if not reading books. So, do I that too, although I rather delve into physics or cosmology. 
Here we go:
I'll stick to the Orator's principle and gonna make an attempt I never did, to write my review based on those Cicero's fundamentals. So, allow me to start with:
"DOCERE" - It's full of "stars" from Hayek, the entire Libertarian theory is relaying on - I'd say. What I was missing is a reflection on roots of political ideology that will remind the reader that his determination yields back into the deep past of eternal dichotomy of stability vs. change! The political ego of the human individual is a result of hers/his general neural state. I'm convinced on some stage of basic education, kids should have insight into evolutionary psychology behind the politics. The "primer" should have come around with these basics in brief before starting to disclose and prove the theory. I don't say this has prevented the author in writing a good book, I just believe that body of knowledge is crucial for an individual to phatom the world of politics. What is proven for sure according to my opinion is that in this rapidly changing world, having the laws of our world, the common sense and the emotions in equilibrium is utterly crucial.
Did I found all the theses definitively proven? The worst nightmare for us, libertarians, is that we have a theory that is working along intervening laws and common sense, yet we're facing that we lack the proper "fabric" for it. And by this I mean the quality of humanity in global to live in a libertarian majority lead community. 
"DELECTARE" - I did really have fun in learning about all those facts that actually knocking down the socialist-liberal and conservative thoughts by disclosing facts and gradually rendering them ridiculous and obsolete. You know the "tyranny of the status quo (or the tyranny of bureaucrats), the being equal and all those meaningless emotional concepts of "we hate gravity, because it kills, so lets jump from the roof to defeat it" ! 
It's not just the content that the author has decided to enroll , but the style he deployed to beautifully across the book.
"MOVERE" - been I touched emotionally? Been I moved? Actually, I've been experienced a pretty of "A-HA''s rediscovering more and more how much important is for our future to rethink our education systems, and our priorities and to put back bureaucrats-politicians in their "protect and serve" role!!!!

Thanks for the nice book! Sometimes, I wished for the author to possess more "laconic" traits, but actually it was an excellent read. Cheers!