Rating: 4/5

* Audio version of this review to follow on Reading in Bed Book review Podcast from readinginbed.bandcamp.com from 01 August 2021 *

Michael Morpurgo 
Arthur High King of Britain

Blurb:

Marooned on a sandbank, a boy faces certain death. With the sea closing in and the current about to drag him to a watery grave, his final wish is to see heaven. Waking in a strange bed, the boy meets an old man sitting by the fire with his dog. It is King Arthur, the great warrior of legend, and from his lips the boy hears of Camelot, chivalry, magic, evil and betrayal.

Strengths:

I’ve read and reviewed a few of Morpurgo’s books for Reading in Bed ‘Why the Whales come’ and ‘Escape from Shangri-La’ both of which were set in a modern setting and both of which were more softer, subtle character like pieces.

This one was somewhat different as it focuses on the legend of King Arthur when a young boy stumbles into a cave and meets Arthur who sits down and tells him his story etc and the child instead of being the narrator is the vehicle for him to tell us the story.

And well, it covers all of the bases with all of the main characters of course. Arthur is somewhat more human than I have seen before, and Merlin felt very sad and weary throughout the book which was also nice.

Guinevere sadly didn’t have much to do, and Lancelot I felt was much more in the background too. 

As stated elsewhere, I have read a bit on these myths before and it does appear to be a mixture of different versions of the legends. It feels like the Author clearly has researched this and used it to place his own thumb print on it and despite the hinting of sex and voilence (which I have seen mentioned elsewhere) is a great introduction to the Arthur legends.

Weaknesses:

It certainly however didn’t add anything new to the story, and despite being great for children, I thought the narrative was somewhat flat throughout the book in places and I was disappointed with Guinevere, instead much preferring the mists of Avalon by Marion Zimmer Bradley which looks at the myths through the eyes of the female characters (which is essential reading).

I felt some of the backing cast who I won’t name were wrote inconstantly also in places and the setup while great did wander into information dumping way too much for my personal taste.

I did enjoy it, but it was far from the author’s best book and also far from the best Arthur legends book I have read.

Worth a read but don’t expect anything major. 

7/10