Rating: 3/5

Written in roughly 1800 BC. Nearly 4,000 years ago. 

Summary:
Twin Father &amp; Mother Gods created the heavens and the earth. They then had many children. Notably Marduk was the most powerful of their children. The Father hated all the commotion and noise made by all of his children, so he planned to destroy them. One of his sons was able to stop him, however killed him in the process. Peace reigned and the Gods created humanity out of the blood of the fallen God to be their slaves. Then, after a time, the mother God (Tiamat) grew angry at her son for killing his father. She declared war on all the world of Gods and man. Then Marduk stepped up to stop her on the condition that he would be supreme among all the Gods. He was able to destroy her, and now reigns supreme among the Gods.

I read the Enuma Elish because I had heard it had some remarkable similarities to the Genesis creation account. However I found that it was not very similar at all. The most significant similarity I found was a phrase in it that was almost similar to Genesis 2:5 prior to the creation of humanity: 

“And no pasture land had been formed” (Enuma Elish 1:6)

Compare to Genesis 2:5 (ESV): “When no bush of the field was yet in the land and no small plant of the field had yet sprung up for YHWH God had not caused it to rain on the land, and there was no man to work the ground...”

Not a hugely striking similarity... but there is a slight resemblance, and it fits into the same timeframe in this story as the text in Genesis. 

All in all I don’t think it was worth my time to read the epic unfortunately. The text was very broken, and the translation in this account in particular, showed all the parenthetical guess work of the textual critics to try and salvage the text of the damaged manuscript. It was nice to be able to see some of the manuscript evidence, but it made the reading experience really choppy and difficult. Each verse (which were often half sentences) was on a new line, which contributed to the choppy experience. I found myself wanting a smoother translation - something more for popular reading. I found myself skimming after a bit. It was interesting to be sure. But probably not worth the time if you’re only reading it for context in Genesis.