Rating: 4/5

This is a sequel book to Ms. Bittner's "Montana Woman". It's Anna Barker Kelley's story, the younger sister to Joline Masters (the main character in "Montana Woman"). Where the author used Quantrill's raid on Lawrence, Kansas as the historical catalyst for Joline's tale, she ties Anna's book to the 1864 Centralia, MO massacre lead by Bloody Bill Anderson. Like the predecessor book, Ms. Bittner does a good job of weaving the story through and around historical facts.

It's a good book but difficult to review without accidentally providing a spoiler. The reader will experience how difficult life was for Kansas and Missouri residents caught between the political violence of the Jayhawkers and Bushwhackers. It also sheds light on how one person tries to live her life without taking sides. Anna is definitely torn because she's married to a southerner, but her father and brother-in-law are Union supporters. The political and lifestyle differences between Anna's family and her husband's southern family practices are contributing factors to their decision to leave Lawrence in 1860.

In 1861, Darryl leaves Anna in Columbia to fight or assist as a doctor for the Confederacy in the Civil War. During the first year of his absence, he writes her when he can but communication stops after that. For several years, Anna doesn't hear from Darryl and doesn't know where he is or if he's even alive. During this time, she meets Nate Foster and they form a friendship. Nate's smitten but respectful of her situation. Anna is also attracted to Nate but excersizes control over her emotions knowing she is still technically married to Darryl Kelley.

There have been many books written about men who come back from war changed. Every man handles it differently, but is still deeply affected by the violence and bloodshed. While reading this novel, I was reminded of the character Anne Alexander Gordon from Ms. Santmyer's book "And Ladies of the Club." While Anne Gordon married a doctor who was a veteran of the Civil War, Anna married Dr. Darryl Kelley before the Civil War started. Both men had changed after the war. They were different types of changes, but neither was the same person from before the war started.

I gave the story four stars because I felt the author drew an amazing character with Anna but tired of how often she was told how beautiful she was. Anna is a strong and independent woman that handles herself gracefully when she is terribly lonely but also tries not to capitalize on her beauty. However, her attractiveness is definitely an asset while she's living in Abilene, KS and running a restaurant. I also deducted a star because while every reader most likely is not going to like Fran, I just thought the physical description the author provided of her was over the top. It was like the writer thought Fran should be just as ugly in appearance as she was in personality. This is my own personal opinion so please don't rely on it in deciding to read the story.

Overall, there was much sadness, gloom and doom. I'm now ready to read something much lighter that will hopefully make me laugh.😊