Rating: 5/5

Probably most contemporary readers know enough about Delany to not just pick up one of his books with a dragon on the cover and expect something like Brandon Sanderson, but back when this was published, I feel sorry for someone like myself as a very young man in 1979, wandering into Century Bookstore, browsing the racks and finding this dragon about to eat a scantily clad woman along with her topless companion, and cart it home, carefully hiding it from mom and dad, and then digging into it via flashlight under tented sheets, to read the opening epigraph from an introduction to On Grammatology by Jaque Derrida, who I wouldn't encounter again for many years until a college linguistics course. Probably, a well-read shopkeeper would've steered me away. (Unlike today's shopkeepers: in a recent Barnes and Noble trip I overheard a customer asking about Tarzan, and the woman shelving showed no recognition at all! She said she'd have to look him up, and how do you spell Tarzan!?)

Neveryon consists of related Tales that are better read together, like in a novel, than as regular novellas or stories. In some instances, like in the Tale of Small Sarg, I'd argue that the tale doesn't fully stand on its own at all, but with others, like the Tale of Old Venn, they are very enjoyable without any other Neveryon exposure. That said, these tales are more about characters than plot, and even more about sociology, history, philosophy, and even language. Magically (the book is otherwise without magic), Delany doesn't allow the characters to become too archetypal or too allegorical. In many ways, they are all very clearly allegorical, as is Neveryon, as is 'the message' but you don't need to read between the lines to enjoy them; they are excellent in and of themselves; reading between the lines only adds to the enjoyment, for those that wish to do so.

This is only my second book by Delany to read, the first being Dhalgren, which blew me away, and now this much gentler book has also blown me away. The fictional (fictional in that it's written by Delany (Kermit) and about Delany (Steiner)) essay at the end of the book left me giddy with joy as it perfectly indicates without seeming smug or self-important what the tales are also doing. In a way, the essay says, "hey, did you consider the subtext, cause it's there if you're interested and want to take another look."

And yet, this book needs the right audience. Like I kind of pointed out in the opening paragraph, expectations will play a huge role in whether a reader enjoys this or not. Having read Dhalgren, I was naturally ready for this to be challenging, and I was also ready to read deeply. For your average fantasy goer, I'd say take a pass unless those expectations have been adjusted; this barely qualifies as fantasy for me.

Excellent book.