Rating: 4/5

In their second year, the Malory Towers bunch get two new girls, and the main plots revolve around them. The formula for bringing something new to the table through new students is set in this book and will be followed throughout the series. This just makes this a better book than First Term at Malory Towers. There will be spoilers ahead. 

One of the new girls is Ellen. She is a scholarship girl, supposed to be brilliant in studies. She is bad tempered and is unable to make friends. The girls try to be friends at first, then let her be when she refuses to respond to their overtures. But when many girls start missing money and other valuables, Alicia catches Ellen lurking around the place and accuses her of theft. 

The second new girl is Daphne, rich and pretty. She is befriended by Gwendoline, who is taken by her stories of yacht parties and large mansions. She also uses Mary-Lou to help her with her French studies. However, Daphne turns out to have feet of clay.

I thought it was Alicia and Darrel who came out of this term looking really bad, the former with her maliciousness and Darrel with her hot temper. This book sees the third time Darrel assaults another person, having assaulted Sally and Gwendoline the previous year. Belinda too did not shine, and I don't know why it is all right for her to get out of chores and draw unkind pictures of people. 

Blyton spins it that Gwendoline is the one who didn't come out of the year well for the sole reason that she was not happy to give Daphne a second chance. But why should she? She was the one who was made a fool of by Daphne, she was the one who lost a friend! In fact, Gwen actually showed some good qualities: she does not borrow money and she does not lie! She also had the sense to save both Daphne and Mary-Lou from certain death by informing the right authorities in time. 

I enjoyed this year and looking forward to more! It was nice to read that the girls were perfect terrors rather than being the angels with no feelings like in the first book!