Rating: 2/5

Pretty ridiculous story of a nobleman's daughter who runs away from their countryside manor disguised as a boy. She is pursuing her crush (her brother's best friend) all the way to London. 

En route, her disguise is uncovered by a London rake who, instead of seducing her, thinks it is a great idea to hire this complete stranger of dubious background and morality to chaperone his beloved younger sister during her debut in London.

Unfortunately for the heroine, her Big Crush has forgotten all about her and is now interested in her young charge. So our lying, manipulating lady tells her brother to romance the young girl and drive her away from her Big Crush so that he comes back to her. It works! Now the Crush is ardently pursuing heroine again. Problem solved and HEA? Wrong!

Heroine now realizes all she feels for the supposed love of her life her is merely affection because Mr. Crush's kisses leave her cold while Mr. Rake (remember him?) curls her toes with his punishing kisses. Problem is that Mr. Rake has been involved with his married countess mistress for ten years and they even have a child together, though they passed him off as the heir and offspring of the mistress' actual husband.

Not to worry though: Mr. Rake has instantly fallen in love with the plucky heroine from Day one and resolved her real identity long time ago. He was simply letting her stay and continue her stupid schemes (you know, like manipulating his little sister, and pursuing her lover) because he found her so entertaining. Oh yeah, and the mistress has been a mere, platonic friend for years now and she approves of hero's new interest. Plus, she is dying of lead poisoning because of all that makeup she has been applying with a spatula for a decade so any awkwardness will soon end with her impending demise.

If all that typhoon of tackiness was not enough, the author also throws in an abused 8 year old chimney sweep apprentice subplot. Wow, this novel sure has something for everyone!