Rating: 3/5

I had this book when I was a kid, and I must have read it in fourth grade. I liked it then, especially the second half. But rereading it as an adult gives me a different perspective on it and a different opinion.

The plot concerns a group of 3 boys who decide to spy on a local neighborhood woman, believing her to be a spy for a foreign country. But before they can do that, they have a problem to deal with - the woman's pesky pet chicken and a neighbor's petition to get the chicken removed from the area, could end up drawing too much attention to the suspicious woman and make it harder to spy on her.

Before I go any further, I have to talk a bit about the characters and storytelling method. The book is written in first-person, and the narrator's name or even age are literally not given. Even without having his name mentioned even once, the main character still shows a lot of personality through his very humorous and sometimes mildly sarcastic narration. It colors the entire story and sets a very light mood for the proceedings.

His two friends have more exaggerated personalities. Paul is a boy genius who talks like an adult and is very literal and exact, a trait which is played for humor. One of the funnier examples to me as an adult (that didn't strike me as funny when I was a kid), is when Paul decides to hold a vote asking his friends if they wish to crawl, walk, or run to the neighbor's window to spy on her, and then goes into detail about the pros and cons of each choice. The narrator even says that it took far less time to make the vote than it did for Paul to go into such detail about it.

The other boy, Quentin, is sort of a jokester who not only says random and inappropriate things at times, but is easily impressed and says "wow" whenever something of interest happens. Which is fairly often.

The first half of the story concerns the kids' attempts to stop the suspected spy's neighbor from drawing attention to the spy's house with her petition, so they take a train to New York City and try to hire a lawyer to stop it. That's right. This unbelievable event is handled surprisingly believably within the context of the story. Paul, due to his intelligence, is so trusted by the adults that they figure as long as the "normal" kids are with him, they'll be fine. And what's more, the trip to the lawyer's office goes as you'd expect. In real life, lawyers don't want to waste their time with kids who barely have a case to present, and this is no different.

The second half concerns the kids' snooping and spying on the suspected spy. They watch her from behind a bush in her yard, bringing sandwiches to eat in case they get hungry, and they follow her everywhere she goes. They try to sneak looks at her mail and packages. It's all handled believably - and heck, a group of kids doing such mundane snooping is more plausible than a group of kids taking a train to the city to see a lawyer!

This is a somewhat stylized story, now that I think about it. An unnamed main character who humorously remarks on the events, somewhat exaggerated personalities (particularly Paul), and the blending of the unlikely with the mundane. It's a short read at only 105 pages, but it's pretty neat. Not a particularly exciting book, but the humor and personality make the mundane interesting, which is truly a compliment for a book in which very little actually happens, plotwise.