Rating: 5/5

I found this a superb look at the iconic battle of World War I. In spite of being written appox. 50 yrs ago, Alistair Horne’s look a Verdun stands up extremely well. Mr. Horne looks at the battle from all levels, from the poor infantry soldier in mud to the highest general in his chateau. 

In looking at the commanders, the German commander, Falkenhayn, comes off extremely poorly. He is presented as being overly cautious, overly secretive, excessively stingy with troops, having a flawed strategic vision, and probably his worst fault - indecisive. In fact Mr. Horne has almost nothing good to say about him. The French commanders don’t fare much better. With their over reliance on "Spirit of the Attack", they let the defenses around Verdun decay to the point that they were almost inviting a German attack. Of all the major French commanders, Petain comes off the best. 

In looking at the French commanders, the author also looks at the culture of the French Army. He looks at how the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian war affected the development of the army's culture and tactics. This culture embraced the "Spirit of Attack" as the only approved method of war and led to many needless deaths in the trenches along the western front. The picture painted of Petain, the accepted hero of Verdun, is an officer completely out of step with the prevailing attitudes in the army - a defensive specialist. He was the right man, at the right place, at the right time.

In addition to giving an excellent understanding of overall flow battle, the author also does a commendable job of telling the reader the experience of the men who had to make the battle plans work. The story of the poor infantry soldiers, both German and French, is in my opinion the best part of this work. His telling of the fall of Ft. Douaumont to the Germans in the early stages of the battle is very well done. The author also tells of the emotional toll the battle took on the men fighting there. By the end of the battle entire French battalions were baaing like sheep as they moved to the front. Yet, in spite of the horrendous loses and living conditions, there were no major break downs in discipline

Mr. Horne also lets the reader know of the new weapons and tactics used in the battle. These include the first use of flame throwers and phosgene gas by the Germans and rolling barrages by the French as they pushed the Germans back in fall of 1916.

In addition to telling the story of the battle itself, the author looks at the effects it had on the army's both sides, both in its immediate aftermath and how it affected the developement of tactics that were used in Second World War.

About the only problem I had with the book is rather nitpicky, but as with many other authors of books on the Great War, Mr. Horne’s uses many quotes in French and the translations sometimes leave a little to be desired.

Overall, this is one the best books I’ve read on the Great War. I highly recommend this to anyone with even a passing interest in the events that occurred some 100 yrs ago. My rating - 4.75 stars, for Goodreads - round up to 5