Rating: 3/5

I'm starting this review now because I've finished the first volume, The Great Fortune and will take a break before the next one. It reads almost as a travel memoir, as Manning describes Bucharest at the start of WWII so vividly, based on her own experience of living there. Full of well observed detail about the way of life and the group of British expats living there. Harriet is clearly a stand-in for Olivia -- a young woman just married to Guy, a British Council lecturer who has been based in Bucharest for a year. They met and married during his summer holiday in the UK.

At first you can't understand what could have propelled them together, and why Harriet would have been willing to marry and move to a foreign country on the basis of such brief acquaintance. Their marriage seems a rather rickety affair. Manning doesn't offer an explanation -- she leaves the reader to figure out that Guy probably treated Harriet as a project for improvement, as he does with so many people, and Harriet, who has no close family, was probably grateful.

Most of the characters here are unsympathetic if not downright unlikeable. Even Harriet, whom I did sympathise with because of her situation, can be quite irritating. Xenophobic prejudice -- no doubt true to life -- is on full display here, as the expats look down contemptuously on Romanians and Jews and live a sybaritic lifestyle based on their access to foreign currency.

There's not much of a plot -- it's more a slice of life and a study of characters. But it ends neatly with the cast and audience of Guy's production of Troilus and Cressida (set during the fall of Troy) pouring euphorically out onto the street, where they learn that Paris has fallen to the Nazis. The war has been a spectator sport up till now (Romania was neutral) but it's about to get real.

Volume 2, The Spoilt City, done now. Once more it’s fairly plotless but the tension is ratcheted up in the political turmoil as the Romanian government veers from the Allies to the Axis. Like probably most readers I knew nothing about Romania during the war, and Manning doesn’t go into detailed explanations. There’s a sense of gathering menace as the fascist Iron Guard appears on the streets, and gradually takes control.

Again, it’s a character study. Most of the British chaps seem much of a muchness to me, but we see a lot more of the growing problems in Guy and Harriet’s marriage, seen from Harriet’s point of view. Guy is worryingly insouciant, both for himself and Harriet, determinedly going on lecturing, running a summer school, even when there are only three students willing to turn up. Harriet, left to her own devices, has to figure out how to keep them safe, along with a Jewish student and army deserter whom they are hiding.

The rather boring and repetitive accounts of the British lives are offset by Yakimov’s positively dangerous adventures, which include giving the Gestapo the impression that Guy is a terrorist, and visiting his old friend Freddi, now a Gauleiter, who is not as welcoming as Yaki would like. Yaki is a great character, bringing plenty of drama and humour to the story.

Volume 3: no need to write a review, Violet Wells sums it up here. A shame, she got carried away with putting in every detail, clearly largely autobiographical. So many tedious conversations, and how many visits to the Parthenon do you need?