Rating: 3/5

How cute. He’s a millionaire. So 90s.

Luckily the French/Greek H is not a Harlequin HP as French HP heroes are alway cold and smarmy and the Greek ones, while 6’ 4” and excellent at sex, listen to old girlfriends way too much and obsess over revenge and virginity. How do we know it’s a DP hero?
under that shirt was a broad, dark-skinned chest with thick black hair covering it.

That’s my boy.

The heroine is more of a game changer. She is brash, fresh, adorable and willing to challenge the hero. I adored her. At first. She’s only striking rather than pretty, but has great Breck girl hair. This is a slight her mother gives her not the hero. Plus she’s sassy.

She actually stands up to mean girl at her boarding school instead of turning the other cheek.

“Oh, that’s okay, Emily,” she replied with an equally sweet smile. “I told her what you’ve been doing with Dr. Mordeau behind the Chinese screen in art class on Tuesday after class.”

She flirts and challenges the hero and despite being a hairy French/Greek one woman, mourning widower -man who can never love again, kind of loves it.

“There’s a very slinky-looking woman over there with platinum hair out of a bottle giving you the eye. She looks like she’d just love to lead you home and make love to you and steal your wallet.” 
He leaned toward her. “I can’t make love,” he said confidentially. “I’m too drunk.” 
“She wouldn’t care, I think.” 
He smiled lazily. “Would you?” he mused. “Suppose you come home with me, and we’ll give it my best shot.” 
“Oh, not when you’re soused, thanks,” she replied. “My first time is going to be fireworks and explosions and the 1812 Overture. How could I possibly get that from a drunk man?”

PLOT
The heroine’s selfish mother remarried shortly after the H’s father died, like six months or so, to a rich, bad guy. The new husband ships the h off to Paris where she meets the brooding H and falls for him, but he is wallowing in mourning over his first wife. 

The h is pretty cute, and they have a friendship of sorts and meet up again in the Caribbean. I think it was the Caribbean. The h’s stepfather is trying to strong-arm the heroine into a relationship with a handsome, mysterious man who is not all as he seems. Sexual tension escalates between the h and H much to his distress, and now we are entering real DP territory. The heroine still maintains her wit, but her spine begins to disintegrate. He talks her or she talks him into taking her virginity to protect her from the mysterious man. They then marry in a sad little ceremony where the heroine mourns a pretty white wedding dress and flowers.
 
Graduating from the Bill Clinton School of Sex Education, the H doesn’t classify their fooling around as fooling around aka oral sex. He then devirginizes her digitally which is totally ick. Ick for me although they seemed pretty okay with it.

More downhill plot lines and it devolves into a suspense thriller with the attempted takeover of a fictional Muslim/oil country by the evil stepfather and who cares anymore.

The H and h finally have “real sex”, and it’s awesome, or would be if the hero weren’t calling out his dead wife’s name at critical moments. 

The h is anything but stubborn and continue to hope for true love. Optimistic? Stupid? Take your choice.

“Listen, honey, you’re a tasty little banquet and I’m a starving man. All my good intentions won’t spare you if we’re under the same roof for very long.” 

“But I want you,” she protested. 

********

“You’re barely twenty, naive and aching to lay your heart at my feet. Don’t. I want you. I could take you and enjoy you and walk away from you the next morning with my heart intact. You couldn’t. You’re too intense for me, Brianne.” 

“You mean if I could just have sex with you and disappear, you’d let me stay,” she said stiffly. 

“That’s it in a nutshell,” he agreed.

Does he love her in the end? Who knows, but she's water on a stone so I think she'll wear him down.

Heavy sigh. The mysterious man ends up as the H one of the next books Lord of the Desert, and goes from a virtual eunuch to a DP stud due to the magical V of the next heroine, but leaves his heart with this h.

I've noticed that DP's H's always improve in someone else's book, but the same can not be said for all of her heroines.