Rating: 3/5

The romance in this novel is kinda sweet but I must warn modern day readers that this H is very politically incorrect and quite chauvinistic/sometimes condescending and misogynistic in his attitude to women. One must remember when reading this novel that it's written in a different time when double standards are are an unfortunate concomitant of male-female relations. Why did I enjoy it then? Hmnn. In my search for the old school "alphahole" hero I tend to find some interesting guys in romancelandia and the H in this novel deserves a special place ( if not a pedestal of his own ) as one of the all time assholes. But Josh was an interesting and sexy asshole and to be fair to him, he never made promises to the heroine. When he breaks her fantasy bubble of marriage and babies , she is partly blame for her own unhappiness. In spite of her shortcomings and sometimes annoying behaviour, I did like the heroine Annette. I was fascinated by her joy for life and amazed at her astounding level of self confidence and vanity: this was a 19 year old girl who was very beautiful and felt that she could use her looks to get any man her fickle little heart desires. 

This novel is a bit of a cat and mouse game of romance between Josh ( our sexy alphahole hunk is in his early 30's and he's also a playboy tycoon - 1980's version of today's billionaires ) and 19 year old Annette ( our beautiful blonde heroine who has been spoilt by her dad and her doting stepmom and has always been a rather mischievous young lady whose hare brained schemes always seemed to work in the past ). I must note that the heroine's dad Jordan and stepmom Kathleen were the MC's in a previous novel by Janet Dailey called The Matchmakers. That was another rather sweetly romantic novel where the heroine from this story teams up with her little sister Marsha to find a new wife for their hottie daddy. That's a novel I shall be re-reading in the future ! This story line follows the adventures of Annette as she spends a summer at a luxurious North Carolina resort with her parents and siblings. Annette is a bit of a tease and loves to test out her sex appeal by flirting with guys and then losing interest before things even move to first base. The H Josh, is the owner of the resort and Annette becomes smitten with him at first sight, because he is not boyish like the usual guys that salivate over her and kiss her dainty princess feet. 

Josh is more than aware that Annette wants him and he is very attracted to her too even though she is younger than his usual conquests. What I enjoyed about their romance is how Josh made Annette think that she had the upper hand in their burgeoning relationship. The guy just sat back and let her make her play for him, all the while smirking at her silly innocent feminine wiles like a wolf just waiting for the right time to pounce. Annette's schemes to garner lots of attention from Josh were funny, annoying and sometimes endearing. I felt sorry for her poor shy sister Marsha because she dragged that girl along to help her with all her scheming plans. Annette was so silly that she thought Josh was unaware of her hare brained schemes. It was kinda cringeworthy in a sad sort of way and sometimes I despaired for the poor girl. She really did do a couple of embarrassing things in her efforts to get Josh's attentions.

When she eventually did get his attention, Annette thought she was on her way to winning the man of her dreams. The girl really thought that she had found her HEA dream man and wedding bells were ringing. She still had to hide the relationship from her parents, however, because she was also pretending to be more sophisticated than she actually was. Josh was not hearing wedding bells unfortunately. He was only interested in a pleasurable little sexual dalliance with a beautiful girl and although Annette entranced him more than any other woman he had ever met, he had no desire to marry her. Their relationship develops gradually during that summer and soon it looks as if Annette would be ready to give up her virginity to Josh because our little schemer has finally fallen in love. She knows it's the real thing and not just a teasing flirtation like her old boyfriends. She makes the mistake of thinking that Josh is also in love.

The big scene comes when Josh and Annette are finally going to have sex and Annette is dismayed that the man of her dreams is not suitably deferential and full of gratitude for the "gift" that she is about to give him. I felt really sorry for her in this scene. No woman deserves to have a man talk to them the way Josh did when he shattered her illusions. Josh tells her coldly and mockingly that it will just be sex and that he is not going to be mooning over the fact that he is so "lucky" to be her first lover. That was really hurtful. No romantic young girl deserves to hear that kind of shit when she is about to lose her virginity. Josh also destroys her wedding dreams by telling her that they don't have a future together. Annette gets mad, goes ballistic, insults his ass in a really fabulous manner ( I loved that girl's spunk and fiesty charm ) and leaves his suite. Then she spends the next day or two just stewing and letting all sorts of cynical and hateful thoughts fill her mind. This part was kinda sad because it's like a coming of age moment when a young ingenue's dreams are shattered violently and her entire personality changes. Annette becomes really bitter at this point and soon decides on a new hare brained scheme: to lose her virginity to one of the sexy young waiters called Craig who had been flirting with her. Marsha tries to get her not to go through with it but Annette says ( I think she's still bothered by how little value Josh had placed on her virginity ) that virginity is just a burden and she's going to get rid of it in a cold blooded manner. 

Marsha is then in full panic mode but is afraid to tell their dad Jordan because he will blow his top. She decides to go see Josh and ask for his help. At first Josh is skeptical and tells Marsha that he is aware of the all the schemes Annette had used to attract his attention in the past. Marsha is like the the boy who cried wolf; she begs Josh to believe that this time it is no scheme and that Annette is really going to some motel to have sex with Craig. Josh is, like all alpha asshole man whores with double standards, outraged that Annette will dare to give away her virginity to another man so he goes on a rampage to find his erstwhile former girlfriend before her hymen gets destroyed. This part cracked me up big time ! I found it hard to believe that Josh would realize how much he loved Annette only when he thought another man was gonna get to have sex with her first. I wanted him to love her without all this drama happening. But I did honestly love all the drama. At the motel, Annette gets cold feet when she's wearing only her slip and tells Craig the sex is not happening. Craig is annoyed, because his shirt is already off, his pants are unzipped and he's got a boner. Craig grabs onto her just as Josh breaks down the motel door. Josh is outraged, jealous, possessive and mad as hell because his little virgin princess brat is standing half naked with one of his waiters whose pants are falling down. 

The novel ends with Josh declaring his true love and intentions to ring wedding bells for his beloved. Apparently the thought of another man touching her made him so jealous that he suddenly realized he was a marrying man after all. I thought the ending was a bit rushed and maybe I wished there had been an epilogue as in present day romances but this was a fairly entertaining story.