Rating: 4/5

During the reading this week, I felt that I was really able to see O. Henry’s personality in the stories. One of my favorite parts was the beginning of “Springtime a la Carte” on page 10:

“It was a day in March.
Never, never begin a story this way when you write one. No opening could possibly be worse. It is unimaginative, flat, dry and likely to consist of mere wind. But in this instance it is allowable. For the following paragraph, which should have inaugurated the narrative, is too wildly extravagant and preposterous to be flaunted in the face of the reader without preparation.”

And then he started the story. I almost laughed!!! He totally broke the boundaries that few authors even bend. He was “breaking the 4th wall” (as some may call it) and I loved it. (He did it again on page 12.) His style was different and exciting. His stories were very comical to me, which seems to be what everyone else thinks. Every now and then, he would have a very random sentence like:

“He had a telephone in his cow house, and he could figure up exactly what effect next year’s Canada wheat crop would have on potatoes planted in the dark of the moon.” (“Springtime a la Carte”)

That seemed pretty random (and hilarious) to me. Here’s another one:

“She got out ‘The Cloister and the Hearth,’ the best non-selling book of the month…” (“Springtime a la Carte.” If you can’t tell, that story was one of my favorites! )

It’s no wonder that everyone else seems to like his the best so far. Plus, each of the stories seemed to end with irony. Hawthorne’s style was more formal and eloquent than the others and Poe’s seemed more expressive and thrilling. Then you’ve got O. Henry. He was very conversational in his writing as if saying, “Here’s a story I once heard…” For some reason, I really like that style a lot. However, after a while, it was really simple to see his style and therefore predict the ending. For many of the stories, I felt that they needed a bigger and more exciting (and almost mysterious) ending since they all seemed to have a puzzle-like storyline. For example, I loved the Green Door because of the mysterious feel throughout it. However, the ending was quite disappointing for me. I was really hoping for an amazing (and, for some reason, strange) ending to flow with the enigma theme. However with his ending it was not as exciting anymore and the thrill was gone. Some of them were predictable like “After Twenty Years” and “The Pimienta Pancakes” (which I thought was a strange story). Overall I really liked them, though!!