Rating: 4/5

The Cheyenne people were dying, from disease and starvation, in the southern lands to which they had been consigned by the U.S. government; and therefore, in the autumn of 1878, they broke free from their confinement and made their way northward, with a forlorn hope of successfully returning to their ancestral homes along the Yellowstone River. Mari Sandoz tells this story with a striking blend of the epic and the intimate in her 1953 book Cheyenne Autumn.

Sandoz was born in rural Nebraska, and she experienced all the travails of a farming life in a northern locale. She pursued her vocation as a writer in the face of a variety of obstacles and challenges, including an authoritarian father who disapproved of the very idea of a farm woman wanting to write. And in composing books like Cheyenne Autumn, Sandoz drew upon the stories she heard from old-time trappers and traders who had known the harsh life of the Old West – who had worked with, and sometimes fought, the Sioux and Cheyenne.

These Indians told stories, too, of their old buffalo-hunting life, and of the first real encounter with the United States Army in the Grattan fight of 1854. At that time, the white men in the region were only a few little islands in a great sea of Indians and buffaloes. Twenty-three years later, in 1877, the buffaloes were about gone, and the last of the Indians driven to the reservations – only a few little islands of Indians in a great sea of whites.

Sandoz offers devastating commentary on what was done to the Indigenous people of the West: “This exploit of modern man is unrivaled in history: the destruction of a whole way of life and the expropriation of a race from a region of 350,000,000 acres in so short a time.” There had been a tendency to romanticize the way of life of the Plains peoples, but then gold was discovered, “and suddenly the romantic Red Hunter was a dirty, treacherous, bloodthirsty savage standing in the way of progress, in the path of manifest destiny.”

Incidents like the Sand Creek massacre of 1864, when U.S. troops murdered unarmed Cheyenne people who had been promised the protection of the U.S. government, became more the rule than the exception; and, as Sandoz puts it,

All this time, a few humanitarians were complaining against such treatment of the Indian, but no voice was loud enough to be heard above the drumbeaters for the railroads, the cattlemen, the miners, and the army contractors. There were some generals who protested these war tactics and regretted the entire Indian extermination policy, men like [John] Pope and [George] Crook, but their voices too were like the wind on the buffalo grass.

Sandoz’s Cheyenne Autumn is characterized by a spirit of profound respect for the Cheyenne sensibility and worldview. Writing in a style that could be characterized as prose poetry, Sandoz seeks to help the reader enter into the Cheyenne outlook on life, as when she writes that “All the things that ever happened here were as of today, because what has been done in a place is always there.” Going into greater detail regarding the Cheyenne view of life and the world, Sandoz later writes that

The old Cheyennes, even more than their High Plains neighbors, had a rich and mystical perception of all life as a continuous, all-encompassing eventual flow, and of man’s complete oneness with this diffused and eternal stream. It was a stream of many and complex dimensions, one in which man, the tree, the rock, the cloud, and all the other things were simultaneously in all the places they had ever been; and all the things that had ever been in a place were always in the present there, in the being and occurring.

In their northward retreat, the Cheyennes were led by Little Wolf and Dull Knife. Together, the two men led a brilliant fighting retreat, evading one column after another of U.S. troops sent to capture them, as well as posses of angry whites who wanted nothing but “revenge” and would not be bound by any laws of war or norms of civilized behaviour.

Little Wolf in particular made me think of Xenophon leading the retreat of the Athenian mercenaries from Persia, as he recounted in his Anabasis (The March Up Country). Like Xenophon in 401 B.C., Little Wolf in 1878 had to lead a 1,500-mile retreat by persuasion, and by the force of example; as the “bundle bearer,” he could not simply give orders and assume that they would be obeyed, the way a U.S. Army general might be able to expect. Rather, in every aspect of his command, he had to embody the honour and dignity of the Cheyenne people, and had to persuade his fellow Cheyennes to accede to his ideas for how to conduct the retreat. To say that Little Wolf bore a heavy burden of leadership on the long walk north toward the Yellowstone would be an understatement.

Over the long march, the Cheyenne find themselves meditating on the difference between the U.S. and the Cheyenne way of war: “Somehow unlimited killing never turned the veho officers from their path. Was it because the white man’s fighter was not from a home, not returning to his house to eat and sleep and to live as the Indian warrior did, but was a pay man who did nothing but kill? Was it because the stink of all the blood could be kept away from the living, off in the distant forts?”

In a fateful decision, late in the retreat, Dull Knife and his followers choose to break away from Little Wolf, to seek shelter with the Sioux leader Red Cloud. But then Dull Knife learns that Red Cloud too is virtually a prisoner of the veho, and that now the veho soldiers holding Red Cloud say that Dull Knife and his followers must disarm, surrender, and submit to be taken back to Indian Territory. It is moving to witness Dull Knife’s heartbreak at realizing that he has in effect delivered his people into the hands of the enemy, and at hearing that his people have been ordered to return south to the desolate lands where they had faced a slow death from starvation and disease.

“We will die first,” Dull Knife said, so sorrowful and low it could scarcely be heard by the soft-listening Cheyennes about him. It was a hard thing to see, this man rousing himself to realize that all his plans for refuge had only been a dreaming. They looked into the earth, for no one could speak the comforting words as Dull Knife slowly got up and stumbled away into the darkness. Here and there a woman began to cry softly, and then that too was gone.

It is likewise thought-provoking when Sandoz provides the perspectives of other Cheyenne people seeking a way out of their nation’s dilemma, as when a young warrior named Little Finger Nail suddenly finds the idea that “The Cheyennes must try to discover a new path” coursing through his mind, “as though a voice had spoken” to him. Little Finger Nail, who has never thought of himself as anything other than a fighting man, thinks long and hard about the change in life direction that he is contemplating:

It would mean that the gay and bedecked Little Finger Nail must become a plain man of the village, without the paint and feathers that pleased the young women; without the display and rivalry of the soldier lodge that pleased him so much, or the parades, the racing and gambling, the accumulation of horses and honors. All the wise ones of the Cheyennes had been simple men, and modest, their far-seeing eyes not blinded by the brilliant prides and vanities close before them. They were humble men, wanting nothing for themselves, so their hands were always empty and ready to receive the gifts that came for all.

Suddenly, the young Cheyenne found himself singing a new song:

“Help me, Powers of the wind and sky,
And the Earth in the cold night-time,
Help me get my people away!”

Cheyenne Autumn contains a great deal of heartbreak – and, toward its conclusion, a surprising measure of hope. It is an essential work for any student of the history of Indigenous Americans in the West.