We'll never know exactly how far our actions fly into the future.

There's probably nothing Sadako loves more then running around Hiroshima. Then the dizzy spells start. She doesn't understand why until she receives a life changing diagnosis. Soon, Sadako is running once again. But can she win the race against time?

A story of luck, legends, and letters. A tale of omens, and origami.

**********POTENTIAL SPOILERY TRIGGER WARININGS for illness of a child, talk of war, mention of loss of a loved one, leukemia, grief, and mention of death.**********

Active, eager Sadako was excited to be alive. Be it Oban Day or becoming her class's running superstar, there was so much the optimistic girl was looking forward to. It was impossible not to feel everything she felt, no matter where the path of her race took her. Her bravery and courage were so inspiring.

Family is a forever flock. Seriously sweet, you watch Sadako's family and community react to her diagnosis, and see their determination to remain sources of everlasting strength and comfort. Admiration and love flowed between Sadako and all of the important people in her life. But the moments between Sadako and her mother had me in tears.

Over 14 years later, and I can still remember the first time Sadako's tale was read to me. The reasons behind the intense feelings it evoked are no longer lost on me. Straightforwardly complex as one of its titular birds, Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes is exactly the story it seems, yet within it's folded creases lie shouted whispers of WWII, fears, long ago stolen dreams, and hope in the face of great sadness. Perhaps loudest though, is its out cry for peace.

Despite the fact that Eleanor Coerr's prose was purely tell and no show, Sadako practically runs out of the book and into your heart. Incredibly sad, the quick historical fiction introduced the readers to a truly strong spirit, a well known Japanese legend, and the devastatingly long-lasting effects of nuclear warfare. Accompanied by black and white illustrations, the story of a bright soul dimmed far to soon, moved me. I am however perplexed as to why certain parts of the plot didn't remain faithful to her life. Reading this makes you wish a better future for the world.

I hope that one day all your whispered wishes take wing.