Rating: 4/5

A fascinating read about immigrant daughters, mother-daughter relationships that are strained, and the life of an artist struggling to be fresh, new, and pulled in too many different directions. 

The book is written from two different viewpoints--the daughter's and mother's. * * *[Spoiler alert] * * * After the mother dies, the daughter asks her father to translate her mother's journals. She discovers that her mother was a dream-teller, an exalted position of oracle in India. Here in the US, she has built a coterie of followers, most of them South Asian. 

The daughter, a talented artist, is pulled in different directions. Like many first generation women, she wants to be free of the old, confining ways, but also finds them comforting. She is having problems with her art, because she paints scenes from India, but catches flashes of so much more.

Rikki, the daughter, wanted to be a dream-teller, too, but did not have the gift. Or perhaps her mother bought it from her early in life to prevent her from suffering the dreams of others. The open-ended portions of the story don't feel unfinished, they feel mystical. Appropriate.

Rikki also owns a restaurant with a friend, and the restaurant is under attack from competition--both for their patrons and for the heart of what a restaurant should be--a "third place"--different from work and home, where we can be ourselves. The story of the restaurant is another facet of Rikki's life.

Of course, there is more. Rikki is newly divorced and negotiating bringing up a daughter, who may have inherited the dream-teller status of her mother, as well as the painting talent of her mother. The next generation of mother-daughter tension is in the works.

Rikki's mother's story is also explained--the training of a dream-teller, how she struggled with the talent, what she chose in life when choices to be made--all are fascinating

The book covers a lot of cultural ground, mystical ideas, and wonderful story telling. I enjoyed it fully.