Rating: 3/5

This is an award-winning book aimed at the young adult audience in schools and libraries. I feel sure many young people reading this will be delighted and entranced with the lives of the Dalton sisters. Perhaps it would appeal more to girls than boys, the romance is certainly there. There is also the rough and ready lifestyle our pioneer men endured, working virtually till they dropped to earn a quid that would appeal to males. 

The Dalton sisters move through from tragedy to happiness and back, with the Far North Queensland world of hardship at the whim of weather and work, as their home. They are vibrant believable characters, alive with their differences and sisterly bond. Belle, the youngest is restless with her world, seeking nothing but notoriety as a stage performer. She allows herself to be courted, not realizing the consequences of breaking the loving heart of the handsome Greek Nicos. The middle sister Molly is the solid cornerstone of the family. As cook, at their boarding house adopted home, she finds complete happiness with her husband Fred only to find it tragically taken away in the cruelest way possible. Then the educated and sensible Josie, having the world at her feet, finds herself coming to terms and accepting second best in many things, when her world changes irrevocably. The beauty of the area known so well to the author, described so richly, seems to intertwine with a rich tapestry of native and multi cultural people as the backdrop to the Dalton girls lives.

There is an educational addition in the Author’s note, which is likely to surprise young adult and mature readers alike. The thought of a disease such as Leprosy existing in Australia in the early 1900’s seems incredible. The drastic treatment of the disease, as the victims were sent to live out their lives in isolation on Peel Island Laseret, terribly cruel for the diseased and their families alike. Communication one way only, letters to the Leper colony, never knowing how the diseased people coped, was a torture in itself.

For those with family or friends who would enjoy “Young Adults Fiction” (which is most of us at heart) please read “A Net Full of Honey” you will find yourself enjoying the roller coaster of emotions Estelle sets running. I now look forward to reading “Time Out for Living” which I’m certain will be as entertaining.