Rating: 2/5

Thank god I am finally done with this book. Wasn't it so very very long? I would have cut at least a third.

All right, before I start on the litany of criticisms, two things biased me against this book, and I feel I must disclose them before you think I'm just ragging on that poor author: I bought this book in a boxet of "marriage of convenience" books, and though the characters are supposed to get married for convenience, they actually fall in love before that, with one of the parties not even knowing that this is her fiancé. So, no catnip trope for me. And secondly, I'm just not that big of a fan of historical romances. Really, I should have just stopped the book at the beginning, but I'm a compulsive finisher.

The hardest thing for me to get over was how the heroine was introduced. She was naive, sad all the time, and just didn't seem that bright, since she was fooled by her husband for so very long. We were constantly told how beautiful and smart she was, but never really shown it. The hero was better at first - I can always get behind a good rake - but then he caused incredible pain to the heroine by not revealing his true identity to her, and it just made him seem dickish, and I couldn't get over it (at a later trial in their relationship, I could have screamed to him - of course she doesn't trust you!!! you lied to her from the beginning!!). 

I was also annoyed by how François I mooned over Micheline, and Anne Boleyn over Sandhurst. It just seemed a little convenient. Really, a lot of historical name-dropping I could have done without. There was also a little too much of the previous book's couple (which I hadn't read). And finally, yeah, the book went on forever. Every time I thought it was done, another part started. It could have ended with them off to England to get married. 

(I always feel bad when I leave such reviews on goodreads! But I spent a lot of time reading this book and I had a lot of thoughts! I'm sure some people will enjoy this book much more than I did!)