Rating: 4/5

Despite the title, don’t look in here for any kind of narrative of the Revolution: the focus is on what went before (and why it made the Revolution inevitable), not a description or analysis of the Revolution itself.

I found this fascinating, and the mass of detail gives a strong flavour of what pre Revolutionary France was really like. Or so it seemed to me – I am aware that many have called into question the accuracy of the author’s economic descriptions. Of course, famine and privation existed before the Revolution -as they did after it – but I am persuaded by the author’s belief that economic conditions were not, in and of themselves, the causes of the Revolution. As was also the case with Tsarist Russia, the last years of the old regime saw some remarkable economic advances. But both societies were doomed. Here, a strong case is made for maladministration and the selfishness of the ruling class.

A central tenet of the idea of European chivalry has always been that the knight or nobleman holds both land and honour in exchange for going to war for the monarch. When I was commissioned into the British army there was still a relic of this: not just the sword and spurs we wore with ceremonial dress, but the fact that officers paid for their own uniforms, just as our knightly predecessors arrived for war on their own horses. In France, centuries ago, the deal was: you provide your body and your horse and your weapons for the king when required, and in exchange you don’t pay tax. The whole point of the tax free status was that it was in exchange for service: but the aristocracy wriggled out of all their obligations, and yet retained all their privileges: unlike the peasantry (all obligations and no privileges) or the aristocracy in Germany (obligation to do military service replaced by a nobles’ tax). 

It is easy to see why this was a recipe for a failing state, especially when the aristocracy in France became a caste closed to intermarriage (which it has never been in England). The resulting inability of the state to raise anything like enough revenue to enable it to function, and the selfish abdication of any kind of responsibility for public service by the ruling class, led inevitably to a disastrous seizing up of the organs of state, with the peasants feeling – with justification – that they had nothing to gain and everything to lose from a system entirely skewed against them. 

The example of England shows that this did not need to be the case. And – to my surprise – there were also examples of good government and fiscal responsibility in some parts of France which, had they been duplicated everywhere, might have staved off disaster there too. (There is a very interesting Appendix in which the author discusses the case of Languedoc – the only part of France which seems to have worked – run efficiently as a kind of self governing province). 

Marxist scholars have long been contemptuous of de Tocqueville, seeing him as a “bourgeois ideologue” who got his economic facts wrong. I am no economist, and I cannot judge the fairness of these criticisms. But I do know that de Tocqueville, after a long period of being out of fasion, is now undergoing something of a renaissance. At the very least, he gives interesting and eye opening examples of many of the tragedies and absurdities of pre Revolutionary France.