Rating: 2/5

I've had really bad luck with short story collections this year, and Men and Cartoons by Jonathan Lethem is no exception. I've read several of Lethem's full-length novels before and usually enjoy them, but his short stories are a mixed bag, and I don't like most of them. This is my second short story collection by Lethem, the first being Kafka Americana, which he wrote with another author and which I just read a few weeks ago. I liked that collection more than this one, despite this one having a higher rating from other reviews on Goodreads. 

I'm not even sure how to really describe the stories in Men and Cartoons. I guess contemporary weird fiction? One story, Super Goat Man, is about a goat-man hybrid creature who retired from being a fringe superhero, and now teaches at different universities as a professor and is really washed up, to give an example. That story was really long, and felt to me like 100% filler; I didn't get the point of it. That seems to be a common theme with Lethem: he always seems to have some deeper meaning or underlying moral lesson in his stories, but I can never figure out what it is, and so I just read his stories for what they are at face value and don't end up enjoying them. 

I did really like one story, The Glasses, which was a hilarious and endearing story about a man who gets his glasses replaced, only to find the new ones quickly scratched in the same place as his last pair. When he takes them back, the two optometrists insist the customer is to blame for the scratches, and refuse to let it go, essentially holding the man hostage while he tries on the glasses numerous times, determined to catch him in the act of scratching them. That story was so funny and I absolutely loved it. 

Overall this is pretty disappointing collection of stories. I didn't see a point to most of these stories, and they felt like filler to me. Only one story in this collection warranted a four-star rating from me, and not a single one was better than that. The collection abounds with one-star entries, and honestly just isn't a lot of fun to read, with the exception of the excellent story The Glasses. Unless you're already a Lethem fan, I'd pass on this one. If you're looking to get into Lethem, this isn't the place to start. 

My ratings for each story and for the book as a whole are below: 

The Vision: 2.5/5
Access Fantasy: 3.5/5
The Spray: 3.5/5
Vivian Relf: 2.5/5
Planet Big Zero: 1/5
The Glasses: 4/5
The Dystopianist, Thinking of His Rival, Is Interrupted by a Knock on the Door: 1/5
Super Goat Man: 1/5
The National Anthem: 1.5/5 

= 20.5 / 45 = 45.5% = 2.27 stars