Rating: 4/5

Cecelia Holland is one of a handful of masters of historic fiction. Her characters are true, more real than many "real" figures found in histories and biographies, as are the finely detailed and carefully researched past worlds she creates.

The Kings in Winter tells the story of a fictional Irish chief, Muirtagh, who lived in the time of the legendary Irish king Brian Boru.

Muirtagh's clan, then led by his father, was massacred before the story begins. They now live in the hills, away from the land that was once theirs. Muirtagh, who prefers the harp to killing, declines to scheme for revenge - a stance that ironically transforms the clans who took part in the massacre into murderers rather than the brave heroes avenging past wrongs, as they prefer to see themselves.

Muirtagh unsuccessfully maneuvers to shield his family from harm, survives a winter as an outlaw, and finally takes refuge with the high king's enemies - and the Danish invaders allied with them.

Muirtagh's outlaw winter was a favorite part of the story for me. "In the afternoon he reached the shore of huge lough and made a camp beside it. Sitting before his fire, he wished he had his harp; he wasn't sleepy, and it would be pleasant to play his harp. The wind came up over the lough, sharp and edged with cold. He should have chosen the summer to get outlawed in.

"Finally he got up and went after the mare, who was grazing along the shore. He hadn't tethered her, thinking she wouldn't go far from him, but when he came close to her she lifted her head and moved away. He followed her along the shore, but she wouldn't let him get near her, and eventually he gave up. She put her nose down to the grass and began to browse again.

"If she got away from him he was helpless. The thought of being left on foot in this country, of being seen and chased on foot, took the breath out of his lungs...."

The battle at the book's end is a classic, vividly describing both action and Muirtagh's interior take on it.

I finished it about 1:30 a.m. last night, couldn't put it down.

An aside - I don't understand another reviewer's complaint about the Irish names. It's a book based around 999 in Ireland. Given those circumstances, what names would be preferable?