Rating: 3/5

EXCERPT: There was a long silence while the ill-assorted pair studied each other. 

Frederica thought the title of the Wicked Duke suited her companion very well. 

He had thick, black hair worn longer than the usual fashion. His eyebrows were very thin, black and arched over jet black eyes with curved eyelids. His face was very white and high nosed and his mouth was firm and rather cruel. 

He was well above the normal height with broad shoulders. His blue morning coat had a black velvet collar, his long waistcoat was black, as were his breeches and top boots. His hands were long and white and a large ruby ring blazed on the middle finger of his left hand. 

But it was not his appearance alone that made him look so satanic. It was the air of cruelty mixed with arrogance that seemed to emanate from him. 

ABOUT THIS BOOK: Last of her six sisters left single, Frederica intends to avoid the marriage mart and runs away. In chambermaid disguise, Freddie joins the household of the fashionable Duke of Pembury. But that wild gentleman sees through her tricks, and escorts her back. When the sisters make over the tomboy, she cannot recognize herself, but the Duke can.

MY THOUGHTS: I found this book nestled in the top of one of my as yet unpacked boxes of books. Looking for something small and quick to read while my Kindle recharged, I plucked it out while wondering where on earth I had originally picked it up. Because it is not my normal reading matter at all. I think I may have acquired it at a garage sale, tempted by the author, whose Hamish Macbeth series I enjoy. 

Despite my initial reservations, I found myself enjoying this read. It crossed my mind as I read that the new Brave and Fearless Frederica would be a good companion for Flavia De Luce. She certainly manages to get herself into some scrapes! 

This was an amusing and entertaining read that had me laughing out loud in places. Well done M. C. Beaton. If I come across any of the other books in this series, I will certainly pick them up. 

😊😊😊.5

THE AUTHOR: Marion Chesney Gibbons
aka: Ann Fairfax, Jennie Tremaine, Helen Crampton, Charlotte Ward, M.C. Beaton, Sarah Chester. 

Marion Chesney was born on 1936 in Glasgow, Scotland, UK, and started her first job as a bookseller in charge of the fiction department in John Smith &amp; Sons Ltd. While bookselling, by chance, she got an offer from the Scottish Daily Mail to review variety shows and quickly rose to be their theatre critic. She left Smith’s to join Scottish Field magazine as a secretary in the advertising department, without any shorthand or typing, but quickly got the job of fashion editor instead. She then moved to the Scottish Daily Express where she reported mostly on crime. This was followed by a move to Fleet Street to the Daily Express where she became chief woman reporter. After marrying Harry Scott Gibbons and having a son, Charles, Marion went to the United States where Harry had been offered the job of editor of the Oyster Bay Guardian. When that didn’t work out, they went to Virginia and Marion worked as a waitress in a greasy spoon on the Jefferson Davies in Alexandria while Harry washed the dishes. Both then got jobs on Rupert Murdoch’s new tabloid, The Star, and moved to New York.

Anxious to spend more time at home with her small son, Marion, urged by her husband, started to write historical romances in 1977. After she had written over 100 of them under her maiden name, Marion Chesney, and under the pseudonyms: Ann Fairfax, Jennie Tremaine, Helen Crampton, Charlotte Ward, and Sarah Chester, she getting fed up with 1714 to 1910, she began to write detectives stories in 1985 under the pseudonym of M. C. Beaton. On a trip from the States to Sutherland on holiday, a course at a fishing school inspired the first Constable Hamish Macbeth story. They returned to Britain and bought a croft house and croft in Sutherland where Harry reared a flock of black sheep. But Charles was at school, in London so when he finished and both tired of the long commute to the north of Scotland, they moved to the Cotswolds where Agatha Raisin was created.

DISCLOSURE: I own my copy of Frederica in Fashion by M. C. Beaton, published by Constable and Robinson Ltd. All opinions expressed in this review are entirely my own personal opinions. 

Please refer to my Goodreads.com profile page or the about page on sandysbookaday.wordpress.com for an explanation of my rating system. This review and others are also published on my blog sandysbookaday.wordpress.com