Rating: 3/5

After her death in 1965, Lorraine Hansberry's ex-husband Robert Nemiroff collated her unpublished writings and adapted them into a stage play that first ran from 1968 to 1969 off Broadway. The play was then converted into an equally successful autobiography with the same title: To Be Young, Gifted and Black.
  "The poets have been right in all these centuries, darling; even in its astounding imperfection this earth of ours is magnificent. But oh this human race!"
I read Imani Perry's beautiful biography on Lorraine's life, Looking for Lorraine, and was thus familiar with large parts of her life. However, To Be Young, Gifted and Black is such a valuable read because so many excerpts of Lorraine's plays are included, from A Raisin in the Sun and The Drinking Gourd to The Sign in Sidney Brustein's Window (which I desperately need to read!!!) and Les Blancs, where some of them cannot be easily found in print. Lorraine was such a versatile artist and it's a shame that she's only remembered for Raisin. I vow to read everything that's out there from her – she was such a treasure. 

The other reason why I'll cherish To Be Young, Gifted and Black is that it humanises Lorraine to an extent that I didn't think possible. Maybe it's a me-thing but I struggle to conceive as people from the past, especially when they were as iconic as Lorraine, as "real" people. Lorraine was born in 1930 and died (from cancer) in 1965. Her life is so far away. Her lived experience differs so greatly from mine. Her achievements are beyond what I can ever strive to do with my little life. But reading her autobiography, reading these excerpts from her letters, essays and speeches, made her come to life in a way that is incredibly special to me. Lorraine was a real person. I now understand why Jimmy thought of her as "a sister and a comrade". She was such a wonderful person, and she died way too young. 

I have some issues with the structure of this book and with the fact that her husband, who was her literary executor and ultimately put this book together, omitted parts in regards to Lorraine's homosexuality etc. But all in all, it's a wonderful book that brought me closer to a wonderful writer and human. Instead of giving you a run down of Lorraine's, I wanna share my favorite quotes and annotations from my read of To Be Young, Gifted and Black. I think these will make you understand why Lorraine was so special, and above all, human. 

"I am a writer. I'm going to write." is something Lorraine wrote down and it reminded me of Octavia E. Butler's manifestations on paper: "I shall be a bestselling writer. [...] So be it! See to it!!!" There is something so wonderfully empowering about Black women who have found their calling and who won't let anyone stand in their way of achieving it. In 1962, when Lorraine was struggling with loneliness and depression, she jotted down on paper: "Will work or perish." And that says so much about the power of literature and the role and meaning writing had for her. 

One quote that shows up multiple time in this autobiography goes as follows: "I wish to live because life has within it that which is good, that which is beautiful, and that which is love." It is depressing when you realise that she only got to live to the young age of 33 but LOVE was the current that ran through her life, and her work as well. 

Lorraine, politicised in her childhood through her father, grew up and lived through the 1950s and 60s, so the Civil Rights Era in the US. Therefore, it comes as no surprise that large sections of her autobiography concern themselves with the Black struggle for liberation, equality and justice. She asks herself: "Do I remain a revolutionary? Intellectually—without a doubt. But am I prepared to give my body to the struggle or even my comforts?" — which is such a real question and so many of us can relate to. It's easy to be a revolutionary in theory, it is much harder to be one in practice. I struggle with that immensely and don't feel that my journey is over yet. I often feel like a coward and wish I would stand up more, participate in more boycotts and demonstrations etc. etc. 

On schools for Black children, she writes: "That, after all, was why it existed: not to give education but to withhold it as much as possible, just as the ghetto itself exists not to give people homes but to cheat them out of as much decent housing as possible." If you're interested in that topic I'd highly recommend Carter G. Woodson's The Miseducation of the Negro, which precisely looks at the segregated American school system during the Jim Crow era. 

One of my favorite quotes: "I can be all filled up that day with three hundred years of rage so that my eyes are flashing and my flesh is trembling—and the white boys in the streets, they look at me and think of sex. They look at me and that's all they think... Baby, you could be Jesus in drag but if you're brown they're sure you're selling." I LOVE IT BC I FEEL IT. I LOVE WHAT SHE SAYS HERE AND EVEN MORE SO HOW SHE SAYS IT. 

I also love what she says here: "I think, then, that Negroes must concern themselves with every single means of struggle: legal, illegal, passive, active, violent, and non-violent. That they must harass, debate, petition, give money to court struggles, sit-in, lie-down, strike boycott, sing hymns, pray on steps—and shoot from their windows when the racists come cruising through their communities." Throughout the book, it becomes clear that Lorraine both sympathised with Martin's route (bc it prevented extinction) as well as Malcolm's ("by any means necessary"). 

In a letter to her mom, she writes about Raisin: "Mama, it is a play that tells the truth about people, Negroes and life and I think it will help a lot of people to understand how we are just as complicated as they are—and just as mixed up—but above all, that we have among our miserable and downtrodden ranks—people who are the very essence of human dignity. That is what, after all the laughter and tears, the play is supposed to say. I hope it will make you very proud." I mean, I'm literally gonna cry. At the end of the day, we're all little kids who want to make their parents proud. And boy, did Lorraine do that. Not just her mom but all of us, too. I'm sappy. Don't talk to me. 

I want to end this review on a more light note and share three of my favorite moments from this book. First of all, all of Lorraine's doodles. I had no idea that homegirl was an artists like that. So many of her letters have doodles that go along with whatever she's writing about. I particularly loved: "A portrait of the artist as a young woman contemplating Christmas". :D Lorraine also was a Shakespeare girl (DUH) and her literary interests (her favorite books, her comments on Hemingway's death etc.) made this book so interesting. Secondly, I loved what she wrote in a letter to her husband about her writing her characters for her play: "P.S. Above all—I'm beginning to think of the people as people... I talk to them now and all that sort of thing. I am either cracking or turning into a fugging genius. You decide." I mean, how iconic is that? And lastly I wanted to share what she wrote on a note to the postman when she over-stamped her package bc she didn't have the right stamps: "So—give the next poor fellow a break when he is short, please?" Lorraine was one of one. 10/10 beautiful human being! Love her guts!!!