Rating: 2/5

I am physically unable to give this book more than two stars. Perhaps it's unfair. Perhaps it deserves more, as it apparently inspired thousands of American women to live a better, more meaningful, life.
Yet, I am reading this book in 2018, and I can't help but see the flaws in Friedan's reasoning. 
This book is far from nowadays intersectional feminism. Black women, who it is safe to say were living a much harder life than those middle-class suburbian white women, are scarcely mentionned. LGBTQ+ women are not only erased from her narrative, but Friedan makes a vile comment that leaves no doubts as to what she thinks of homosexuality, which she describes as "something that is spreading like a murky fog over the American scene". In her epilogue, she also notes that "some seemed to be using the women's movement to proselytize lesbianism". Two times she mentions the fact that the narrator of Capote's Breakfast at Tiffany's is a homosexual, while the narrator clearly falls in love with Holly Golightly, so he is at least bisexual—thus did Friedman assume that because Truman Capote was a gay man, his characters must be too?
Another thing that I found truly innapropriate is the whole passage where she compares the life of the white middle-class suburbian housewife to the concentration camps. As much as I pity those depressed housewives, who really did not seem to lead a happy life, comparing their feeling of unachievement and unsatisfying sex life to the mass extermination of a people is truly despicable. In this passage she keeps repeating that it is the "strong" women who survive, confusing the strength of the mind and the strength of the body—although it is true they are sometimes linked, women who survived the camps were, most of the time, incredibly lucky. Comparing them with the women who sat at home while they were going through hell is almost insulting. Many, many strong women died in the camps.
Finally, to comment on the main subject of the book, which is the general misery of American women who are told that they must basically stay in the kitchen and take care of the children, Friedan argues that happiness can only be achieved through a career, through labour, which I think is an extremely capitalist way of thinking.