Rating: 4/5

Tales from the Planet Earth is a fascinating collection of short sci-fi stories. 18 authors, from almost as many countries of the world tackle a shared prompt: alien possession. Whilst some stories are naturally more successful than others, it was interesting to see how the authors used this simple shared narrative dressing to explore a wide range of human concerns. A loss of agency is almost always the central thrust, but through this disempowerment, authors tackle intimacy and relationships (Contacts of a Fourth Kind — Ljuben Dilov), national exceptionalism (User Friendly — Spider Robinson), collective shame (Don’t Knock the Rock — A. Bertram Chandler), cultural appropriation (Fiddling for Water Buffaloes — Somtow Sucharitkul), age and grief (On the Inside Track — Karl Michael Armer) and much more. 

Scattered reviews of the last 40 years sometimes critique the collection’s length or lack of editorial sharpness, but I think they miss the point of the book. The prompt - alien possession - is a catalyst, and the outcomes are arguably less important than the project’s boundaries themselves. Falling between distinct voices, tenses, and perspectives, each story holds a mirror back towards humanity. Sometimes with a sense of softness and warmth, sometimes with acerbic disdain. When the aliens inhabit to observe, we’re often given lilting slice of life stories of gentle interaction. Flies on the metaphorical walls of our brains. When the aliens are framed more as recognised antagonists, they are almost always characterised as such to foreground human failings first and foremost. 

Growing up, my Dad used to say, believing himself prescient and philosophical: “the only time the human race will really club together and stop killing each other will be when we have a common alien threat to fight”. The authors of Tales from the Planet Earth posit that even in this scenario, we’ll still step on each other’s toes either in intentional duplicitous and sycophantic servitude, or through mostly accidental bumbling inaction.