Rating: 5/5

Another book which broke my heart into pieces...We keep on wanting more and more, more and more, nothing satisfies us...And the ones who suffer the most because of our sins, are the innocent ones among us, the animals, who did not want more. I used "who" intentionally because otherwise it would be just speciesism. 

"A great deal of harm is being done to the environment, and thus to animals, in the name of “progress,” for the economic benefit of those who are already wealthy and have more than they need, but continue to demand more". 

Of course as Jane says between us and animals is not a difference in kind but of degree. Unfortunetaly we are still not taking the right measures to reduce polution...that means we will all die...I am quite ill, so I can't have children so ill, my grandchildren will be fine because they will be non-existent. In my misfortune there is a lot of fortune. Maybe in the future it will really be like in Atwood's MAddAddam trilogy, people will be very evil and Earth's resources will come to an end, it will be hot and sterile everywhere or like in Handmaid's Tale. Hm...it wouldn't surprise me anymore because I see that the people who are making money from pollution are not stopping...they are greedy, or maybe money gives them power and power is like a drug you can't live without after some time...Who knows. All that I know is that we are all dying. And the animals are the first driven to extinction and they have no fault in all of this... I don't know if Jesus died for our sins but animals for sure are dying right now for our sins...so I guess I should be praying to them. 

When I look into my daughter's eyes, my kitty, Honey I see a being with feeling and a soul, I saw it in her eyes... She is the greatest love I have ever felt, and the best of friends and I cannot imagine her being tortured in a lab or in a farm for furr without committing suicide or worse annihilate those who harm cats. When I read this book and found out the animal experimentation is used for make up, I finally decided that if I want makeup I must pay more money for ethical brands, even if they are expensive at least I did a good thing. 

"Omar Eduardo Rivera was working at his desk on the seventy-first floor of the north tower when the hijacked airliner struck the building twenty-five floors above him. Mr. Rivera is blind, and his guide dog, Salty, was lying at his feet. Mr. Rivera said, “I stood up and could hear how pieces of glass were flying around and falling. I could feel the smoke filling up my lungs and the heat was just unbearable.” And, of course, it was pitch dark in his sightless world. He knew he could not run down the stairs in the confusion of screams and shouting and rushing feet. He said he was resigned to dying, but hoped Salty might escape. “I unclipped his lead, ruffled his head, gave him a nudge, and ordered him to go.” For several minutes Mr. Rivera struggled on his own in the chaos. Suddenly, he felt a familiar knee-high nudge. Salty had returned to guide his friend down into the street. “It was then I knew for certain,” said Mr. Rivera, “that he loved me just as much as I loved him.” The nightmare descent took an hour—they got out just before the building collapsed".

There were people who were telling me that Honey does not care for me, even though I could feel her love, many times I doubted she loved me too...but now I am sure...

"Many animals become depressed and withdrawn when they lose a close companion. The intensity of the depression or grief depends on the strength of the bond between the two or the degree to which one is dependent on the other. The bond between chimpanzee mothers and their offspring is similar to that between human mothers and their children—in other words, it is similar to what we call love. Young chimpanzees who lose their mothers show many of the symptoms of clinical depression exhibited by human orphans: hunched and huddled posture, rocking, and withdrawing from social contact with their peers".

"I shall never forget the days following the death of the old matriarch Flo, as we watched her son, Flint, sink deeper and deeper into depression and grief. A most poignant incident took place three days after her death. I watched Flint climb slowly into a tall tree near the place where she had died. Slowly, he walked along one of the branches, then stood looking down at an empty nest. After a minute or so he turned away and very slowly climbed to the ground. There he lay, his eyes wide and blank, their light dimmed. That nest was one he had shared with his mother a few days before she died. As the days passed, Flint became increasingly lethargic. He stopped feeding, showed no interest in the other chimps, and, with his immune system weakened, fell sick. The last time I saw him alive he was gaunt and hollow-eyed, sunk deep in depression and sickness. His last short journey was to the very place where Flo had died, by the clear waters of the Kakombe Stream. He stayed there for several hours, not moving, staring into the water. Then he struggled on a little farther, sank down onto the ground, and never moved again. I believe he died of grief".

I knew she loved me...I knew it...always knew it...though sometimes doubted it...but I knew it.

"There are countless stories of the desolated grieving of dogs and cats when they lose a much-loved animal companion. Indeed, the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA), in response to concern shown by humans about the deep grief that their dogs and cats express when they lose an animal companion, conducted a study to determine behavioral changes accompanying bereavement. Grieving dogs and cats show marked shifts in feeding and sleeping patterns; two cats starved themselves until they were so emaciated that they had to be euthanized despite all attempts to get them to eat. Grieving dogs and cats also showed changes in confidence and how much they solicited affection after their loss. For both dogs and cats, more than one-third of the animals demanded more affection when grieving. Fortunately, most behavioral changes in grieving animals due to the loss of animal friends are resolved in one to six months. But the intensity of their grief cannot be denied".

Sometimes when I read these types of books, I enter a depression so severe I wanna kill myself.
Especially when they talk about cats. I get extra sensitive.

"When I first began conducting research in neurobiology and behavior, trying to figure out how cats processed visual information, I had no idea what I was getting into. I’d teach cats to make discriminations among different visual patterns, for which they were rewarded with food for making the correct choice. Each cat had his or her own way of learning, some slowly, some rapidly, and some not at all. I’d (secretly) name the individuals as they ran the maze, paying attention to their personalities and learning abilities. I remember Speedo looking at me when I lifted him from his small cage, anesthetized him, and then proceeded to remove part of the visual cortex of his brain. As he succumbed to the anesthesia, his eyes looked at me and asked, “What are you doing?” His gaze is forever burned into my heart.
For a very short time I was able to continue this research—train a cat on a particular task, remove part of the brain, and see how well they remembered the task after recovering from the surgery. But it was when I had to euthanize them (sacrifice—kill—with a minimum of pain, distress, and fear) to make sure that the damage I caused was localized in the correct area of the brain that it all came to a sudden halt. I did indeed regretfully euthanize four cats, Speedo being the last. When I went to get Speedo for the final exit from his cage, his fearlessness disappeared as if he knew that this was his last journey. His boldness and cockiness melted as I picked him up, and tears came to my eyes. He wouldn’t break his piercing stare, and it broke my heart to kill him. I wish I could have taken him home. To this day I remember his unwavering eyes—they told the whole story of the pain and indignity he had endured."

When I read this book, unfortunately my heart burned with hatred for myself and all of us...Because I can see that this Earth is not only for us, it's for them too, it's their home too...
 "As a result of our Western materialistic greed and arrogance, on the one hand, and poverty and desperation, on the other, we are not tending Planet Earth and her animal inhabitants as good stewards should. Instead we have despoiled the land like thoughtless conquerors. Humans have adapted to life in almost every kind of environment on Earth, from mountain heights to steamy jungles to open plains. Adaptations that would take millions of years to acquire through the process of physical evolution have been developed in just a few years through cultural evolution and technology. When the wildness of a place or the animals living there got in the way, they were mercilessly cut down, killed, banished, enslaved, tamed. And our human numbers grew and grew."

Favorite shorter quotes:
"Much of the destruction and pollution around the world is mindless, due to lack of education and understanding. “Only when we understand, can we care.” "
"Let us not forget that in most instances we have intruded on other animals—they are not the intruders. And many animals suffer each and every day because of the messes we make."
"We are not alone on this planet, although we frequently behave as if we were. Our big old slowly evolving brains that are confronted by new and rapidly evolving sociocultural milieus not only keep us somewhat in contact with nature but also remove us from nature, and this alienation results in our wanton abuse of the Earth. We are continually faced with making difficult and oftentimes agonizing choices that have short-term and long-term consequences."
"	By minding animals we mind ourselves. Personal transformations are needed and will serve us well. We owe it to future generations to transcend the present, to share dreams for a better world, to step lightly, to move cautiously with restraint. We destroy one another when we destroy the Earth. We all can be dreamers and doers. We owe it to ourselves and to other animals, to whom we can, unfortunately, do whatever we choose. We owe it to ourselves to keep in mind the power of love. As big-brained, omnipresent, powerful, and supposedly omniscient mammals, we are the most powerful beings on Earth. We really are that powerful, and with that might are inextricably tied innumerable staggering responsibilities to be ethical human beings. We can be no less."

Ok, I will end it here...there's much more to say, but there are no words to describe...you'll cry a lot...It's funny ... afterall, we will self-destruct but not through an atomic war, but through greed and materialism and ... who knows when times will get hard and climate will go crazy, who knows how evil humans will become and what terrible wars will start. Yeah, the future does not sound good. And I was hoping then everyone will be vegetarian and women have half the power. Yeah... there will be no more progress when nature will go mad. Who knows maybe there really will be an end of the world, at least Our World...maybe they are not just stories.