Rating: 4/5

A mammoth task described in a mammoth tome written by a mammoth ego. Part One is a personal account of Norman Mailer's time at Cape Kennedy during the launch of Apollo 11, written as it happened: history seen from the vantage point of press enclosures, pool parties and hotel rooms. Part Two goes back to the beginning again for an exhaustive, 272 page long, almost moment-by-moment summary of the mission itself: a mixture of reportage, engineering and philosophy. Then in Part Three, the author again becomes the centre of attention, ruminating on death and divorce.

Mailer's brief was to act not only as a journalist, but to conjure up some ideas on what the whole endeavour might mean. And so the book becomes a discussion of what he sees as "the chasm between technology and metaphysics, the psychology of machines and the dreams of men". In opposition to his undoubted awe in the presence of the great "braincase on top of a firecracker", he claims he cannot pass through a room containing a bank of computers without feeling that he has "just walked through an amphitheatre where some species of higher tapeworm was quietly ingesting the vitals of God." When data from an apparently malfunctioning Lem reaches mission control and is described by the engineers as 'beautiful', he bristles. "An engineer's idea of beauty was system perfection. Beauty was obviously the absence of magic."

The extent to which this is a piece of New Journalism (and an act of colossal immodesty) is immediately apparent when Mailer refers to himself in the third person, giving himself the name 'Aquarius'. The author is an overbearing, self-absorbed companion and someone with whom I would not like to share a drink. But his skills as a writer of prose are undeniable. His description of the landing itself is genuinely thrilling.

Yes, it's flawed. Yes, it's often frustrating. But it's ballsy enough to stand up to what might eventually prove to be one of the most significant events in human history.