Rating: 5/5

This could easily have been a 1-star DP for me because of how disjointed and abundant the non-romantic parts of it were. Since it's the first book of series, DP tries to introduce her next heroes all in the same book and some of them just have long tedious backgrounds. Also the plot was needlessly convoluted. In order to justify every character's presence in the book, we are forced to read pages about them and the romance is completely shelved during these portions. 

But DP saved the book with what I love best about her. We have an innocent heroine who meets our widowed hero in Paris and is immediately fascinated with him. I immediately loved Brianne because I recently watched a French movie about a young girl's coming of age and it was easily to picture the actress as Brianne because of how DP described her. Pierce is still mourning his wife with whom he enjoyed 10 blissful years of marriage. Her loss has consumed his willingness to live and if not for his chance encounters with Brianne, he might've committed suicide. 

Now why does the book get a 5 star when I hated significant parts of it? Because how corny the romance was. And I demand my DP novels to be as cornier as they can get. 
Because of how the adorable (and cheesy) way Brianne wishes to make her leap into womanhood and how much she wishes Pierce would just ravish her. Pierce constantly harps about their age-difference but couldn't help himself from becoming physically attracted by her "nubile body". Once forced into a MoC, Brianne lies about taking pills while they make love. All love scenes were great, though their timing and surrounding could've been much better. Because of Brianne's lies, she gets pregnant and her news of pregnancy forces Pierce to let go of his wife's memories and realize a future with his "young wife". I love when a baby forces the man to realize his love for his wife. 

Even though some reviewers claimed H was jerk and emotionally abusive, I found him much tamer than other DP heroes. (Though he was hairy as usual.) I love it when heroine toughens it out against dead wife's ghost to have her happily HEA. The book ends with them holding their baby boy and planning on having a daughter soon.