Rating: 4/5

Killer Clinic
Review of the Vintage Canada paperback edition (2011) of the Faber &amp; Faber hardcover original (1963)

  At the other end of the square, Superintendent* Adam Dalgliesh of the Criminal Investigation Department was attending the ritual autumn sherry party given by his publishers which had coincided with the third reprint of his first book of verse. He didn't overestimate his talent or the success of his book. The poems, which reflected his detached, ironic and fundamentally restless spirit, had happened to catch a public mood. He did not believe that more than half a dozen would live even in his own affections. Meanwhile he found himself awash on the shallows of an unfamiliar sea in which agents, royalties and reviews were agreeable hazards. And now there was this party.

I started a binge re-read of the early P.D. James Adam Dalgliesh novels when I recently discovered my 1980's Sphere Books paperbacks while clearing a storage locker. After finishing Cover Her Face (Adam Dalgliesh #1 - 1962) I realized that I did not have a copy of A Mind to Murder, the next entry in the series. Fortunately I was able to source a nice copy of the 2011 Vintage Canada paperback.

Cover Her Face held back quite a bit on introducing Adam Dalgliesh and did not even mention his being a poet. A Mind to Murder brings him on-site almost immediately, only part-way into Chapter One when he is called away from a party at his publishers to a nearby murder scene at the Steen Clinic, an exclusive psychiatric treatment centre. The Chief Administrator has been found murdered in a basement file room and there are multiple suspects, including the doctors, nurses, secretaries and custodians.

P.D. James adopts a trademark style of revealing quite a lot about the inner lives of the suspect characters through inner monologues &amp; scenes without the investigators, including the various possible murder motives that they might have. It seems fairly evident early on that one individual is the wrong 'un of the pack, but James manages to keep you guessing throughout, and then even pulls out a complete surprise at the very end, even to the point of fooling her lead detective. 

I'm quite enjoying getting reacquainted with P.D. James and Adam Dalgliesh and look forward to the next books in the series.

Cover of the Sphere Books paperback edition (1985). Image sourced from Library Thing.

Trivia and Links
* In Cover Her Face, Adam Dalgliesh was a Detective Chief Inspector. In Books 2 to 4 he is a Detective Superintendent and then in Books 5 to 14 he is a Detective Commander.

A Mind to Murder was adapted for television in 1995 as part of the long running Dalgliesh TV-series for Anglia Television/ITV (1983-1998) starring actor Roy Marsden as Chief Detective Inspector Adam Dalgliesh of Scotland Yard. You can watch the entire episode of the 1995 adaptation on YouTube here. NOTE: The adaptation differs considerably from the original novel.

The new Acorn TV-series reboot Dalgliesh (2021-?) starring Bertie Carver as Adam Dalgliesh has not yet done an adaptation of A Mind to Murder (Dalgliesh Book #2). It has not been announced which books are being adapted for Season 3 (as of early August 2023). Season 1 adapted Books 4, 5 &amp; 7. Season 2 adapted Books 6, 10 &amp; 12.