Rating: 4/5

The story of dynamic Mattie Ross, a spunky 14 -year -old girl, from Yell County Arkansas, who seeks justice , when her beloved father is treacherously murdered, on the streets by the reprehensible outlaw Tom Chaney in Fort Smith, in the Razorback State. Set in the late 1870's , the kid soon understands this, nobody wants to risk their precious life for free, to capture the dangerous fugitive . Informed that the one-eyed, patch wearing Rooster Cogburn, is the toughest marshal in town , working for the famous or is it infamous hanging Judge Isaac Parker, a historical figure. He shoots first and asks questions later, as over a dozen deceased outlaws have found out too late, Cogburn will track down the criminal for a generous fee, in the lawless, nearby Oklahoma Territory were Chaney has gone , but is known to take a drink or two...maybe a little more. Mattie has to sells some of her dad's belongings, her family needs the money at home, negotiating with Colonel Stonehill, to sell back her father's unneeded horses to him . Discussions deteriorate rapidly, the back and forth nature of them get hot under the collar, the unyielding girl constantly threatening the Colonel by evoking the name J. Noble Daggett , her never seen unknown lawyer, does he actually exist ? Stonehill cannot believe his ears, just to rid himself of the relentless onslaught, the pest, he gives her generous terms... hoping that it is the last time the Colonel is in her presence...the best scene in the novel. Going to the home of Rooster to pay the marshal, Mattie finds him living in the back of a dilapidated store and drunk ...So he drinks some , (everyone does ) like a fish. His only friends are General Sterling Price , his very independent cat as they are all and the card playing Chinese owner who likes to gamble. Later, LaBoeuf an unimpressive Texas Ranger, (a lawman not a baseball player) wants to join them in apprehending Chaney, reluctantly they agree. After a long, hard chase through the rough countryside , meeting many unwanted obstacles, Cogburn and friends find Tom, who has become a member of the notorious Ned Pepper gang, a group of nefarious killers, a very rip roaring finish to this fine book. The authentic sounding and speaking characters for that period, makes this western believable and they become real people...A must read for anyone interested in the Old West...or just great entertainment...