Rating: 5/5

It's been a long time since I've enjoyed a book so much. Stephen King's Danse Macabre is a non fiction book about the horror genre between 1950 to 1980. In it he encompasses horror at its foundations in story form before going on to speak about films, radio and books. It is beautiful written in the most engaging ways that leads you as the reader to feel like the author is having a conversation with you. The writing itself is insightful, often hilarious and thought provoking. It is perfect for readers who are looking to learn more about the genre and for authors looking to gain a few tips. I have rated this piece five stars because as a Stephen King fan it appeals heavily to me. His writing style here is much closer to that of his earlier books, including his ability to go off on tangents, to readers who are not the biggest King fans I could see this experience being jarring or even frustrating. If you are a fan though or looking for advice on writing in the genre and wishing for more after reading his other fantastic non fiction book, On Writing, this is for you. The book is peppered with in depth advice into the best approaches to writing in the genre while providing insight into some of King's own work. Like I said the book is like having a conversation with King, were the reader stops reading to have their side of the conversation. With this I found I did not always agree with King's theories, one such being that after Dracula the vampire sub genre had exhausted the theme of sex in its telling. King mentions he chose in his own vampire novel to not include such a theme. However, I disagree and with being in 2019 when you consider books like Twilight and Stackhouse, which play into the theme of desire in the sub genre heavily. My finally point is the book comes with a list of films and books that any fan of the genre would love to spend his time working through. I plan on doing just that. I think it will be interesting to see if I agree with the King of Horror with the books that he believes are the best in the field. 

Wish there was more. Oh wait he has another sixty books.