Rating: 4/5

I discovered this book while sorting through the library that my congregation inherited when we moved into our new-to-us building. Among a number of "out-of-date," evangelical books on marriage of dubious quality that we discarded (a church library need have only the best), I saved this one for personal perusal because a friend had given me a copy of the Wheat's Intended for Pleasure. Garrett and I started reading that book on our honeymoon and have found it helpful. So, why not read another book by the same author(s)?

Author and Synopsis
Ed Wheat, doctor, sex therapist (didn't use to know that was a thing), and counselor, offers this book as "a counseling manual" (18) filled with "solid biblical principles that will always work when applied properly to individual problems" (16). Although this book is authored by Ed Wheat, he refers often to his wife Gaye as a partner in his message; the dedication is offered to readers from them both.0

Ed Wheat writes to married men and women in any stage of marriage; his audience is qualified only by this: he's speaking to believers. 

In Love Life, Wheat begins with a discussion of marriage based in the early chapters of Genesis, as "these chapters form . . . the foundation of everything else in the Bible" (21). As a part of this foundation, he also addresses the fall, problems in marriage, and divorce; the big point: the fall, sin, etc. have not caused God to revise his definition, standards, or plan for marriage. The meat of the book is concerned with advice about love in marriage, broken down into five parts based on different New Testament words for love (epithumia, eros, storge, phileo, agape). Based on these words, he discusses sex, romance, "belonging" (that sense of home, comfort, and security), friendship, and sacrifice. Next, Wheat discusses intimacy and its importance; lessons from the Song of Solomon; miscellaneous but important additions (that's my way to summarize it); overcoming negativity; and advice for a spouse who is on his/her own in wanting to save the marriage (with lessons drawn from Hosea). He concludes with encouragement drawn from God's promises and our newness in Christ.

Negatives
Before the positives, I’ll discuss three negatives. 

First, as can be expected from books written to (evangelical) Christians generally, there’s a level of gospel-assumptiveness. It is important to note that a book cannot do what a pastor or a discipler should do: help a couple apply Scripture’s truth to their lives by faith and repentance. Additionally, I give Wheat credit for clearly stating his audience, as well as speaking often about the confidence that we can have in the promises God has made to his children in his Word. The last chapter has some good material about the hope that believers have thanks to the work of Christ; even so, this is written with the typical “you must believe these truths” approach. In several places, Wheat reiterates the importance of the church and prayer/Bible reading as a couple (the means of grace). It’s not surprising, but it’s still a problem, that these ideas are “tucked into” the chapters, surrounded by other sound advice, instead of being given their own chapter. Wheat has great confidence in the truth of God’s Word; he won’t give into unbiblical definitions of marriage and he won’t accept the easy copout of divorce. He’s right that Scripture speaks to all of life, and God’s Word offers wonderful counsel for married couples. Still, there’s a danger in jumping to application too quickly; the Bible says a lot about love, and this has applications for marriage, but that application needs to be better situated in the person and work of Christ. Otherwise, we run the risk of a kind of social gospel: if I do what the Bible says, I’ll have a great marriage! 

Second, I’m leery of any application-focused study that breaks concepts down by a word study. Different words are used in the Bible for the idea of “love,” yes; they denote different ideas (nuances), yes; but that doesn’t mean we can construct a paradigm from them. Scripture uses words in their original-language/cultural contexts (so yes, we can ask: what does epithumia vs. eros mean?), but the most important context is Scripture itself! In other words, instead of just doing a word study, we need to look at the passages that use these words in their context (nearest to farthest). Accordingly, I’d want to see more of Wheat’s sources, study these words in their passages in context, and check out some trusted commentaries/theologians before accenting to his claim that the Bible speaks about love in these five ways and, therefore, we ought to consider love in marriage from these five biblical perspectives. 

Third, Wheat includes a paraphrase of the Song of Solomon and a retelling of the story of Hosea and Gomer. Wheat includes his source for both (he’s not coming up with this on his own). He provides some discussion of how the Song of Solomon relates to Christ (and this is a definite positive). However, there’s so much interpretation in that Song of Solomon paraphrase; not just interpretation of phrases, but interpretation of the story overall (understanding and organizing scenes, the flow of the narrative). I’m not comfortable with the level of interpretation (lacking explanation). And there’s so much being said about this as a story that helps married people that the emphasis is no longer on Christ at all. The story of Hosea and Gomer is presented pretty much entirely as a story that exemplifies “the ultimate pattern for a love without limits which eventually reunites husband and wife in spite of great obstacles” (228). He encourages an abandoned spouse to read this so that he or she might be encouraged to keep trusting God and seek the restoration of his or her marriage. In other words, there’s pretty much nothing said about a Christological interpretation of the story. A reader could possibly make a connection to Christ on their own given the fact that Wheat elsewhere discusses how God designed marriage to point to Christ and the church. But…that’s not enough. 

Positives
Next, the positives. My paragraphs are much shorter here than above. Don’t take that to mean that I feel the negatives more strongly than the positives. It’s just the negatives take a lot more explaining! 

First, Wheat exemplifies his love for God, his love for Scripture, and his love for his fellow believers in this book. It’s a pleasure to read a book like this because, even with my reservations stated above, I feel confident that the author cares about all the things that I care about. I’m thankful. Given these things, it is no surprise that he writes with an encouraging, even hopeful tone. The encouragement and hope are based in his confidence in God and God’s Word. 

Second, Wheat relies on Scripture for his understanding of marriage. By this, I mean his defense of marriage, his stance on divorce, is strong. He’s not strong at the expense of that necessary encouragement for someone who is struggling in their marriage. 

Third and finally, there’s so much good material in this book. Helpful insights, practical wisdom, good explanations. Some of the lists and self-diagnosis questions are really great. I especially liked: advice to wives for communication (page 110); self-diagnosis questions related to unconditional love (page 123); and twenty-five non-sexual touching suggestions (pages 184-187). Even though I’m not crazy about the word study, his discussion of love under five categories yielded a lot of great insights; those five chapters are some of my favorite chapters. His overall picture of marriage is compelling to me personally. 

Conclusion
Overall, I’m thankful for Love Life for Every Married Couple. The book made me think; it made me pray in thanks and repentance; in a few places, it made me cry (in response to some of Wheat’s stories). I found many encouraging things here. I found several convicting things too! After finishing this book, I shared a lot of things with Garrett (little did I know that he’d already skimmed the book and read several sections!). We had some wonderful conversations. I look forward to reading another Wheat book in the future, as well as revisiting this and the other Wheat book I’ve already read. 

Note. Here's the bibliographic information for my copy of the book (for my page numbers): Wheat, Ed. Love Life for Every Married Couple: How to Fall in Love, Stay in Love, Rekindle Your Love. Grand Rapids, MO: Zondervan, 1980. I have not read this updated version.