Rating: 5/5

"Weiser wasn't just anyone - the other boys were sure of that. Yet during the hot Polish summer of 1957 extraordinary conditions prevailed. The fish died, and stewed fetidly in the bay; there was a drought, and a comet: Father Dudak and the old people said these were signs of heavenly retribution.

"But Weiser was the greatest puzzle. There was no end to his puzzling talents - and no explanation for them. Even animals seemed to obey the scrawny boy. Then came the explosion and the revelation of his arsenal at the disused brickworks. With qualities like these, David Weiser was quickly promoted from Jewish outcast to local hero.

"In a tantalising and searching confession, one boy who was held in Weiser's thrall that summer tries to look back and recreate the mystery. Who was David Weiser? What did his eccentric powers portend?" From the jacket of the 1991 Bloomsbury hardback edition of the novel. I have included it not because it is a good summary of the novel, but because it is better than the minimal ones on GR. At least it hints at the novel's complex, rich, many different meanings.

Because this marvellous novel is open to many readings, but no sure or simple ones. Although this is Huelle's first novel it contains themes that would recur again and again in his work most particularly Gdansk; which inevitably, for this reader, brings to mind 'Cat And Mouse' by Gunter Grass. Huelle's novel takes place in Gdansk post WWII and is about, in part, a boy, David Weiser, who nobody understands and who disappears. Grass's novel takes place in WWII and at its heart is a boy, Joachim Mahlke who also disappears. Huelle's novels is also about absence and what is absent in post WWII Gdansk? The Germans, and the Jews of course. David Weiser, and the man who looks after him who may or may not be his grandfather, is Jewish and obsessed with the fast disappearing ruins of German Gdansk.

That the novel is set in Gdansk in 1957, the year and place of the author's birth is not accidental. The novel is an exceptionally fine portrayal of life in communist Poland. Huelle is not writing about dissidents or intellectuals but of very ordinary people, many of whom of course had no roots in Gdansk. They would have come there as exiles from parts of Poland, that were no longer Polish (please see my footnote *1 below). The novel jumps forward in time as far as the Solidarnosc years in the 1970s but it is not in anyway anti-communist. The Catholic Church is shown to be as powerful, if not more powerful, than the party in controlling and forming the children. The Catholic Church is omnipresent as an alternate power, not as a force for good. By the time the novel was published in 1989 the time when simple dichotomies of good and bad as represented by the catholic church or communist party had long vanished.

It is this lack of easy answers that makes this novel so absorbing. It concentrates on one boy that knew and was involved, with two other friends, with David Weiser as, not friends, almost more like acolytes, who keeps trying to understand who David Weiser was, what he did and what became of him. But his attempts to understand is frustrated as the memories of his friends and others fragment and even those who were adults at the time, like their teacher Mr M-ski, change and become different. But then trying to understand as an adult, what he didn't understand as a child, is complicated by past ignorance and current knowledge. The novel concludes with both resolution and no resolution:

"...everything that came within your view, and everything that lay within your touch, has long ago crumbled to dust..."

This is a fine absorbing novel by an author I will read more by. It is rich in suggestions, but simple in its telling. I apologise if anything I have written might discourage you from reading this novel, that was not my intention. This is definitely a novel you should read.

*1 You don't need to know any of this history to read or enjoy this novel but to not even realise the complexities is to leave yourself at a disadvantage where the history of this region is concerned and, as an example, I recommend reading about The Cemetery of the defenders of Lwow at:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cemeter...

or you could ponder that Lwow (Polish) is now Lviv (Ukrainian) and was also at one time referred to as Lvov (Russian) and Lemberg (German).