Rating: 2/5

I found this book astonishing and not in a good way. I understand the ms was found among Josephine Tey's papers after she died - in 1952, I believe. I think her publishers should have left it there. It's a bitter little book, threaded through with the most appalling prejudice against Scots and all things Scottish. This is all the more unpleasant when Josephine Tey was herself Scottish. So was her fictional detective.

Over the last few days since I finished The Singing Sands I've really swithered about writing this review. As a writer myself, I never publicly review a book I really didn't like or thought was poorly written. It seems like professional discourtesy.

My other reservation is that The Daughter of Time by Josephine Tey, featuring the same Inspector Alan Grant as The Singing Sands, is one of my favourite books. I expected to love The Singing Sands but it's left a really unpleasant taste in my mouth. 

There's some great writing in here. Tey was one of the doyennes of the Golden Age of crime fiction, after all. There's an intriguing premise, a mysterious poem, some fantastic descriptions of landscape and unflinching descriptions of Alan Grant's experiences while going through a nervous breakdown. However, none of it really knits together and makes a coherent whole.

It's hard to forgive the snobbery. The aristocracy and gentry are all humorous, intelligent and self-effacing. The lower orders, both north and south of the border, are stupid, criminal or comical. 

There are side-swipes at Scotland and Scots threaded throughout the book. Nobody in Scotland can cook or bake anything palatable. Gaelic songs are poor efforts, sung by people with expressionless voices. Anyone who advocates Scottish independence is to be mocked or possibly reported to Special Branch. 

Even Scotland's buses are painted "that most miserable of colours: blue." London buses, by contrast, are a cheerful red because "...the English, God bless them, had had gayer ideas." At which risible point - even Scotland's buses are rubbish - I snorted audibly in derision. 

The killer comment comes towards the end of the story. Grant's posh cousins are amused by their son speaking "clotted Perthshire". They do actually live there, so that doesn't seem too odd. However, Grant hopes they won't wait too long before they send the young boy away "...to his English school. The quality of Scotchness was a highly concentrated essence, and should always be diluted. As an ingredient it was admirable; neat, it was as abominable as ammonia."

If that had been written about any other nationality?

I find it very sad that such a talented writer should clearly have felt the need to do down her own people. In Scotland, we call this chip on the shoulder lack of self-esteem the Scottish Cringe. I'm glad to say it's rapidly fading into the past. I'm sorry that Josephine Tey isn't around to see the much more confident Scotland that exists now.