Rating: 5/5

I read James Baldwin's Another Country because I thought it would give me the opportunity to revisit the New York City I had visited in the summer of 1966. I thought it would give me a chance to once again experience the New York City I revisited in both Patti Smith's Just Kids and Dave Van Ronk's The Mayor of MacDougal Street. No such luck. Another Country presented me with an entirely different city. It was as if Baldwin's New York City was from a different universe. 

From 1948 through June of 1966, I lived in the Parkwood area of Kalamazoo, Michigan. First on Rose Street in the valley between two hills. Then, on the top of Westnedge Hill, not far from the majestic Crane Park. Shortly after graduating from high school, I spent a week at Emory College before moving on to New York City. NYC made a huge impression on me, but NYC paid me no never mind. 

I read two books while I was living in New York City. The first was a novel by Saul Bellow. I'm pretty certain it was Herzog. The second book was written by James Baldwin. I'm thinking it must have been The Fire Next Time. Those two books made this Midwestern boy feel forward thinking and progressive as I laid reading in my tiny Village room. I laid on the bed to read because I didn't have a chair. 

Towards the end of July, my time in NYC came to an end, and I took a train back to Kalamazoo. While I was away, my parents built my mother's dream house on Indian Lake near Vicksburg, Michigan. Living in Mom's new house was like being transported to a different world. I felt like a Stanger in a Strange Land, while I waited for college to begin in the fall. 

At times, I felt lost and alone until my future wife came for a visit. She brought me a cherry pie. She was a little disappointed when the pie wasn't as perfect as something her grandmother would bake. It was more like something her mother would bake. Naturally, we didn't yet know that our daughter would end up being the best cook of the bunch. 

During July and August, I worked at a local bank as a coin wrapper so I could help pay some of the bills that would come due when I was at college. I mention this because in Another Country, James Baldwin frequently mentions the need to pay up when a bill becomes due. Although he was talking about the personal lives and transgressions of his characters, it didn't take a lot of imagination to conclude Baldwin was really talking about slavery, and the need for people in the USA to honestly face and discuss the legacy of slavery. 

Another Country was published in May of 1962. In May of 1962, JFK was still alive, the world economy was healthy, and the Civil Rights Movement was front and center in the news. In 1962 The Sixties hadn't yet happened, but they were on the verge of being born. In 1962, the Jim Crow South was still alive, and The New South was still a myth. Personally, I was in the 8th grade, and I was still 13, but I was on the verge of becoming 14. There is no way I could have imagined John Kennedy's assassination or The Beatles. I certainly couldn't have imagined Lyndon Johnson's Great Society, let alone his willingness to throw it all away. 

The theme in Baldwin's book is straightforward but never explicitly stated. It is time for the citizens of America, the U, S of A, to have a frank and honest discussion about our history. It's a history we share the second we come ashore or cross the line. It's a history whose dues are long overdue, and we must pay our dues. After we have faced our history head-on, we can decide how to best move forward. Move forward together, when and where we can. Move forward separately where that's the only remaining option. Move forward to create another country; a better country. 

James Baldwin's Another Country is character driven. It's about friends with benefits that are rarely beneficial. There are a good many sex scenes. Scenes where the action is both explicitly described and alluded to in a suggestive nondescript way. For example, we read how one person's hand goes between another person's thighs or between their own thighs. The male sex organ is referred to as his "sex" and female sex organs aren't mentioned at all. They're implied, as in his sex was in her. So, if you hate sex scenes, you're out of luck. If you love sex scenes, you're also out of luck. Sex is assumed to be a natural component of both a normal healthy relationship and an unhealthy relationship with a predator. I mention this sex business only because I accept the notion that one is forearmed when one is forewarned. So expect male and male sex. Male and female sex. But curiously, there is no female and female sex. 

Major characters include Rufus Scott and his sister Ida. There's Richard Silenski and his wife Cass. Then there's Vivaldo. There's also Eric and Yves. By the end of the novel, you're wondering if Cass can, or Richard will, work things out for the sake of the children. You'll be hoping Vivaldo and Ida can work things out.  You will also be hopeful for Eric and Yves, but you will wonder if their relationship will survive if Eric is as honest with Yves as Cass was with Richard.