Rating: 4/5

Based on a true story of a violent conflict between the railroad and California wheat ranchers in the San Joaquin valley, The Octopus is a big, baggy amalgam of naturalism, regionalism, sentimental novel, political novel and historical dramatization. Just because you may have heard of it being associated with "naturalism," don't be fooled. This turn-of-the-20th-century book has more in common with Dickens or Stowe than, for instance, Richard Wright or even Stephen Crane. It's really striking how some passages of this book feel so modern they could've been written in the 1950s, while others feel so old-fashioned they could've been written in the 1850s. 

Although dated in significant ways (e.g., straight-up racism; religious sentimentality), it's still a fascinating document of its time and intriguing artistic effort. OK, I do have to comment on one style tic that is unintentionally hilarious: Norris is kind of addicted to repeating certain descriptive stock phrases when characters or situations reappear in his narrative. A charitable interpretation is that he thinks these word-for-word repetitions are leitmotifs or Homeric epithets something, but they, in fact, are just plain corny and good occasions to skip a page. 

The Octopus' length and baggy, episodic structure would have been, for its time, a feature and not a bug. It's a reminder that novels of this time were more analogous to seasons-long TV serials, rather than tightly paced feature films. I recall HL Mencken half-jokingly commenting that the prodigious length of Dreiser novels (from roughly this same period) were selling points -- more book for your bang to pass a long winter. 

In short, I'm giving this four stars because there are genuinely interesting and well-done parts mixed in with the not-so-well-done parts, and because it's a pretty significant (though fictionalized) California historical account. To enjoy it, it helps to be a little detached and intellectualizing, to think of it as an artifact somewhat, rather than expecting oneself to be Frank Norris' target reader.