Rating: 2/5

I’ve been meaning to read A Series Of Unfortunate Events for ages, so when I was browsing through the children’s section at the library, I had to pick this up!

I didn’t like it as much as I thought, and if I stopped after reading the first book, I would have been fine. For those not familiar with the series, it’s about the unfortunate lives of the Baudelaire orphans. In the first book (The Bad Beginning), we learn that their parents died, so the 3 children go to live with Count Olaf. He’s after their fortune, which they can’t touch until the oldest is an adult. He tries to marry Violet, but his attempt fails, so they go off to live with a different relative in The Reptile Room. Once again, Count Olaf tries to get a hold of their fortunate by murdering their Uncle Monty. And naturally, this attempt fails, so in The Wide Window, they get sent to live with their Aunt Josephine, who dies in the lake. 

I got through the 1st one really fast but somewhere in the second one, it really started to get boring. I get the whole point of the series is that all of these really bad things happen to the kids, but I started to get really annoyed with it. The adults in the series with the exception of one or two, were either evil or completely useless. The whole Sunny said X, which probably means Y bit got really tired, and while the definition of different words in the books are really great for the kids, I found it somewhat distracting. 

There is a certain quirkiness to the adults, though, and there is something sort of steampunk about Violet inventing things, and looking at the different gears and stuff.

I think I would have liked it a lot better if I didn’t read the 3 books back-to-back. If I do decide to continue on with the series (it’s not going to be anytime soon), then I’ll definitely take some time in between each one. 

Rating: 2 out of 5. I felt like I got a pretty good handle on the series just from reading the first book, and the following two were just a repetition of The Bad Beginning, with a few character changes, and a different disguise for Count Olaf.