Rating: 4/5

The hallmark of this book on leadership is the depth and breadth of quotations on the diverse issues of leadership drawn from a wide range of individuals in history, education, philosophy, virtually every situation where leadership takes place. The insights of these individuals are presented, often in their own words, as the author challenges the leader to consider the ever-present vagaries of organizational development. He begins by dealing with the importance of context, commenting on the critical need to look beyond a short-term focus to address the new challenges presented to leadership. Bennis suggests that there are far too many bosses, and few real leaders, resulting in many of the problems addressing organizations at present. In describing leader’s failure to develop the ability to master their context, the author cites the words of Mathilde Krim, a scientific leader in the fight on AIDS, who states that such leaders can “become prisoners of habits, practices, and rules that make them ultimately ineffectual” (page 31). 
	Effective leaders demonstrate a mastery of what Bennis calls “the basics” – a guiding vision, passion, and integrity (33-34). These leadership resources are the foundation for the development of trust with followers, as the leader demonstrates self-awareness, maturity, and candor. The author takes the time to demonstrate the clear distinctions between managers who he suggests are surrendering to the context and leaders who master it. Some leaders are primarily the product of their circumstances (such as Presidents Johnson and Nixon) while others practice self-invention (Presidents Roosevelt and Truman), a necessary trait for authenticity (46-47). The insights that create this perspective are driven by a conscious desire for self-knowledge, a practice that should be a lifelong journey. Insights from a wide range of individuals on this process include author Boris Pasternak, psychologist William James, and psychoanalyst Erik Erickson. This self-knowledge prepares the leader for focus on understanding the world through “innovative learning,” learning that engages the individual in creative problem-solving in contrast to “maintenance learning” and “shock learning,” both of which fail to move beyond present circumstances (60-71). Such leaders are constantly expanding their perspective in a wide range of activities, including education, travel, and mentoring relationships. Developing a tolerance for ambiguity, these individuals are able to move beyond merely focusing on the facts to engage instinct as well. 
	According to Bennis, these leaders are continually open to alternatives, not only managing chaos effectively but even encouraging a certain level of disagreement in engaging followers in their visions. They are aware of the assets and liabilities that are present in organizations, seeking to take full advantage of the opportunities without becoming victims of the constraints of such structures. The author drives home thoughts on the futurist leader by providing ten key factors to assist in “coping with change, forging a new future, and creating learning organizations” (188). 
	This exceptionally practical book provides excellent insights on the leadership phenomenon, closing with brief biographical abstracts on the key individuals cited throughout the work. The experience of reading “On Becoming A Leader” is as if the reader was sitting down with these individuals to benefit from their experiences, failures and successes.