Rating: 4/5

Mind Over Back Pain by John Sarno was originally published in 1982 but some of it feels like it was written in the 1950s with its case studies of housewives and male breadwinners. Sarno also published Healing Back Pain: The Mind-Body Connection, in 1991, which perhaps I should have read instead, although I'm not sure a 30-year-old book is that much more current than a 40yo book. 

Either way, Sarno's work came highly recommended by two friends who had suffered chronic back pain, one stemming back to her teenage years. Both said they had read the book and their back pain had simply gone away. It seems a bit magical thinking to me, but during my most recent episode of back pain, I picked it up, and read it in an afternoon (it's just over 100 pages). 

The gist of MOBP is that structural abnormalities (in your spine) are not what is causing you back pain, but TMS (Tension Myoneural Syndrome). Basically stress. Now I wholly believe that stress is a major factor in both causing and exacerbating many illnesses and injuries (and holding back healing). But as Sarno predicted, it is hard for me to undo a lifetime of linking my current back pain back to an injury back in the day. This is despite the fact that my back pain, when it does come, manifests at odd times (unrelated to anything I can pinpoint), and in different parts of my back. Sarno asks, shouldn't there be a specific physical trigger? Shouldn't it hurt in the same place, or the same way? 

It's true that the yogic philosophy of your body being a series of connected parts provides a possible answer to that - perhaps your right knee injury caused compensation in the left knee which is why your left hip now hurts. Right? But yogis also tout the healing power of your mind and body, which is the entire gist of Sarno's book: your spine is not a delicate flower (even though we all relentlessly age). Your body has powerful self-healing mechanisms. And if you'd only believe in it, it could get going with the healing. 

There's no trick as such, other than unlearning what you believe about the physical causes of your back pain, and reminding yourself about the role of stress. There is a section of the book that talks about reduced blood circulation as a major source of back pain: lack of blood and oxygen to muscles (causing cramps and seizing), to nerves (causing pain signals), and the build up of chemical waste (causing dull aches). Any physical therapy or exercise that increases circulation will help, but according to Sarno, the most important part of the process is internalizing the diagnosis of TMS which might take days or weeks. 

If this seems too woo-woo, I'll tell you what made me keep reading (and believing). If you look at the statistics of back pain across different age ranges, the vast majority of sufferers (60%) are between 30-60 years of age. 15% are under 30, 25% are over 60. I'm assuming these stats from the 1980s are still in the ballpark, and certainly fit with anecdotal experiences from my life. So - if degeneration and damage of spinal vertebrae, disks, cartilage, tendons, ligaments, nerves, and so on are what causes back pain, and these are inevitable with age (and not just injury), then EVERYONE over the age of 60 should have back pain, AND increasingly so. But that's just not the case! So there's something else causing back pain in midlife. If we are to believe Sarno, that thing is (mid)life. Ages 30-60 are pretty intense if you think about it - not only do you have more self and world awareness, you're also starting and growing and ending a million things. 

The other compelling argument he offered was how mental issues are such a stigma that it's more acceptable to have a physical ailment than a psychological one. This is sadly quite true even now, 40 years later. Sarno argues that this process of translating a psychic pain to a physical one happens more often for certain personality types (the type As, or the particular ones, or the anxious, for example), although it affects everyone to varying degrees.

The part I've been mulling over is how Sarno says you don't have to actually fix the cause of the tension. You just have to recognize that that's what's at play. So say you have a terrible fight and your back gives out. You don't have to address the fight (let alone fix it) to fix your back. Dr. Sarno says just fully acknowledging the psychological burden of that trauma is enough to heal your back. In a way, he's saying to put the pain back where it started: in your psyche. So your psyche might still be tormented, but no longer your back. This rings true to me. The great Buddhist philosopher Thich Naht Hahn says acknowledging someone's suffering is the greatest gift you can give that person. And I know when I feel seen, I feel better, even if whatever is hurting me is still in effect. In this context, of back pain, you are listening to yourself, acknowledging your own pain, healing yourself, or at least your back. 

 The last thing MOBP reminded me of is how little the remedies we have now for back pain work. Surgeries are incredibly risky and don't always work. Sarnos doesn't dispute the healing powers of massages, acupuncture, physical therapy, exercise, meditation, or medication - but he says these are temporary strategies for back pain. The pain always returns, and if you are a chronic sufferer, you know this all too well. So if that's the case, then why not believe in TMS? You have nothing to lose but your pain.