Rating: 2/5

Debuting in 1978, The Fox Busters was Dick King-Smith's first novel, and its theme of the bullied fighting back would remain a mainstay of the author's work for the rest of his career. On Foxearth Farm, foxes have always preyed on chickens, but recently the pecking order is changing. Because the chickens caught first were always the foolish ones, natural selection has steered the farm's chicken population to be smarter, faster, and have better eyesight to detect foxes lurking in the shadows. The chickens have also developed the true ability to fly, which makes escaping from predators a cinch. They're killed by foxes much less often than once was the case, and Farmer Farmer (yes, that's the farmer's name!) is glad. On occasion a lucky fox nabs a complacent hen, but even that might end with the birth of three extraordinary pullets.

 Like all chickens of Foxearth Farm, Ransome, Sims, and Jefferies are named from scraps of human writing found around the barn. The only female offspring of Spillers, a highly intelligent hen, and Massey-Harris, a brash, brave rooster, Ransome, Sims, and Jefferies prove themselves special shortly after birth. Their wing feathers seem designed to fly, and they do so better than any other chicken. They're unusually smart, and with them helping protect against predators, Foxearth Farm is safer than ever. But Ransome, Sims, and Jefferies have counterparts among the foxes: four bright young cubs who have never eaten chicken and are desperate for a taste. The four hatch a plan and slaughter a great number of chickens, but Ransome, Sims, and Jefferies won't be caught off guard like that a second time. A deadly game is on between these four foxes and three chickens.

 Foxes are predators and chickens their victims; that's how it's always been. But what if chickens refused to accept that? What if three talented young hens could turn their bodies into weapons against the foxes? Spillers hits upon a brilliant idea for her children to reverse polarity and be the aggressor against the foxes. If any bird can pull it off, Ransome, Sims, and Jefferies are the ones. The stage is set for a battle royale between the best of the foxes and the best of the chickens. Will nature resume the course it has taken since time immemorial, or will the fowl of Foxearth Farm revolutionize the barnyard's social order? We're about to find out.

 Whether you favor Ransome, Sims, and Jefferies or the four hungry young foxes, the reason they become leaders of their respective groups is their innovative thinking. Not satisfied with the status quo if it isn't working, they teach themselves new skills to gain every advantage against their adversaries, and are successful to at least some degree. That's the way natural leaders view the world. The Fox Busters is clever and fun; not as deep as some of Dick King-Smith's later novels, but engaging nonetheless. You'll have a good time losing yourself in the story.