Rating: 3/5

1980s Japan, language, sex, noodles, foreigners in an unforeign land, friendship, betrayal, love, and of course, an independent woman equates to a very intrigued me. 

 The Earthquake Bird  is a short book and a very very quick read. The plot is curious and suspenseful, set in a backdrop of Tokyo with its neon lights, of a friend and a murder and perhaps a love triangle? I liked it. 

The thing is though, it wasn't really the story that made the book JUST alright, it was the way the story was told. Everything was written in a very direct way that came to an unsplendid reading experience. It was extremely dull, super plain, super boring, lots of telling and not showing, and I felt like I was reading an amateur blog. BUT the more I think about it, the more unsure I feel about the whole WRITING of the book. The way the story was told was either the author's own writing style OR the main character's telling of the story from her perspective (which I guess is kind of genius by Susanna Jones). Because of this discombobulated feeling, I can't bring myself to give this book a higher rating. I'm all about the flowery writing and metaphoric prose, but The Earthquake Bird  lacked all of that. And I can't decide whether it was a technique to understand Lucy's brain or the author's lazyish writing.

Speaking of our main protagonist, I really like Lucy Fly. I'm surprised by how much I like her character because I did not expect to like her AT ALL. Lucy is what makes this story  alive. She has a lot of qualities that I really admire in a woman. She's very independent, very strong, she's made a lot of questionable/unconventional perhaps BAD choices, but she always strives her best and that doesn't make her a bad person. And of course, she's weird as fuck, but that's also what makes her very endearing. I love Lucy's passion for new languages and new worlds, and the way she takes everything so into her heart, but portrays herself as maybe a little bit more cold hearted? Somehow, I super empathized with her and I did not expect to do that.

 I still have no idea what the motive was behind all of Teiji's killings? And why those girls? Also, when Lucy found out about the cheating, my heart really did break for her. I can't imagine loving someone so hard, being someone's friend so hard, and having both of them fucking stab you in the heart. FUCCK THEM. 

This book has been adapted to a Netflix movie starring Alicia Vikander (I love her) so let's see how the film goes. I think it can translate very well to a movie.