Rating: 5/5

I have always held Helen Keller in high regard. How can you not, really? She is a remarkable woman. I did a report on her in grade school, and though I forgot many facts of her life over the years, what I learned of her perseverance and strength of spirit left a lasting impression on me.

Helen Keller's spirit certainly shines in this short but beautifully written memoir, which Helen wrote when she was just 22 (and, worth noting, attending Radcliffe College).

I think most know that Helen lost her sight and hearing at a very young age (she was not yet 2) after suffering a mysterious illness her doctors did not think she would survive. It was not until several years later (almost 7) that her beloved teacher, Miss Sullivan, would arrive and introduce her to the world of language, and thus the world at large.

I found it fascinating to learn of Helen's memories of those many years after she first became blind and deaf, and before she learned language. How does one makes sense of a world she cannot see or hear before she even has words to conceptualize it? It was amazing to me that she was able to understand so much about her surroundings at such a young age, and essentially only through touch, smell and vibration. 

I was also fascinated to learn how Miss Sullivan was able to so patiently and thoroughly introduce Helen to all the many complexities of language (and even abstract thoughts such as love) to a child who, up to that point, had no real idea such things existed. Even more remarkable is that Helen not only fully mastered English, but French, German and Latin as well.

Helen's love of language is clearly displayed in her rich, descriptive writing. One reviewer called it "too flowery," but I thought her words to be often poetic.

Perhaps what I found most remarkable was Helen's incredible sense of awe and wonder for the world -- at times her joy for life seemed to exude from the pages. Though she admits moments of extreme isolation and sadness, she writes, "Is it not true then, that my life, with all its limitations, touches at many points the light of the world beautiful? Everything has its wonders, even darkness and silence, and I learn, whatever state I may be in, therein to be content." 

And later, "I try to make the light in others’ eyes my sun, the music in others’ ears my symphony, the smile on others’ lips my happiness."

This is ultimately a story of her life (as it is appropriately titled), so those looking purely for a book on what it is like to be deaf and blind may be disappointed. But after all, that is truly Helen's legacy -- that she led such a rich life despite being blind and deaf.