Rating: 5/5

Well crafted, structured and layered book. Only 180 pages, but it had an intensity mostly the result of the indoor scenes that set the stage from the beginning and the way the elderly Moran dominated family life as he oppressed the air inside both the rooms and my consciousness at times. 

This is a generational story, a transitional moment in modern times. We start in the 1950s, with Moran – a widowed civil war leader and operative and McQuaid his underling who visits every Monaghan Market day to sit, reminisce, drink whiskey while the teenage daughters move around making sure the day is a good one for him. Moran’s rigid catholic, rural, parsimonious world view gets aired early and regularly throughout. He refuses to take the IRA pension McQuaid reminds him he deserves. Some staunch gruff reasoning is provided. 

But this book is about transitions, and for things to change there must be something there already, speaking of Moran, a neighbour describes him so:

”They say he’s one sort of person when he's out in the open among people – he can be very sweet – but that he’s a different sort of person altogether behind the walls of his own house.”

Though the story takes place on a farm, we rarely get to see the outdoors early on. Moran is a farmer - earning his farm with assistance from the IRA. He has five children. Three daughters still teenagers in the house and Luke who has left for England following an altercation and the very young Michael. 

Rose, newly returned from working in Scotland for a family as a housekeeper accepts that Moran may be the one she marries late in life. Her effect on the oppressive house is transformative, as though all the children needed was an outlet for the hardness of life with just their father. Often we experience Moran’s methods with family and Rose through the threat of violence. If a matter is remotely tense, the children have learned to slip out of the room without being noticed. 

Transformation is nicely done in this book. Everyone emerges as themselves over time as the 1950s give way to the 1960s and opportunities through education and migration to England arrive for all the children. And they take it because they're all smart. After all, old Moran was the brains behind many successful IRA civil war operations thirty years earlier. Yet he thinks politicians, doctors and priests sucked the value he got out of the war.

Moran can’t stop change, the influences of others on his insular being can’t be held back. He tries to be his same dour self - forged in poverty and war early in the century. But the world changes and he changes, as he perhaps abetted in changing it militarily. And it seems women have the largest role in all this and the males all take a back seat to change. The daughters Mona, Maggie and Sheila have the most to gain from change – jobs, education, decision making in marriage, and defining the idea of family and home. 

”by the time Maggie had got back to London they had never felt closer n warmth, even happiness. The closeness was as strong as the pull of their own lives; they lost the pain of individuality within its protection.”

I find it interesting that the outdoors emerges late in the book with scenes of rural life like cutting and stacking the hay - an event described often as the greatest change in family circumstance happens – the daughters go off to Dublin and London once they finish school but return regularly and every summer when the hay cutting occurs on the right day when it’s expected to be dry. This makes for a lovely juxtaposition of the perennial and the modern. The scenes are described in detail, observed as though from afar in their deeply unchanged way – though machinery is used, the way family joins in the most important moment of the summer strongly expresses the central motif of family life. 

Family is paramount, an entire society is geared towards and not much gets in its way:

”Such is the primacy of the idea of the family that everyone was able to leave work at once without incurring displeasure.”