Rating: 4/5

As somebody who knew next to nothing about Vietnam, I found this book enormously useful. What I know best about it are the famous photographs, reproduced so many times as to lose meaning or to convey the wrong one: 

- the Vietnamese guy shooting a Viet Cong wearing a checkered shirt? He was a general, executing a spy who had just killed soldiers under his command

- children running naked? The napalm was dropped by South Vietnamese

- piles of civilian bodies, inclusive of babies? The My Lai massacre, for which the GIs were never really punished

In short, after the WWII the French were forced out of Vietnam, but the Americans enforced splitting the county in two (following the infamous Korean model) because they were paranoid about Communism.

Vietnam could have united from 1954, but despite the Cold War being very much in the air, the Vietnamese failed to make clear they were not a Russian or Chinese paw and they were planning to create a cozy, independent Communist state of their own. However, during the war they had no qualms using military and financial support from both Communist super-powers.

Even in the North, many Vietnamese were not enthusiastic about loosing their land to a Communist regime, the South was a mess and what developed was basically a civil war, intruded upon (and instigated) by the American - who definitely should have stayed out of it.

High ranking Americans knew the "war" was lost from very early on, but they continued to send troops not to "loose face". The North Vietnamese were fanatically brainwashed into fighting forever and the South Vietnamese were lost in between.

The “war” itself was an endless series of inconclusive missions and bombings that caused enormous casualties. If anything can make you lose faith in humankind, it is this whole senseless "war" that lasted some twenty years and left EVERYBODY involved permanently scarred.

Interesting to know, when the South fell, the Communist implemented a programme of "re-education", slightly less severe than in Cambodia and sent hundreds of their countrymen to work in agricultural projects, to break their bodies and spirit and "convince them" that Communism was the only way to go.

The victorious, Communist Vietnam did not work out so well, but it is not the sort of story that makes headlines like American bombings...