Rating: 3/5

Alexis de Tocqueville was a nineteenth century aristocrat and liberal who, after visiting the United States of America, became so interested in the concept of democracy that he wrote two huge volumes on 'Democracy in America'. One of the main themes in this work is the problem of how to combine the struggle for liberty with the struggle for equality. Tocqueville saw the struggle for equality as a danger to the freedom of individuals. Equality requires a centralized authority to make things equal and, combined with the process of democracy, leads to a situation in which every individual will be just that: an individual. This will lead inevitably to a transfer of power to the state and the rule of the majority, and hence destroy the personal autonomy of the individual.

In the USA, according to Tocqueville, this paradox was resolved by the strong sense of community: the state governments, but especially the townships, were a decent bulwark against the centralizing tendencies of the federal government. In Democracy in America (1840), Tocqueville concludes that democracy worked in the USA because it could start from scratch; democracy in Europe would be an entirely different matter - historical developments had already led to very unequal societies in which classes and despots were already present.

The Ancien Régime and the Revolution (1856) explores this last point in relation to France. Tocqueville delved into the administrative archives to unearth the society of eighteenth century France, in order to explain how the French Revolution originated and why - also: why in France and why at that particular moment (1789)?

So what's Tocqueville's answer to these questions? According to him, in the eighteenth century, there were different strands, all intertwining to develop into the explosion we now call the French revolution. First, feudalism was eroded - peasants were landowners and the aristocracy gradually lost all its finances, but increasingly gained in power. At the same time, a middle class developed that gained ever more financial power, eventually becoming much more powerful than the old aristocratic elite. France was a strongly stratified society: the three classes - nobility, bourgeouis, commoners - didn't mingle with and looked unfavourably towards each other. 

During the eighteenth century - and really from the reign of Louis XIV in the seventeenth century - the French kings increasingly spend more and more money on wars, and because of the decline of the aristocracy gained tremendously in power. 

The result of all these events? To finance the expenditures of the French state, the king needed taxes. Because the administrative and judicial systems were almost exclusively manned by bourgeous, and the nobility held exclusive privileges to exemptions from taxes, the state increasingly taxed the poorest people: the commoners. This led to frustration and growing unrest.

During this process, the French state centralized more and more, eventually ending up with the situation that 'just' the city of Paris governed the rest of France. The countryside and the smaller towns were only peopled by the French without money - if you had any money you would build your future in the capital. In effect this meant that the nobility ruled the countryside and the towns without being present. This strengthened the already ongoing process of alienation of the nobility from the commoners.

According to Tocqueville, this was a state bound to crumble. When Louis XVI tried to reform his administrative system, sending many bourgeois officials home, he created - in one instance - a society of individuals, in which everyone looked at everyone else with hatred and envy. For years the philosophes had inspired a sense of injustice and inequality in the common people and, strangely enough, the nobility. Just before the Revolution broke out, the nobility had tried to help better the situation of the commoners; this was also what king Louis XVI tried to do with his reforms. 

So, absurdly, the Revolution was heralded (and if not heralded, at least welcomed) by the nobility, who would be the first ones on the list of the commoners, when they got rid of the king. The people, spurred on by the political ideologies (some would say demagogery) of the philosophes, resented king and nobleman alike and held both accountable for the abominable state they were in. And since the Catholic church was in league with the state - and derived much power and authority from this relationship - they felt strong passions for anticlericalism and antireligiosity. 

And the bourgeois? They just went on with their business, administering the organs of the state. The only thing that really changed was their ruler.

Tocqueville claims that the lesson we should learn from this (among others) is that ideals of equality (really, democracy) and ideals of liberty (really, autonomy) can conflict with each other and clash violently. The Ancien Régime digged its own grave by taxing and alienating the masses (the poor): forced labour, military service, ever increasing taxation, harsh punishments, etc. The nobility stood by, while the bourgeouis just went about their business on their financial ego-trip. When the situation got so bad that, out of sympathy, king and nobility wanted to reform the situation, the slightest betterment led to immense feelings of unfairness and inequality by the masses. The Ancien Régime already passed the point of no return and, according to Tocqueville, the Revolution was, in this sense, inevitable.

Originally meant as part 1 of a trilogy on the Revolution, this is Tocqueville's only finished book on the subject. He intended to write two subsequent works: one detailing how the Revultion progressed and the other explaining what came after it. But even though Tocqueville didn't manage to write the other two works (he succumbed to tuberculosis), throughout The Ancien Régime and the Revolution, it becomes clear what his viewpoint is. He continuously compares the situation after the Revolution with pre-Revolutionary, eighteenth century France, and concludes that nothing really changed. The Revolution happened; and existing state structures and especially the trend of ever-increasing centralization of state power were used as tools by the new regime. 

I continue to be amazed by Alexis de Tocqeuville's sharp insights and his eloquent analyses of the themes of democracy, equality, liberty and centralization. In both Democracy in America and The Ancien Régime and the Revolution the same trends are observed. The struggle for equality leads to a situation in which liberty eventually succumbs and a centralized authority emerges. Although he was an aristocrat, Tocqueville seems to have accepted the changing times and he seems to have sympathy for the poor and powerless; he also seems to be a true liberal, fighting for personal freedom and autonomy and warning us for the potential dangers of democracy. (He saw Napoleon I as the culmination of all the bad sides of democracy; he was thrown in prison because he observed the exact same trend with the rise of the war-hungry demagogue Napoleon III).

Amazing thinker; amazing book; amazing subject.