Rating: 4/5

”I will have a job convincing the police that I am innocent, but one thing is indisputable. If Lily had never met me, she would be alive now.”

It would seem that death follows Lucy Fly around. For a young woman, she has had too many people she knows meet an untimely demise. She is aptly named, because when people talk to her about rooting down in a place, she will correct them and say people don’t have roots...they have legs. She grew up in the Yorkshire area of England, and as soon as she possibly can, she flees to Japan because it is someplace completely different from her pudding and ginger beer upbringing. She loves her simple life. She has a job as a translator that gives her intriguing word puzzles to unravel. She has a few friends, really the right number, and she has a boyfriend who is strange and wonderful. 

Everything is going fine until she meets Lily Bridges. A taste of home, a Yorkshire girl who talks incessantly about the very place that Lucy wants to forget. She is asked by a friend to help her find a place and settle in. Lucy isn’t the right person for this type of favor. She is self-sufficient and doesn’t really like the lack of that in others. Still, she decides to help. 

Teiji is a photographer, a photographer who never sells his pictures. He has file folders brimming with wonderful, evocative photographs, but they are his and not for anyone else. He likes the odd intensity of Lucy’s eyes. They meet because he finds her on the street in the lens of his camera.

Lucy hasn’t introduced Teiji to any of her friends. She is the golem, and he is...precious. She doesn’t want to share him because he is...hers and hers alone. He works in a noodle shop, and sometimes she likes to watch him without him knowing she is there. She is obsessively protective of him because to lose him is something she doesn’t even want to contemplate. 

There is a murder, and Lucy is the perfect suspect. 

The novel centers around the police and also the reader trying to sort out what is true, what is partially true, and what is absolute delusion. The truth is sometimes a chimera. 

The writing moves between first person and third person, which has been confusing to some readers, but I didn’t experience that problem. It makes perfect sense to me as I start to discover that Lucy is experiencing some disassociation from her life. She is an unreliable narrator, and some things she tells us are easier for her to share with some distancing of the narrative. As the plot unfolds, we have to weigh everything that has been revealed to us and determine if we believe what happened really happened. 

I also watched the movie version of this novel from 2019 starring Alicia Vikander. They made some revisions to the plot, including transforming Lucy from being English to Swedish. This might be because Vikander is originally from Sweden, and her particular accented Japanese would make more sense. There is one death that was changed for the movie, and I’m so glad they made that modification. It added a more compelling aspect to the subplot that was better than the book. The biggest alteration in the movie was to the ending. I MUCH preferred the ending in the book, and many movie watchers found the ending of the movie to be one of the weaknesses. My recommendation for those who are interested in this story is that they should read the book first and then watch the movie. They will still enjoy watching the book come to life on the big screen, but they will certainly be shorting themselves by not reading the book first. 

The dust jacket blurb compares this book to The Wasp Factory and The Sculptress. I haven’t read the Minette Walters book, but I have read the Iain Banks book, and even though it is considered a classic by some and a piece of filth by others, it is, in my mind, not the best comparison. I think The Earthquake Bird has a broader appeal to a larger audience. 

I ended up really liking Lucy. Her eccentricities are ones that I have sympathy with. Her obsessions, her desire for privacy, her inadequacies at interacting with people, her fears of public exposure, her desire for intimacy are all things that I think most introverted readers will identify with. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten and an Instagram account https://www.instagram.com/jeffreykeeten/