Rating: 4/5

This is a novel with many moving parts-- and the author does an excellent job of juggling ideas, atmosphere, vampire lore, Victorian life, and a mystery. The author's design is to create a story out of journals, letters, notes, and Scientific reports. This manages keeping the reader a bit disoriented at times, which is perfect for this story is all about being disoriented. Whether it is due to the oddity of circumstances or the mesmerizing power of apparent vampires-- the reader is able to feel the bombardment of the senses, the confusion, the horror, and even the humanity. 

Jack Eliot joined a military expedition in the Himalayas some years before the real story begins. There, he sees horrors beyond the imagination, as he sees what are either Vampires or zombies, or both. Blood and superstition are everywhere, but Jack, a medical doctor, is certain that there must be a scientific explanation. 

Years later, Jack is contacted by the wife of an old friend and wades into his friend's involvement with some very unusual characters. Along the way, he joins forces with Bram Stoker, working as a writer and theater manager, but they form a friendship and delve in it together. The premise is that their adventures form the basis for Stoker's most famous work, Dracula... While there is some truth to that, there is so much more depth to the "vampire conspiracy" than a simple story about thwarting a vampire. 

The mystery portion of this novel is excellent. What is the plot? I almost gasped when one of the secrets was revealed... But of course, I said to myself. 

This book is a fine work. It's greatest success is putting a Dicken's type spell on the reader as he describes a dualism between the glory of Victorian England and the filth of it at the same time. The gothic flavor is rich and the reader is almost mesmerized himself. The author's ability to describe the mists, the carriages, the clothing, the workers is nothing short of wondrous. 

And by the time the reader gets to the conclusion, he will be truly surprised that he didn't know the direction the author was really going.