Rating: 5/5

While not as laugh-out-loud hilarious as the first book, this is a great follow-up to Saffy's Angel. Indigo is the quiet child of the family, the one with the most (any) reserve. It's no surprise, then, that he has difficulties with bullies at school. Indigo's classmates form the backdrop to the story, but I was glad to find that they weren't its heart.

The story picks up with Indigo returning to school after an extended convalescence. While the bullies reassert themselves, we meet Tom--a new kid in school recently arrived from America. When Saffy and Sarah put Indigo off limits (for certain values of off-limits), the gang turns, quite naturally, to the next available outsider. Tom is happy to oblige. 

I confess that I didn't really like Tom very much. He's a brash young liar who doesn't really care for anybody else and is happy to let them know it. Indigo, being who he is, can't keep himself from trying to help Tom, even though he has made it clear that he doesn't want help any more than he needs it. Of course, things proceed in standard Casson fashion from there.

While I didn't like Tom (and still don't, really), I very much appreciated his growing friendship with Indigo. You know going in, of course, that they will end up friends. Trust McKay to map out a non-standard, but completely natural, path to get there, however. What could have been a trite exposition about standing up for outsiders and finding value in our differences ends up as a deeper exploration of love and friendship and absorbing change without becoming broken. In the end, I came to like Tom for the sake of his relationship with Indigo (and Rose). And that, at least in the message delivered very cleverly by the end, is exactly perfect.

There is a lot of ancillary activity in the rest of the Casson family in the course of the story--including disruptions that are rather fundamental. McKay isn't afraid to shake things up and mix the bitter with the sweet any more than she is reluctant to mix the melancholy with the hilarious. I'm still not sure what I think of some of the changes, but I'm grateful that McKay has the fortitude to make them. My heart goes out to poor Rose, though. I'm really glad that her novel is next. I can't wait to get started.