Rating: 2/5

Not recommended for: people without a sense of humour.

The Skylark of Space is undoubtedly one of the most important novels in the history of SF - as 'the first space opera', it and and the author's later novels (Skylark was his debut work) held, alongside predecesors like Verne, Wells and Burroughs, an immense influence over at least one generation of writers. This is what inspired the authors of the Golden Age to write; and this is also what the authors of the Golden Age tried to do better than.

[it's not just SF, either. Any fans of superhero stories should be interested in this, as the tone so clearly previews the Golden Age comic books that were to follow.]

It is, however, a tricky book to review today, because much depends on your sense of humour, and your charity. Personally, I found it a hilarious book - but I readily acknowledge that that hilarity is only partly the result of Smith's deadpan wit, partly the result of Smith's doughnut-engineer-writing-his-first-book-and-not-really-knowing-what-he's-doing ineptitude, and partly the flippant stiff upper lip and zany slang of the novel's original birth-era in the America of circa 1920. [Anyone who remembers the fun I had with Babbitt will know how enjoyable I find that.]

If you're a hardhearted critic, you'll be nonplussed by the period idiosyncracies, miss the intentional humour entirely, and see the fact that the author's enthusiasm far outstrips his prose style, his plotting, or indeed his characterisation, as a terrible flaw. Add in the patent ludicracy of the science and the fluffy lightness of it all and you'll come away thinking that it is all a load of tosh.

If, on the other hand, you're willing to give the Doc the benefit of the doubt as to how much of the humour is actually intentional, and just go along for the ride, Skylark is actually a pretty enjoyable book. Without lying, this was one of the most unabashedly fun reading experiences I've had in many years. The humour and the silliness (part intentional, part not) go hand in hand with a belting enthusiasm, a real sense of possibility and adventure and novelty, and a surprisingly geeky pervading spirit of curiosity and reason (Smith is always happy to pause events for a moment to explain tangential scientific questions). This is a novel in which touching Metal X to some copper lets your spaceship blast out of the atmosphere in moments without destroying where you were standing (reactionless drives!), but where characters will pause for a moment to discuss the problem of what "keeping the same orientation" means in a space ship once you lose the frame of orientation provided by the earth's gravity well, and where interstellar travellers take care to begin flying backwards halfway through their journey.

The whole thing is a frothy pink mousse of a novel, and it's likely to be loved and loathed in equal measure. [and there are Issues, of course. Smith is clearly progressive in spirit, but can't escape the insensitivities of the era's cheap pulp fiction when it comes to sex and race; given that this is actually rather laughable, and that it's clearly driven by misplaced progressivism rather than by malice or idiocy, I think you'd have to work hard to be offended, but of course your mileage may vary]

What this is not is anything like a lot of modern SF. This is not The Expanse or Westworld. It's the superhero tradition that seems to have remained closer to the spirit of the novel: this is what people read in the 1920s instead of watching The Flash or Agent Carter. Watching Agent Carter and complaining that the character of Howard Stark, brilliant millionaire mad scientist, is shallow wish-fulfillment [a character in Skylark is actually introduced as "the multi-millionaire explorer-archaeologist-sportsman who was then District singles champion"], or watching The Flash and complaining that having a sentient gorilla conquering a city on a parallel earth is just not realistic, is kind of missing the point about these shows. And quibbling over all of the many, many things that are wrong with The Skylark of Space is missing the point in almost exactly the same way. 

So I suggest that you read it. It's not very long. Just... don't expect literature, OK?
[but you can expect one of my favourite Dastardly Villains ever...]

So yeah. Reading this, being open to its excitement and its curiosity and it devilmaycare attitude, you can see why it inspired a generation of imitators. But at the same time... you can also see why it inspired a generation of authors who thought they could do the same thing but better.

You can read a fuller review over here!. There are pretty pictures!