Rating: 2/5

Regina’s Legacy

There’s a new photography club at SVH, and Liz is all excited about learning another skill to enhance her journalism. The club decides to make a visual mural of life at SVH. Each student picks a different theme to focus on. Liz picks the teachers. They all think it’ll unify the school after what happed with Andy. They all promise to keep the project a secret from the rest of the students. Late that day, Skye Morrow drops by with a present for Elizabeth. It’s a fancy, expensive camera they were gonna give Regina for her birthday because she’d just gotten interested in photography. This turns out to be perfect timing because Elizabeth can use it to shoot the pictures for the mural. The next day at the beach, Liz is taking pictures and she sees 3 guys running by the water. This is unusual because they aren’t dressed for the beach. She takes a picture. One of the guys comes up to her pissed and lunges at her trying to snatch the camera away. Prince Albert snaps at him, and he and Liz manage to get away. Todd tells her that not everyone likes being photographed. Side note: Todd’s BMW doesn’t work. Liz develops the picture (at school) and she sees a nervous-looking guy in the middle guarded by a bald guy and a hot one. She takes the picture with her. Jess and Lila are driving, and they’re being tailed. Turns out to be the hot guy. They stop and he apologizes for his friend. (Chad) asks to see the picture and Jessica makes up an excuse that it’s at school. She tells him she’ll show it to him if he calls her. Lila says the guy was only interested in Liz, but Jess doesn’t care because she can get the picture and Liz won’t mind. Jess tries to tell Liz about Chad (and thank her) but she gets annoyed when Liz rushes off to meet up with Todd and decides to keep Chad to herself. Todd and Liz are watching the news, and the key witness of a big drug ring scandal has been called on to testify. Now all of a sudden, he has memory loss (Ron Hunter). Liz is shocked because it’s the middle guy in the photo. But Todd says the guy on the news has been in DC all week. She shows him the photo and he agrees to help her enlarge it because there are some words on the guy's shirt. Liz tries to ask Jess about the hot guy when Jess reminds her, she blew her off on the ride to school. But Jess leaves her hanging. Soon afterwards Liz learns the darkroom was trashed. Everyone’s upset about the mural, and Liz feels guilty. But she’s glad she has the picture (even though she can’t enlarge it now). Not realizing it’s one of the guys in the picture, Liz takes a call from Chad looking for Jessica. He won’t give any info other than he’ll call back. Amy’s dad lets Todd and Liz use his darkroom, and the find out the guy's shirt says “Ricks Place”. They find out it’s a restaurant in Big Mesa, and head there for dinner. Jessica heads out for a date with Chad, despite having the picture he requested. Elizabeth comes home to a ransacked room (Jess did this earlier looking for the photo) and she’s freaked (even though Todd suggests Jessica). Jess starts to see that maybe Chad isn’t all she thought he was because he’s not falling for her charms, and he looks older than she first thought. He takes her bowling and then to a restaurant. Liz and Todd show up at the restaurant and find out the guys comes there a few times a week and eventually, he shows up… with Jess. All the pieces connect in Liz’s head that the guy must have gotten them confused and *this* was the Jess had been trying to tell her about. They decide not to interrupt the date, even though Jess is looking uncomfortable. Chad demands the picture and Jess (scared) tells him its at the school in her locker. They leave. Todd and Elizabeth trail them. Jess sees them and points at her jacket (letting them know they’re going to the school). Todd and Elizabeth get pulled over but convince the police to take them to the school to rescue Jessica. The police arrive just as Jessica is in hysterics trying to open her locker. Chad tries to run but Todd punches him. The police take them all to the station. It turns out Chad was over one of the biggest drug rings in the country, but his colleague (Ron) wanted to leave that life behind. He was going to Washington to testify but they kidnapped Ron and his identical brother Rich took his place. Ron tried to escape and that’s where Liz came in. 
Plot B
Shelly is mad because her boyfriend (Jim) is over the photography club and it’s taking up most of his time. Because he vowed (along with the other members) he wouldn’t tell anyone about the mural he can’t really tell her what he’s been up to. So she thinks he’s hiding something. She even shows up to the room and he rushes her off. Andrea Slade is also having problems because Nick Morrow found a picture she took of Max Dellion and thinks she’s into him. (Come on Nick, you are WAY more awesome than that!). On the day the darkroom is vandalized, Jim forgets he has a date with Shelly at the Dairi Burger and shows up an hour late. She’s pissed and leaves with Greg (the jerk that thought she was too tall for him in the first book). Elizabeth tells Jim to put a special picture of Shelly in the mural. He does (of her scoring a basket) and they kiss and makeup. The Morrows show up and offer to pay for the darkroom. Elizabeth feels like she got justice for Regina by busting the drug ring because Regina died of drugs.

My Thoughts:
1)	Liz is like SO many people I know that are OBSESSED with taking pictures (mostly of themselves) that don’t seem to understand that not everyone has a photo fetish. And so even though the guys had a sinster reason, I thought Todd (for once) had a valid point. And honestly, I just shake my head at people like this who all they wanna do is take pictures 24-7. It’s really just not my thing. So she annoyed me for not minding her business and assuming everyone was cool with her taking their picture.
2)	 Elizabeth also annoys me HIGHLY because she always thinks she has to investigate every damn thing. If you were at the beach and taking pictures and a guy came up to you and tried to attack you and then you saw later that one on the news looked like the one at the beach, would your first instinct be “Oh, I need to look into this?” Or would it be “Hmm, that is strange?”, develop the picture, and then put it somewhere and let the whole thing drop from your mind after you told someone “a crazy guy tried to attack me at the beach today”. I think if I made it out of there, I’d personally try to forget the whole thing.
3)	Then the plot didn’t make sense because if Rich didn’t know anything at all about the case what good was, he. When he found out his twin was kidnapped and he decided to take his place, did he not think that he was gonna be questioned about the drug ring? (Shaking my head). That made absolutely no sense, unless they just randomly came to get him and he tried to tell them “You got the wrong guy?” And if that’s the case, then that doesn’t make the government look to bright if they didn’t at least check his identification.
4)	Jessica continues to be an IDIOT! No difference here from other books. But then so is Shelly. Shelly is one not because she gets pissed that Jim is keeping things from her. Honestly if I was a teenager and my boyfriend was keeping stuff from me (even if it was irrational) I’d be mad too. And if he was giving something else all his time and neglecting me I’d have done the exact same thing. As a matter of fact, I did do the exact same thing when I was a junior. I found another guy to spend time with. But Gregg? Come ON! Why is he even still a *thought* after she saw what he was all about in her own book? Surely, there was another guy better to make Jim jealous 
over. But I guess that was the point. The closer to home it hit the better. And since Nick Morrow is taken.
5)	Speaking of, NOPE I refuse to let you make Nick Morrow look like he’s into some petty, SVH, BS, drama.

Rating: 4