Rating: 4/5

Warren Bennis's book describes the key qualities and features of great leaders (of corporations, non-profits and other organisations) based on his research and interviews with 29 leaders. Like other great writers of business or management books (I'm thinking particularly of Robert Shiller here), Bennis writes from a position of passion and integrity - viewing corporations as merely means to achieve concrete ends. The author's clear view that organisations can, and indeed should, be agents with purpose imbues this book with a weight and meaningfulness utterly absent in the reams of self-help / how to become X schlock so often found on the shelves of airport bookshops. Instead of blandishments, we are treated to astute point after astute point that, if absorbed by the reader, will surely (hopefully) give them a few more tools and ways of thinking to allow them to "express themselves" and in the end to become great leaders.

The book's organisation - into ten chapters with fairly determinative headings like "Knowing the World" - belies the subtlety of its structure. Instead of each chapter offering just one lesson, all chapters merge together into one overarching set of points - all of which combine in varying amounts in the leaders Bennis interviewed for the book - and all of which will variously be relevant to those trying to learn something from this work. Instead of entering chapters expecting to hear a narrow argument in line with the title, the reader will get more from their time by simply allowing all the valuable insight to wash over them. I did battle briefly with the structure - not seeing how what I was reading linked to the chapter itself - but quickly relented and enjoyed my time with this short work, soaking up its managerial acuity.

So what is this great insight I've claimed the book has? I strongly suspect everyone who engages with this book will focus on something different. Personally, I found myself underlining two different kinds of remark.

The first kind concern points the author raises that I felt not only spoke to me but were aspects of my style that have been problematic for me in the past. The leader, in Bennis' view, is strongly distinguished from the manager: "The manager asks how and when; the leader asks what and why ... The manager accepts the status quo; the leader challenges it." These sentences epitomise at times my feeling of difference and struggle with places and people I have worked and reassured me that (at least some of the time) I may do well to appreciate my differences and not be upset that my particular context at that particular time may simply not be conducive to my more creative and innovative instincts. 

This sense of struggling against arbitrary limits comes out time and again in the book in a manner much reassuring to someone who has done this all their life: I couldn't help identifying with one of the interviewees who remarked on how "I remember, during arguments with my father, there seemed to be arbitrary rules, which I never understood. I used to ask 'why' all the time." Such was my experience as a young child and, in modified form, my experience now.

Another key point made my Bennis is how leaders take responsibility for their mistakes and actions, never palming off blame on others. In a strong argument against an over-focus on the nature versus nurture dichotomy, Bennis points out how "between the arguers for hereditary determinism and those for environmental determinism, not much room is left for self-determination." As the author goes on, we should stop fixating on our past as the source (excuse) of our problems but reflect on it, harness it as grist for our life-mill and get on with the process of being who we are today.

The slippery (but no less important for it) concept of knowing and being yourself is perhaps the most important idea in Bennis. This seems to derive from a Heideggerian notion of 'authenticity'. For Heidegger, humans are not mere objects among many, but we are that being for which our own being is in question (i.e. we worry about who we are). We can, and should, set up life projects and goals that will reflect in the outer world who we are. Only when doing this are we acting authentically, rather than going with the flow of the world and behaving as others think we ought to. Bennis very much subscribes to this view: for him, true leaders have a vision and set out to execute it. Much of the book not only states this but nuances this to acknowledge the importance of understanding one's context and the vital element of bringing others onboard with your programme to affect change. 

If the first kinds of quotations I dutifully underlined concerned those aspects of the book that truly resonated with me, the second concerned those that I knew were features or issues I struggle with. Conveniently for me, Bennis believes good leaders must have a thorough understanding of their strengths and weaknesses so identifying these is a good start. 

The most important character trait I have in spades but which comes in for criticism is the notion of being "driven". This, for the author, connotes a kind of fixation on achievement without substance: "We all know people who are driven to succeed, never mind at what or how, who are never satisfied, and who are often unhappy." Solving this issue comes back to the concept of knowing yourself (and the possibility it entails of acting authentically): "It is entirely possible to succeed and satisfy yourself simultaneously, but only if you are wise enough and honest enough to admit what you want and recognize what you need." Through the discussion of 'drive' and its perverse consequences, the book challenged me to think about what I want (beyond degrees or awards) in a difficult but constructive way. In short, I must "drive" and not "be driven".

The book is not perfect: while the slightly erratic structure no doubt reflects the trickiness of the topic it does render it a tricky read at times - which I think could have been solved with better planning. Consequently, the book has great messages and lessons but they can be a little hard to pick out and distill from the complex web of discussion. 

A second criticism is the slightly off-putting American nationalism: the author sounds almost hysterical in his fear of the rise of Japan. This fits the time of publication - 1988 - but in 2021 looks slightly absurd given Japan's near immediate stagnation that began in the 1990s. Aside from being overblown, it lends the book an element of 'we need great leaders to fend off external threats' which seems needlessly parochial. Though this smacks of the period the book was written, the reader should not be entirely put off by the book's age. One pleasantly surprising feature was the prevalence of women among the leaders Bennis interviewed: about a third are women, far more than lead S&amp;P 500 companies today shockingly (about 6%). 

This book is, in the final wash, a treasure trove of advice that will likely be beneficial in different ways to any who pick it up. For me, I enjoyed seeing codified features of my personality - such as resistance to dogma - and crucially witnessing how this has been constructive for the leaders interviewed in the book. Equally, I appreciated the challenges this book threw my way, such as on my sometimes destructive over-drive to achieve. Lastly, I value this book for how it captures challenging ideas in often simple and somehow intuitive terms. This is on display right at the end of the book where the author highlights the vital role of authenticity for leaders, cementing its place at the centre of Bennis' leader-philosophy: "it’s much easier to express yourself than to deny yourself. And much more rewarding, too.". Thought such apothegms may, when taken in isolation, sound a little trite, I assure you the book taken as a whole is vastly more profound than anything likely to be found on the bestsellers list.