Rating: 4/5

I bought the entire series at a library sale for $10. I read the reviews before reading book 1 and was a bit worried going into the series. I must say, I found the book to be very enjoyable. I'm surprised to see how many people get offended by the language in the book! The book is not "racist" as many people try and portray this book. In fact, it's quite the opposite. The main character Ben Raines, is fighting to create a United States that does not see color. I think many readers are who are reviewing this book poorly, do not agree politically with the author, and therefore are becoming tainted in their review.

The book is VERY enjoyable in the beginning. The story starts before the nuclear fallout, and the twist and turns to start the book off was exciting. Then you move into the wasteland and the search for survivors. Then ultimately the climax and ending. Where I will agree with the negative reviews of this book for being "preachy"to a degree. Near the end of the book, we are welcomed into Ben Raines new America or "The Tri States" as they call it. 

The Tri States have their own laws and beliefs (this is where many readers tend to get upset and let their political beliefs interfere with their review) and the book spends A LOT of time telling us about them. I honestly wasn't bother in the slightest about their new laws, and I thought the concept was very interesting. HOWEVER; it drags on way longer than it needs to. Johnstone could have eased up here and probably cut the book down about 50-75 pages. 

SLIGHT SPOILER:
Besides this one section of the book, the only other complaint I have with the story would be the death of some main villains. We are introduced to a few different villains, and Johnstone builds us up to believe there is going to be a large shootout and some action. Instead, we hear of their demise in passing. 

Other than that, I really enjoyed the book. The ending is great and plays out like an action movie. In fact, I was hoping for more action in this series, similar to other books of this time and gerne, i.e. the Rat Bastard. I'm curious to see where storyline goes from here. There are 34 or 35 books, so the story must have some wild twist and turns!