Rating: 4/5

By page 130 I ran out of patience with this thing so I channeled my inner irritable 14 year old and composed the following review:

This Ballsack is a great writer I am told but one problem is that he wrote 4,578 novels, so which one should I read. I saw that Old Goriot has mostly 4 and 5 star reviews, so it looked like a good choice, but I was so so wrong. For the first 70 pages Ballsack describes buildings and characters, as if nobody knows what anything looks like or has ever met a student or an old dame or a boring old fart before. Everyone has met those types before, I meet them every day. No one needs 5 pages about what an old fart does. So nothing happens. Then after 70 pages people start to go into rooms and make speeches and go out of rooms. Not so often but sometimes, they take a carriage which is French for taxi to another house so they can go in another room and make a speech. 
There is no story but if there is it is about this old Goriot who gave all his dough to his daughters who surprise turned into ungrateful bitches and don’t give a stuff about their old dad anymore and it breaks his heart but he should of thought of that earlier. Like King Leer, another windbag. 

But then I read ten pages more and found – wait! – a little bit of plot appeared, and then some more, and pretty soon Old Goriot was bowling along spiffily, there were evil schemes, criminals were unmasked, there were huge rows, there was police involvement, there were gold lame dresses… it was most entertaining! 

There is a fabulous villain named Vautrin - here he is being very cheeky to some old dear who has just squeezed herself into a dress two sizes too small :

“Ah! Here comes Ma Vauquerre, fair as a star-r-r, decked like a Christmas tree – do we not feel just a shade too tight, Ma?” he asked, laying a hand on the lady at the place where her corset took most strain. “Our little front is well squeezed in. If we get worked up there will be an explosion; but I will gather up all the fragments with an antiquary’s care.”

Now and then Balzac throws in some zingers like

You can do without a King but you can’t do without your dinner

and most of the time (after page 130) he writes with great comic energy, but he still doesn’t know when to shut up, so that when the big dramatic scene rolls round at the end we have to put up with a whole lot of eyerollingly ridiculous wildly overstated camped-up drama-queening

He stopped abruptly looking like a thunderbolt had struck him

He fell on his bed as if a bullet had struck him

“Papa! Papa!” the two young women cried, clinging to him to prevent him dashing his head against the walls

I cannot risk meeting your husband again, I should kill him on the spot

And perhaps the most ridiculous line in all of French literature

I wish I were God so that I could throw the universe at your feet

So..... this is a fairly infuriating mixture of the tedious and the fabulous. You may need amphetamines to get through the first 100 pages but after that this is pretty much a bittersweet tragicomical King Learish hoot.

3.5 stars, rounded up to 4 to make me look better