Rating: 3/5

Before Reading: I needed to read some good old trash so went back to my SVH books. :) Todd looks super hot on the cover, the artist really focused on him this time. Check out those arm muscles.

The Main Plot in 50 Words or Less: Todd gets a motorcycle. Liz refuses to ride it, but doesn't want any other girls riding it either.

The Second Plot in 20ish Words or Less: Enid's mom is throwing her a sweet sixteen party and is going completely overboard.

Opening Lines: "I still can't believe you got permission to take the Spider to school today," Jessica Wakefield said, opening the passenger side of the red Fiat convertible. "How'd you do it?"

Closing Lines: Yet Elizabeth remained unresponsive, her eyes closed to the world around her.

Best WTF Lines: Elizabeth to Lila: "Listen, you haven't seen Todd around, have you?"
"Have you tried the lost and found?" Lila purred.

"How's my favorite motorcycle mama?"

"You have my word that you'll never see your daughter on my bike." Good use of words there, Todd.

Enid's mom: "I'm not going to use a person whose idea of haute cuisine is pigs in blankets."

"Dreams have a way of turning sour when they become real."

Happenings in SV: The Dairi Burger gets a makeover and a questionable new hot clam special.

The twins are forbidden (and don't want to) from riding on any motorcycles, after their cousin, Rexy, (oh Rexy, you're so sexy) dies in an accident the day after buying his bike. I'm truly surprised that Jessica is okay with this rule and am wondering if it is contradicted later on. I can't see her not getting on the back of some bad boy's bike. Todd is disappointed that Liz won't ride with him and even tries to convince her parents. Yeah right. He gives other girls rides until Liz finally confesses that it makes her jealous. In the end, he decides to sell the bike because it's no fun without a hot blonde pressed up against his back.

Jessica has a new boy toy but dumps him for Enid's cousin. Enid's mom throws her a huge, extravagant 16th birthday party because she's so glad Enid's not on the drugs anymore. Jess abandons Liz after the party to go make-out with her new toy and Liz has no choice (sure) but to ride on the back of Todd's motorcycle. Of course, they get in an accident, thanks to drunk driver Crunch McAllister. Todd's okay but Liz wasn't wearing a helmet and is in a coma at the end of the book.

Fashion Icons: [Elizabeth had] her hair tied back with a blue ribbon, dressed in jeans, blue oxford shirt, and dark blue blazer, [she] looked as fresh and attractive as could be.

She thought [Mr Collins] the strawberry-blond teacher looked especially handsome in the blue crewneck sweater he wore with jeans and a tweed jacket. It wasn't hard to see why practically every girl in school had had a crush on him at one time or another.

[Helping Jess find a dress for the party] "You know that green polka-dot dress with the puff sleeves? I think it would look terrific on you." No, no it wouldn't.

After much searching, [Jessica] had finally found an outfit that did her justice, a black-and-white satin jumpsuit held in place by two tiny spaghetti straps. With her hair piled atop her head and long black-and-white earrings dangling from her lobes, Jessica looked stunning. Brian was a fitting companion, his six-foot-plus body shown off by the Egyptian cotton dress shirt and charcoal-gray pants he wore.

Twin Hijinks: No hijinks, but Jessica has some twintuition when Elizabeth gets in her accident. And at the hospital, she tries to mind-meld with her or something.

Other Thoughts: Guy Chesney, the keyboardist for The Droids, hits on Liz and comes across as kind of creepy. Foreshadowing? This book ends on a cliffhanger and I do NOT have the next book and I'm so annoyed!! How will I know if she makes it?? Spoiler: she does. ;) The ending is very "after school special" but I think it was well done actually. I teared up a little when Jessica was talking to the comatose Elizabeth and saying how she couldn't live without her and such. She also promised to be better if Liz recovered, but we all now how that worked out.

The Next Book*: Will Elizabeth live or die? Find out in Sweet Valley High #7, DEAR SISTER.

*(not necessarily what I'll be reading)

Blogged at SeeJennRead