Rating: 4/5

This is another one of those “cleaning out the closet” reads (Jul2022). I loved the tv show Justified and was really bummed when it ended, but was pleasantly surprised by the new series City Primeval. So finally getting around to reading the books (I’ve done this with quite a few tv shows that I’ve liked), I was really surprised that the show never included this first installment. Well, I guess I shouldn’t say that none of the story was included in the show. I think there were some flashbacks (very few) as well as some references to “what happened in Miami” between Raylan and various people. Anyway, this installment was, for me, a look into why Raylan was transferred from Miami to Harlan County (KY).

The book summary was actually kind of useless as book summaries sometimes go. It’s actually a tribute to Elmore Leonard than what a book summary is supposed to be. Whatever. The primary storyline is Harry, a 65yr old bookie, who wants to finally retire now that he has a boatload of money that he skimmed from the mobster, Jimmy (aka the Cap). The Feds, who are after the Cap, set Harry up to take the fall so that they can flip Harry to catch the Cap. Harry bolts to Italy because the Cap sent his guy Tommy (aka the Zip) to kill Harry.

There is a secondary storyline of Raylan who is supposed to bring Harry in, but Harry got away from Raylan just like he did years earlier when Raylan tried to bring Harry in for something else. Raylan, who is obsessed with “getting his man” (especially this man) goes after Harry by following Harry’s girlfriend, Joyce, who Harry sends for after he gets to Italy. As to be expected, the Zip and his guys follow Joyce too knowing that she will eventually lead them to Harry.

Murder and mayhem ensue (typical Raylan Givens behavior), ending in a scene with Raylan, the Zip, Harry and Joyce and it’s that scene that I believe was where the first episode of the tv show actually started because I kind of remember that scene. I also remembered Torres, a Miami cop, and Earl Crowe, one of the Cap’s hitmen. Anyway, I enjoyed this bonus read about Raylan and understanding more about why Raylan got transferred to Harlan County. 

Also, a weird twist in the story was the relationship between Raylan and his soon to be ex-wife, Winona. While the story of her running off with the Realtor is still part of Raylan and Winona’s story, there is another part of their story that the tv writers chose to leave out. Bad decision. I wish they would have included that part into Raylan’s character, but then I guess he wouldn’t have been able to be the total footloose and fancy-free player that he was in the tv show.

Most of the characterization was pretty good, with the exception to that part of Raylan I just mentioned. The pacing was very good; typical fast-paced, action-packed Raylan Givens style of story. Very much typical Justified stuff. The storyline was good and the ending was great! I’m looking at an overall rating of 4.25. Adding the next installment now.