Rating: 3/5

Travel books always appeal to me, because they allow me to get a perspective of what others see. While many current travelogues seem to be more about finding oneself and promoting one’s blog business, the older books were more concerned with locations and sights to visit. This book falls into the latter category, having been published in 1997. There are no AirBnB promotions or laments about over-tourism, just simple digests of the author’s favourite visits and those outcomes.

…I thought about how often, when we travel, we are given tantalizing glimpses of others’ lives: brief notes, edited from longer stories, condensed endings.

The first section is devoted to England’s Special Pleasures, including English rain and English gardens. The author also writes about visiting bookshops and lugging a suitcase full of books around, as this was before the advent of virtual books. I have to agree with her. There is something very special about ending up in a small English town or village and finding a bookstore in which to spend a rainy afternoon. Or finding an out-of-print book in a London bookstall. Although many of the Charing Cross Road booksellers are no longer around, it’s still an adventure, especially given limited baggage space. One of the best chapters in this section is dedicated to London, or more specifically, “lolloping”. She describes the way her vocabulary changes the longer she is there, as eggplants become aubergines and elevators become lifts. And then there is that distinctive London…odor.

Perhaps London’s secret is an oddly haunting aroma – a faint, blended scent I can’t ever analyze.

Agreed. It’s as though centuries worth of drizzle and dirt have collided with diesel fumes, moistened by more rain. I have never smelled it anywhere else and because of that, I would know it’s London even if I was blindfolded. My heart rejoices when that scent hits me because my body instinctively knows there will tea and scones and embankment walks, ending with exhaustion at a pub, nursing an excellent cider. 

There is also an entire section on the various museums, not just in London but throughout England. The Barbara Hepworth Museum in St. Ives is one I would now like to visit thanks to learning about its history from this book. Then Toth spends the next book section on the waterways of England, including the Thames and the Cornish Coast. The subtitle of this book is With Forays To Scotland And Wales and it is in this section that she visits Anglesey in Wales and the Isle of Mull in Scotland. Time to visit both, say I, and I will look for Paul McCartney’s bright red barn on that forbidding isle.

She finishes the book with a hodgepodge of selected places to see, but the Lost Gardens of Heligan interest me the most. Toth also includes some tips on being a savvy shopper plus a word about negotiating time differences. It seems this was written mainly for new visitors to England, including end-of-chapter details for opening hours and addresses of the places described in the book. For its time, it would have been a fairly perfect book to carry while travelling, lightweight and able to fit in one’s knapsack. Nowadays, everyone uses their phones, but signals aren’t always available so a good book is worthy in itself. I enjoyed the read and the little bits of knowledge she imparted along the way.

Now that I know how to react if I see a frothing hedgehog, I complacently think of myself as a tourist with a difference.

Book Season = Year Round (controlled haste)