Rating: 4/5

I have a habit of wandering around the nonfiction aisle if our local library and checking out random memoirs that managed to catch my interest. Keith Fleming's  The Boy with the Thorn in His Side was one of this memoirs and I cannot emphasize enough how glad I am I stumbled upon this rare gem. It followed the crazy roller coaster ride that is Fleming's adolescent life, and every page of the book is a wild loop that one simply cannot get enough of. This was indeed a thrilling ride from start to finish.

Fleming's life started out as normal as it can be. Gifted in both athletics and academics, this happy suburban boy could not ask for more. But as life tends to take a turn for the worst, he found himself losing the life he used to have. As he faced adolescence with his parents' divorce, raging hormonal changes, and one unfortunate circumstance after another, he developed a bubbling pot of teen angst that everybody who went through this stage can relate to. 

This memoir gave off a sense of nostalgia that reminded the readers about the awkward and terrible adolescence stage. As cringeworthy and painful the memories of being a teenager are, one cannot deny that these moments of our lives made us the people we are today. This stage of our lives is reserved for wrong decisions, questionable choices, and irrational behavior, and as we pass this chapter of our lives, we could look back and see how much we have grown from being that annoying teenager to this mature adult. Fleming wrote about his personal transformation and the journey he took to get where he is today.

For I just read Augusten Burroughs' Running with Scissors  only few weeks ago, I cannot help but compare Fleming's and Burroughs' unusual lives with each other. Both memoirs explored the themes of adolescence, rebellion, lust, appearance insecurities, and of course, dysfunctional families. One might think that this combination of topics is a bit cliché and overused, and it's true. But nonetheless, these books are important for teenagers to get a hold of for them to feel less isolated and alone in this world. As we watch the teenage selves of these well-renowned writers navigate themselves out of the chaotic stage that is adolescence right before our eyes, we-the readers- get this feeling of hope that things will indeed get better for each one of us.