Rating: 4/5

I never pictured myself TRULY reading a textbook cover to cover, yet here we are. Oh, Bressler, the things you did for me (and DIDN'T, for that matter). 

I had to pull out my laptop to write this review because I have things to say—where even to begin?

This textbook covers eleven schools of literary criticism and provides examples for each alongside the story "Young Goodman Brown" by Nathaniel Hawthorne. Each school this book covers is done with such grace. I spent the whole semester reading this textbook's recap of one school alongside a recap of the school featured either in "The Turn of the Screw" or "The Awakening," and oh my goodness, I could not tell you what a single school did until I had this textbook in my hand. Seriously, how this book manages to put the most mind-boggling concepts into the terms of a simple birthday party is BEYOND ME, but THANK YOU! 

Bressler has a way of over-explaining concepts multiple times, but it's his over-explanation that makes the concepts so digestible. At first, I was annoyed. Then you're hit with post-structuralism, and you're thinking, 'Wait, can you say that one more time!' The breakdown of information into a school's history, its development with different authors/contributors, assumptions people make about the school, a school's methodology, common questions people have about the school, AND potential issues with the school is done PHENOMENALLY. Where you may be confused about different practices, different contributors, timelines, etc., is easily cleared up, as it covers the same information through a variety of lenses. 

That being said, there are some overgeneralizations. This is NOT to say I'm an expert in literary theory, but... BUT... having the opportunity to compare Bressler's explanations of a school of criticism to OTHER explanations, you find some weak points! Of course, no one person can cover *every* aspect of a topic, and these are blanket explanations, but it was sooooo annoying sometimes to have to correct him. Bahahah. But it is also an excellent learning opportunity.

Honestly, Bressler just speaks to me. I see myself coming back, yes, BACK, to reread this textbook. I just yearn for post-structuralism... (Also, can we explain cultural criticisms more? I swear the eight pages per criticism were not enough...).