Rating: 3/5

Anyone who might be an admirer of “The Lion in Winter” – the original 1968 version with Katherine Hepburn and Peter O’Toole, not the travesty of a remake put out in 2003 – will understand my excitement when I heard about this book via the enthusiastic recommendation of another booktuber. The original play was written by James Goldman just a few years before being turned into the multi-Academy Award-winning film. It wasn’t until several years later in 1979 that Goldman got around to writing this novel not about Henry II and Eleanor, but rather their second most well-known son, King John. Goldman adds a preface to the book suggesting that there has recently been new details discovered about John that suggest he’s not nearly as ruthless and ham-handed as it was once suggested. For what it’s worth, though, Goldman’s portrayal of him is far from what I would call sympathetic. It is, however, human.

“Myself As Witness” begins in the year 1212, with King John abruptly requesting the services of his favorite court historian to accompany him to record his res gustae. His choice is Giraldus Cambrensis, perhaps better known by his anglicized name Gerald of Wales. In 1212, the real, historical Gerald would have been nearly 65 years old, more than old enough to have continued living the rest of his life in secluded retirement as the former bishop of Lincoln. But feeling compelled to serve his King, he lays aside his studies and decides to join John and his confreres on his travels. The real, historical Gerald traveled with King John, but only in 1185 on his expedition to Ireland. There is no evidence that John actually called Gerald out of retirement at any time so late as 1212 (though Gerald was still alive at that time).

The events that Gerald records in the next few years weren’t the ones John was anticipating: he is defeated at the hands of the French army, forced to give way to the demands of the Pope, and has to deal with the group of his own insurgent barons who are petitioning him for greater and greater liberties. Of course, these events all culminate in what – what else? – the only thing anyone really knows King John for: the signing of the Magna Carta in 1215.

The entire book is epistolary in form, stitched together from journal entries Gerald made during his trip abroad. While this has the virtue of letting you get a better feeling for Gerald’s own psychological drives and desires, it somewhat robs you of getting the same thing from other characters. The book’s plot and fast-paced, leaving only a little room for Gerald’s occasional reflection on the nature of history and the writing thereof. 

For those of us who are interested in a more meditative reading experience, Gerald’s diary entries can read as a bit too quick, brusque, and staccato to come off as good writing. Granted, it adds a tint of verisimilitude. But it also leaves little time for characters to think back on events. We see Gerald as a delightful combination of cynical, wise, detached, and showing deep solicitude for his King. As someone who is much more used to slow-paced, more self-consciously literary fiction, I enjoyed this for what it is, but the short, choppy journal entries and uneven character development really left me wanting more. 

Perhaps the Angevins are just better-suited to the stage than the novel.