Rating: 3/5

I first read Francisco Goldman’s work (The Long Night of White Chickens and The Art of Political Murder: Who Killed the Bishop?) while researching Guatemala for my novel, The Taste of Ashes. His writing is vivid and engaging – full of sensory detail that leaves the diesel fumes of Guatemala City catching in the back of your throat. His enthusiastic depictions of women are generous and brutally honest – especially in the way he depicts the mysterious combination of selfishness and passion that create fascinating relationships. Say Her Name depicts exactly this kind of relationship and plumbs the depth of his grief after his wife’s sudden death.

I came across The Ordinary Seaman in a lovely little used bookstore in Ingersoll Ontario near the beginning a cross-country trip (researching another novel). It tells a story that’s worth telling: a group of Central American men with virtually no experience are hired to man a derelict container ship rusting in a New York City harbour. Their subsequent abandonment by the terrifyingly incompetent owners and their lack of legal status in the US cuts them off from the world and they create their own village and call on their own resources to survive. The people who work the international container ships do indeed live a precarious existence (so we can get more cheap, plastic junk) and this book draws some attention to that.

The two main characters – Esteban, the young Nicaraguan who is fleeing the civil war after suffering the loss of his lover, and the aging Bernardo, a former ship waiter and one of two members of the crew with any experience at sea – are wonderfully rich characters struggling to be honorable in an impossible situation. Both are exuberant lovers of women, both care for the well-being of their micro-community and contribute as best they can. 

While Goldman is a beautiful writer and tries to bring many points of view to the story, he sinks it under a surfeit of detail. He tells the story from many different points of view and after a while it feels like a series of New Yorker articles strung together – the assiduous and painstaking attention to micro-matter an obstacle. I could barely continue at times and must admit I skipped over bits – especially when listening to the voices of the indulgent and deluded ship owners. But I’m glad I persevered – because of Esteban, mostly. What a character! And Goldman’s cameo as the Ship Visitor and the depiction of his own tumultuous relationship with what I can only image was his beloved Aura Estrada is interesting to read, especially knowing how he lost her.