Rating: 5/5

Trask’s unabridged version runs to six double volumes and Casanova’s voice speaks clearly across nearly 300 years, 
‘…I was in all my life the victim of my senses; I have delighted in going astray and I have constantly lived in error, with no other consolation than that of knowing I have erred.’

Unfortunately Casanova’s name has become synonymous with philanderers and libertines everywhere. Perhaps this is because every translation prior to Willard Trask’s version was abridged or condensed to censor Casanova’s previously unacceptable religious views, his radical political views or his erotic musings. 
 

Casanova recorded his life as he lived it. He wrote constantly - on the run, in prisons, carriages, palaces, low dives and grand hotels - but it wasn’t until 1789 in retirement that he started his memoirs. And so we leave his Preface and plunge across Europe, beginning with his birthplace in Venice and winding up in Count Waldstein’s Chateau in Bohemia. 
It is one hell of a wild ride as Casanova practiced many professions including that of charlatan and gambler. He was at times a soldier, a spy, a preacher, a professional writer, a violinist, a silk manufacturer, a lottery director and an alchemist. Casanova met many intellectuals including Voltaire, Rousseau, d’Alembert and Crebillon in Paris, George III in London, Louis XV at Fontainebleau, Catherine the Great at St. Petersburg, Benedict XII at Rome, Joseph II at Vienna and Frederick the Great at Sans-Souci. 

Casanova lived by his wits and considerable talents and as he spoke his mind, banishment and imprisonment became a regular part of his life. Casanova was the first prisoner to ever escape the notorious prison in Venice, The Leads. He had been incarcerated there by the Venetian State Inquisitors.

Casanova revelled in the high life of Europe’s best courts as well as having genuine friendships with those deemed to be social degenerates – actors, dancers, musicians and other creatives. He found lovers in every social strata: servant girls, dancers, Countesses, shop girls, Duchesses and aristocrats in the courts of Europe. He accepted women as equals, made sure they were satisfied sexually and was non judgmental. Frequently his women preyed on his natural generosity and ruthlessly fleeced him.
 
Having decided that, ‘Marriage is the tomb of love.’ he never marries and later has regrets. Was he the cold hearted seducer of his legend? Occasionally he was but he was also an astute observer of character and the portraits he draws of his lovers are in the round. He brings them alive for the reader and it is their conversation and character that brings him to his knees and by his own admission makes him their dupe. 

Casanova had a wonderful sense of the ridiculous and is honest about his personal failings. His pride frequently gets him into diabolical situations as he has the unfortunate habit of using his wit to rub his enemies up the wrong way. He was quick to draw his sword and pink those who had the temerity to insult him. Many of his dealings are dodgy and the reader gets the impression that Casanova isn't owning up to all the amoral things he has done for money. The chapters dealing with his fleecing of a gullible aristocrat are deliciously wicked.

Some may find Casanova's memoirs a hard read but personally I find the complexity, intricate detail and humour an absolute delight.