Rating: 4/5

I finished my first re-read of Black Water and I must admit that I found it to be a much better novel than I recalled.

In Black Water, the Traveler Bobby Pendragon finds himself on the first territory where humans are not the prominent species. And no, Howard the Duck fans - the dominant creatures are not water fouls either. Rather, the most evolved class of beings on the territory of Eelong are cats - and not your average kitty cats either - BIG cats, like lions and tigers. As such, Bobby finds himself in the role that other humans, Gars, have on this territory - as a slave.

But that's not his only concern. After achieving victory on Veelox in the last novel, Saint Dane claims that the rules have changed. Bobby's friends, Mark and Courtney, have discovered that they too can now use the flumes, though they are not Travelers. To make matters worse, Saint Dane has brought the plague Bobby and his friends stopped on Chloral several novels back to Eelong - and only Mark and Courtney know it. They take matters into their own hands - travel to Chloral to obtain several quantities of the antidote and get it to Bobby before Saint Dane can use it against the Gars.

But what effect will non-Travelers using the flumes have? And even though they are doing it to in response to Saint Dane, is bringing the antidote from Chloral - mixing the territories as Bobby was warned against - the right thing to do?

You know... for once, I would like for novels or movies involving other sentient species NOT to be about prejudice or slavery. Planet of the Apes, Avatar... I mean... don't get me wrong. I know that they're perfect environments for authors wanting to address these issues... It's just... a part of me is just yearning for someone to take the Douglas Adams approach and make the story about something else entirely. Then again, perhaps the world will be be destroyed to make way for an intergalactic highway if that should ever happen.

This novel is highly entertaining for any number of reasons. The first is it has great characters - it makes Mark and Courtney active members in the fight against Saint Dane, not merely 'librarians' as Courtney puts it at one point. It also sees the return of Spader, the Traveler from Chloral, and Gunny, the Traveler from First Earth - both great companions of Bobby. It also introduces another great Traveler, Kasha - a black panther-like cat or Klee, as they call them on Eelong - and her acolyte, Boone.

The second is it really brings the reader into the overall battle for Hallah that the extremely devil like character Saint Dane is waging. All the other novels were very territory-centric - they defeated Saint Dane on Denduron, Chloral, and First Earth and they lost on Veelox, but those victories and that loss seemed localized. In this novel, while he appears to be battling for victory on Eelong, it becomes obvious, more so than ever, that the overall war is his true objective - and that Bobby will have to keep that in mind moving forward if he intends on winning out in the end.

I found the novel extremely difficult to put down, despite having any number of reasons for needing to do so in my personal life these past couple of weeks. As such, I award Black Water 4.25 out of 5 stars. Thanks for the novel, D.J.! And so we go on to The Rivers of Zadaa.

Hey, did I mention that there are dinosaurs in this novel? No? Well, they're are dinosaurs in this novel. So if you like dinosaurs... :-)