Rating: 4/5

Hewey Calloway is a real cowboy at a time where the need for cowboys is fast declining.

Hewey will tell you that he has seen a great deal of North America cowboying from Mexico to Canada and now, in his late 30s, he thinks he is in his prime. Most of the rest of the world thinks differently including his brother, Walter. Walter and his wife, Eve, have two sons who admire Hewey but everybody but the cowboy knows that the horse is being replaced by the motor vehicle.

"Walter had tried at the time to persuade Hewey to take up a homestead for himself. The temptation had been strong—for a couple of days. But Hewey contended that land ownership worked two ways. A man might own the land, but the land also owned him."

When after several years, Hewey wanders back to see his brother, it is a tense time. Walter is glad to see him, but Eve, not so much. She sees Hewey as a temptation to her husband to get back to the “cowboy life.” She defends her home against all that.

"“I ain’t changed any. You’ll be mad again if I stay long.” She took another step. “I know. You can be an exasperatin’ man, Hewey. I’ll bet there’s not three things in this whole world that we agree on, you and me. But the next time I get mad, you just go off out of my sight awhile and give me a little time. You don’t have to stay gone for two years.”

Hewey is a legend to his nephews, Cotton and Tommy, and he thinks everything will be the same in this visit.
"The boys had no grandparents to spoil them, so Uncle Hewey had served that function. Riding in at intervals, doing his mischief, telling them stories that would never have stood the scrutiny of a court, playing hell with family discipline, he would then ride cheerfully away to greener pastures without having to assume any responsibility for the chaos he had wrought. He had all the privileges of a grandparent but was saddled with only half the age."

Hewey’s past encounters might be catching up with him and a friendly sheriff advises him to “keep moving.”
“I just don’t like people tryin’ to run my life for me, tellin’ me what to do. I don’t do that to other people, and I don’t want them doin’ it to me. When I go someplace it’s because I want to, and when I leave it’s because I want to.” “I’m not crowdin’ you, Hewey. At least I’m tryin’ not to.” “It ain’t you, it’s them.” He felt somehow trapped. He doubled his fist and beat it against the bar. Hopefully the sheriff asked, “That mean you’re fixin’ to leave?” Hewey had hit the bar too hard. He rubbed the aching hand. “It means I’ll think about it.” “All right, Hewey. I just don’t want you on my conscience.”"

Kelton puts Hewey Callahan squarely between the past and future. Not just the dying need for cowboying. Technology and the “horseless carriage” are coming to the ranches and farms. In addition, the next generation, exemplified by Cotton, sees the world in a different way that Hewey can. Furthermore, Kelton doesn’t “sugarcoat” the fate of old cowboys.

"Hewey had heard old stories about Boy Rasmussen. He had been a great cowboy in his prime, pushing herds up the trail from South Texas to the railroads in Kansas, and beyond to the Indian reservations in Wyoming and Montana. There had been a time, before the years and the bottle had robbed him of dependability, that he had bossed herds and been a man of substance and repute. But the years had not been benevolent. Whatever might once have been was gone now. All that remained was a shell, a lonely and pathetic remnant, a burned-out relic of another time…He was a chuckline rider, too old anymore to find any steady work, existing off of the kindness of others, and off of grudging charity when he found no kindness. Almost nobody in this country would turn an old man away hungry, but there were some who would make him pay a price in shame and humility."

The legendary cowboy characteristics of perseverance in hardship, code of honor and chivalry are all on display in this novel. Kelton makes it work on several levels: giving us a simple story of a cowboy making ends meet, while at the same time showing us what life was really like in that corner of the world as an era was coming to its end.

My GR friend Howard’s review includes some great quotes illustrating Hewey’s philosophy of life.
https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

4.5