Rating: 5/5

After trying to not projectile vomit while reading I: The Creation Of A Serial Killer, I began wondering why I am so into true crime. That book felt like reading torture porn. I was almost disgusted with myself for finishing it. 

Obsession was the perfect book to read after it. More than anything, this is a book about victims' rights. It doesn't focus on the deconstruction of cases. It instead discusses what PTSD is actually like for victims of violent crime. It discusses the stories of victims, as opposed to their killers. It gives you a clear impression as to what these people are actually taking from the Earth. 

John Douglas and his writer do a great job of spelling out what life is actually like for these victims and when their rights aren't being served. It discusses what changes need to happen in the criminal justice system. More impressively, the book discusses extensively what precautions these people wished they had taken.

What fascinated me the most was John Douglas's deconstruction of violent and aggressive males. I am always astounded by his analysis of males and their pathologies. He is so damn clinical when he breaks them down, and his disgust drips through the pages. This book is something special because it seems more unhinged than his other books. It's barely there, but you can sense it. His dissections of violent individuals are clearly born of hatred. You really feel like you're reading a profiler pour out everything he knows about how these people tick. 

I can understand why people don't like his books. He waxes poetic, he gets on long tirades, and he talks about what is actually important, as opposed to what sells books. He can be long-winded, but...I just can't stop reading these books. The guy is clearly open-minded enough to hear out sadistic killers and relate with them, yet he is so viciously hard on crime. You get the sense in this book that he wanted to make a difference. He knew he had everyone's ear after the sensationalism of his first couple of books, and now he wanted to use his pedestal.

Highly recommended for true crime fans. Don't expect anything salacious.