Rating: 4/5

While I do also like Jennifer L. Holm's "Our Only May Amelia", I have always preferred Miss Jane Peck's adventures. From the ridiculous (but based in historical fact) rules of Miss Hepplewhite, and the unfortunate morals of William Baldt, to the unconventional love of an unconventional father and the romanticized realism of Jesu Scudder, the story is insightful and entertaining.

As a young child I read historical fiction almost constantly, and this story has stayed with me because of its wonderfully realistic portrayal of historical values and lifestyles. More than that, it manages to blend modern sensibilities into characters in such a way that they feel as real today as they could have been then.

One of my biggest pet-peeves from historical fiction is an unconventional character beloved by everyone when they would more likely have been some kind of an outcast - but this is cleverly avoided by our young lady feeling the prickles of being an outsider at times, and yet finding people she belongs with, who are outsiders, too. 

Jane Peck carefully weighs the merits of belonging to the various societies that she has been exposed to and is lucky enough to have a choice. While most girls from Philadelphia at the time would not have even imagined such a life as she lived, it is an important reminder of the lives that brave men AND women lived on our broad frontiers.

In conclusion of this scattered and somewhat insensible review: I would recommend this book to any young girl (or boy who can be interested in a girl's perspective) who enjoys American history. An additional warning: this book does address (primarily indirectly) issues involving women's equality and racism (involving Native Americans). While I love that this book doesn't simply gloss over such issues as so many children's books do, I do believe that a parent should be prepared to discuss some of these things if a child had a question - though by no means are these handled in a heavy handed manner that would require close monitoring.