Rating: 5/5

Here we are with another Neal Shusterman novel that blew my mind on multiple levels. Having up to this point read mostly the author's work from the 2000s, I wasn't sure what The Shadow Club (first published in 1988) would be like, but it is in the same league with Shusterman's masterpieces. The Shadow Club deserves mention alongside other brilliant offerings from the Storyman such as Bruiser, Everwild and Unwind, books that changed my life and perspective on the world. No one hits the mark with this kind of dead-on consistency the way Neal Shusterman does. He may be the greatest young-adult author of his generation.

 More than a gripping, ingeniously orchestrated web of suspense, The Shadow Club hooks readers from page one primarily by use of profound emotional pathos, making the specific issues experienced by the main characters come disconcertingly alive for all of us who have ever been in their shoes. When one works obsessively at something to become the very best, practicing while the "enemy" sleeps and dreaming of all the good that is sure to someday come as a result of so much hard work, yet falls short enough of that lofty goal so as not to be even the best in one's own social group, the negative emotions that build up inside can become totally overwhelming. It's not an easy thing to put in the kind of dedication necessary to be the best, so when not even the most diligent pursuit of greatness ends up delivering on the promises of glory, the collapse of one's plans can be utterly spirit-breaking. And that, of course, is where The Shadow Club begins. 

 Jared has lived in the shadow of Austin Pace for most of his life. Himself an excellent runner—second at his school only to Austin, in fact—Jared has never really been able to even get close to Austin's skill level when it comes to track, and Austin passive-aggressively derides Jared about this fact on a continual basis. Taking the subtly mean-spirited teasing in stride has long been a challenge for Jared, but when he begins to open up and converse with his friend Cheryl about it more frequently, it dawns on him that he has grown to truly hate Austin. The things that Austin says to him go well beyond the parameters of friendly ribbing, intended to hurt Jared beneath a cleverly stitched veil of jocularity. As Austin continues to step up the low-key harassment, the seeds of the Shadow Club are planted in the rich soil of Jared's darker thoughts. All it takes is the right person to suggest the idea to him, in just the right way.

 When Cheryl steps in to be the one to make that perfect suggestion, just like that the club is born. Jared isn't the only kid at the school who has been dogged by more successful peers who refuse to lay off teasing their own "second-bests" about it; his friend Cheryl is in the same boat when it comes to her younger cousin Rebecca, and several other students have their own axes to grind against those whose life mission seems to be to surpass them in what they do best and then lord it over them. This cross-section of second-best students, who if not for their connection as relative underlings would have virtually nothing in common, is brought into synergy by the powerful nature of their shared bitterness and resentment. As they coalesce to become a group bound closely to one another by the ties of growing trust and friendship, the question arises as to what can be done about the kids who make their lives miserable by always beating them. Is there some way to stop the dominance of their arch-rivals, or at least cause them to ease up in how they treat the second-bests? What good is the Shadow Club, really, if it's not going to do anything about the problems of its members? With the dissatisfaction of his new friends ringing in his ears, a desperate Jared comes up with the notion that they, themselves, could mete out retribution on the ones who have become the bane of their existences. A few harmless, anonymous pranks might be able to keep their "enemies" in line, right? At least it would allow them to deal with these other students without blowing up at them, since they could have their moments of sweet revenge whenever they needed it. The plan seems simple enough.

 What happens next wouldn't be so scary if the reader were not already utterly convinced by the potent emotional rationale of the story. It's hard even just to keep one's own emotions on an even keel while reading about the passionate anger behind the formation of the Shadow Club, let alone to imagine the dark thrill of what it would be like to actually be a part of the group. That's what makes it all feel so real; if we in simply reading about the unfairness that Jared and his Shadow Club friends routinely experience at the hands of their smug antagonists can feel the emotion smoldering within, then how could they resist the impulse to do bad things as a way of evening the score, to press the boundaries of the Shadow Club charter until the idea of playing "pranks" has been grotesquely twisted to mean far worse things than originally intended, the types of tricks that could do irreversible damage to other people? At least, this is what appears from the outside to be happening in the club; really bad things are beginning to take place, and as key figures in the school catch wind of the existence of the Shadow Club, the club's members become the primary target for suspicion by the teachers and student body at large. Things have changed now, though, and the second-bests as a unit have the power to defend their group against an outside assault. Or is the assault coming from the outside? 

 In writing down my thoughts on this novel so far, I've come to the honest conclusion that I fall pitifully short of expressing the greatness that lurks within the pages of The Shadow Club. Packed with explosive sociological and psychological truths layered one upon another, profound to a level that is impossible to fully fathom, The Shadow Club reaches a pinnacle of absolute success that very few books will ever see. It's an emotional roller coaster that is as thematically deep as it is thrilling, a foray into the darkness of the human soul that doesn't flinch from the horror it finds there, yet ultimately comes away from the excursion with genuine hope for all of us who identify with the angst of the Shadow Club at constantly being beaten down by people who always do what they do best, better. I came very, very close to awarding this book five stars (and I may still make that my rating; in fact, I've now done exactly that), but at the very least it is worthy of four and a half stars, and a hallowed place among the legendary classics that Neal Shusterman has produced. The Shadow Club is a life-changer, for sure, and no one should miss out on it.