Rating: 2/5

First thing first:
This book should have had a trigger warning!!! 

I understand it's a book written in the eighties and I know things have change in the way books were read and written, but, when I pick up a romance, especially a regency romance, what I expect is some light, maybe silly reading, not something with gratuitous animal abusing in it. 

This time I had what I think is my worst experience with a romance EVER.

The story started well, a naval officer rejected by the family of the woman he loved, and that loved him in return, come back ten years later with an earldom, with the intention of marrying his lady, very Prersuasion like. 

But things have changed, he's not still the young insecure officer Mary loves, he is indeed a harsh, brooding man that intend to honor his promise, even if his feelings where not the same as before. 
As is for his lady. 

The younger sister of the bride to be tries and failed to convince both to call off the wedding, and to save them take her sister's place. 

So this is the thrope of the forced marriage, which is one I particularly like. 
And the permises were good and entertaining, so I can say I enjoyed at least 50% of the book. 
But then things went south. 

The relationship between the newly married couple just not just tense, but soon became non existent, with the earl sending his wife at home to her parents for Christmas, while spending the holidays with his mistress under the nose of all the ton in London!!! 
And when his neglected wife asked him for a pet he declare that animals don't belong in the house (and I understand this his a book written in the eighties, but a man that has no compassion can't be my hero. Period).
But the worst happens when returning home in a snow storm she finds a poor starved kitten and decide to take it home with her.
That wretched maid she have trow the poor beast out a windiw in the snow!!!
And she' not even reprimanded for doing it!

Then later in the story a bunch of village kids enthusiastically trys to hang the creature and when it escapes ending in a pond they try to stone it to death.
Reading this kind of thing is very upsetting for me, because I know all to well that this kind of things still happen and I won't read about it when I'm in search of some comfort (which is why I read romance!!!)

Last but not least, in the end husband and wife make peace, but there is no reason truly why they have achieved such a feat, there's no growing or real développent in the relationship, and in the end it's just her loving him even if he is a moron.

The end.
So, not for me, thank you very much.