Rating: 4/5

i've been inspired by mia b to start leaving goodreads reviews so here goes - this was a quick paced novel that jumped around chronologically and by perspective, and yet it wasn't at all convoluted nor did i find it difficult to follow. it was a nice little work read that i could manage while simultaneously working a cash register (except for this awkward moment where i got too immersed and i did not realize there was a guy needing to check out and it took several moments before i looked up and was like omg im so sorry). i mean this novel is seeped in tragedy from the start but the writing style isn't existential enough to depress me and if you've been on a roll of tragic historical fiction like i have this is a breeze. my favorite thing about this book is how wiesel examined the absolution of death from perspectives that would skew it. there was this beautiful metaphor about the sound of the wind residing permanently in the tree that filled me with inner peace until this madman went on rambling about how the absolution of death fueled his sadistic and sacrificial torment and how he applauded himself in possessing godlike power because of it. he also made some allusions to sartre in regards to trauma that made me think. nearly everything went unresolved in the end, which spoke to the whole accepting uncertainty and nonclosure thing. i liked that this book was intermittently philosophical but you had to sort of connect the dots. each character was so isolated and so stubborn that only from the perspective of a reader could you see how they were intertwined. some of the broader themes of this novel were revealed only when several backstories were explicated. like for instance, how for a withering pregnant women, her imminent death could not have meant permanence, but for a murderer, permanence was imperative. this was only my second wiesel and it couldn't really compare to night but i mean i didn't expect it to. overall, pretty solid it just could have been more depressing.