Rating: 2/5

Storyline: 3/5
Characters: 3/5
Writing Style: 3/5
World: 3/5

(rating Lost Dorsai and Warrior)

Like The Spirit of Dorsai - the series' publication before this - Lost Dorsai is a collection. Unlike that fifth in the series, this sixth in the series is not entirely Dorsai works or entirely complete. "Lost Dorsai" takes up the vast majority of the pages and surely qualifies as a novella. "Warrior" was a short story. I was disappointed with these two because they were so much like the last. They don't move the series forward or reach out to anything new. Both new additions in this collection are enlargements on past minor events from earlier in the series. Not exactly a parallel tale but a zooming in on a detail or mention that readers encountered earlier. As for ideas, Dickson continues with the romanticized notion of human (generally military) potential. Dickson does this well, and I like it. He also did it well (and I liked it) the last five times he has done it in the series. I'm ready to move on to more on the interstellar economics, other splinter races, and evolutionary implications. He's intimated that all these are important features of his world, and they interest me, but he keeps replaying the man of war theme without building on any of the others . 3/5 stars for these two.

Even more bothersome were the last two components of this collection. The first was an odd mini-biography by Sandra Miesel and the second was an excerpt from the then-forthcoming Final Encyclopedia. I wasn't the least bit interested in either of these. The biography was too short to do any justice to Dickson and too long to wander as it did. Fans must have liked receiving a preview of the Final Encyclopedia in 1980, but I'd rather just wait until I get around to reading it now in 2018. Miesel's mini-biography veered between adoring fan, name-dropper, and unfocused book critic. Her portrayal of Dickson did make me think that it would have been great to have been going to science fiction conventions during his heyday, but her "insights" into him and her "critiques" of his overall bibliography revealed very little. The worst of it was the adulation of Dickson's research habits, inquisitive demeanor, and ambitions to greatness. None of those qualities were evident in "Lost Dorsai" and "Warrior." They easily could have been leftovers from the original books. The mini-biography mostly seemed like filler - as if someone told her they needed x number of pages to thicken this publication, and she padded the installment appropriately. 1/5 stars on these last two.