Rating: 4/5

What a delightful and informative book for young adults. I read it years ago and kept the book because I liked it so well. Now in re-reading it, I am asking myself if this was really the same book. What I had remembered was a young girl going next door to talk with an elderly black woman who taught her about herbs and things. Gullah people who know healing and magic. The magic of this book was not the same that I remembered. I must have gotten it mixed up with Gloria Naylor’s “Mama Day,” which is about magic on a Gullah Island off the east coast of America. “Mama Day was the book that first got me interested in the Gullah culture.

The magic in this book was still about the Gullah culture. It was about how a small black neighborhood on a beach town in S.C. learned the value of their history. The elderly woman was Miss Effie, who was a church secretary. Raisin, the young girl did go to visit with her like I remembered, but Miss Effie would tell her about the black history in their part of the country, in their town, a history that some of their people wished to keep hidden, until the very end where they became proud of their past. It is a book about a church burning down, a cemetery falling into disrepair. It is about how it was during segregation when black people couldn’t eat in the same restaurant, use the same bathroom and something else that didn't sink in the first time I read it: They couldn’t try on clothing or even return them if they didn’t fit. If they bought shoes and found out that they didn’t fit, they wore them anyway. 

For years I had wanted to visit a Gullah Island. Like I had said, Gloria Naylor’s book started it all, and I had read it in the late 80s, it has been that long. Then a few years ago I read “The Water is Wide” a true story by the author who went to a Gullah island to teach. 

This year my husband wanted to take a trip back east to check out all the beach towns from South Carolina to Key West, and then the Gulf Coast. I looked up the Gullah culture and decided I wanted to see St. Helena Island in S. C. We pulled into Beaufort, S.C., but with my views on racism, I wanted nothing to do with seeing mansions. I had seen enough in my life.

We went across the bridge to St. Helena, and the tourists were not there. What a relief. We had breakfast at the Bella Luna Café. Their biscuits and sausage gravy was the best I had ever tasted in a restaurant. Homemade. 

A couple of young women were sitting next to us, and I began talking with them, or they me. One was white; the other black. At first I thought that they were Jehovah’s Witnesses, who do mix in company with other races, which is one of the very few things I have missed about being a Jehovah’s Witness. But when I asked them if they had hurricanes on the island, one of them said, “No, God protects us here because we are Christians.” Hmmm. Jehovah’s Witnesses never use the word, God or Christian. But who knows, maybe they learned to to with strangers. And just maybe things have changed in the south somewhat. And then silently I wondered why God doesn’t protect the other Christians, whoever they may be.
 
We left and drove down Martin Luther King Blvd., a very small two lane road for a blvd. As we drove to the east end of the island, we saw a tree that looked like it was full of white plastic bags tied to branches. We stopped and got out our binoculars. The bags moved, and then all the sudden we saw a few great white egrets fluttering their wings like individual feathers of a fan. How beautiful. I took photos, but they didn’t come out well—too far away. Cheap camera.

Then we found a church called the Chapel of Ease. It had been burned down after the civil war. Built by blacks for the white plantation owners, and after the war the blacks had it, but not for long. We stopped and took photos. A cemetery was next to it, a small one, but in this book that I just read, the church where Miss Effie worked, had a cemetery as well, but that church was not the one that had burned down in the book.

I could have lived right there in the Chapel of Ease. Put a roof on the church; add windows and doors and a floor. It just felt peaceful with Spanish moss hanging from nearby trees. 

What was interesting about the chapel was that it was made with oyster shells crushed into the concrete. The concrete is actually called, tabby. Here is how you make it: Burn oyser shells to make lime, and then mix with water, ashes, and sand. 

Then we stopped at the Penn Center that was on the same road. It was one of the first freed black schools where they taught them farming, shoe making, basket weaving, etc. Martin Luther King, Jr. used to come to the island to the school to rest after his lectures across America. He lived in a house across the street, and it is said that he wrote his “I Have a Dream” speech there. He was going to return there after leaving Memphis, but he never made it, he was murdered in Memphis. We had just come from Memphis, from seeing the place where he was killed, and through a town in Georgia that had lined its cemetery with confederate flags. 

P.S. This book was set in Myrtle Beach and not on an island.

Chapel of Ease, St. Helena Island, S.C.

great white herons