Rating: 3/5

Sadly, they sent me the other cover, and sadly, Carlyle does belong into the does-never-reach-her-potential group. I read A Woman Scorned first and didn't review it, not quite sure about her, but it really is the better book. Her flaws were the same here - ie. the issues between h/h were not perfectly handled, rambled indecisively - like I'm going to do now, too. 

I enjoy the amount of time h/h spend with each other, but just as Cole in AWS never seemed to be a priest to me, David drew the short straw in this book - he is completely outshun by not one, not two, no, FOUR OTHER MALE CHARACTERS that author plans to use. It's so obvious, and it made my opinion plummet so much. De Rohan is fascinating and taciturn, Hell-Bent is vulnerable and appealing, Kemble is intriguing and irresistible, and I'm sure she'll use Giles again - so what chance does the nominal hero of this book have, when most of it is taken up with four other males?

Carlyle had raised a good point about Cecilia being unable to handle the attraction to the man who nearly raped her. David, being the result of a rape, suffers from what he nearly might have done - it really wasn't, he's not the type, but I THINK Carlyle might have meant to undo the sickening tropes in many romances here - but she doesn't. She leaves the facts in, but flees into the murder mystery and the other four men instead of sticking with the h/h. 

There is still one good observation during sex, always important for me, that these scenes are not rote, but the later ones are, unlike AWS where the two were different, but then again in AWS the deep hurt and emotions were also sort of vaporised, more obvious since Jonet and Cole had deeper differences - but it's not better if in AWoV there are less differences simply because the book is not really about them.

In summary: blame the fucking industry. It hurts more than with that horrid Quinn when Carlyle keeps introducing her heroes as fascinating, complex and compelling characters - in the books BEFORE they are the heroes. Only to have them all be completely identical in their own stories. It's worse than cheap marketing, because David was an insolent, beautiful creature in AWS and in his own AWoW he was just zis guy - and that hurts. It's common to have rakes and rogues and other meaningless words as heroes, but they are never shown as actually being anything bad - and while I don't relish that anyway, I wonder if it's cowardice or inability and I'll stop rambling now.

The women, btw, at least have the reverse fate. While they also all are indentically most-beautiful, hair, breasts, blabla, they are always the firm center of their stories, appearing as cold or plain in previous ones. Again, why can't these writers copy Heyer in the ways that matter? Why dare nobody make h/h truly different in their own stories?

I need to read the three books on de Rohan, Hell-Bent and Kemble now *sigh*