Rating: 5/5

Comanche Moon by Virginia Brown

Five stars for this historical romance set in the West.

This story is set in the old West in a time when marriages were arranged for convenience and power. Deborah has been married off by her father to the heir to a Spanish fortune in the wild territories. Deborah has been a pampered southern belle from Natchez. 

Her wedding reception is attacked by Comanche warriors and her new husband is killed while Deborah is taken captive along with her cousin Judith. 

After a horrible forced march to the Comanche village, Deborah is purchased by Hawk, a Comanche warrior with blue eyes. Hawk is in fact Zack, a half breed who was forced from his home as a very young man because his father had been Comanche.

This love story begins with Zack's respect for Deborah and the way she handles herself in a very difficult situation. 

I hate spoilers in a story but... Eventually Hawk is forced let Deborah and her cousin go back to Deborah's father in law. The father in law is not a very nice guy. The single man who is interested in Deborah is also not a very nice guy but if he convinces Deborah to marry him, he will control water that he desperately needs for his cattle.

This story is set in a time when women were property. It is harsh and brutal at times. 

Hawk shows up as Zack (his original name) and his now working for the rancher who is trying to marry Deborah for her water rights. Of course, her father in law does not want the marriage to take place and he engages in some evil deeds to prevent it. Meanwhile, Deborah and her cousin, Judith, are without means to do anything for themselves.

There are several times during this story that I wonder how the couple can ever be together. There is an HEA but the story itself was disturbing to me in some places. There are some moral issues that are very grey. 

I am giving this story five stars because it's well written and the characters are well developed. However, the story left me feeling a little sad.