Rating: 5/5

AN INFLUENTIAL (AND CONTROVERSIAL) BOOK 

Eric Donald Hirsch Jr. is an American educator, literary critic, and educational theorist. He is professor emeritus of education and humanities at the University of Virginia.

He wrote in the Preface of this 1987 book, “To be culturally literate is to possess the basic information needed to thrive in the modern world. The breadth of that information is great, extending over the major domains of human activity from sports to science… Cultural literacy constitutes the only sure avenue of opportunity for disadvantaged children, the only reliable way of combating the social determinism that now condemns them to remain in the same social and educational condition as their parents… Some say that our schools by themselves are powerless to change the cycle of poverty and illiteracy. I do not agree. They CAN break the cycle, but only if they themselves break fundamentally with some the theories and practices that education professors and school administrators have followed over the past fifty years… Cultural literacy is represented not by a PRESCRIPTIVE list of books but rather by a DESCRIPTIVE list of the information actually possessed by literate Americans. My aim in this book is to contribute to making that information the possession of all Americans.” (Pg. 
xiii-xiv)

In the first chapter, he states, “This book explains why we need to make some very specific educational changes in order to achieve a higher level of national literacy… It focuses on what I conceive to be the great hidden problem in American education, and I hope that it reveals this problem so compellingly that anyone who is concerned about American education will be persuaded by the book’s argument and act upon it.” (Pg. 1)

He says, “Although nationalism may be regrettable in some of its worldwide political effects, a mastery of national culture is essential to mastery of the standard language in every modern nation… But however laudable it is, it should not be the primary focus of national education. It should not be allowed to supplant or interfere with our schools’ responsibility to ensure our children’s master of American literate culture... The acculturative responsibility of the schools is primary and fundamental. To teach the ways of one’s own community has always been and still remains the essence of the education of our children, who enter neither a narrow tribal culture nor a transcendent world culture but a national literature culture. For profound historical reasons, this is the day of the modern world. It will not change soon, and it will certainly not be changed by educational policy alone.” (Pg. 18)

He observes, “It will not do to blame television for the state of our literacy. Television watching does reduce reading and often encroaches on homework. Much of it is admittedly the intellectual equivalent of junk food. But in some respects, such as its use of standard written English, television watching is acculturative. Moreover… the schools themselves must be held partly responsible for excessive television watching, because they have not firmly insisted that students complete significant amounts of homework, an obvious way to increase time spent on reading the writing.” (Pg. 20)

He suggests, “Successful communication depends upon shared associations. To participate in the literate national culture is to have acquired a sense of the information that is shared in that culture. No adult-level discourse retreats to the rudiments of knowledge. If assumptions about rudiments could not be made, ordinary discourse would be so lengthy and intricate as to obscure its own point.” (Pg. 59)

He notes, “The traditional materials of national culture can be learned by all citizens only if the materials are taught in a nation’s schools. But to teach them, the schools must have access to books that explain them… Like everything that helps to spread literature language and culture, a nation’s dictionaries, including those of cultural literacy, have helped to overcome class distinctions and barriers to opportunity. Historically, they have had a liberalizing and democratic effect.” (Pg. 91)

He argues, “well-meaning bilingualism could unwittingly erect serious barriers to cultural literacy among our young people and therefore create serious barriers to universal literacy at a mature level. I am opposed neither to BILITERACY not to the learning of foreign languages. I am strongly in favor of both. In the best of worlds, all Americans would be multiliterate. But surely the first step in that direction must be for all of us to become literate in our own national language and culture.” (Pg. 92)

He explains, “Civil religion gives American culture its direction and defines its fundamental values, but it does not determine the diversified contents of American national culture. American national culture is neither coherent nor monolithic, and no convincing attempt fully to define its character has ever appeared… The national culture, as contrasted with the national civil religion, depends on a highly diverse vocabulary of communication rather than a coherent system of fundamental values and principles. Like the bible of the civil religion, the national vocabulary changes with the consent of those who use it, but because of its use in communication, it is fundamentally conservative and its core contents change very slowly.” (Pg. 102)

He points out, “Many Americans who have graduated from high school in the recent past have been deprived of the cultural vocabulary possessed by educated persons in past generation. Some repair work is necessary for them and the or the members of the current school generation. They must be reintroduced to the cultural vocabulary that continues to be the foundation for literate national communication. The new illiteracy is sometimes excused by the argument that our schools are now educating larger portions of our population. The point is that we are NOT educating them. We undertook the great task of universal education precisely in order to produce a truly literate population, but we have not succeeded in that task in recent years. We must assure that new generations will continue to be enfranchised in our medium of national communication as securely as they are enfranchised at the polls.” (Pg. 108)

He states, “The polarization of educationists into facts-people versus skills-people has no basis in reason. Facts and skills are inseparable. There is no insurmountable reason why those who advocate the teaching of common traditional content should not join forces. No philosophical or practical barrier prevents them from doing so, and all who consider mature literacy to be a paramount aim of education will wish them to do so.” (Pg. 133)

He recounts, “Such agreement about literate culture should… enable a random group of literate Americans to compile a list of its core contents… In 1983 I persuaded two of my colleagues at the University of Virginia… to help me compile such a list… Each of us took the primary responsibility for developing the vocabulary within his field… When we finished the first version of the list, we submitted it to more than a hundred consultants outside the academic world… In consulting others about our initial list we did in fact discover a strong consensus about the significant elements in our core literate vocabulary… We do not claim that the initial list is definite… Nonetheless, the consensus we found has made us confident that our list provides a fairly reliable index to the middle-level information that is shared by most literate people but remains largely unfamiliar to most illiterate people.” (Pg. 135-136)

He concludes, “I hope that anyone who has read this book will see that the educational reform it advocates are based upon reason and strong evidence. The reforms are meant to raise the reading level of all students and to break the cycle of illiteracy that persists from parent to child under our current school curriculum… I hope that in our future debates about the extensive curriculum, the participants will keep clearly in view the high stakes involved in their deliberations: breaking the cycle of illiteracy for deprived children; raising the living standard of families who have been illiterate; making our country more competitive in international markets; achieving greater social justice; enabling all citizens to participate in the political process; bringing us closer to the Ciceronian ideal of universal public discourse---in short, achieving fundamental goals of the Founders at the birth of the republic.” (Pg. 143-145)

This book will be great interest to all those interested in the debates about the ‘Western Canon,’ the 
‘Great Books,’ and Multiculturalism