Rating: 5/5

THE FAMED ANTHROPOLOGIST DRAWS CONCLUSIONS FROM THREE CULTURES

Ruth Fulton Benedict (1887-1948) was an American anthropologist and folklorist, who studied under Franz Boas, and was close friends (quite possibly VERY “close”) with Margaret Mead. 

She wrote in the “Acknowledgements” of this 1934 book, “The three primitive peoples described in this volume have been chosen because knowledge of these tribes is comparatively full and satisfactory and because I was able to supplement published descriptions with many discussions from field ethnologists who have lived intimately with these peoples and who have written the authoritative descriptions of the tribes in question. I have myself lived several summers in the pueblo of Zuni, and among some of the neighboring tribes which I have used to contrast with pueblo culture… For the presentations here I am alone responsible and it may be that I have carried some interpretations further than one or another of the field-workers would have done. But the chapters have been read and verified as to facts by these authorities upon these tribe, and references to the detailed studies are given for those who wish to consult the full accounts.”

She stated in the first chapter, “Anthropology was by definition impossible as long as these distinctions between ourselves and the primitive, ourselves and the barbarian, ourselves and the pagan, held sway over people’s minds. It was necessary first to arrive at that degree of sophistication where wo no longer set our own belief over against our neighbor’s superstition. It was necessary to recognize that these instructions which are based on the same premises, let us say the supernatural, must be considered together, our own among the rest.” (Pg. 3)

She observes, “All over the world, since the beginning of human history, it can be shown that peoples have been able to adopt the culture of peoples of another blood. There is nothing in the biological structure of man that makes it even difficult. Man is not committed in detail by his biological constitution to any particular variety of behavior. The great diversity of social solutions that man has worked out in different cultures in regard to mating, for example, or trade, are all equally possible on the basis of his original endowment. Culture is not a biologically transmitted complex.” (Pg. 12-13)

She suggests, “We greatly need the ability to analyze traits of our own cultural heritage into their several parts. Our discussions of the social order would gain in clarity if we learned to understand in this way the complexity of even our simplest behavior. Racial differences and prestige prerogatives have so merged among Anglo-Saxon peoples that we fail to separate biological racial matters from our most socially conditioned prejudices.” (Pg. 40)

She notes, “The diversity of cultures can be endlessly documented… Traits having no intrinsic relation one with the other, and historically independent, merge and become inextricable, providing the occasion for behavior that has no counterpart in regions that do not make these identifications. It is a corollary of this that standards, no matter in what aspect of behavior, range in different cultures from the position to the negative pole.” (Pg. 41)

She states, “Cultures, likewise, are more than the sum of their traits. We may know all about the distribution of a tribe’s form of marriage, ritual dances, and puberty initiations, and yet understand nothing of the culture as a whole which has used these elements to its own purpose. This purpose selects from among the possible traits in the surrounding regions those which it can use, and discards those which it cannot… The process of course need never be conscious during its whole course, but to overlook it in the study of the patternings of human behavior is to renounce the possibility of intelligent interpretation.” (Pg. 43)

Of the Pueblos of New Mexico, she comments, “In their strict Apollonian ethos, the Pueblos distrust and reject those experiences which take the individual in any way out of bounds and forfeit his sobriety. This repugnance is so strong that it has even been sufficient to keep American alcohol from becoming an administrative problem. Everywhere else on Indian reservations in the United States alcohol is an inescapable issue… But in the pueblos the problem has never been important. They did not brew any native intoxicant in the old days, nor do they now… Drunkenness is repulsive to them.” (Pg. 82)

She summarizes, “The segment of human behavior which the Northwest Coast has marked out to institutionalize in its culture is one which is recognized as abnormal in our civilization, and yet it is sufficiently close to the attitudes of our own culture to be intelligible to us and we have a definite vocabulary with which we may discuss it. The megalomaniac paranoid is a definite danger in our society. It faces us with a choice of possible attitudes. One is to try to brand it as abnormal and reprehensible, and it is the attitude we have chosen in our civilization. The other extreme is to make it the essential attribute of ideal man, and this is the solution in the culture of the Northwest Coast.” (Pg. 205)

She notes, “Western civilization tends to regard even a mil homosexual as an abnormal… We have only to turn to other cultures, however, to realize that homosexuals have by no means be uniformly inadequate to the social situation… In some societies they have been especially acclaimed… [With] The American Indians … homosexuals are often regarded as exceptionally able… The emphasis in most tribes was upon the fact that men who took over women’s occupations excelled by reason of their strength and initiative and were therefore leaders in women’s techniques and in the accumulation of those forms of property made by women.” (Pg. 242-243)

This book is one of the “classics” of cultural anthropology, and will be of great interest to those studying this field.