Rating: 2/5

I didn't see the movie that was made of this novel. Others tell me it was pretty much the Rocky of chess, with the underdog working his way up to win the nationals.

This is really not what the book is about. On the surface, the book has interesting insight into the world of chess, from the impoverished masters and grandmasters that play in clubs or parks in New York and other cities, to the rigid study of Soviet chess (at least, back during the cold war when this was written). A great deal of the book follows his son as he plays tournaments, many of them with kids his age. (His son ranges from ages 6 - 9 over the course of the book.) During the book, Fred Waitzkin goes into the terrible behavior of chess parents, the pressure they can put on their kids, and the terrible shame of losing that the champions develop. And he periodically questions his own behavior, or remarks on his wife or mother criticizing how much he has pushed his son. But that brief bit of insight lasts for only a moment before he is back to pushing his son harder than ever.

That phenomenon in Waitzkin's writing is representative of the book as a whole. He will touch upon a topic, perhaps even start to bring about a conclusion, then rapidly spin away to something else, leaving you unsatisfied and wondering exactly what the point was. He is repetitive on the subject of his own inadequacies and behavior as a parent, and then periodically dives into other topics without any seeming rhyme or reason.

Bobby Fischer, the namesake of the book, barely makes an appearance, except to be referred to frequently as an inspiration for so many kids/parents getting into chess, and a brief chapter when the author goes unsuccessfully looking for him in Los Angeles. While so many great players live impoverished lives in the US, Fischer could command huge sums for interviews or games, and this made him something even more extraordinary in the chess world. Of course he also seems to have become a crazy recluse, supporting Nazi philosophies and spouting anti-Semitic slurs. And once again, Waitzkin doesn't really seem to bring this to any sort of real point.

I read separately that Fischer, once the book was made into a film, was very angry at not receiving any royalties for the use of his prestigious name. And, crazy or not, I really can't blame him for that because his name feels like it was tacked onto the book solely to sell more copies.

The book was not totally worthless, I feel I learned something about the world of chess, but it could have been a lot more coherent.