Rating: 5/5

I don't quite know how to write this. 

Last week I bought this book out of sheer desperation. I barely could make the drive to the book store without crying out in pain. 

I have had two back surgeries, and was seriously contemplating a 3rd (and hopefully final). I had been diagnosed with spinal stenosis, DDD, a bulging disc, and nerve damage. I am only 30. I have tried everything! I lost 45 pounds, I eat well, I exercise 6 days a week, I don't lift my children or other heavy things, I did everything as I was supposed to after my surgeries and was still left with crippling pain. 

18 months ago I read "This Naked Mind" by Annie Grace as I was first attempting sobriety. I had already had back surgery at that point, but I remembered that her entire premise for HER book was based on the work of Dr. Sarno. That book is the book that got and has kept me sober for 18 months now, so last week when I was in desperate search for pain relief, I suddenly remembered his name and tried to find a local copy. 

I devoured the book in a matter of hours. I then devoured The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain. After finishing both, I suddenly realized that my burning nerve pain in my leg could be "turned off" with just concentration. I tested it over the next few hours, and 24 hours later I was still able to "turn off" the pain as soon as it started. I was hopeful, though it did require quite a bit of concentration. Almost like meditating. 

But now three whole days after reading both books, I am entirely pain free. I am also entirely flabbergasted. 
I cancelled my epidural spinal injection that I had scheduled. 
I put away my ice packs, my heat packs, my muscle relaxers, my ibuprofen, and my biofreeze spray. 
I have no nerve pain in either leg, I do not have burning lower back pain, the cramping in my legs has stopped, and I have regained all feeling that I had lost. 

4 days ago I had a very bleak hope that I might be pain free one day, and now my life is completely changed. I know it sounds crazy, I can hardly believe it myself. But take it from me, I've HAD the back surgeries, I've had multiple injections, I've done PT, chiropractic, massage, you name it. Nothing has touched my pain like reading this book and genuinely believing in TMS. I have a classic presentation of it, just as Dr. Sarno describes. I believe that this book could work the same wonder on others who have similar pain. 

No matter how crazy of a premise it sounds, I will share this book with whoever I can!