Rating: 1/5

It's fitting that Rand's non-fiction reads like an advertisement for Atlas Shrugged; she is the ultimate capitalist after all. This is the lowest score I've yet given a book on this website; it's rare that I can't find something of significance to appreciate in any of the books I read. Although Anthem was a semi-interesting (if hackneyed) entertainment for an afternoon, this essay collection is as bad as it gets. Supposedly a scholarly work of philosophy, this book has inspired many people (some of whom I admire), but I found the shrillness which Rand employs in her "reasoning" is matched only by her supreme arrogance. 

I don't think anybody could convince me that selfishness is a virtue (certainly not Ayn Rand). Her defenders point out that the title is a misnomer of sorts; they point out that it is "rational self-interest" not selfishness. Personally, I find it embarrassing that so many intelligent people are taken in by her dismissal of altruism; as Gore Vidal rightly points out in his shrewd essay on Rand, the fact that an author who blatantly preaches "every man for himself" is so popular says quite a bit about our society. The odd thing about Ayn Rand is that many of her chief followers are religious (Glenn Beck for example); apparently many would be Objectivists only read the sections on looking out for # 1 and how being egotistical is the only way to lead mankind to advancement, while ignoring Rand's militant atheism. This would imply that even her followers can't stomach some of her opinions. As for me, I found morally repugnant ideas on nearly every page. I don't attack Rand for being secular (there's nothing wrong with that); rather I attack the hypocrisy of her statement that religion imprisons man in dogma, but then goes on to state a "philosophy" that is not only immoral, but equally dogmatic (if not more so) as she is highly dismissive of any views except her own, without any desire for a serious, open discussion. For someone who valued "reason" so much, it's odd that this book is so dense with logical fallacies and reasoning that is, at best, fuzzy and, at worst, ludicrous. Finally, the writing style she employs here is shrill and irritating, hardly appropriate for any "scholarly" work; also, she constantly italicizes arbitrary words, which give the impression of a parent lecturing a particularly dim-witted child. 

In closing, I must say that I couldn't recommend this book to anybody that believes in the importance of charity and generosity, is religious or is annoyed by banal and sanctimonious attacks on religion's worst aspects while ignoring any positives, enjoys good prose and/or has left leaning opinions. For everybody else...