Rating: 5/5

René Descartes: A Discourse on Method and Related Writings 
Published by: Penguin Classics

The Discourse on Method is a very short work (60 pages or so) and was intended initially to preface Descartes three scientific essays. The publishers of this edition thus included a collection of other works by Descartes as well as various correspondences all selected to provide context for the work. 

Discourse on Method: The Discourse itself is just that, a discourse. It was never intended to be a comprehensive account of Descartes’ philosophy and it does no such thing. The work is more anecdotal in nature, providing a personal account of the development of Descartes’ skepticism (the philosophical idea) and his application. It then proceeds to discuss the results of the application of his skepticism in the discussion of how it relates to his physics and what that implied for his religeon. He also advocates for the use of inductive reasoning rather than deductive reasoning (reasoning from evidence rather than reasoning from first principles/axiomatically) and diverged from the use of Aristotelian “demonstrations”, which employed the latter form of logic, in the discussion of the natural world. As is expected Descartes got some things wrong about the world, like his contention that the action of the heart was due to heat expansion, but he also got a lot of things right and contributed greatly to what is now the method of science.

Selected Correspondances: There are a number of correspondences which serve to provide a little context for the Discourse as well as a look into how it was seen by his contemporaries.

The World: This book provides a short depiction of what an imaginary world might look like given Descartes understanding of the laws of physics. As far as I am aware, he opted to describe an imaginary world rather than the real world partially out of fear of what had happened to Galileo. It was for this reason he never published his comprehensive physics and this book was published posthumously. 

Rules for Guiding one's Intelligence in Searching for the Truth: This work was also never published in Descartes’ lifetime. It is as its name suggests: a list of rules, and it outlines a method for finding truth. It was a precursor to the Discourse on Method written afterwards, and one can see how the philosophy of skepticism could have been developed by its author. This work is more assertive than the Discourse, but it still advises diligence and caution in finding the truth and suggests that the properties of objects should be determined from what we can observe; though Descartes focuses on empiricism a little more in the Discourse and the Rules are a little more abstract.

I recommend this book to anyone who is interested in philosophy, and I look forward to rereading it myself so that I can understand it better.