Rating: 5/5

really enjoyed becoming acquainted with the Garrison family. Jordan is the oldest child. Jordan has a twin brother and sister. There is also the father and the grandmother. Jordan is only thirteen years old. He experiences difficult losses at his early age. Jordan is a good boy. His father tried very hard to teach him the basic principles that would lead to a successful life. 

Jordan's problem is one not unknown to all teenagers. He becomes very weak under peer pressure. As I read the book, I thought a lot about peer pressure. I've heard the words all my life. Not an innocent I've succumbed, at times , to peer pressure. I would like to know more about peer pressure. Why do young people try so hard to please their friends? 

The pressure of peers is not the only interesting part of this small book. My favorite character is Snackman. He owns the corner store. No one knows his age. His hair is grey. This makes people think he is around fifty years old. Whatever his age, he is compassionate and wise. I would call him the philosopher of the Oakwood community.

I also love the grandmother. Throughout the book I could see the importance of family and community. These are the people who show the virtues of Kwanzaa in their lives everyday.: "Umoja/Unity, Kujichaglia/Self-Determination, Ujima/Collective Work and Responsibility, Ujamaa/Cooperative Economics, Nia/Purpose, Kuumba/Creativity, Imani/Faith."

At the beginning of each chapter down the side of the page flows Kente cloth. After a tragic event, Snackman places the Kente cloth around Jordan's shoulders. Although, Jordan seems to have all the right elements for growing strong and upright in his life, the paradox is the way he sees and reacts to life, at least, for awhile. 

"Yet though Jordan was embraced from all sides, he felt alone. He felt as if he had crossed some threshold, or, more accurately, had been delivered blindfolded to some threshold that he was afraid to cross."

I think Eric V. Copage uses many symbols. I believe even Jordan's name is symbolic. There is also Jordan's African dream, the lost Kente cloth and the fable. This is a wonderful, wonderful book for middle aged children, young adults and adults.