Rating: 5/5

5★
“In an old house in Paris
that was covered with vines
lived twelve little girls in two straight lines”

Someone mentioned this recently, and I can't believe I hadn't added one of my all-time favourite children’s books to my list! I remember my mother reading it to me, and I loved reading it to my children and grandchildren. I used to be able to recite most of it.

The rhyming is not strictly the same all the way through, but it is lyrical and almost impossible not to read aloud. The story follows the little girls through their days as they go walking around Paris, come rain or shine. There are scenes from all over the city.
“the smallest one was Madeline”

On the iconic cover, Miss Clavel, their teacher, is holding the hands of two girls. Knowing the story as I do, I suspect that she is really trying to hang onto Madeline, who is already looking adventurously off to the side.

Miss Clavel doesn’t miss a trick! She knows how brave Madeline is, compared to the other girls.

“To the tiger in the Zoo
Madeline just said, ‘Pooh-pooh’”

At least the tiger is in a cage, so Madeline isn’t at great risk. Bemelmans shows, with just a few simple strokes that the city has other dangers.

“and nobody knew so well
how to frighten Miss Clavel.”

Note Madeline teetering on the wall while Miss Clavel has her hand raised to her brow in despair. There’s almost no picture, and yet it says everything. Every child who sees this understands it.

One night, Miss Clavel wakes suddenly.

“In the middle of the night
Miss Clavel turned on the light
and said ‘Something is not right!’”

Madeline is crying in pain. The doctor whisks her away to hospital to have her appendix removed. When the class visits her in hospital, Madeline is happy, glorying in the gifts and attention. 

“and the dollhouse from Papa”

That night, Miss Clavel is startled awake again, and we see the same image of her in bed, exclaiming as before.

She already has one child in hospital – what next? The illustrations of her rushing to put her habit on and racing down the long hallway are perfect! There is a series of her stretching ever further as she hurries.

“And afraid of a disaster Miss Clavel ran fast

and faster!”

Of course, the remaining eleven little girls “want to have our appendix out, too!” And then comes the part I remember so fondly, because my mother used to say it often, hoping we would be quiet and go to sleep. I leave the words with the illustration so you can see them fade softly down to a whisper.

“ ‘Good night, little girls!
Thank the lord you are well!
And now go to sleep!’
said Miss Clavel.
and she turned out the light – 
and closed the door – 
and that’s all there is – 
there isn’t any more.”

Still a favourite! Madeline had some more adventures in other books, and there’s all kinds of merchandise and games. But it’s this book that sticks in my memory. Just the best. Today I still sometimes say:

She turned out the light – and closed the door – and that’s all there is – there isn’t any more.