Rating: 5/5

In the novel Starry, Starry Night, Lurlene McDaniel restores the true meaning of the holidays through 3 stories about teens rising to help one another, and be different than the norm. She evokes emotion throughout the story using diction, and ties together the three books by unique themes that intertwine in some sort of way.McDaniel demonstrates the themes at the end of each story through a passage explaining what the individual has learned. Each book has a different twist to the theme, but generally speaking the overarching theme would be: challenges teens face have the ability to restore the true meaning of Christmas: love, hope, family, and selflessness.

In the first story Christmas Child, the main character Melanie feels like her heart has been ripped out and that life is not fair when her baby sister is born during the holidays and only lives for a few hours. The baby’s brief life shows her that love lasts forever. McDaniel evokes emotion through diction, especially in this passage; “Surprised that she’d even fallen asleep, and still groggy, she stumbled into the bathroom and took a shower” (37). Surprised, groggy, and stumbled all evoked emotion in me when reading. These words demonstrated to me the painful process that Melanie was going through. “For they were a family. And what remained of their family was different, changed, somehow made bigger, stronger, deeper by Jennifer’s existence” (87). This passage was Melanie’s thoughts after Jennifer her sister had passed away. Melanie now knew that the love they shared for Jennifer would last forever and change the family completely, however change in a good way, not a bad like she felt in the beginning of the story.

In the second story Last Dance Brenda faces troubles in deciding what to do when she could be a dying young boys only and last chance for happiness. McDaniel evoked emotion in me by demonstrating what Brenda is going through diction examples being; “Slow flush creep up” (98), “hot and cold at the same time” (98), “almost creepy” (98), “squirmed” (99), and “vulnerability” (99). These were all little sound bites that evoked emotion in me by painting a picture and demonstrating what Brenda was facing. In the end though she felt she made the right choice,“Brenda knew she’d truly done the right thing. She’d have the rest of her life for the Matt Forresters of the world. But she only had one special night with Doug” (164). Brenda knew she did the right thing, especially in this situation. She put the heart of Doug before her own and in return got a very rewarding experience.

In the final story Kathy and Ellie become great friends, and learn how to make lemonade out of the lemons that life gives you. McDaniel evokes emotion through diction using words like, “trembling” (229), “tears welled” (229), “pressure” (231). These words all demonstrated the struggles that Kathy and Ellie were facing. In the end they became good friends and learn not to judge one another, or others for that matter. Life will throw things at a person, and it is all how that person deals with it and makes that situation the best. Kathy teaches this to Ellie. “She took Kathy’s hand, looked up at the bright, glimmering star and wished with all her heart for Kathy to find her answer. For Kathy to be at peace with whatever she chose to do” (243). Ellie learned to be selfless and care for others, she learned her true values and morals. 

This isn’t really three stories about Christmas, it’s three stories told by girls who encountered life changing experiences that taught them the values of family, love, hope, faith, and friendship.