Rating: 4/5

Whatever else he was aside for the moment, Abbey was a relentless diarist and we have this selection taken from his journals by a close friend (David Peterson) to thank for compiling it. Like many authors when asked which of their work is their favorite they will pick them but Abbey shunned at least this portion of his output and at one point almost destroyed the originals that at the time were in the possession of the University of Arizona special collection. Fortunately they survived and we have this collection to illuminate one of the least understood and frequently most maligned of contemporary writers (not without good reason).

Abbey is a hard one to pin down - frequently funny, often caustic (particularly to fellow writers with whom he had public feuds especially later in life i.e., Tom McGuane, Gretel Erlich and Annie Dillard with whom he was often compared as a “nature writer” for lack of a better label). 

“‘Be kind’ is perhaps actually more difficult than ‘Love everybody.’ Love is treacherous, really easy and the lover a tyrant. I would rather be tolerated than loved – wouldn’t I? – as I prefer to tolerate rather than love. I’m another tepid liberal myself, despite extreme inclinations and fanatic aspirations.” (p.59) This sentiment from the man who fathered four children from five different wives and had little to do with the upbringing of most of them either because his peripatetic wandering from coast to coast left him apart from his kids or he was too busy doing what was most important to him. 

He grew up in the small town of Indiana, Pennsylvania but is most associated with his life and writings set in the southwest and Utah where he found his muse – the canyon lands and deserts of the American southwest. Although much of who we are today is defined by what we do for a living, Abbey is more defined by the work he didn’t do – an itinerant working part time for the Park Service primarily as a fire lookout, a job he loved for its isolation. 

The love of nature sentiment runs strongly throughout his diaries e.g., 

"This land belongs to them that love it (and will fight for it?). 
DICTUM: NO AUTOMOBILES IN NATIONAL PARKS.
Let’s make them parks and not parking lots.
FOR HUMAN BEINGS ONLY.
God bless America. Let’s save some of it." (p.141)

But then there is the Abbey who purchased a Cadillac convertible later in life and was known to drive down forest roads tossing his empty beer cans aside saying “my beer cans are prettier than your billboards”.

Much of his writing occurred during and between his stints with the park Service including “Desert Solitaire” one of the greatest books about the outdoors and nature written to date. 

Not surprisingly he had a less than positive view of reviewers and the publishing industry he became increasingly dependent on for income because of his spotty work history. About what was reportedly his favorite novel he wrote: “Rejecting Black Sun – the biggest publishing blunder since Simon &amp; Schuster rejected the New Testament.” p. 174 Yet it is candid statements like this that show his humanity: “All of my books have been hastily and carelessly written, in violent desperate spasms of last-minute effort to meet some publishers mad invented deadline. The only book I took pains with, actually labored over was Black Sun and the reviewers hated it. (I think it’s my best, most deeply felt.) p. 253

As readers we can’t help but wonder what the spark is for the book we’re holding in-hand. Here is one of the more clearly stated reasons I’ve seen:

“Why I write:
Not so much to please, soothe or console, as to challenge, provoke, stimulate, even to anger if necessary. Such is my aim. (What’s yours?). And, of course, to entertain. To generate tears and laughter. 
Or I wrote to amuse my friends, and to aggravate – exasperate - ulcerate - our enemies. 
The fine art of making enemies: I’ve become remarkably good at it. Which is probably why reviewers give me such a hard time?” p.284

And he does all in equal measure in this highly readable collection.