Rating: 5/5

I've been living in Fez for four days with Amar, Polly (Lee) and John Stenham. What an adventure inside and out of the medina. Paul Bowles artfully weaves Arabic and French words in the story which did bother me at first (much like the first few days traveling in Asia or the Middle East) until i gave into it and caught on. War between the French and Moroccans wasn't the only battle going on. It was a battle of the sexes when Lee and Stenman got together. It was also a battle between pure Islam and Arabs who didn't follow the Koran, plus the age-old differences between those scraping along for money and the opulent rich. Bowles descriptions walked me through the narrow passageways and zigzagging streets of Fez, sat me down in the tea houses and on a crowded seat riding out on a rickety bus to a religious gathering in the countryside. No one was really in a comfort zone with all of the changes happening in French-occupied Morocco. That was the heart of the creative tension in the story. Bowles lived in Morocco and had a writer's view of the changes happening there that he captured beautifully. He crawled inside the hearts and minds of the characters as well as capturing the setting. His writing is often poetic with images so strong I stopped and reread sentences to let them seep into my imagination as I savored them. In the end (and the story did have to end) I was left with the not-so-profound thought that no one in the story really understood anyone who wasn't just like him or herself when even belonging to the same family or faith didn't help. The two Americans left Amar in the dust as they drove off. He was alone, but clever enough to make his way I'm sure. We ARE all alone, bottom line, and live by our innate beliefs, probably never really understanding others. Does confronting another culture help us know ourselves or do we leave it behind like John and Polly? 
I want to reread The Sheltering Sky and then get started on Bowles other books. Reading The Spider's House was a sensory experience.