Rating: 1/5

This book is marketed as a critique of American foreign policy, but the truth is that it belongs more in the realm of apologia. The authors do make some criticisms, but the overall effect of the book is to reassure Americans that the goals of their foreign policy are sound and that their methods would succeed if not for the incompetence of a few bad actors.

Indeed the central idea of this book is that the struggle in Asia is not between America and communism, but between American officials who are intelligent and noble and American officials who are boorish dullards. Through a series of interlinked vignettes the authors show that America could easily accomplish its goals if it could get rid of the latter and recruit more of the former.

In fairness the issue of professionalism in the foreign service is a legitimate one to focus on and is relevant today, but the authors' analysis is so shallow, reductive and elitist as to be laughable. In their view the way to make these foreign posts more attractive and thus win the struggle is to reduce the pay and worsen the living conditions because apparently the best people are attracted by “challenge.”

The book is also very dishonest in it's portrayal of the political and military situation in Indochina. The French are supremely arrogant and stupid and the authors portray them as unaware of the Viet Minh supply trails leading to Dien Bien Phu and completely unwilling to try guerrilla tactics, both of which are false. The authors also vastly oversimplify guerrilla warfare and severely underestimate how difficult it would be to defeat the Viet Minh.

Worst of all though is the character of Colonel Hillandale, who is based off the real life Colonel Edward Lansdale. In a particularly absurd chapter of the book Hillandale defeats the Huk communist insurgency in the Philippines by going over to the common people, playing his harmonica and generally demonstrating how cool and relatable Americans are. I wish I was making this up. In reality Defense minister Ramon Magsaysay and Lansdale defeated the communists by adopting the most popular parts of their platform thus depriving them of the popular support they needed to succeed. Here is a quote from Lansdale:

 “the Huks had analyzed the people’s grievances and made the righting of these wrongs into their slogans. And the change came when Ramon Magsaysay became Defense Minister. He was from the people, loved and trusted them. He and the army set about making the constitution a living document for the people. As they did so, they and the people emerged on the same side of the fight. The Huks lost support and had to go on the defensive.”

None of this is mentioned in the book and in fact the authors make a habit of obscuring the political realities of these conflicts.

The Ugly American was written in 1958, three years after Graham Greene's more widely known The Quiet American. The worst thing I can say about The Ugly American is that Alden Pyle would absolutely love this book. This book is trash and, in my opinion, you should only read it if you are looking for a window into American naivete and overconfidence at the beginning of the Vietnam War.