Rating: 4/5

Michel Tournier's Der Erlekonig(a.k.a. The Ogre, a.k.a Le roi des aulnes) accomplishes the remarkable feat of making the reader feel even queasier than does the poem by Goethe from which it takes its name.

I still recall reading Goethe's poem in my last year of High School surrounded by old friends. The Erlekonig is the ogre of the alders lurking in the trees waiting to grab and kill children. In Goethe's poem a child is riding with his father who is driving his horse at a furious gallop hoping to reach home before the dreaded Erlkonig takes the child. Alas it is not to be. The boy dies in the last stanza leaving my friends and I in the class horrified. Goethe indeed created a masterpiece of terror.

Tournier's version of the tale is even more unsettling to the reader. His protagonist is a socially awkward, automobile mechanic who seems to be of rather sub-par intelligence. His name is Able Tiffauges (which is the name of the property of Gilles de Rais the supposed historical model for Blue-Beard). Tiffauges unlike most Catholic men who arew instructed follow in the footsteps of St. Joseph, Tiffauges Saint Christopher as his role model. His great dream is to be a porter of male children. At this point, the reader becomes quite worried, sensing that Tiffauages is a very strange person who could quickly develop into a predatory paedophile. What happens is indeed quite horrible.

Tiffauges enrols in the French army during WWII, is taken prisoner, changes sides and is transferred to the Eastern Front. He is assigned the job of kidnapping Lithuanian boys to be trained as soldiers to be used against the rapidly advancing Russian army. The dimwitted 
Tiffauges initially believes that the boys are being trained for an elite officers corps. When he realizes the truth, it is of course too late. Tiffauges tries to redeem himself by saving one of the boys from being killed. He picks a particularly nice Jewish lad and flees. Tiffauges and the boy are soon caught. Tiffauges is killed. 

(In the view of some, the author leaves the issue of the boy's survival open although from my view the text suggest that the boy dies as well. The other opinion would have to be based on an interview with the author or same other statement outside of the book itself.)

However the last page is interpreted Der Erlekonig is a profoundly unsettling book. The reader feels ill from the experience of having spent so much time inside the unhealthy mind of Tiffauges. Nonetheless, Tournier's novel is a tour de force. He convinces us that the child-eating ogre of the alders is indeed a reality in our unhappy world.