Rating: 5/5

This review contains spoilers

Alias Grace by Margaret Atwood is an absolute belter of a book. I was absorbed from the very first page, it’s a chunkster, but as we say – it’s not too long if it’s good enough.

We follow the life of Grace Marks who is accused and found guilty of murdering Thomas Kinnear and his housekeeper Nancy Montgomery. Grace was accused of committing this crime with the distasteful James McDermott. Halfway through this read, I discovered this story is based on a real case in Kingston, Canada back in 1843. This added gravitas to this story for me, Atwood says she ”has not changed any known facts”, this made the story even more meaningful. 

Grace is found guilty along with McDermott, the latter hangs but Grace evades the noose and is sent to the penitentiary, ultimately spending close to thirty years incarcerated. She spends some of that time in an asylum and a great deal of her time working as some sort of housekeeper in the prison Governor’s house – as a trusted inmate. Grace is fortunate to have a band of supporters, ‘well-to-do’ acolytes, advocating for her release. Another main character is Dr Simon Jordan (fictional) who spends hours interviewing Grace to try and recover memories of the crime, this to try and assist in the determination of guilt or innocence. Jordan is used by Atwood as a tool to uncover Grace’s life to the reader. 

Well, well, well. The author really toyed with me on this one – I spent most of my time totally sympathetic to Grace Marks, she had such a rough life, coming out from Ireland in squalid conditions, subject to ordinary and sometimes terrible treatment - probably a very typical life of a poor woman of the time. I felt sorry for her, to me she was obviously influenced by the vile McDermott as he was a very nasty piece of work. He was violent, moody, manipulative – not the type you’d sit down and have scones and jam with. So, Grace had my sympathy, but more importantly, I started to fall for this woman – I thought the way she slowly revealed her story to Dr Jordan was so gentle, timid, reserved and calm. Grace didn’t have a bad bone in her body, she was angelic. In addition, my crush on her included my imagination creating this physically beautiful creature (after all I am a bloke), but in a way where she didn’t flaunt it as she probably wasn’t even aware of how beautiful she was. Yep, I was in her corner, a vial of smelling salts, water bottle, liniment oil, a couple of dry towels at the ready and screaming words of encouragement - You Go-Girl!!.

Having said that, Atwood introduced bloody uncertainty didn’t she? Grace’s recall of events surrounding the murders was vague. Why didn’t she warn Mr Kinnear (or someone) of McDermott’s premeditated intention to murder? (well, she was obviously under McDermott’s spell – wasn’t she?) But she could have been involved, she may have given McDermott sexual favours – God forbid!! She may have been intimate with Mr Kinnear (slightly more palatable). Grace certainly had an antagonistic relationship with Nancy, who was capricious and nasty. There were some dynamics – or let’s say hypothetical dynamics in that household, where one could dream up of her having good cause to be involved. 

Oh dear, what to think!!! Some people at the time thought she was evil, manipulative and psychologically inclined to commit such an atrocious act. Grace may have even had multiple-personality-disorder. We may have witnessed a bit of this during a particularly confronting hypnosis session. But was she acting when she was ‘under’ hypnosis? Aaaarrgghh.

It’s this type of uncertainty, this kind of dilemma that caused me to think about this book ALL THE TIME. I couldn’t wait to get back to it – I wanted to find evidence of her innocence. But even evidence of guilt would have helped me – at least then I could let go, move on from Grace and get my life back in order and start eating, have a shave, maybe even a shower. But no – this is all unresolved (as far as this reader is concerned). Yes, she was eventually pardoned and lived a quiet life of domestic bliss with a man who had a crush on her back in the day. A nice fella – so that part of the story was resolved. Her happiness.

But was she guilty?

There is a series on Netflix about this story – of course, I’d love to watch it. But I am hesitant as it may destroy the vivid minds-eye images I have of beautiful Grace, of all the other characters (good and bad) and the times of the 1840s – whether it be the life of the rich, those living in squalor or in captivity. I might have to give it a while. It should be in black and white, with Grace the only character in colour – but that type of editorial influence might be a bit obvious.

5 Stars