Rating: 3/5

Read as part of a bossy book challenge on a group on here. This had always been on my mental "to read" list, but not terribly high up - kind of a "one day / someday" sort of thing. Full disclosure - this is the third book by Frank Miller I've read after Batman: Year One (which I think is brilliant) and Batman: The Dark Knight Returns (which I think is good but a little overrated).

So, Ronin. 

This is actually a review in two parts:

As a contemporary reader
This isn't that great. The premise and plot are interesting and the world Miller builds is well thought out, but some of the dialogue is clunky, and the art... don't get me going on the art. Seriously, the art is so ugly in this book that at times it's difficult to tell what is going on in a panel. There are some pages which if you looked at in isolation you'd wonder if the person responsible could actually draw. So, overall - pretty good story held back by terrible art.

Two stars.

In historical context
I think you also have to look at this (and really any book) partly as a product of its time. This was published in 1983, so to put it in context, that's a year after Blade Runner, a year before Neuromancer, and three years before The Dark Knight Returns and Watchmen. To put it in broader context in the comic world, this is a 30 year old book - 30 years is a long time in comics. The Avengers were only created 20 years before Ronin was written, and 30 years before there was no Spiderman, X-Men or Fantastic Four.

Against that background I think you have to really admire what Miller achieved here. There are a lot of things in this book that would have been revolutionary in the early '80s - the subject matter, some of the characterisation, the use of Japanese art and culture in a Western comic, even some of the page layouts (there are parts that are very obviously precursors to The Dark Knight Returns, with multiple panels of characters on screens, or grids of small, identically sized panels).

The downside is that a modern sensibility a lot of this seems incredibly dated now - I have this image of Frank Miller spending his downtime when he was writing this living in pre-clean up NYC, wearing a leather jacket, smoking a lot and going to the cinema to watch Blade Runner obsessively. A lot of this book is now extremely clichéd, but I guess that's what you get for being a trailblazer and setting the tone.
Overall - hugely influential and an interesting template for some of Miller's later work.

Four stars.

I think it's probably fair to average these out to arrive at a three star rating. One of the other reviews on here summed up this book brilliantly - basically it's more important than enjoyable.

However you look at it, the art is still terrible though.