Rating: 3/5

This is the story of four generations of the author's Vietnamese family but, let's be straight about this, what's interesting about it to most people is the Vietnam War. I would never have picked up a similar book about, say, four generations of a Burmese family.

I enjoyed the book and was never bored with it, but became somewhat frustrated with it towards the end when she described the fall of Saigon to the Viet Cong. My frustration stemmed from the fact that I found this section of the book utterly gripping, deserving of five stars and quite the best description I've ever read about what happened in those last few days and hours.

What this section made me feel about the book was that she'd made a mistake by going into the level of detail she did about the earlier generations of her family. Whilst those elements were interesting (though not riveting) in their own right and useful in putting into their historical context the growth of the Viet Minh, the expulsion of the French, the growth of the Viet Cong and the war against the US, they didn't warrant the quantity of writing within the book that she gave them. They were simply her personal family history, and writing about them in such detail and at such length bordered on the self-indulgent, particularly in contrast to what came later in the book. 

Those earlier sections also suffered from their distance, with the stories being told third or fourth hand, as opposed to the post WWII elements which were generally told to her first hand. I also feel that she would have done better allowing the people within the book to tell their stories in their own voices in the style of someone like Svetlana Alexievich than, as she did about people whom she clearly interviewed, "Giu felt sad to hear....". 

A good book, though frustrating in that she had enough material to have written a great one had she been more ruthless in what she chose to leave out, what she chose to focus on and the way some of the material was presented.