Rating: 3/5

The Cater Street Hangman is the first Charlotte &amp; Inspector Pitt novel by Anne Perry. I had read some of the Pitt mysteries as a teenager and thought I might start at the beginning of the series and read them through. I remembered being fascinated by them at the time, but memory isn't always reliable. In fact, the story is intriguing, well-written, with an interesting twist at the end and a strong component of social commentary that is as relevent today as to the time period in which the story is set (Victorian England). It just wasn't as great as I remembered, but that is hardly the book's fault. One's taste can easily change in 10 or 12 years.

The plot: A murderer is on the loose in the respectable neighborhood surrounding Cater Street. He assaults and mutilates his female victims, then garrotes them with a wire. The killer has shaken this posh, upper-middle class community to it's core. As it becomes more apparent that the murderer is one of their own, rampant fear manifests itself in unspoken suspicions, quiet whisperings, and outright accusations - unfounded and true. Suddenly, as secrets are revealed, nothing is as it seems. 

The characters: The novel centers around the Ellison family. Mother Caroline &amp; father Edward have three daughters: Sarah (married to Dominic), Charlotte (unmarried and somewhat disinterested in the prospect), and Emily (on the lookout for the most suitable and advantageous match possible). The murder hits close to home when their maid is killed. Enter the impertinent and hard-nosed Inspector Pitt, determined to find the truth and solve the mystery.

What I liked most about the book is the protagonist: Charlotte. She's a strong female character: outspoken, clever, compassionate, and a bit defiant. In fact, all the female characters are well drawn. In addition, the author strives to expose the inequalities between what is socially acceptable for men and that which is condemned in women. She explores the effects of men's actions on the women around them. I believe this is a consciously feminist text, which is refreshing in the genre. So many mysteries are about clever male detectives, and while our Inspector Pitt is in fact a man, this is really a novel about women.

(As an aside: the author has very sordid past, which really informs the novel and affected my reading experience this time. The story is not for me to tell, but if you're curious, a little internet research into Anne Perry will clue you in to what I'm talking about. Creepy!)