Rating: 3/5

This is a follow up story to Johnson's Mommy Said Goodbye. You can read my review here. The heroine of Revelations, Ann Caldwell, is a cop just like her father. In MSG, Ann followed in her father's footsteps when it came to hounding Craig Lofgren, hero of MSG. Now Ann has realized her father wasn't the cop she thought he was. She's moved on but still trying to come to terms with the father she thought she knew.

Juan Diaz is an older, more experienced cop who finds himself partnered with Ann Caldwell, a newly minted detective. He's intrigued by her. She tries to dress to hide the fact that she's a woman but Diaz can't help but notice that his partner is a woman. Diaz has already lost one marriage to his job and he doesn't see his kids as much as he would like. We hear how divorce rate is high among cops so I'm glad Diaz had that baggage of a divorce, made it far more realistic. His kids were well done - having enough page time to establish his relationship with them but not too much since he didn't see them that much.

Ann Caldwell is a grown woman yet she hasn't had many of the experiences that most women have had. She doesn't date much and her work has her primarily around men all day. What she really needed was some confidence in her femininity. I do think that Diaz helped bring that out in Ann. You could tell she wanted to change and become who she wanted to be and not who she thought her father had wanted her to be. She just needed a catalyst to make that change.

The suspense plot I found somewhat boring at times. Maybe if it had been more graphic or I had felt Ann or Diaz were in greater danger, then the tension would have been higher. As it was, the villain was fairly easy to identify and I much preferred time spent with Ann and Diaz getting to know each other. I liked seeing Ann come out of her shell, shedding her nervousness and gaining confidence in her power as a woman.

I liked Ann and Diaz, seeing them take their professional relationship and turn it into a close friendship and eventually a romantic couple. The mystery/crime solving was simply okay. I do like Johnson writing style, she does well in the short format. Fortunately, she has a long back list and continues to publish with Harlequin.