Rating: 3/5

This review is of “Pirate’s Wild Paradise” a standalone from February 1989 by Kate Douglas.

.The book starts in Port Royale, Jamaica, with the heroine of the book, James Allison Morgan-yes, that is her name-hereafter known as “Jamie”, trying to get married. She won’t be married, however, as her ceremony is interrupted by Francisco Alonzo Montenegro “Franco” DeCortega, the hero of the book, and Jamie’s former lover.

We then flash back to how Jamie and Franco came to know each other. (Jamie is the only child of notorious English pirate Captain Henry Morgan). One day, Captain Morgan attacks and sinks a ship with Franco on it. Henry plans to kill Franco, but Jamie stops him. Henry then decides to hold Franco for ransom. As to how Jamie got the name James Allison, Henry decided that was what he was going to name his child, regardless of gender. We also learn about Jamie’s mother, Antoinette Duvalle, who was kidnapped and impregnated by Morgan; she later committed suicide.

 After a drunken wager, Jamie and Franco become lovers. He leaves her, however, upon learning that his father, Carlos, is dead. (The DeCortega family consists of the late Carlos, mother Isabella, Franco and his older brother, Lorenzo, who hates Franco, and two sisters, Maria and Teresa). Franco goes to Spain to stop Lorenzo from destroying the family in many ways and Morgan sends Jamie to England to attend a finishing school for ladies.

The scene then shifts to London, where Jamie spends two years learning how to be a lady. While in London, Jamie is told by Henry-now Sir Henry and Governor of Jamaica that Franco returned to Jamaica and never asked about her, and meets Peter Alexeivitch, a.k.a. Russian tsar Peter the Great. Peter offers Jamie marriage. She refuses. Jamie then returns with Henry to Jamaica.

Back in Jamaica, we meet up with Franco again. After he was released from Morgan’s captivity, he went to Spain to confront Lorenzo. It didn’t go well for Franco. With no money and no way to fight Lorenzo’s power, Franco was forced to become what he didn’t want to be-a pirate. He still has plans to defeat Lorenzo, but he has to balance that with having Jamie back in his life (they reunite when she returns to Jamaica). Jamie also gains an uncle, as she meets Antoinette’s brother, Bertram, for the first time.

Franco, Jamie and Bertrand then make their way to Europe-France and Spain to be specific-to help Franco settle his family affairs and help his revenge against Lorenzo. The latter won’t happen, however, as Lorenzo passes shortly after Franco’s arrival (He was gravely ill when Franco got to Spain). After seeing to his sisters’ welfare and regaining his inheritance, Franco and Jamie plan to marry. Another roadblock is put in place, however, as Morgan angrily refuses to bless their union; he later has Jamie kidnapped and returned to Jamaica. More problems soon follow as Morgan passes and Jamie finds Franco in a compromising situation.

After Henry’s death, Jamie, who now has no money thanks to a codicil in Henry’s will requiring her to marry someone he would approve of-and all the money would go to her future husband-decides to follow in her sire and Franco’s footsteps and becomes a pirate. Her crew consists of some of Henry’s former crew and two surprising additions. Later, Jamie’s ship, the Lady Morgan, captures a British naval ship, taking the crew hostage. She then blackmails the ship’s lieutenant, John Terry, into marrying her so she can get her inheritance. The marriage doesn’t happen, however. Franco sees to that. Jamie is arrested and will be hung for piracy, but Franco vouches for her. 

In the end, twin catastrophes-an earthquake and a wave-destroy Port Royale, which is rebuilt. Jamie and Franco survive, she gives birth to a son, and they have their Happily Ever After. 

Upside: Readers who follow my reviews know I love heroines with spirit who are strong and fight against the tide of patriarchal society. Jamie fits into that category. She and Franco are fairly well-developed characters. Franco is a good hero; although he has some alpha characteristics, he is overall a decent man. I liked the fact that Ms. Douglas showed us both Franco and Jamie’s emotions.

Dowside: I didn’t like the way Ms. Douglas handled the storyline involving Lorenzo. After Carlos died, Lorenzo:

Cheated Franco out of his inheritance.

Framed Franco on charges that, had he not left Spain, would	have had him arrested and hung.

Forced Maria and Teresa into marriages to an abuser and an adulterer, respectively.

I like when villains get their comeuppance, and that didn’t happen here. The ending of the book is too simplistic and kind of lame.

Sex: Multiple love scenes involving Jamie and Franco; however the scenes are fairly mild and not very erotic.

Violence: Assault, battery and one killing. The violence is not graphic. 

Bottom Line: “Pirate’s Wild Paradise” is a good book, but has too many issues to make it a great one.