Rating: 5/5

I thoroughly enjoyed this trip around the world with one of the great writers on ecology and human impact on and interaction with nature. Although this book is a bit dated by now (it was written in 1998), it is an amazing introduction to the beauty, complexity, destruction and hope (and so much more) that make up the world’s fishing industry and community. I have not read many environment-related books (my knowledge in this area has been primarily from magazines, newspapers and televised documentaries), but this book has shown me what I have been missing. There are so many things to praise about this book; I will highlight a few:

1. The format: The author travels to almost all parts of the world and introduces us to a colorful cast of (real life) characters, each of whom are local experts in their field (with that expertise coming from any or all of life, work, school) and includes people with very different perspectives on the issues driving the crises facing the local and broader communities - - some are scientists, some are government workers, some are policy advisers, some are fishermen and women, some are from big industry, some are just trying to feed their families. The story in the book is really the collective stories and experiences of all of these many people.

2. The passion: The author truly loves the subject he writes about and this comes through on every page. Whether writing about the people he meets, the fish and other marine life that inhabit a particular place, the effect on the local human population, or the factors considered or ignored by those with the power and authority to determine the fates of all those affected by their decisions or recommendations, Safina makes the reader feel like you are right there with him and experiencing the wonder, agony, despair, joy and hope together with him. 

3. The education: If you have never read a book about our oceans, rivers, fish and the people, communities, industries, government regulators, natural beauty, and life impact )positive and negative), I urge you to read this one. It is considered to be one of the seminal environmental book on our oceans and aquatic life, in the way that Silent Spring was instrumental in launching the modern environmental movement. It is Safina’s first book, won awards and critical acclaim and is a page-turner to boot. 

I cannot recommend this book highly enough! Finishing this book made me feel like I was leaving important friends behind and that I need to learn so much more about our natural world. My only disappointment is that Safina didn’t write a follow-up (but there is still time…)