Rating: 5/5

Even better the second time—giving a fifth star. Immense depth if you’re willing to receive it. This book gives voice to many of the deepest set fears that come with the unpredictable and costly call to follow Jesus but also a picture of why we can trust that it’s all good despite what our limited vantage point may suggest. Few resources provide the encouragement this book does that no sacrifice is too much and that the journey is always worth continuing.

—-

I was initially a little turned off by the directness of the allegory, but this story makes many beautiful points about the unintuitive nature of a journey with Jesus. The journey of transformation that the Good Shepherd is leading us on is not straight and flat but instead long, winding, indirect, and challenging. It requires full reliance on the Shepherd at all times. But while it may not make sense to us in the midst of the journey, it's good, and it's purposeful in changing us into who we were created to be. 

Some Favorite Quotes:
"'shepherd, tell me why i nearly got into Pride's clutches again?'...'I think that lately the way seemed a little easier and the sun shone and you came to a place you could rest. you forgot for a while that you were my little handmaiden and were beginning to tell yourself it really was time I led you back to the mountain. When you wear the weed of impatience in your heard, you will always find your enemies get an advantage over you.' said the Shepherd"

"'You mean' she said incredulously "you really mean that I am to follow that path down and down into the wilderness and the over that desert, away from the mountain indefinitely? why? ' 
'Much Afraid, do you love me enough to accept the postponement and the apparent contradiction of the promise, and to go down there with me into the desert?'...'I do love you, you know that i love you. Oh forgive me because I can't help my tears. I will go down with you into the wilderness, right away from the promise, you really wish it. Even if you cannot tell me why it has to be, I will go with you, for you know I do love you, and you have the right to choose for me anything that you please."

"Much-Afraid looked earnestly. 'I have often wondered about the wild flowers. It does seem strange that such unnumbered multitudes should bloom in the wild places of the earth where perhaps nobody ever sees them...they have so much beauty and sweetness to give and no one on whom to lavish it, nor who will even appreciate it.' The look the Shepherd turned on her was very beautiful. 'Nothing the Father and I have made is ever wasted and the little wild flowers have a wonderful lesson to teach. They offer themselves so sweetly and confidently and willingly, even if it seems that there is no one to appreciate them. Just as though they sang a joyous little song to themselves, that it is so happy to love, even though one is not loved in return. I must tell you a great truth which only the few understand. All the fairest beauties in the human soul, its greatest victories and it most splendid achievements are always those which no one else knows anything about or can only dimly guess at. Every inner response of the human heart to love and evert conquest over self-love is a new flower on the tree of love."