Rating: 5/5

The girls were "full of excitement, looking over their shoulders at nothing and pressing their hands over their mouths to keep back the giggles. There was, of course, no reason on earth why they should giggle, which is, of course, the reason why they did. If you've ever been a little girl you know about that."

This is a great family read-aloud! Fun stories for the children and for the adults, hilarious interpretations of childhood and the mixed up ways of a condescendingly doting aunt.

The writing style adds to the wit of the story, as does the occasional illustration for your young listeners. And in this book, the moral lessons and take-away aren't just for the children.

I loved it!

Cleanliness:

Children's Bad Words
Mild Obscenities &amp; Substitutions - 5 Incidents: good land, thunderation, what in thunder, darned
Name Calling - 4 Incidents: You gump, darned old skunk
Religious Profanity - 21 Incidents: Mercy!, goodness, goodness' sakes, good gracious, gosh, Lord

Romance Related - 1 Incident: The word "breast" is used a couple of times - non-sexually.

Attitudes/Disobedience - 5 Incidents: If a little girl couldn't think of anything to tell her aunt when she asked, she would sometimes invent something. A little girl lies about knowing something. When asked a few questions, she's unable to answer and feels ashamed. A girl is upset and angry and thinks that if she were to just walk on and on until night came and she froze to death, then wouldn't her guardian feel upset. A girl lies, trying to be polite and to cover someone else's rudeness. Children make fun of a poor little boy. They regret their attitude and instead help him.

Conversation Topics - 2 Incidents: A side character has a step-father who is a drunk and the adults in the town suspect he might beat the boy when he's drunk. When a boy at school hears about the step-father's mean actions, he gets mad and says "I'd like to kill him!" "'Yes, he is a darned old skunk!' she said to herself, rejoicing in the bad words she did not know before. It took bad words to qualify what had happened."

Parent Takeaway
A sweet and entirely hilarious story about a little girl that learns she can do a lot more than she thought. She doesn't always do the right thing at first, but repents and learns great, moral lessons.

**Like my reviews? Then you should follow me! Because I have hundreds more just like this one. With each review, I provide a Cleanliness Report, mentioning any objectionable content I come across so that parents and/or conscientious readers (like me) can determine beforehand whether they want to read a book or not. Content surprises are super annoying, especially when you’re 100+ pages in, so here’s my attempt to help you avoid that! 

So Follow or Friend me here on GoodReads! You’ll see my updates as I’m reading and know which books I’m liking and what I’m not finishing and why. You’ll also be able to utilize my library for looking up titles to see whether the book you’re thinking about reading next has any objectionable content or not. From swear words, to romance, to bad attitudes (in children’s books), I cover it all!