Rating: 3/5

Oh, how much ink has spilled on this excellent Shakespeare work and how many tears will have been shed for it, I dare not imagine.
Also, I will not pretend to do a review that you would probably not have read dozens of times, or even bring new elements you would not already know, but only see this piece. Admittedly, this is a tragedy (therefore, as the name suggests, nothing very encouraging), but what poetry in these verses, what beauty in this bittersweet madness the Prince of Denmark believes he has reached, the young Hamlet.
Is he mad? I don't think so. He saw a specter, that of his father murdered by his uncle, but who never felt the presence by his side of a loved one who had recently disappeared, and what is more, in more than questionable conditions. I cannot say that I have never experienced this feeling, or at least wanted to believe it. The specter, therefore, reveals to his son how his brother did it to assassinate him and demand revenge!
So Hamlet's mind is tortured, it is true, but who wouldn't be after such a revelation? So what does he have to do? Take the sword and spill more blood? For his part, the King, Claudius, sensing the danger, does everything to remove Hamlet from the kingdom of Denmark to preserve his place on the throne.
Hamlet, therefore, finds himself alone in the face of his fate because, although the presence of this specter at the castle has been revealed to him by three guards and by his friend Horatio, on whom else can he count? Who will believe it? He will take for granted, which will well arrange the affairs of his uncle or others who would be just as greedy for power as he and who have dedicated their cause to Claudius. Because, as everyone knows, the Prime Minister (to name nothing but him) must be faithful to the one he serves and devote his most remarkable devotion to him.
I will not say more about the plot because I think I will only repeat what has already been said many times, but I insist on the point that this work, although 'this is a drama in which a lot of blood will flow,' is a thing of beauty. It is to read and reread without fail!