Rating: 5/5

This book will never leave my keeper shelf. It had so much poignancy. Kelly is severely abused by her fundamental zealot of a father. She finds some of her mom's old sixties clothes and makes herself up to go out for a night on New Years Eve, and meets Dan. Dan takes her home and has sex with her in a drunken haze. Kelly gets absolutely nothing out of it except an unwanted pregnancy. You can't really hate Dan, because of what he's lost and how he's suffered. He was badly injured and stranded after a plane accident. When he returns, his pregnant fiance has married his best friend. So he loses his fiance and his child in one blow. He's feeling sorry for himself and drinking when he picks up Kelly. She looks older than her eighteen years all made up, so he doesn't realize she is a very innocent virgin. He passes out and wakes up the next morning alone. Weeks later, a scruffy looking teen who looks like she's been beaten up comes to his auto shop and claims she's pregnant and he's the father and asks for money for an abortion. Yes, he probably should have been more responsible and wore a condom. But you will see that he is a man who lives up to his responsibilities. At the same time, you can't judge Kelly for choosing to have an abortion, considering the horrible life she has with zero chances of it improving in any way. It is a scary life to bring a child into.

 He won't give the money to her, because he could not fathom losing another child. And this could be his chance to be a father after all. Instead he makes a bargain with her to take care of her until she has the baby. Thankfully, Dan saves Kelly from her abusive father, who really goes off the rails when he realizes his daughter has gotten pregnant out of marriage (aka sinned against God). 

This was such a good book. It made me cry for how sad Kelly's life is. And how Dan comes to open his heart again to love after what he lost. He doesn't want to fall in love or feel anything deep for Kelly, but ends up falling deeply for her. He is so kind and loving to her, and she doesn't really know how to accept his care, because of how strict and cruel her father is. There is a twelve year age difference between them, but it didn't bother me because Kelly is very mature for her age because of what she suffered, and Dan is not too old to be a good husband to her.

This is one of my all time favorite contemporary romances, series or otherwise. It has the heart and the soul that I really look for in a good romance. Dan is the lost fiance of the heroine of The Vow (if you want to read that story first).