Rating: 4/5

I’ve been patiently parsing my way through a lot of the early works of Stephen King lately. I think “The Stand” is next in order of publication, but that’s a tall order to tackle, so I might put it off until early next year. In the meantime, I picked up a battered paperback copy of King’s long-form essay on the horror artform itself, “Danse Macabre.” Originally published in 1981, King wrote this book at the urging of his then-editor at the time, Bill Thompson, who told him it would be a good idea to do a genre study in the hopes that it would answer a bunch of commonly asked questions from fans and interviewers. I remember reading it not long after it first came out, and the material has aged reasonably well despite the fact that it’s now 37 years out of date. There have been a couple of revisions since the initial publication, and King added a “forenote” to a 2010 revision entitled “What’s Scary?”

So, here is the caveat right off of the bat: younger fans are going to have a hell of a time with the pop cultural references that King uses to illustrate his thesis. He was current up to 1980, but let’s face it, a hell of a lot has happened in the horror genre since then. You won’t see the name Clive Barker in these pages. You won’t see any references to “The Walking Dead.” No Poppy Z. Brite. Even Anne Rice gets the short stick seeing as “Interview With The Vampire” still seemed like a shiny new toy in the field at the time. You won’t even get any Freddy Krueger action, and the “Nightmare On Elm Street” franchise now seems rather quaint in the harsh light of 2018. And I wonder like hell how King would have contrasted the original movie version of “The Thing” with John Carpenter’s truly horrifying remake.

But despite that feeling that the expiration date has long passed on this book, it still has some value to anyone interested in the idea that horror fiction is more than just cheap thrills. King uses “Danse Macabre” to argue that horror is in fact a legitimate art form that has has a place in the cultural canon beyond that of a curious oddity that’s only fit for people who can’t handle “real” literature. And “Danse Macabre” also does another important thing: it establishes Stephen King’s bona fides as a serious genre figure. King often suffers from “popular author syndrome,” that curious malady that infects writers who appeal to a mass audience. There is a certain subset of fandom that tends to equate popularity with vapidity, as if widespread appeal is somehow an arbiter of a lesser quality. And maybe sometimes that’s true to some degree. Some writers DO water down their work in an attempt to reach a larger demographic. But let me tell you this, King isn’t one of them. He has written some of the most classic genre stories and novels to ever grace a bookshelf, and he has never diluted his product in order to score easy bestseller points. 

The best way to approach “Danse Macabre” is to put the pop cultural references mostly to the side and instead focus on King’s well developed ideas regarding the subconscious roots of horror and why it appeals to a certain subset of the populace. Stephen King is a smart guy, and he has been a teacher and a lecturer at various times in his career. Readers with a good eye and an even better memory will realize that some of the material here has been recycled, a fact that King freely admits in his afterword. That doesn’t change the fact that King makes some really interesting observations on the idea of the horror as a genre deserving of respect. And in all fairness, a lot of the books that King cites are older works that still have a revered place in the catalog of fantastic fiction. The sections on television and the movies have aged less well, but it’s fun to remember just how Good (“Twilight Zone,” “Outer Limits,” Hammer horror flicks) or Bad (“Kolchak, The Night Stalker,” “Plan 9 From Outer Space”) the visual medium was as seen from the vantage point of 1980. One of the best things about “Danse Macabre” is that it’s a reminder of just how good (and obscure) a television series like “Thriller” was. Readers today DO have the advantage of YouTube, where reruns of these old television series and a number of movies that King talks about can be easily found. 

I’m certainly not going to spoil the ideas that King presents. Suffice it to say that he makes some very valid arguments about the psychological nature of the horror phenomenon, and he does so with style and panache and a clear passion for his material. Starting with the basics, fairy tales, King takes us through a whirlwind tour of the dark arts, covering radio shows, television, movies, and books on his way to explaining the enduring popularity of horror. My favorite section of the book is where King decides to take an autobiographical detour through some of his own experiences as a aficionado of the eerie. I’m not going to steal any of the man’s thunder when I tell you that there really WAS a Marsten House in the town that King grew up in. All of this just serves to reinforce the fact that Stephen King is a reliable narrator on our journey of darkness. He is as entrenched as anyone in the great Family Tree of horror fandom, and he comes by it honestly and without shame. Face it, King just happened to be lucky enough to have enough of that mysterious rocket fuel that we call “talent” that he was able to distill his love and knowledge of the form into a VERY profitable career as a writer. 

I don’t think that I discovered anything new between these pages. I have enough memory of reading the book in my teens that none of it really felt new to me. I did appreciate the section on television because it did remind me of the long-lost “Thriller” series. And you would be a fool if you did not check out a few of those old “Dark Shadows” shows out on the trusty interwebbings. If you’ve never read “Danse Macabre” before, though, then you need to. Used copies are a dime a dozen and if you’re really into it you can go and find the original hardback printing for a reasonable enough price. It’s an overlooked and fairly obscure part of the King oeuvre, but it’s well worth seeking out for its insight into how the young Stephen King approached his writing within the framework of horror fiction as a whole. 

One last thing….I have had quite a few people mention to me that King is on record as really hating Stanley Kubrick’s movie version of “The Shining.” That may be a case of revisionist history on King’s part. He seems mostly ambivalent about the whole thing in “Danse Macabre.” He has a mild criticism of Kubrick taking “The Shining” “backwards to the sound stage,” but overall he is fairly complimentary to Kubrick’s legacy as a director of true vision. In speaking of the movie version of “The Shining” on page 115, King states that “Kubrick is a director who shows an almost exquisite sensitivity to the nuances of light and shadow.” Not exactly a scathing condemnation of the film, at least not in THIS venue. 

Ultimately “Danse Macabre” is really only necessary for superfans and/or King completionists, but it’s still a fun read, even as outdated as it is. Pick it to pieces with an open mind.