Rating: 3/5

I'm usually a big fan of historical fiction, so I was excited to delve into this book. It follows siblings Sean and Annie as they leave their home in Ireland during the potato famine and set off to America in search of their father.

It had a slow start, spending a few chapters describing their life at home and building the friendship between the Dragoon and the two kids to explain how they came to board the ship to America. This was interesting to read about so I didn't mind the slower pacing. The passages following, about their experience on the ship, were the most interesting of the entire book for me. I loved reading about their friendship with the Fiddler and their mission to retrieve the golden torc back from the Captain. 

The story is packed with more adventures after this as they slowly make their way towards the place they believe their father will be. They meet many different individuals and a lot of the new adventures seems to stick to a pattern; they meet a nice stranger willing to help them, somehow get the golden torc stolen by a new antagonist, and then eventually retrieve the torc with the help of the stranger who ends up dying. This made the story a little predictable at times but it was still enjoyable to read. The dialogue as a whole did also feel long-winded at times; there are paragraphs of speech where the same sentence is repeated multiple times which felt unnecessary and tedious to get through.

The ending was positive but felt rushed. They finally reach their destination and Annie notices a grave which she briefly believes to be their father's, but her fears are quickly dispelled as he comes out to greet them. They have a wholesome reunion and then learn that their mother, who they left dying back in Ireland, is also at the house alive and well. It was a cute ending, but didn't appeal to me personally. I honestly would have preferred it if the grave had been their father's, but I suppose that would have been too depressing for a book aimed at children.

Overall, this was a decent book with just a few elements that missed the mark.