Rating: 3/5

He was standing quietly on a table with a thermometer sticking out of his bottom, like a cigarette. And this humiliating spectacle was rendered all the more crushing by the fact that there was no one else there. Absolutely motionless, and with an air of deep absorption, the dog was standing upon the table in an empty room with a thermometer in his bottom, almost as though he had put it there himself.
“Oh, Tulip!” I groaned. “If only you were like that!”

Did you ever watch that UK tv series Spaced? I remember it fondly as a great show but every now and then I’ll think about when Jessica Stevenson’s Daisy is the self absorbed human. She forgets about dear dog Colin except when she wants him. He’s hopeful and he’s an afterthought in his dog’s eye view. It is a recurring guilt trip for me about my dog when he wants me to hold him instead of whatever it is I’m doing. (I’m such a hypocrite. He is pouting as I write this book review. I read My Dog Tulip on a trip. He had to make nice with dogs he doesn’t like while I was a monster reading about another dog.) It can’t be because I’m that great. Seamus hates being alone. J.R. Ackerley knows what this relationship is. Can you really know that they love you, would the traitor leave you if they got the chance (Seamus sluts it up to every man on the beach! She’s abusing me, save me wet trembling)? I’m going to revisit My Dog Tulip a lot, I just know it. J.R. Ackerley paints himself as a helicopter parent (maybe he invented that. Was that a thing yet in the 1960s?), sure, much more than I ever will be, but there’s a familiar anxiety in their life together. I am thankful that I never tried to breed Seamus. David wrote in his review that if you were grossed out by the detailed descriptions of vulvas that you probably didn’t really love dogs. I’m not icked by that but I did flashback to a rape scene in another book when the engorged wolf got stuck. I did know that dogs and wolves could not exit without completion, Ackerley. He was kind and footnoted this factoid without turning to a traumatizing rape scene. I would worry about subjecting Tulip to male dogs she didn’t fancy. What if that happened?! The love life of Tulip is loaded with the guilt of the universal kind like if you love someone set them free. Is he depriving Tulip of her chance (I liked her boyfriend who only wanted her when she was in heat)? It is almost too intimate, in that way when your dog wakes you up at one in the morning because he was licking his butt too loudly (and you can’t get back to sleep until five minutes before your alarm goes off for work). There’s nothing they could do you wouldn’t love them. But maybe you really are the worst person ever and if they could talk they would prefer that nice lady vet. I feel better about myself, too, because I’m not even as anxious about that as Ackerley is over Tulip. I feel laid back next to him. I wish he was still around so I could sit next to him in the vet. Seamus poops when they probe him….. Ackerley would like to sit next to me, then. Fine!

Englishman Ackerley uses ‘alsatian’ instead of ‘german shepherd’ like popular in the united states. I had to look up the breed in google to figure this out. I may have pictured Tulip as a big white dog for a while. I wonder (but not enough to google again) if they used ‘alsatian’ in the usa during the anti-German times of world war II.