Rating: 4/5

Frantic to make sure this wasn't the last of Rumpole's stories, I was relieved to learn that this book was published in 1987 (and there are many more stories to be read). I particularly enjoy listening to these stories and Frederick Davidson is a delightful voice.  He catches all the nuances of British humor.

There are seven stories in this book.  This is a great way to while away some hours watching Rumpole try his best to save British law and language.

"Rumpole and the Blind Tasting" -- Who can believe Rumpole didn't know about free wine tastings?  He's heartbroken to discover that the real connoisseurs spit out the delightful bubbly.

"Rumpole and the Old, Old Story" -- Can you believe it?  Rumpole leaves "She Who Must Be Obeyed" and takes up residence with the Erskine-Browns.  Fear not, Rumpole quickly returns to his home hearth.

 "Rumpole and the Official Secret"  -- When are secrets not secrets?  That is the question and Rumpole has to defend a woman accused of giving away governmental secrets to the press.  It's much ado about not much.

"Rumpole and the Judge's Elbow" -- I thought this was the funniest of the bunch because a judge (or rather his credit card slip is evidence) in a massage parlor sting.

"Rumpole and the Bright Seraphim" -- This proves that Rumpole will do just about anything to get in front of a judge.  He winds up in front of a court in Germany to save a soldier in a proud regiment. 

"Rumpole and the Winter Break" -- Rumpole meets a cross-section of the public in his endeavors.  However, he remeets a man who has a habit of murdering wives; one who is giving  "She Who Must Be Obeyed" too much attention.

"Rumpole's Last Case"  -- Rumpole takes the opportunity to tell off people he's tired of because he has found a way to riches at the race track.  Alas, all that glitters is not gold (in Rumpole's pocket).

Rumpole Series
Rumpole of the Bailey (1978)
The Trials of Rumpole (1979)
Regina v Rumpole(1981)
Rumpole's Return(1982)
Rumpole (1982)
Rumpole for the Defence (1982)
Rumpole and the Golden Thread(1983)
Rumpole for the Prosecution (1986)
***Rumpole's Last Case (1987)   
Rumpole and theAge of Miracles (1988)