Rating: 3/5

I once team-taught with a young and very gifted teacher, J, whose pedagogy and commitment were streets ahead of mine. It was one of the best periods of my teaching life – we had such fun. In the second year of our work together with a large Year 7 group, she sat down with me one day and said “I think Justin is truly evil.” Justin was quite a disruptive boy – perhaps the only one who really confronted J in terms of discipline and attitude. Justin had said to J. “I’m going to kill you (there was an elaborate plan) and then I‘m going to laugh at your graveside.” All kinds of thoughts are going through my head as I type this. It sounds funny and silly and melodramatic and unbelievable. But I can also still see J’s face as she told me; she was in tears and she was also afraid. She truly believed he was evil and was frightened of him. 

For some reason, he did not have the same impact on me (but he hadn’t threatened to kill me either). And we weathered the year together with Justin and I don’t know what happened to him after that because I left that school and so did J (though our departures were not because of Justin but in the natural order of things).

I thought a lot about this time when I was reading The Case of Mary Bell. This relates to the killing of two small boys in England in 1968 by two girls aged 11 and 13. I was prompted to read this book after hearing the author Gitta Sereny speaking with Phillip Adams (http://mpegmedia.abc.net.au/rn/podcas...). They were mostly talking about her later book Cries Unheard (which is about the same case). Sereny was propelled into writing two books about this case because of the ‘bad seed’ argument. She said that she simply didn’t believe that children were born evil – that it had to be events in their childhood which led to their committing evil acts. One of the things that bothered Sereny was that courts did not allow discussion of the background of criminals in the course of the trial – the facts of the case were the only allowable elements (and I think it’s similar here – the background is only relevant in sentencing.) 

The Case of Mary Bell follows the events around two killings and the subsequent trial. It also has an additional chapter added twenty years later at the time of the killing of James Bolger. Sereny tries to unpack something of the family background of each of the two young girls charged with murder. While interesting, the fact that we learn so little about the motivations for the crime is frustrating. It means that there is an essential gap in the book that leaves me wondering – and that leaves it wanting.

Through the narrative, Sereny indicates that things were awry in Mary Bell’s family that contributed to her anti-social behaviour. She is coy about what these are and they only emerge on the later book when she has a chance to interview the adult Mary. But she is very critical of the prevailing practices of the state in terms of intervention in the lives of children. She says, writing in a post script in 1995, that there is "still too much ignorance within families about how to live and how to love. And a state which is ruled by a dogma of non-interference in private lives - which admittedly, of course, can save enormous sums of money- is showing ever less compassion for troubled adults, far too little care for troubled children, and entirely lacks the courage to separate children from parents when the relationship is manifestly destructive ." (p xiv) She also asks “When are we going to have the courage to discard the tired principle of the absolute sacredness of family and parental ties? When are we going to allow parents to be free if children they for some reason cannot love, and help children be free of the catastrophic handicap of parents who cannot love them?” ( p259) Sereny believes that things have regressed from 1968 to 1995 in Britain, that our children are living in a more materialistic world, our kids are increasingly living in a moral void.” 

We have been provoked lately, to think about good and evil and to think about madness and badness because of Anders Breivik. What can you say of an 11 year old? Would the Justin of my opening (who must now be in his early 30s) recognise my story and laugh? I have taught 3 kids or brothers of kids who have ended up murdering someone. In two out of three cases, they grew up in ‘bad families’. As an adult looking at the home environment, bad outcomes were predictable, but maybe not pre-ordained. What does Mary’s story, fifty years on, mean for us?