Rating: 3/5

Second Rating: 3.5 / 5 (rounded down)

I'm so very glad that I decided to give this book a second chance, as it definitely was raised in my esteem. Not by a lot, but it certainly was in general and gives me hope for the entire series--which is great, as the covers are so very beautiful, and I love how they're based around the seasons! (EDIT: I just figured out that all four books are a continuation of Joanna's and Windhawk's story, and that's kind of...eh....)

Anyway, this story is about Joanna James, a girl who's forced out of her home along with her brother, by her slatternly aunt and lustful uncle. Together, Joanna and her brother, Tag, set out west to find their father in Oregon, and reclaim their home and their fortune. Now...apart from the "going west" part, this isn't really the usual set up for a Native American romance, but I kind of like the originality of it.

Anyway, they're out west and there Joanna meets Windhawk, a young Blackfoot chief, and the two immediately share an attraction, as they are destined soulmates and whatnot. So ensues the usual Native American romance, and while there are misunderstandings and things keeping the couple apart, ultimately they get their happy ending by the end.

I did like it just find the second time around reading it, although I have to admit that I could have done for the conflicts to be more external than all just internal, as Joanna kept thinking that she shouldn't be a part of Windhawk's world, whereas Windhawk himself is also acting a lot on impulse--and for both of them, this has consequences. I think that if maybe they could have been developed a bit more in terms of their own individual strength of character and their relationship as well, I might have been a bit more intrigued to see where their story would go. 

Oh, don't get me wrong, I quite liked everything just fine, but at this time, I'm not yet ready to rank that up to 4 stars just yet. Perhaps a third re-read in the future will be enough to convince me, though. In any case, it's renewed my faith in this author and...well, who could ask for more than that, right?