Rating: 5/5

Summary: An Entertainment Weekly pick as a best non-fiction book of 2003, The Brass Wall is timely and important still. It will be as long as police officers go undercover.

_____

Instinct kicks in when an undercover police officer hears a suspect use a bit of jargon that cops use when speaking to each other. The cop knows that he might be in danger because one of his colleagues on the force might have given information about him to criminals. 

It gets worse when the undercover officer confirms his suspicions. Then it gets worse still when he learns that the crooked cop is the son of a senior official in the New York Police Department. That member of the department's brass uses his power to shield his son, erecting around him the title's protective barrier. 

It is possible to pick up David Kocieniewski's gripping The Brass Wall: The Betrayal of Undercover Detective #4126, which the author developed from his reporting on the case for The New York Times, with the suspicion that "betrayal" is just a bit of marketing hyperbole. But Kocieniewski's scrupulous reporting and attention to telling detail leave one thinking that perhaps "betrayal" is not strong enough. Most readers will have come up with much harsher words by the time Kocieniewski refers to Internal Affairs agents who persistently protected a corrupt cop as "frauds."

The undercover cop sets out to infiltrate a murderous gang to solve the arson death of a firefighter. He ends up trying to salvage the pieces of his personal life and career, shattered by the selfishness of a cop who hurt people but did not care. That bad officer is not made to care by the powers that should have protected the undercover. His department's disregard for him leaves the detective wondering: 

How could he possibly continue risking his life for an institution that had no regard for his life? How could he keep taking orders from chiefs and commanders who had spit at their oath? 

He finds a way to continue because it is in his nature to do so and because he knows that the good cops who encourage him outnumber the others. His dedication is rewarded, but not enough. A reader can cheer for a bit of the ending but the resolution will anger anyone expecting a satisfying wrap-up in which all the bad guys pay. 

The Brass Wall shines with the kind of thorough reporting that looks easy when done well, and Kocieniewski has done it very well. He has assembled the elements carefully and he lets the facts speak for themselves. He identifies in extensive endnotes the sources for everything he presents, carefully noting what he observed personally and what he took from interviews with others or from court records and other documents. 

Kocieniewski also identifies at the start his one narrative device that does not conform to the facts: He gives the undercover detective, his partner and a very few others fictitious names. He does this to try to protect their safety. In typically graceful restraint, he does not point out that this is more than the NYPD bothered to do. 

_____ 

I went to graduate school with the author in 1985-86. That long-ago acquaintance would not lead me to write anything positive about Dave's book if it did not deserve it.