Rating: 3/5

"Neither innocence nor vigilance may be protection against the howling heart of evil" — Mulder (p.100).

Old-world superstitions and the existence of Evil is explored in The Calusari, a young-adult adaptation of The X-Files episode of same name, a tepid novelization that more or less captures the creepiness of the 1994 teleplay. When a two-year old boy is inexplicably led to his death, a photograph of the incident yields evidence of supernatural goings-on that piques Agent Mulder's curiosity, prompting he and Agent Scully to investigate. When another unexplained death in the family occurs, the grandmother of the remaining child seeks to cleanse the boy's spirit with the aid of a mysterious sect of Romanian ritualists, the eponymous Calusari.

While I never found this episode all that memorable, the book itself does a satisfactory job of maintaining the mystery throughout its 100-page run. The reader is unsure what to make of Charlie, the sullen boy with an air of darkness enveloping him, or his superstitious grandmother's seemingly injurious treatment of him. Scully's theory of Munchausen by proxy as a cause of the familial woes is reasonable, unlike some of her other bull-headed rationalizations (i.e. her "mountain-lion" explanation in "Shapes"). To the book’s credit, the story never slackens, nor does the suspense waver. The novella is well-plotted, moderately tense, and possesses an ominous atmosphere that's laced with dark, sectarian undertones—though it doesn’t quite delve as deeply into the Eastern European religion and folklore that older readers like myself would’ve appreciated. I wished the author had devoted another page or two to the exorcism scene, in order to give the book’s climax a proper treatment. On the plus side, though, the family drama is quite compelling and fleshed out adequately enough to keep young readers interested; the mother’s fear came across palpable and genuine. 

One minor yet interesting character worth mentioning is Dr. Charles "Chuck" Burk(s), who makes his first appearance in this story, assisting our favorite FBI agents with his technical expertise and knowledge of bizarre phenomena. A renounced hippie, Chuck is delightfully quirky in his present-day doctoral position; he's a fun character. It's a shame his appearance in this story is so brief. Interested readers can also find him in Regeneration, Book #14 of this YA series. 

To put it mildly, The Calusari is a far cry from William Blatty’s The Exorcist. What we have here, at best, is a solid adaptation of a mediocre episode. While the book isn’t without its flaws, its eerie ambiance and creepy Cliff Nielsen cover may give younger readers the chills.