Rating: 4/5

I have a weak spot for some gritty sci-fi, especially with geopolitical implications. This book was written at the height of the Cold War, and the reader is immediately immersed in some of the paranoia and tension present at that time. Grittiness and geopolitics are both core to this plot, and are delivered adeptly by the author. Ben Bova impressed me with the first installment of his Grand Tour series - a series title I love, since it's reminiscent of the path traveled by the Voyager space craft as humanity just began to grasp for space. The book opens on a world dominated by the Soviet Union, who has forced all the other major political powers out of space. This allows the Soviets to control the world economy by having a monopoly on lunar mining, which has become a major source of minerals across the planet.

I really like sci-fi books which imagine us in the early stages of an expansion out into space. It seems like in many cases astronauts fly by the seat of their pants and we get a less polished, more adventurous-feeling type of science fiction. I like this, at least in part because plots like this allow for more action and quicker pacing, which this book took advantage of in a way I appreciated. There is never a dull moment to be had with Privateers, and I found there were some truly forward-thinking moments where I could tell Bova was trying to predict both the direction the world and its technology might be headed. There are some moments that are almost eerily prescient of our modern-day international and domestic politics, as well as some really interesting consideration given to the knock-on effects of the discovery of a cheap source of rare materials. 

I will say that parts of this book did not age well, both in tone and occasionally in treatment of some characters. I think the main character somewhat exacerbated this simply by not being a very likeable guy, at times. He has been shaped by some pretty negative experiences, and his motivations aren't always altruistic, but he seems to be genuinely trying to do the right thing. While it is hard at times to like him, I was mostly able to suspend this and go along for the ride anyway. These moments are pretty minor and spaced out, so I mostly ignored them. I had another issue with the way this book is organized.  In the first page of the book, many important characters die before we even get introduced to them. We are introduced to them in a flashback shortly after, and we remain in that flashback for the majority of the book. This type of heavy-handed foreshadowing really threatened at times to make me dislike this book. In the end, the author managed to redeem this choice in my eyes for the most part by giving us some context at the end to help frame his decision. 

Overall, this book was a great ride. I will be following Bova to his next stop on the Grand Tour. In the meantime, this book gave me quite a few hours of enjoyment, and I think most fans of sci-fi from the '80s will like this. The quick burn and fast pace really meld well with the atmosphere of the era, and the book captures this all in a great and believable setting.