I have a quote from Joan Didion in my goodreads quote collection. It goes like this: 
I write entirely to find out what I'm thinking, what I'm looking at, what I see and what it means. What I want and what I fear. 
There's also a quote in my collection from Grace Paley: There is a long time in me between knowing and telling.

What Elizabeth Hardwick undertakes in Sleepless Nights strikes me as a combination of both those approaches. She writes as if the page is where her thinking happens and yet her sentences read as if they have taken a long time to mature in some back room of her mind. 
I should say 'dark room of her mind' because it is implied that Sleepless Nights is composed of episodes of her life which the narrator revisits during the hours she lies awake in the dark, trying to choose what to remember and how to process it.  If only one knew what to remember or pretend to remember. Make a decision and what you want from the lost things will present itself. You can take it down like a can from a shelf.

In the cans she takes down from the shelf are the various homes she's inhabited at different points in her life, plus the people she's known, and she opens them up in random order. Sometimes, it's as if there's a photo on the particular can she's chosen: Here I am with my hibiscus blooming in the bay window, or maybe the can has a date instead: It is a Friday night, October 1973. Whatever the label, the contents spill forth onto the page in advance of the reader's eye. Gradually we learn more and more about the person behind the words, and we see that the events of the narrator's life follow closely Elizabeth Hardwick's own life as if this were memoir, written from the vantage point of later middle age:  the battered calendar of the past, the back-glancing flow of numbers…And yet the old pages of the days and weeks are splattered with the dark-brown rings of coffee cups and I find myself gratefully dissolved in the grounds as the water drips downward. 

When it comes to the descriptions of other people, the writing becomes less autobiographical and more like fiction, though there is still present the careful processing method she applies to her personal memories. She recounts, for example, the experience of a woman who spent her life working as a cleaner in other people's houses and then distills the entire account into two perfect sentences: Ferocious battles with repetition, with the sloth of others, the crumbs and dust, the gathering of ashes, the adhesion of eggs, burnt pans and blackened ovens. At some point in the day, finally things in place, for a moment.

Speaking of perfect sentences, I have to mention that I read this book immediately after Brian Dillon's extended essay Suppose a Sentence because he devoted a chapter to Elizabeth Hardwick. That circumstance fits very well with another quote from my Goodreads quote collection, this time from Virginia Woolf: For books continue each other, in spite of our habit of judging them separately. 
Elizabeth Hardwick's book continues Brian Dillon's perfectly—any one of her sentences could have figured in his book, and I found myself reading them all with his voice in my ear. It was a very rich experience.