Rating: 5/5

The Child Queen: 4 stars
The High Queen: 4.5 stars
Overall rating: 4.5 stars

I'm going to be honest and say I had basically no knowledge of Arthurian mythology going into this, other than knowing about Merlin and about Arthur pulling Excalibur out of the stone. Some of my concerns might be just my own because the issues are rooted in the source material. I was hesitant to read this initially because I had no prior knowledge, but I was surprised at how much I enjoyed it. I fell in love with it and it’s one of my favorite reads of the year so far. I’m sad to leave Gwen’s story behind but happy I chose to pick this up. This is one of those long, slow books that can be a little frustrating at times but are best read slowly and not rushed. 

Guinevere is a sympathetic character, and I was surprised to hear in other reviews that this is not usually the case in other retellings. I enjoyed reading the story from her perspective and watching her grow from a young girl into a queen. Yes, sometimes she could be emotional and cried a lot, but I never saw that as a negative thing. Is she not allowed to be emotional? I see quite a few people criticizing this but I didn't have a problem with it. 

In the beginning I felt there was a lot of distance between the events that were happening and the reader, because Guinevere was not witnessing them firsthand, since she is a woman. This could just be me but I almost felt like I would rather have had the story told from multiple perspectives rather than just Guinevere's, but this could just be because I haven't read the source material. I also found this happening at the end, and it made the ending a bit weak for me. I was expecting more emotion but it didn’t hit me because Gwen was getting the end of the story from someone else because she was not there to witness it, which naturally adds distance in a narrative that is told in first person. 

Initially I had wished I liked Elaine more than I did and that she was characterized differently, but having read the entire book I can understand why she is portrayed as a spoiled brat who throws a tantrum whenever any man looks at Gwen and not at her. Her later actions did not seem abrupt or out of character, but all the same I wish Gwen had more female friends in her childhood and adulthood who were more positive. 

I was afraid that the author would not be able to convince me of Gwen's love for both Arthur and Lancelot, but I found that wasn't a problem. The two loves are different, and while I preferred her relationship with Arthur, I didn't dislike Lancelot as a love interest. 

Spoilers!

I did think that some characters were going to play larger roles and appear more often in the story than they did, because some characters seemed to fade out at certain points. When Gwen became friends with Anet, for example, I expected her to be more involved in the story, but then she just faded out. I felt the same with Gwillim, Gwen's childhood friend. She mentions the accident that basically got her sent away from home, and while he appears a few more times he does not have a large role beyond this. They meet only a few times in her later years, and I expected more because she described the incident with the ponies as a integral event in her life but it seemed that Gwillim ultimately wasn't that important. Even Alyse fades out of the story toward the end, and I was a bit confused when Gwen said that Alyse blamed her for Elaine's early death because we never saw that interaction. Last we knew Alyse was on pretty good terms with Gwen. 

One thing I didn't necessarily like was the fact that both times Gwen is kidnapped she is saved by a man, namely Lancelot. Maybe it was necessary for the plot, but I would have liked to see Gwen rescue herself. She does kind of do this later on when she goes out to face Constantine on her own and makes him back down, but I wish she had been able to escape her kidnappers on her own at least once. On the subject of the kidnappings I felt the second rescue less convincing than the first because it seemed a bit rushed. The fire had basically just been lit when Lancelot comes bursting in. I didn't really have time to fear for Gwen's life because I hardly had enough time to process what was happening before she was rescued. The emotions didn't have time to hit me before the danger was averted. In some ways it felt like a repeat of the first kidnapping, where Gwen is in danger and it seems like there is no way out but at the very last moment Lancelot comes to rescue her. In the first kidnapping, however, the tension feels more drawn out, as Gwen is actively in danger for longer and really has to work out how she is going to stall for time. The druid ceremony one just felt rushed all the way through, and I was less convinced by it as a whole. 

The end felt rushed to me, like the author was remembering in Gwen's grief that we need to get the specifics of the end of the tale of Arthur and Mordred because Gwen wasn't there to witness it. We then get a few pages from dying soldier describing what happened, even though he cannot confirm Arthur's death. Once this is done we only get about a page of Gwen's reaction and thoughts before the story is done. It just seemed like there wasn't the emotion there that I was expecting. I was expecting it to tear me apart, but it wasn't there because there wasn't enough space for it and for me to process it. There was also the distance from hearing of the events told to Gwen from someone else, and I think this could have been done in a different way. I did like how the ending circled back to the prologue, but it felt like the story could have used an epilogue somehow. With this long, mythical tale it seemed like it needed that final polish so it didn't just end abruptly. I was expecting there to be an epilogue and was surprised when there wasn't one. I think the prologue was fine because it served to give some background and context to the situation for people who had no prior knowledge and it creates a bit of dramatic irony because we know what will happen. It also works in the context of the inevitability of the prophecies, because although the people have some control over their actions and how they come about, they will eventually happen regardless. I just felt there should be some sort of prologue that was equally well crafted to close out the story and not rush the ending and leave it hanging.