Rating: 5/5

A Lantern in Her Hand by Bess Streeter Aldrich was first published in 1928, and was very popular back in the day. Sadly, this book is not well known, much less read anymore. It makes me sad because, in my opinion, this beautiful little gem of a book, is one of the greatest books ever written.

It is a book of hope, a book of love, of self sacrifice, of courage, of friendship, and of true Christian motherhood. The heroine herself, Abbie Deal, I think could take her place among those heroines who we greatly admire, not as a lovely lily, but as one of the little flowers.

The book begins with a flash back. Abbie Deal has died, and standing around her bedside are all her children and grandchildren bemoaning the fact that their poor mother has died alone. That is, all except Laura, a granddaughter of Abbie who says: “‘I don’t think it was so dreadful. I think it was kind of nice. Maybe she didn’t miss you.’ She looked slowly around the circle of her elders. ‘When you stop to think about it, maybe she didn’t miss you at all. One time Grandma told me she was the very happiest when she was living over all her memories. Maybe. . .’ She hesitated, a little shy at expressing the thought in her heart, ‘Maybe she was doing that . . . then.’”

It is not until the very end of the book that you will understand what Laura is talking about. And oh, it will mean so, so much to you. How can you be sad at the death of one, who lived such a wonderful life?

The author takes us all on a journey of a lifetime, by telling us the story of one human life. The life of a woman, a pioneer, who gave up everything. A woman who endured many hardships, losses, and sorrows, and by them, gained many joys, blessings, and comforts.

All the events and characters in this book are drawn so beautifully and realistically, reminding one of events and people in their own life. The author has a real knack for the realistic. But by realistic, I don’t mean in the way we usually think of it, but rather in the way of the true realistic, the one where children are more important than the grass on your lawn and where the small and everyday joys of life are the best of all.

I can truly say that this book is a part of who I am today. Many thoughts and ideals that I now hold dear to my heart were inspired and taken from this book, such as my views on: femininity and motherhood, my respect for the elderly, the role of the women in the home, overcoming trials and loss, value of the things of the past, and my outlook on life in general.

Abbie Deal’s life was a triumph. And it is my hope that one day I will be able to say, that I lived my life half as well as Abbie Deal did!

I highly recommend this book to everyone, but especially young women. All of us are in dire need of the light from a lantern, to help guide us safely through this, our culture of death.

“I think that love is more like a light that you carry. At first childish happiness keeps it lighted and after that romance. Then motherhood lights it and then duty . . . and maybe after that sorrow. You wouldn’t think that sorrow could be a light, would you, dearie? But it can. And then after that, service lights it. Yes. . . . I think that is what love is to a woman . . . a lantern in her hand.”
- Abbie Deal