Rating: 5/5

An analysis of the literary trends in English and French literature from the late 19th century through the first three decades of the 20th, as exemplified by the careers of six well-known literary figures: W. B. Yeats, James Joyce, T. S. Eliot, Gertrude Stein, Marcel Proust, and Paul Valéry. 

For each of them Wilson mixed biographic details with literary analysis. Both types of material were entertaining. The former because they led interesting lives and most of them were rather unique characters. The latter type of material was laden with literary references and abstract sociological/philosophical concepts, but I found that investing the time for a little collateral research on Wikipedia, and carefully reading for a thorough understanding of Wilson’s comments, resulted in an enjoyment which more than justified that investment.

The last chapter – AXEL AND RIMBAUD – finally explained the title of this book. Count Axel of Auersburg is the protagonist of a long poem in prose titled “Axel” (1890) by Auguste Villiers de l’Isle-Adam, of which Wilson provides a detailed summary and then uses Count Axel as a symbol of escape from society by locking oneself in a castle. Rimbaud is of course the young French poet Arthur Rimbaud, who retired from poetry at the age of 20 and spent the rest of his life in the less developed parts of the world. For Wilson he symbolizes an escape from the demands of 20th-century Europe through a return to a more primitive society. Axel and Rimbaud were then used to represent alternative means of escape in the future of Symbolist literature. I found Wilson’s biographical summary of Rimbaud’s life the most fascinating material in this book. 

I had read works by only three of the six writers featured and therefore found Wilson’s discussion of them more rewarding than of the other three. This was especially true for James Joyce, as Wilson’s recap and analysis of Ulysses, brought to mind certain passages with greater clarity than when I read it nearly six years ago. However, even with the authors and works I had not previously read, Wilson provided sufficient detail to maintain my interest and comprehension.