Rating: 3/5

Thomas Hardy’s Wessex Tales are well-written, and nicely evoke the rural landscape of Hardy’s Wessex, that area of land that has not been Wessex for many centuries. They also contain few real surprises.

Anyone who is familiar with Hardy’s more famous novels will probably reach a point in each story where they find that they can easily predict how it will end. One mistake that writers with artistic pretentions make is to assume that a downbeat ending will somehow be more truly literary. In fact when a writer tends towards ending his works on a melancholic note, the result after a while is just as conventional as any upbeat writer.

Of course a few corrections are necessary here. Not all the stories in Wessex Tales end badly. Also while Hardy has some leanings towards serious writing here, he essentially wrote most of his prose fiction for money, and concentrated his best efforts on his poetry. 

It is only in his last few novels that Hardy made a stronger effort to write a better novel, but he pushed his gloomy philosophy to such extremes in Tess of the d’Urbervilles and Jude the Obscure that he had nowhere left to go from this point and concentrated on his poetry – which was a wise decision in my opinion.

The Wessex Tales are at the lighter and more commercial end of Hardy’s works. Many of the stories are set in the past before Hardy’s birth, and the writer clearly wishes to give the impression that he is collecting stories of folklore from Wessex’s past.

‘The Three Strangers’ is perhaps the best work in the volume, a story in which the celebration of a christening is interrupted by three strangers, one of whom is a hangman that has been sent down to execute a man who stole a lamb, and another one of whom is the hangman’s intended victim, now an escaped fugitive. 

Hardy has fun contrasting the happy celebration of the new-born child with the macabre business of hangmen and their victims. It is clear that Hardy is rightly sympathetic towards the man who is trying not to be hanged for such a trifling offence.

‘Eighteen Hundred and Four’ is one of those tales that shows Hardy’s peculiar fascination with Napoleon Bonaparte, something that can be found in other works, both prose and poetry. This rests on the improbable idea that Napoleon landed in Wessex for a private reconnaissance ahead of an invasion that never came. The narrator (Hardy?) solemnly reassures us that he has this on a good source, but really it is little more than a fun story.

‘The Melancholy Hussar’ recalls later Hardy works where Fate and blind chance seem to conspire against the characters, as an affianced woman falls in love with a German Hussar while she is being neglected by her fiancé. 

At this stage of his writing, Hardy did not engage in the fist-shaking against God that marks his last works. I have no objection to Hardy’s blasphemies, but cannot help feeling that the suffering of his characters is more often the work of an omnipotent author than an omnipotent deity. Reality is rarely as contrived as it is here. However in ‘The Melancholy Hussar’, it is a series of ironic circumstances rather than a god that causes problems.

The same is true of ‘Fellow Townmen’ where the wrong people die, and the right people die at the wrong time, ensuring that the obvious path of happiness is blocked by a series of improbable coincidences.

We can also say that about the final series of events that conclude ‘The Withered Arm’ where any chance of finding a happy answer to the problems set out is stymied by a dark conclusion that is pure contrivance. However this is an effective story, in which a shunned woman somehow accidentally manages to curse the woman who won over her lover, even though this is done unconsciously in a dream, and against the wishes of the shunned woman. This is again one of the better stories in the volume, offering a nice creepy tale.

‘Interlopers at the Knap’ once more defers lovers who perhaps should be together. A planned marriage is set aside when the would-be bride’s brother turns up with a wife of his own who turns out to be a former lover of the would-be groom. The brother obligingly dies on the same night, and the would-be bride steps aside so her intended husband can marry his old lover. However it does not work out, and he wishes he had married his intended wife instead.

Ending the volume is ‘The Distracted Preacher’, in which a priggish clergyman discovers that the local woman of his choice is in fact a smuggler. He struggles with his conscience while she struggles with the Customs men. This time a happy ending is tacked on, but Hardy cannot resist adding a footnote saying this ending was expected of him at the time, and offering us an alternative ending that he would have preferred to write.

It is easy to condemn Stockdale, the titular preacher, for his horror at discovering that Lizzy Newberry was a smuggler, and his moral qualms probably will not get much sympathy from readers who will feel that she deserves better.

In his defence, I can say that it would be difficult for a man with a religious profession to marry a woman engaged in criminal activities, as that would put his moral standing in the community at risk, and perhaps even lose him his position. 

Still it did make me wonder how many clergymen were involved in smuggling operations at the time. Did some of them directly do the smuggling? Or at least provide a base for hiding supplies, knowing that Customs men would not check a church? I am sure plenty of them bought alcohol from smuggled sources, and most of them turned a blind eye to smuggling practices that went on around them.

I recently acquired a number of Hardy works for free, which is why I am working my way through them. It is interesting to contrast the rustic world of Hardy with the urban world of Dickens. 

The world of Dickens is one of decay and pollution and filth, whereas Hardy’s world is an outdoors one of fresh air and robust activity, though not always physical good health. Hardy probably has a stronger understanding of the social and economic realities of the community in which he lived.

Overall though it would perhaps be better to live in a Dickens town than a Hardy village. Within the more crowded urban societies, Dickens’ heroes can find allies and communities that ensure they receive love and support. The Hardy hero is trapped in a lonely society with limited choices of marital partners, making it more of a tragedy when relationships fail.

There are some fairly good stories here and none that are particularly bad. Hardy writes well, even if the stories have little real substance to them.