Rating: 3/5

First read August 7, 2012. 4 stars.

Saitoti's autobiography is a breezy afternoon read, and it has an endearing naive and earnest tone. It is often marketed as an introductory reading to Maasai life in Tanzania, something people ought to read before they come (was rec'd by both the handbook for my study abroad program and the Lonely Planet Guide). However, I'd question its utility for that purpose. Having read it both before and after my firsthand experience with Maasai, I can't see I got much out of it either time. 

Tepilit's experiences are idiosyncratic, and while they may give some sense of what it is like to grow up Maasai, they focus more on exceptional events in his life and things that would be remarkable to a Western observer, rather than things that help you grasp Maasai life in any way. Much of the interest in the book comes from him experiencing novelty - novel cultures and novel ecosystems (ie, oh a car what's that?; oh the ocean what's that?). None of that sheds any real light on how the Maasai live. 

Nor is there any deeper or more elucidatory explanation of Maasai culture and economics that would be interesting in comparative/historical perspective. Just about the only relevant point of comparison with my experiences concerned education. Tepilit's generation considered Maasai who went to get educated to be abandoning their proud cultural heritage, gathering useless and arcane skills and getting brainwashed into worshiping strange gods and willingly working for others in return for money. Maasai in our study area were almost universally of the opinion that education, as much of it for as many of their children as possible, was the best path to "development" and prosperity. But the end of the book makes it clear that he saw this trend, and its main issue: education in Tanzania is terrifically sub-par, so the good faith efforts of parents and students in the name of education go largely to waste due to inadequate resources and lax teaching.