Rating: 5/5

Five stars, what!? But surely I hate violence in general, and sexualised violence in particular. Well, yes, I do, but this turned out to be way more interesting than I realised. I was revolted but I was completely engaged with it; I hated it, but I couldn't stop taking notes.

Previously, I had only read Sade in fragments, in the wrong contexts or with the wrong preconceptions. This time I came to him after a lot of reading in eighteenth-century thought and fiction, and he stood out completely differently, as a sort of monstrous, semi-parodic jester figure, making a serious and apocalyptic point with the blackest of black humour. It really overwhelmed me.

The thing is, on the face of it Justine is built like a typical sentimental novel of the time. A young girl is led astray, goes on a variety of rambling picaresque misadventures, and finally meets a long-lost relative in disguise who whisks her away from it all. Many of the beats in here are instantly familiar to anyone who's read Ann Radcliffe, Frances Burney, Smollett, Richardson, Fielding, or any of those writers. But while all of their books are driven by more or less implicit threats of sexual violence (often with sublimated incestuous themes), in Sade the subtext suddenly become thunderingly explicit and present. It's like the elided rape scene from Clarissa, forced centre-stage and reduplicated again and again and again (and without any trace of that book's comfortable sentimentality). It all feels like some nightmarish negative-image of the eighteenth-century novel.

However, there is more to it than just scenes of Justine being raped in increasingly elaborate ways, because these horrible set-pieces are intercut with long sections of philosophical dialogue. I know lots of people find these bits pretentious and/or boring, but I felt that Sade was going through just about every major concern of the time, on an almost point-by-point basis, and showing the reductio ad absurdum of contemporary preconceptions. This version of Justine came out in 1791, which was one of the most turbulent times in political and intellectual history. The Enlightenment had just blown up in Europe's face, in the form of the French Revolution. And the way Sade's novel is put together adds up to an argument that human sexuality is deeply political, and that the politics of the time was profoundly – well – sadistic.

The book's arguments are antifeminist, antitheist, antivirtuous and antisocial, but the basic point he makes is that these things are a natural extension of the civilisation he sees around him. Dans un siècle entièrement corrompu, Justine is told near the beginning, le plus sûr est de faire comme les autres, and that is how the action of the novel is presented: as a sort of fairground-mirror reflection of what everyone else is doing anyway. This is perhaps most explicit in his attitude towards women. Here, as so often, one is struck by Sade's disarming habit of simply saying out loud what other writers are accused of keeping hidden. Woman, according to one character in here, is

[u]ne créature chétive, toujours inférieure à l'homme, infiniment moins belle que lui, moins ingénieuse, moins sage, constituée d'une manière dégoûtante, entièrement opposée à ce qui peut plaire à l'homme, à ce qui doit le délecter…un être malsain les trois quarts de sa vie, hors d'état de satisfaire son époux tout le temps où la Nature le contraint à l'enfantement, d'une humeur aigre, acariâtre, impérieuse : tyran, si on lui laisse des droits, bas et rampant si on le captive ; mais toujours faux, toujours méchant, toujours dangereux […].

a weak creature, always inferior to man, infinitely less beautiful than he, less intelligent, less wise, with a disgusting constitution, entirely opposed to what man likes or takes delight in…a sickly being for three quarters of her life, unable to satisfy her husband whenever Nature constrains her to childbirth, possessed of a sour, shrewish, imperious temperament: a tyrant if she is given rights, mean and base when kept down; but always false, always vicious, always dangerous.

The lack of hypocrisy is a bit startling: it sounds like something that might be ascribed, by a modern critic, to the subconscious attitudes of a writer like John Updike or Kingsley Amis. But with Sade, it's never a matter of uncovering subconscious attitudes, but rather just writing his attitudes down when he tells you outright what they are. There is a sense, reading him, of having isolated a virus in its purest form. And yet this disagreeable litany of misogyny is, crucially, founded on a survey of societies around the world:

je le [ce sexe] vois opprimé partout, partout rigoureusement éloigné des affaires, partout méprisé, avili, enfermé ; les femmes, en un mot, partout traitées commes des bêtes dont on se sert à l'instant de besoin, et qu'on recèle aussitôt dans le bercail.

I see women everywhere oppressed, everywhere rigorously excluded from activity, everywhere despised, degraded and locked away: women, in a word, are everywhere treated like beasts, who are made use of when you need them and then sent straight back to their pen.

This actually sounds remarkably close to the sort of thing Mary Wollstonecraft was saying at the time. No, really! ‘If men be demi-gods,’ she writes in A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (published the year after Justine) – ‘why let us serve them!’ If women are just subservient beasts, ‘it will be expedient to open a fresh trade with Russia for whips’. For her, these are flashes of bitter irony. With Sade, the irony is book-length, and the bitterness so dark that you choke on it.

The effect is parodic, whether or not you think he intended it that way. I think it's abundantly clear that he did, although that doesn't mean he didn't also share in these feelings to some extent: obviously, no one would lavish so much care on scenes of sexual torture and degradation unless they got some deep psychological satisfaction from them. But in real life his feelings were a little more nuanced: he hated women symbolically, in a sort of Camille Paglia sense, to the extent that they embodied the principle of weakness. Strong women – female writers and artists, for instance – he respected and admired, and he had many close female friends (to one of whom Justine is dedicated). His legal troubles came mainly from the persistence of his powerful mother-in-law, who loathed him; his actual crimes amounted to little more than some orgies and whipping. Many women he hired chose not to whip him, or to be whipped, or sodomised, and he respected those choices – indeed, turning from his fiction to his biography, one is taken aback at the amount of consent going around.

Not that I want to rehabilitate Sade, just that I want to see his attitudes in context. As far as libertinism went, he was, in terms of his real-life activities, not abnormal, and by some standards was even fairly mild. This was a time when Louis XV ran a ‘deer park’ of barely nubile girls, while the Prince de Conti amassed a collection of two thousand rings, each commemorating a woman ‘forced or bought’. What is unusual about Sade is that, in his writings, he extrapolated from such behaviour, and diagnosed things that other ‘libertines’ were not willing or able to acknowledge.

Indeed, one of the things Justine stresses is what we'd now call the cultural relativism of morality, which, the heroine is told, is a matter of ‘opinion and geography’ (and time, we might add). ‘Moral sensations are deceptive; there is no truth beyond physical sensations.’ Hence the importance in Sade of pain.

[I]l n'est aucune sorte de sensation qui soit plus vive que celle de la douleur ; ses impressions sont sûres, elles ne trompent point comme celles du plaisir perpétuellement jouées par les femmes ou presque jamais ressenties par elles ; que d'amour-propre ailleurs, que de jeunesse, de force, de santé ne faut-il pas pour être sûr de produire dans une femme cette douteuse et peu satisfaisante impression du plaisir. Celle de la douleur au contraire, n'exige pas la moindre chose : plus un homme a des défauts, plus il est vieux, moins il est aimable, mieux il réussira.

There is no keener sensation than that of pain: its impressions are certain, they do not deceive like those of the pleasure perpetually acted out by women and almost never felt by them. And how much self-esteem, youth, strength and vigour is required to produce in a woman that doubtful and hardly satisfying impression of pleasure. Whereas pain, by contrast, requires nothing: the more flaws a man has, the older and less likeable he is, the better he'll succeed.

Again, one is struck by how he's said the quiet part out loud: in Sade's own description, the sadist is someone who inflicts pain on a woman because he is insecure about his ability to give her pleasure. It's a devastating insight, embedded within a scene of almost unreadable unpleasantness.

One of the many disorienting things about reading Sade is the way he suddenly makes other writers of the time seem completely inadequate, in certain specific ways. At several points in this book, Justine is given the chance to join her tormentors, to escape her torture by becoming part of their criminal gang, or at least by turning a blind eye to their activities. She always refuses, in terms that are very familiar from other novels, bursting out with exclamations like, ‘I would rather die a thousand deaths than [abandon my principles]!’ We are so used to seeing virtuous women rewarded for this behaviour in fiction, escaping from the most unlikely scenarios thanks to a just Providence, that there is a grim satisfaction here in seeing her instead punished for it. Because however extravagant the details, the underlying principles of Sade's narrative are often curiously modern – much more in accordance with how we now think consequences in fiction should be felt.

That all this is meant as a parody is surely cemented in the final pages, when, after waiting in vain throughout the novel for any sign of divine punishment, we finally see one appear. The clouds part and a thunderbolt bursts from the heavens, to strike down – Justine herself! The virtuous heroine is killed dead – along with the sentimental novel, and, we might almost say, the eighteenth century itself.