Paul said] “And He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell upon all the face of the earth, and He ordained their preappointed times and the boundaries of their dwellings, in order for them to seek the Lord, if perhaps indeed they might grope for Him and find Him, and yet being indeed not far from each one of us; for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also His offspring.’” (Acts 17:26-28, EMTV) 

As Paul made their ‘Unknown God’ known to the Athenians in the Person of Christ, so does Hieromonk (now Abbot) Damascene seek to make Christ known to those enamored of the Taoist religion of China. While this includes millions upon millions of Chinese, Taoism is also a faith often explored by Westerners turning from Christ towards Asia, looking for a spirituality and mode of life 
that they (mistakenly) believe to be absent among the people claiming Him. 

Having been introduced to Orthodoxy by Fr. Seraphim Rose (+1982), Abbot Damascene (and I) expressed a youthful admiration for the ancient writings of the Chinese sage, Lao Tzu, source of the Taoist religion. The Abbot has no interest in syncretism; his aim is not to weave together some “feel-good” hybrid of Taoism and Christianity. Instead, he takes a cue from the Church Fathers in their recognition of the incomplete, yet genuine, way that Plato and Socrates revealed something of the mind of the Father and prepared the way for Christ in the ancient Greek- and Latin-speaking worlds. Damascene says, “If the Greek philosophers can be honored in this way, cannot also Lao 
Tzu, who came even closer that they to describing the Logos, the Tao, before He was made flesh, and dwelt among us?” 

He opens the book with a series of seventy-eight poetic Christian reflections mirroring Lao Tzu’s Tao Teh Ching and exploring the similarities of spirit between Christ the Logos and the Tao as realized by Lao Tzu. Damascene demonstrates that the only thing lacking in Lao Tzu’s profound intuitions of ultimate reality was the knowledge of personalism of God as revealed in Christ. The book’s second part is a deeper analysis of the philosophical principles common to the two faiths. In the third part, the Abbot reveal how Orthodoxy and the monasticism of the Christian East offers a spirituality every bit as profound and powerful as that of the Far East, but completed by the full revelations of God in Christ.