Rating: 5/5

★★★★ ½

I did not intend to write a review for this book, because the readers are going to either love it, or loath it.
The main target audience is spiritual people; the book shan’t please everyone. In other to understand what is written, one must let go of resentment and judgmental words. 

This is a collection of quotes in the book:

  1. THE GAME OF LIFE AND HOW TO PLAY IT

  ✧ The Game  

“Most people consider life as a battle, but it is not a battle, it is a game ... however, which cannot be played successfully without the knowledge of spiritual law...”

“Keep thy heart (or imagination) with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.”

“The imagination has been called, “The Scissors of The Mind,” and it is ever cutting, cutting, day by day, the picture man sees there, and sooner or later he meets his own creations in his outer world. To train the imagination successfully, man must understand the working of his mind. The Greek said: “Know Thyself.” ”

“The superconscious mind is the God Mind within each man, and is the realm of perfect ideas. In it, is the “perfect pattern” spoken of by Plato, The Divine Design; for there is a Divine Design for each person.”

“There is a place that you are to fill and no one else can fill, something you are to do, which no one else can do.”

“Jesus Christ said, “Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you,” and he said the Kingdom was within man. The Kingdom is the realm of right ideas, or the divine pattern. 
Jesus Christ taught that man’s words played a leading part in the game of life. “By thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.” 

“... for He [Jesus Christ] taught that every man had the power to bless and to multiply, to heal and to prosper.”

“Intuition means, intuition, or to be taught from within. It is man’s unerring guide….”

“There is always plenty on man’s pathway; but it can only be brought into manifestation through desire, faith or the spoken word. Jesus Christ bright out clearly that man must make the first move.”

“Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you. (Mat:7:7.)”

“Nothing stands between man and his highest ideals and every desire of his heart, but doubt and fear. When man can “wish without worrying,” every desire will be instantly fulfilled.”

“Man has ever a silent listener at his side — his subconscious mind.”

  ✧ The Law of Prosperity  

“All things whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive ... You must act as if you had already received.”

“Man can only receive what he sees himself receiving.”

  ✧ The Power of the Word   

“Someone has said that courage contains genius and magic. Face a situation fearlessly, and there is no situation to face; it falls away of its own weight.”

“The soul is the subconscious mind, and it must be “saved” from wrong thinking.”

“Any inharmony on the external, indicates there is mental inharmony. “As the within, so the without.” 
Man’s only enemies are within himself. “And a man’s foes shall be they of his own household.” Personality is one of the last enemies to be overcome, as this planet is taking its initiation in love. It was Christ’s message —“Peace on Earth, goodwill towards man.” The enlightened man, therefore, endeavours to perfect himself upon his neighbour.
His work is with himself, to send out goodwill and blessing to every man, and the marvellous thing is, that if one blesses a man he has no power to harm him.”

“Goodwill produces a great aura of protection about the one who sends it, and “No weapon that is formed against him shall prosper.” In other words, love and goodwill destroy the enemies within one’s self, therefore, one has no enemies on the external!” 

“There is peace on earth for him who sends goodwill to man!”

  ✧ The Law of Nonresistance   

“Resist not evil. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.”

“Nothing on earth can resist an absolutely nonresistant person.”  

““Bless your enemy, and you rob him of his ammunition.” His arrows will be transmuted into blessings.”

“One’s ship come in over a calm sea. So long as man resists a situation, he will have it with him. If he runs away from it, it will run after him.”

“ “ Look well, therefore, to this Day! Such is the salutation of the Dawn.”
He must be spiritually alert, ever awaiting his leads, taking advantage of every opportunity.”

  ✧ The Law of Karma and the Law of Forgiveness   

“Man receives only that which he gives. The game of life is a game of boomerang. Man’s thoughts, deeds and words, return to him sooner or later, with astounding accuracy.
This is the law of Karma, which is Sanskrit for “Comeback.””

“This is the perfect idea of man, registered in Divine Mind, awaiting man’s recognition; for man can only be what he sees himself to be, and only attain what he sees himself attaining.”

“Jesus Christ said, “And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free.  ”

“... there was a higher law that the law of Karma — and that law transcends the law of Karma. It is the law of grace, or forgiveness. It is the law which frees man from the law of cause and effect — the law of consequence. “Under grace, and not under law.””

  ✧ Casting the Burden   

“... the only thing which gives anything weight in nature, is the law of gravitation, and if a boulder could be taken high above the planet, there would be no weigh in the boulder; and that is what Jesus Christ meant when he said, “My yoke is easy and my burden is light.”
He has overcome the world vibration, and functioned in the fourth dimensional realm, where there is only perfection, completion, life and joy.”

“How scientific it then is, to cast the burden upon the superconscious mind where it is “made light,” or dissolved into its “native nothingness.””

“There is no peace and happiness for man, until he has erased all fear from the subconscious.”

“”In the twinkling of an eye,” man’s release will come where he realizes there is no power in evil. The material world will fade away, and the fourth dimensional world, the “World of the Wondrous,” will swing into manifestation. 
“And I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth — and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away.”

  ✧ Love   

“Love is a cosmic phenomenon, and opens to man the fourth dimensional world, “The World of the Wondrous.”“

“Real love is selfless and free from fear. It lies itself out upon the object of its affection, without demanding any return. Its joy is in the joy of giving. Love is God in manifestation, and the strongest magnetic force in the universe.”

  ✧ Intuition or Guidance   

“There is nothing too great of accomplishment for the man who knows the power of his words, and who follows his intuitive leads.”

  ✧ Perfect Self-Expression or the Divine Design   

“No wind can drive my bark astray
Nor change the tide of destiny.”

“There is for each man, perfect self-expression. There is a place which he is to fill and no one else can fill, something which he is to do, which no one else can do; it is his destiny.
This achievement is held, a perfect idea in Divine Mind, awaiting man’s recognition.”

“His demand should be: “Infinite Spirit, open the way for the Devine Design of my life to manifest; let the genius within me now be released; let me see clearly the perfect plan.””

“One should not visualize or force a mental picture. When he demands the Divine Design to come into his conscious mind, he will receive flashes of inspiration, and begin to see himself making some great accomplishments. This is the picture, or idea, he must hold without wavering.”

“The thing man seeks is seeking him — the telephone was seeking bell!

  ✧ Denials and Affirmations   

“Christ was both person and principle, and the Christ within each man is his Redeemer and Salvation.”

“All power is given man (through right thinking) to bring his heaven upon his earth, and this is the goal of the “Game of Life.”

 “The simple rules are fearless faith, nonresistance and love!”  

   DENIALS AND AFFIRMATIONS

(For Prosperity)
God is my unfailing supply, and large sums of money come to me quickly, under grace, in perfect ways.

(For Right Conditions)
Every plan my Father in heaven has not planned, shall be dissolved and dissipated, and the Divine Idea now comes to pass.

(For Right Conditions)
Only that which is true of God is true of me, for I and the Father are ONE.

(For Faith)
As I am one with God, I am one with my good, for God is both the Giver and the Gift. I cannot separate the Giver from the gift.

(For Right Conditions)
Divine Love now dissolves and dissipates every wrong condition in my mind, body and affairs. Divine Love is the most powerful chemical in the universe, and dissolves everything which is not of itself!

(For Health)
Divine Love floods my consciousness with health, and every cell in my body is filled with light.

(For the Eyesight)
My eyes are God's eyes, I see with the eyes of spirit. I see clearly the open way; there are no obstacles on my pathway. I see clearly the perfect plan.

(For Guidance)
I am divinely sensitive to my intuitive leads, and give instant obedience to Thy will.

(For the Hearing)
My ears are God's ears, I hear with the ears of spirit. I am nonresistant and am willing to be led. I hear glad tidings of great joy.

(For Right Work)
I have a perfect work In a perfect way; I give a perfect service For perfect pay.

(For Freedom from all Bondage)
I cast this burden on the Christ within, and I go free! 

  3. THE SECRET DOOR TO SUCCESS

  ✧ The Secret Door to Success  

“That is the secret of success, to make what you are doing interesting to other people. Be interested yourself, and others will find you interesting.”

“Success is not a secret, it is a System.”

“The road to success is a straight and narrow path; it is a road of loving absorption, of undivided attention.”

“You attract things you give a great deal of thought to.”
No man gives to himself but himself, and no man takes away from himself but himself: the “Game of Life” is a game of solitaire; as you change, all conditions will change.”

“... resentment hold backs your good. The more you resent, the more you will have to resent; you grow a resentment track in your brain, and your expression will be one of habitual resentment.”