Rating: 3/5

All the angsty romance I’ve been reading lately has had one (well, probably myriad, but let’s stick to one for now) thing in common: the protagonists are young. Early to mid-twenties. Just starting out in life, overcoming childhood tragedy. Which has got me thinking: why not angst about older people?

And then The Bleeding Heart came up, and now I know why. Maybe. Angsty romance with older protagonists -- in this case, in their fifties, I think, so a little older than I was aiming for, but that’s irrelevant -- isn’t so sunny in the end. In the end, the protagonists are mature enough to know that there is no happily ever after. That all the things that have shaped them have irrevocably damaged and jaded them, and the most we can hope for is happy for now.

Okay, so that’s probably not always the case, and the same can probably be said for some young angst too, but that’s the impression I got after reading The Bleeding Heart. Characters have too much history, too much experience to expect or even want more. They’re too set in their ways to compromise, almost. They’re tired of compromising. They’ve done enough of that already.

In The Bleeding Heart, Dolores, an American English prof who’s on sabbatical in Oxford, meets Victor on a train. Despite the fact that Dolores has been enjoying, more or less, her years-long celibacy, she’s attracted to Victor, who won’t stop looking at her. He follows her home. Celibacy ended.

But, we soon learn a lot about Dolores. How she feels about men, in particular. How they’re always disappointing her by doing exactly as she expects they will. Victor leaves her flat quickly after their first night. He has work; its urgency and importance necessitate abruptness. Dolores isn’t surprised but she’s furious by this little thoughtlessness. However, Victor remains in her life.

I was surprised by that. A lot of things about this book surprised me, most especially my reaction to it. Dolores is argumentative, opinionated, an outspoken, passionate feminist and liberal. Victor’s a capitalist; she’s a bleeding heart. They’re very different, and they’re constantly arguing about their differences. But they’re mature enough to respect their differences and see past them. Or at least Victor is.

Dolores constantly rails on him about all the ways men, and especially men like him, are ruining the world, are abusing women. And it drove me nuts, how she never let up, how she would never compromise, how Victor couldn’t ever win. But also, she was right, so my response was complicated. If she’s right, why should she compromise? Because she wants him in her life? Why should we compromise our principles just for male companionship? But if you want his companionship, shouldn’t you at least give him a break now and then? I was constantly questioning my reaction. Why did I always side with Victor when Dolores so often made very valid points and Victor did in fact represent the enemy? What does that say about me and how I’ve bought into the very status quo that Dolores is fighting?

So many times I would’ve left her and never come back. That’s how infuriating I found her, even when I admired her for fighting. But Victor doesn’t leave. And that confused me even more, although when we learn more about him, we can imagine that Dolores’s passion and honesty are a draw, and that he’s not averse to a little conflict. But wow. No conversation is safe.

Dolores and Victor aren’t what they appear on the surface, though. They’re adults with established careers, the respect of their peers, grown children, but they’ve both been through horrific experiences. So you learn how they’ve been shaped, and how complex they are, and how maybe a little arguing is a small price to pay for time spent with someone who is real and makes you think and feel deeply. This book made me think and feel deeply, and it wasn’t often pleasant, but it was enlightening.

Also, it was written in 1980, so it’s informed by a different female experience (for the most part; I’m not naïve enough to think society’s changed that much). The women are housewives, even those who have careers. The men do not lift a finger, do not know their children, have all the say. That would probably make me furious and obsessed too. A lot has changed since, in part because of the influence of Marilyn French’s first novel The Women’s Room, which was particularly concerned with the oppression of women. The Bleeding Heart is a rant, sometimes a tiring one with moments of hypocrisy and unfair generalizations, but all the more real because of it. As poignant as the romance was, because they do see past their differences enough to want to be together, I didn’t enjoy it all that much (especially the more explicit parts of it -- yeesh). But I couldn’t ignore the message. And I was torn apart by the revelations Dolores and Victor make. Adult angst might not be as fun as new adult angst, but its effect is much more powerful. And so I found this an infuriating but powerful book.

Lila

Reviewed from ARC. Re-released by Open Road Media September 24, 2013.

Full review at nomdeplumepress.wordpress.com.