Rating: 4/5

An undeniable classic and probably a masterpiece in terms of its construction and careful psychology. In my case this has to come with the disclaimer “not for holiday reading.” Though I’m no beach-read person, Margaret Laurence’s best-known novel is so unrelievedly bleak that it calls for a different headspace than August by the lake.

The story tells the life of Manitoba-born Hagar Shipley, bizarrely described on my 1968 paperback as an “unregenerate sinner,” but actually a woman who, through some garden-variety bad choices and delusions of superiority, signs herself up to a life of few pleasures and much strife. Hagar’s father has two sons, but neither lives up to his expectations, which is pours into his daughter instead. She throws it all away by marrying Bram Shipley, a layabout farmer with clearly not much going for him besides a brooding sexuality.

We follow Hagar as an old woman, living with her son and daughter in law who are trying to have her sent to a home. Hagar is determined not to go. The book’s epigraph is from Dylan Thomas’ “Do Not Go Gently Into That Goodnight,” and indeed Hagar at ninety is a formidable presence, raging against the dying of the light, going against everyone’s wishes and running away from home before she’ll be sent away to a residence. A carefully constructed series of chapters links an event or motif in her day to day life with an episode from her past on the prairies.

It is a novel of great psychological astuteness, exploring Hagar’s complex relationships with her husband and both sons, one of whom dies young. It also depicts small-town rural Canada in the 1910s, full of people keeping up appearances and old-world prejudices bizarrely transplanted to the plains, as well as later, Depression era Canada with its joblessness and dust.

Despite its many strengths, I had difficulty warming much to Hagar’s plight, which seemed entirely self-inflicted (in the past rather than the present). She’s no unregenerate sinner, but she is thoroughly disagreeable when young and ornery in middle age. Despite this, there were some strong emotional payoffs in the final chapters.