Rating: 4/5

I really enjoyed it! The barbs at Poirot that Christie laid out were a complete scream. Actually there's quite a bit of humour in this one. Also, Ariadne Oliver is my favourite and for the little she was here, I just adored her. She left abruptly and I was sad to see her go. I loved Poirot playing matchmaker for a couple who complement one another perfectly and would be happy together. It was novel because they weren't the usual and I was pulling for both to be happy at the end of the story. I wanted them to have a win.

Btw, the mystery was fun to try and solve but is just about impossible to my mind. I think I must have seen an adaptation before because there's an instance with the murderer that seemed odd to me and made me suspect it was they but I couldn't figure out the why. A great whodunnit and howdunnit to pass a weekend.

Recommended.

Favourite quotes and passages:

The barbs at Poirot were resplendent! I loved them as much as I adore him!:

"His name, he noted with chagrin, made no particular impression on her. The younger generation, he could not but feel, were singularly lacking in knowledge of notable celebrities."

"It is my weakness, it has always been my weakness, to desire to show off. That weakness, Hastings could never understand. But indeed it is very necessary for a man of my abilities to admire himself—and for that one needs stimulation from outside. I cannot, truly I cannot, sit in a chair all day reflecting how truly admirable I am. One needs the human touch. One needs—as they say nowadays—the stooge.”

"He was the great, the unique Hercule Poirot, but he was also a very old man and his shoes were tight."

Ariadne Oliver is a legend and I really need to watch that Sven Hjerson adaptation! Also, how has no one written cozies of them by now?! Those titles are begging for it! I'll happily read fan fiction.:

Mrs. Oliver suddenly arrived out on the road, rather in the manner of a volcanic eruption.

Sadly, Mrs. Oliver ran her hands through her windswept grey hair, causing it to look as though swept not by wind but by a tornado.

“The Affair of the Second Goldfish,” she mused, “that’s quite a good one. The Cat it was Who Died—that’s where I made a blowpipe a foot long and it’s really six feet. Ridiculous that a blowpipe should be that size, but someone wrote from a museum to tell me so. Sometimes I think there are people who only read books in the hope of finding mistakes in them. What’s the other one of them? Oh! Death of a Débutante—that’s frightful tripe! I made sulphonal soluble in water and it isn’t, and the whole thing is wildly impossible from start to finish. At least eight people die before Sven Hjerson gets his brainwave.”

“How do I know why I ever thought of the revolting man? I must have been mad! Why a Finn when I know nothing about Finland? Why a vegetarian? Why all the idiotic manerisms he’s got? These things just happen. You try something—and people seem to like it—and then you go on—and before you know where you are, you’ve got someone like that maddening Sven Hjerson tied to you for life. And people even write and say how fond you must be of him. Fond of him? If I met that bony, gangling, vegetable-eating Finn in real life, I’d do a better murder than any I’ve ever invented.”

Maureen Summerhayes is the mistress of the Long Meadows and is trying to make a go of turning into a proper B&amp;B type thing. Sadly and hilariously, she's a complete disaster at all things domestic. The woman leaves spinach in a colander on a chair in the sitting room and serves her guests beans she's bled all over in a preparatory mishap. She was a constant pain and truly a danger to health that plagued Poirot during his stay there and literally no one wanted to hear his quite legitimate laments. I couldn't stop laughing!

“I didn’t get to that pudding in time. It had boiled dry. I think it’s really all right—just a little scorched perhaps. In case it tasted rather nasty I thought I would open a bottle of those raspberries I put up last summer. They seem to have a bit of mould on top but they say nowadays that that doesn’t matter. It’s really rather good for you—practically penicillin.”

And just because they're great lines:

“When people barely notice you’re alive, you’re not likely to have any enemies.”

“It is you, mon ami? Attend, I pray. I have news for you. Splendid news. Somebody has tried to kill me. . . .”

"Authors were shy, unsociable creatures, atoning for their lack of social aptitude by inventing their own companions and conversations."

"The bereaved had never any doubt about their dear ones’ wishes and those wishes usually squared with their own inclinations."