Rating: 2/5

Busted down from three stars because the hero was more pathetic than alpha in his reasoning and motivations.

Hero asked heroine to marry him when she was 18. She said no because her parents had a terrible marriage and she wanted a career. Hero did not take it well. A few months later she was forced to marry her father’s employer because daddy dearest embezzled money. Luckily, the old geezer was drunk at his wedding and stepped out in the street in front of a truck and was killed instantly. He died without a will so his new bride got his fortune. 

Heroine didn’t tell her father she was wealthy, but since his employer died, he couldn’t be prosecuted for his crimes. So he was happy and skipped town. Heroine put the money in the bank, earmarking it for charity and went back to work.

Heroine’s mother died a year later. Heroine’s sister’s marriage broke up and she began to pester the heroine for money so she could open a boutique. Heroine gave it to her. Heroine’s boss also knew she was an heiress and kept asking her to marry him. He seemed to have dropped the subject when he told him she would be accompanying him to Greece on a business trip to meet the hero.

Why the heroine didn’t clue in that the hero was going for revenge, I don’t know. Anyway, heroine’s boss sold her out. He delivered her to the hero’s island and then left her stranded.

Hero, who has been out of his mind with grief since his wife drove over a cliff with his three-year-old son (she was terminally ill and wanted to get back at hero) has concocted a revenge scenario. He never would have had an unhappy marriage or lost a son if heroine had married him, so she owes him a son. Also, she married for money after she turned him down. He’s rich now and has complete control on the island. They marry the next day and project baby begins. 

This is all pretty understated. Heroine isn’t willing, but she manages to respond. But her thoughts aren’t about sex or the hero. In fact H/h spend very little time together. Hero is a hermit and only comes out of his study for meals and sex. Heroine takes up with an OM at a neighboring beach house.

OM promises to mail a letter to the h’s sister, but he forgets about it. The h’s time is taken up with an archaeological dig and two university students. Heroine tries to bribe a servant with a bracelet from the dig site, but hero finds out. It’s all dreary and stupid.

There’s no tension or intensity - just the heroine feeling pity for the grief-stricken hero. Or the hero rousing himself to make threats or have sex.

Finally, the sister gets the letter and charges in to rescue the heroine. Hero lets her go. Heroine realizes she doesn’t want to leave. HEA

Stockholm syndrome indeed. 

Lots of dangling plot threads – no baby, no word of a charity getting that money, no word of the archaeological dig or its significance.