Rating: 2/5

My summary:
What makes catholic parents different?
1. Close encounter w Jesus
2. Get by w a little help from mom (sacraments)
3. Love 2 holy books
4. Learn what the theology of the body teaches us 
5. We know what you get when you mix god an human beings
6. Obey isn’t another 4-letter word
7. We aren’t too proud to listen to brothers &amp; sisters in the lord

12 ways to raise perfect kids
1. Say the love words
2. Show them you love them
3. Keep your promise
4. Play together
5. Work together
6. Pray together
7. Be there
8. By welcoming
9. Respect their space
10. Make rapport a 2-way street
11. Have regular family meetings
12. Know their relating styles

Discipline
F - focus on a vision/family mission statement
A - Act proactively, not reactively
M - Make relationship not manipulation the agent of change
I - imitate Christ’s way to command obedience
L - look for ways to train the will, not break it
Y - yes to methods that increase internal control

C - consistency is key
A - acquire a firm but gentle style
R - remember not to lead your children into temptation
E - expect the best from yourself and hour children

Everyday discipline - build rapport, write it doesn’t, re-direction, restating, do-overs, choices, reviewing/rehearsing, manage transitions, use your emotions, labeling, rituals and routines, storytelling, cool down, time outs, logical consequences, positive intentions, solution-focused questioning, grounding, restricting privileges, token economies, practicing, physical redirection
-the more everyday, the less corrective discipline you need

-Kids with detached parents turned into nazis
-The church doesn’t actually say anything about parenting

5 stages of childhood - devote your entire self to your children, wear them all the time, sleep with them, show them lots of love, breastfeed as long as you can, go on dates maybe once a month

My review: interesting that the church does not say anything about parenting, yet the whole book was written on this. Too many acronyms and suggestions, I think simpler wold have been better, a long book is not necessary