Rating: 4/5

4 ½ Stars! ~ Alice Brannigan Meyers was having one hell of a week. “On Monday, Alice turned thirty-five. On Tuesday, her eighteen year old twins graduated from high school. Wednesday, the rumor that the small independent bookstore – which had fed, clothed and housed her and the twins for the past fifteen years – was going out of business became a fact. In Thursday’s wash she found six square innocent-looking cellophane-wrapped packages that let her know at least one, if not both of her girls, was no longer innocent. Friday, Allyn, the twin older by five minutes, climbed into a camper filled with ‘just friends, Ma’ – three of whom were boys – and set off on a 3,000 mile cross country pilgrimage to Meccan, LA, land of the stars. On Saturday, Rebecca, the younger twin, called from East Langsing to say ‘Hi, Ma! Mike and I eloped last night hope you’re not mad and oh by the way you’ll be a grandma in six and a half months isn’t that wonderful? Bye.’” And on Sunday, alone for the first time in eighteen years, Alice had nothing to do but reflect and realize that “Oh, God, it had really happened. In one short week she’d gotten old.” But in all the flurry, it wasn’t until Monday again that Alice’s life was going to change forever. On her way to a job interview, she spotted a man lying on the side of the road. Good Samaritan that Alice is, she stopped, praying over and over again, “Oh, God. Oh, please. Oh, don’t let him be dead, don’t let him be dead…” Undercover with the FBI, Gabriel Book had narrowly escaped an ambush, one that had seen his partner fatally shot. Not sure who the woman was bending over him, he swung up his gun right into her face, and informed her that he needed a new identity and a safe place to hide for awhile – that her place would do.

Gabriel couldn’t have picked a better place to hide in plain site. From the moment he’d entered her home, it seemed he was swept right in the middle of her family. Not the twins, as they are off trying to begin their own lives, but Alice’s family, her seven sisters and her match making mother. Alice’s youngest sister Grace is getting married at the end of the week, and the Brannigan family is in a flurry. The fact that Alice has a gorgeous man living in her house causes even more interference from her noisy sisters. I understand from Ms. Ramin’s bio that she is one of eight siblings, and this shines in the hilarious situations only a sibling of many could create with such a flair. Gabriel and Alice are soul mates and instinctively click from the moment they meet. Though there are many fun moments, the crisis that Alice faces with maturing children and her insecurities of her own place in the world are very realistically done. I love that Gabriel has a sense of humour, but that though he has his own demons to put to rest, he’s also a man able to take charge and sense what Alice needs before she realizes she needs it. This is a whirlwind of a story that grabs you right from the first pages!