Rating: 4/5

Another edge of your seat offering in this exciting series. I have been going through this quickly on audio so I can get to the Will Trent series, but may slow this down as I don't want to 'overkill'!

Sarah Linton, our ever capable and most adaptable pediatrician slash medical examiner of small town Heartsdale is called out to what looks like a suicide on the college campus. It's been mentioned many times that the town's reputation is important and this will need to be dealt with swiftly. Sarah's sister is almost due to give birth and unfortunately has been swept up in this crime, and ends up being terribly hurt also.

Jeffrey Tolliver, Sarah's ex husband and the police chief join forces again to get to the bottom of these crimes which seem to have a hate crime aspect, and poor Lena, the ex detective of the force who has suffered terribly in the prior two installments is dragged into this in more ways than one. She decided to give up her beloved job due to the pressures placed on her by Jeffrey to seek counselling for the atrocities she has previously faced. I like the relationship between these two characters; Jeffrey so clearly cares for her, but fumbles his way through, getting many things wrong. Poor Lena has accepted a job on the campus security division where she is working hard with no direction in her life. 

I did not enjoy this book as much as the previous two, I found the storyline less engaging, but as always in series I enjoy I do love the characters and will be keen to see how they all continue to develop. I like that Nan is still involved, the widow of Lena's twin, she adds a nice touch of softness and really cares about Lena. 

Again Sarah and Jeffrey's push pull complexities are evident, it's clear his indiscretions have hurt Sarah but their love for each other is clear, and she is willing to forgive him. It seems her close knit family is slowly becoming more accepting of him, too. 

I was left wondering a little about Sarah's sister's frame of mind after her tragedy and found she was left out of this storyline somewhat. 

I look forward to book number four to see what dramas unfold in this unlucky small community where lots of things go wrong, and I do hope Lena can start to heal.