Rating: 4/5

I do so hope that at least one of my grandchildren come to love the Oz books as much as I do! This is #7 in the series and there hasn’t been a stinker yet. In fact, I have loved every one of them! 

In this episode, we are introduced to yet more of Mr. Baum’s imaginative characters–malign and benign. In the first category is the famous Crooked Magician, Dr. Pipt, who is practicing his ‘art’ in the Kingdom of Oz against royal decree. He has created a ‘Powder of Life’ – which was used in an earlier book to bring to life Jack the Pumpkinhead and has done the same for the pompous Glass Cat who loves to brag about her pink brains visible through her transparent glass ‘skin’. 

Dr. Pipt is almost ready with another batch to enliven a Patchwork Girl which his wife, Margolotte, had sewn together from an old quilt. She is to be used as the household servant. 

The Patchwork Girl falls into the second category along with Ojo the Unlucky and his uncle, Unc Nunkie the Silent. However, in the process of bringing Scraps, as the Patchwork Girl is called, to life, a bottle of Liquid of Petrifaction gets overturned on Margolotte and Unc Nunkie and they are turned to solid marble which unfortunately, was what this particular invention of the Crooked Magician was supposed to do.

Ojo is devasted as his uncle was his only family. He sets out with the list of ingredients to the antidote to the Liquid of Petrifaction, which he must somehow procure, if he wants his uncle to ever be freed from his marble tomb. Scraps and the Glass Cat agree to accompany him and before long they are joined by a whole host of other Oz comrades, some new and some old familiars. 

Of course, we meet up with Dorothy and Ozma and perhaps we are not too surprised to discover that the Scarecrow is quite taken with the Patchwork Girl. He thinks she is quite beautiful, and she thinks the same of him 🩷– though no one else is quite so convinced. 😉

Another delightful romp through the Land of Oz that ends happily ever after!

On to #8!