Rating: 1/5

This collection of short stories is best described as eclectic. No common theme or type of narrator unites them.

The Lottery, by Lucy Sussex. This was a very bad choice, in my opinion, to start off the book. The story throws out the names of many creatures and places from way back in history, with the result that readers who are not avid scholars of evolutionary history are likely to become lost. The end also plays on a tired old trope by naming the slugs Adam and Eve.

Face to Stony Face, by Gary Crew. This story tries too hard for the stark, noir atmosphere of a gritty detective tale. Instead all it gets is really choppy, with awkward dialogue and stiff sentences. No one gets any character development to speak of; once the mystery is solved there isn't much reread value.

The Battle of Leila the Dog, by Rick Kennett. Plenty of action and mystery here, though again spoiled by the frustrating lack of context. Who's fighting whom, and why? What was the Gartino Experiment? A few more small details here and there would have gone a long way to making this feel like one battle in a larger war, one ship in a larger universe.

Long Live the Giant! by Isobelle Carmody. Punctuation. Please, learn the function of a comma. The story is told more than experienced, and in some places struck me more as a commentary on life and immortality than a story. The fate of Borth was obvious from his name, and a poor choice given the flippant excuse offered to make it possible. ("There had been talk of setting him back in time for some technical reason or other..." Yes, this is the actual explanation). 

The Blondfire Genome, by Sean McMullen. This is one of the best stories in the collection. The narrative details Megan's experiments as well as enough about her life that this feels like a snapshot of those tumultuous high school years of exclusion and bitter envy. Jackie may be a tad too perfect, but overall this was one of the only stories worth a re-read.

Everything, by Mustafa Zahirovic. The gem of this collection, and my reason for keeping the book. The images of the triad of steelworks, rain, and the studio weave throughout the story. Ivan and Niklaus play off each other well. The emotions are powerful; Niklaus lingers over them throughout and poignantly displays them in his narrative.

White Christmas, by Sean Williams. I realize the title was supposed to be a twist on all the other stories about white Christmases, but it's hard to remember how many stories I've read with that same title. Either way, this is a story that bounces between the past and the present, and generally does so well. There was no real reason why the snow only affected nonliving things, and for the amount of grief Stewart was supposed to be feeling, surprisingly little detail about his wife.

Malcolm and the Intergalactic Slug-suckers, by Paul Voermans. This story liked to throw out a lot of made-up words and never explain them. Using new words for new technology is fine, but he's got so much going on that it isn't possible to figure out much of anything about the surroundings. It's also a story to appeal more to the gross factor than anything else (and I have increasingly little sympathy for someone who will do something that stupid for strangers just to show off; he got what he deserved, as far as I'm concerned).

Circles of Fire, by Sophie Masson. This story felt like the author had a really good idea, and told the story to tell the idea rather than to tell a story. The main character has so little personality she might as well be the kitchen table, because her only purpose is to watch Mom, and then watch Dad, and then watch Mom again. Dad was too one-dimensional in his stance of the government can do no wrong; Mom was vague and never even voiced her ideas, let alone committed to them. Although the idea was amusing and interesting, the execution left a lot to be desired.

Overall this is not a collection I would want to keep, save for one story. High school drama is not high on my list, and without "Everything" I would happily donate this back for the next round of library sales. I rate this collection as Not Recommended, although "Everything" and "The Blondfire Genome" are stories I would recommend.