Rating: 5/5

Awww, such a sweet and somewhat angsty Neels' Cinderella outing (although the heroine does a good job of saving herself from adversity most of the time, as any self-respecting BN heroine would). From 1990, but take away the references to cars (and one startling Neelsian reference to computers!), and this really could be pre-WWI (going back even to Regency-era), with its manor houses and Upstairs/Downstairs-Downton vibe. 

The title comes from a quote from Shakespeare that the heroine uses as a riposte when the hero unkindly mocks her with a quote from Chaucer when he comes upon her in a rare new and pretty rose-print dress she is happily wearing for the first time when she bumps into him. Sparks fly: She exclaims "oh no..." and then, aghast at her own rudeness, "Good afternoon, Professor Nauta."

She detected mockery in his "Good afternoon, MIss Fletcher," and his slow appraisal of her person. "Well, well, it would be rude to say that I scarcely recognise you, wouldn't it? Would it be appropriate for me to quote Chaucer? 'And she was as fair as is the rose in May...'"

Sarah eyed him with dislike. "Roses have thorns--Shakespeare said that--and good day to you, Professor. you are not only rude, you are unkind too."

(He apologizes nicely and with real contrition and takes her out to a very nice tea at Fortnums. I love Betty Neels.)

Sarah Fletcher is a well-brought-up young lady who, after the death of her father, was ejected from the small manor house she grew up in by her awful stepmother (Neelsian parents never getting around to wills I guess), and who has been living in a London bedsitter for the past few years. She works as a receptionist for the cranky rich half-British/half-Dutch doctor (RBDD), Professor Radolf Nauta, who doesn’t take much notice of 28-year-old (but younger-seeming) Sarah, who is one of BN’s small and plain-but-not-really shy girls, with beautiful long hair she keeps hidden, “pansy eyes,” and a neat, if a bit thin, figure. Sarah doesn’t much like the Professor to begin with—he is frequently impatient and ill tempered, and she believes he barely sees her as a person (which is mostly true).

Sarah lives a lonely life with only her cat Charles for company, and it’s easy to feel sorry for her, even though she doesn’t herself succumb to self pity much but gets on briskly and mostly cheerfully with her narrow life. She knows she’s stuck in a rut but doesn’t see much way out of it, with no money, “no looks to speak of,” and a shy, though kind and happy-to-help, demeanor. She’s quiet but able to stick up for herself, even with the Professor, whom she repeatedly tells to mind his language when he swears (very mildly) around her.

His mother comes to visit and takes a liking to her. The Professor’s grandmother is dying, and struck by a hunch, his mother thinks Sarah is just the right person to help the family care for her and ease her last days. Radolf agrees to ask Sarah if she will go to his parents house in Holland as a companion for the old lady, to help give his mother a break. He tells her he will arrange the time-off from her job, pay her, and see to it that Charles the cat is well cared for while she’s away. She agrees, since a change in routine seems welcome. At his request, to avoid gossip, she doesn’t tell her boss (who doesn’t like her) why she’s taking time off, but it’s approved.

She fits in well with his parent’s household, given her own quietly upper class background, and even irascible Granny likes her. She spends her days and nights reading Jane Eyre and Austen aloud and playing piano softly for hours on end for the old lady. Radolf shows up for Granny’s last few days to say goodbye, and shares Sarah’s watch in the early hours. BN’s description of the quiet nights they share has a touching intimacy and warmth, although the Professor continues to mostly treat Sarah coolly and dismissively and she reacts similarly although she’s very aware of him and finds herself thinking about him a lot, particularly when her defenses are down just before sleep.

The old lady dies, and he insists she stay a few days longer because Granny specifically requested that Sarah come to her funeral. Sarah tries to explain that she’s due back to work but the moment is interrupted, so she writes her boss and figures it will be fine. She’s not aware that a postal strike is going on in England. After the funeral, the Professor curtly thanks her for her help and arranges her trip back to England. She’s happy to see Charles, but the dark little bedsitter seems cramped and lonely after the luxury of the Nauta home, and she finds herself wondering aloud to Charles an awful lot about where the Professor might be and what he might be doing. Being a Neelsian heroine of character, she makes the best of it and resolves to stop thinking about him, telling herself she’s lucky to have a home and a job and Charles.

But the next day, her boss admonishes her that she is late back, and it’s the second time it’s happened, and accuses Sarah about lying about writing to her. Sarah fires back, and the woman tells her that she hasn’t heard the end of it. By the end of the week, she is fired and given a crappy reference that says she’s a decent worker but unreliable. She has trouble finding another clerical job, so decides to take a position as a domestic in a country house where she can have Charles. She responds to a few ads and decides to take a job that offers a small cottage in which to live and will permit her cat. She goes for the interview and is honest about why she was fired, and to her surprise, gets the job as a housemaid. As Fate, that strong presence in any Neels' novel, would have it, Lady Wesley, her new employer, is Radolf’s godmother. 

Meanwhile, Radolf returns to London and is furious to find that Sarah has been fired. He reluctantly feels responsible, and it becomes an obsession to find her. But he dead-ends in his search, although he finds out quite a lot about her lonely life, even tracking down the small manor house where Sarah grew up before being ejected by her awful and uncaring stepmother. He keeps searching, annoyed to find that he can’t get her out of his head. 

It’s only by chance that he finds her working for his godmother when he goes to visit. He’s not happy about it—although he claims to be not a snob, he considers it very unsuitable for someone of her background (a thought shared by everyone who comes to know her, including the other servants, who nonetheless really like her since she is hard working and not at all snooty and very eager to please and be pleased). He’s not much appeased by his godmother’s observation that while she agrees a job as housemaid is hardly suitable for someone of Sarah’s background, she is, at least, in an environment much more suited to her and much better off than she was living in London.

Sarah and Radolf meet from time to time and usually clash—he seems to go out of his way to needle her when he’s not being cold, and she, mainly out of self-preservation because she is aware that he is far too often in her thoughts, tries to avoid him. They both talk to their pets (Sarah to Charles and Radolf to Trotter, his Golden Retriever), about the other quite often, with neither of them very happy about their mutually unwanted attraction.

It doesn’t take long for Sarah to realize that, to her horror, she is in love with the Professor (she has her Moment of Realization while serving him cheese in his godmother’s dining room where, much to the butler’s horror, she almost drops the plate; the Professor politely pauses and pretends to take no notice). She recovers herself and explains later that she felt “giddy” and uses that as an excuse to avoid him on a couple of subsequent visits, as the butler agrees that it would not do to have her falter during dinner service!. 

The Upstairs/Downstairs depiction continues, with brief interludes in which we see that Sarah fits entirely well into Radolf’s life and would make him a good wife—not least because she is kindhearted and loving and very much a lady, although she has no pretensions and is grateful to have a job where she has friends and isn't so lonely, and can escape, at least temporarily, her unwanted feelings through hard work. 

Radolf, meanwhile, is coming more and more to his godmother's house and seeing Sarah and not getting over his own unwanted feelings for her. However, the Big Misunderstanding occurs between them when she overhears a phone call and thinks he is getting married (he’s talking to his sister about her upcoming wedding), and, in turn, Radolf thinks she is serious about his houseman, whom Sarah grew up with and sees at Lady Wesely’s, because Sarah, desperate to hide her feelings and wanting Radolf to stop feeling responsible for her, pretends that she and the young man have an “understanding.” Radolf soon finds out that his houseman is actually marrying someone else and, by this time acknowledging that he’s in love with Sarah, Radolf becomes set on marrying her. 

But we don’t get there quite yet: Charles is let out by accident by one of the housemaids, and a distraught Sarah, with the help of Lady Wesley’s household, looks for him for three days, finally setting out on her day off to scour the countryside. She finds him in a rabbit snare in the woods but in reaching him, manages to entangle herself in a snare, and fearing he will struggle and be killed if she lets go her grip on his snare, stays trapped for hours. Lady Wesley calls Radolf after a few hours, and he high tails it down to find Sarah. The omniscient doctor, after questioning the staff about where they’ve already searched, thinks “rabbit snares!” (haha, OK!) and asks where it would be likely they’d be set. He sets out with Trotter and finds the ensnared duo, and frees them, and after plying Sarah with brandy and sending her off to sleep, sits with her until dawn, occasionally dropping soft kisses on her hair. Awwww.

He gets her back to the manor and takes Charles to the vet (he’s OK!), and after sharing tea, that Neelsian necessity and cure-all, with her, tells her she’s not to work for a few days and that he’ll be back. When she protests that he previously told her he didn’t want to see her again and she’s been trying to keep out of his way, he tells her that they’ll discuss that later. He sets off and she has a good cry for once. 

Over the next few days, the staff spoils her rotten, with even the amusingly smug Lady Wesley coming to visit her (“How fortunate that I decided to telephone Radolf. I am, when necessary, very quick-thinking you know.” Hee.) Sarah tries to argue that she can help with the work, but meekly agrees to follow the doctor’s orders. She finally gets them to allow her to at least help shell peas and is sitting with Charles in the sunny garden doing so when Radolf comes back a few days later. He picks up Charles and tells her to come with him, permitting her only to drop off the peas in the kitchen (where she finds the entire staff sitting, smiling at her), and then walks her briskly to his Rolls, telling her to get in. She refuses until she knows what’s happening, and he puts Charles in the back and tells her that he’s taking her home – “mine—ours, of course.” Awww. Misunderstandings are quickly cleared up, and he makes a really sweet avowal of love, and kisses her, with the staff secretly looking on, as he sweeps her off to be married shortly by special license and live HAPPILY EVER AFTER. 

A slow simmer in this one—it takes a while for both Sarah and Radolf to realize that their mutual awareness and inability to stop thinking about the other is love, and both fight pretty strongly against their developing feelings. Radolf is of Neel’s crankier heroes but likable for all that, and Sarah is super sweet—not a Mary Sue, because I don’t think Neels writes Mary Sues; she is just a really nice girl who is very lonely but who doesn’t allow herself to feel self-pity and, in BN heroine fashion, just gets on with making the best of things and living her life as independently and well as she can. Nicely drawn secondary characters that, while standard Neels stock, sparkle in their own right give the story a lot of humor and color. A typically comforting and comfortable Neels read, in which most people are kind and well-meaning and we can close the book in the happy knowledge that all is right in the hero's and heroine's world. For me, BN's stories, as similar as they may be one to the next, somehow never fail to deliver.

Not so much car or food porn in this one, but Radolf drives the usual luxurious ride: in this case, a Rolls: