Rating: 5/5

A proper review of this singular tome would require a much lengthier analysis with proper care, consideration, and excerpts to help ensure a sincerely faithful representation of what this novel is, or can be, for the dogged, determined and flat-out stubborn readers among us. You couldn’t have a much more polarizing book. I’ve seen it called everything from ‘solipsistic word-vomit’ to ‘an artistic achievement of monstrous proportions’.
 
This is the portrait of a mind, the story of a spirit, written in the most boldly comprehensive, insistent and unflinching way imaginable. Wiley Silonowicz (Harold Brodkey?!): The Untethered Spirit, The Runaway Soul. Imagine an entirely rootless existence. Unfathomable loneliness. Blood kin amounting to nothing more than a possible maternal wraith haunting your adopted mother on her deathbed. Wiley’s relationships are detailed throughout his life centering most prominently on some lovers as he grows up, his father figure S.L, and, most notably, with his adopted sister, Nonie.
 
Imagine having the audacity to describe the indescribable, such as opening your magnum opus with detailing your birth (it’s gets more and more exquisite each time I reread it) or communicating the sensations of an orgasm. Always being explored are the endlessly chaotic intricacies of human interaction, described with unabashed, ruthless insistence. Brodkey’s complexly ruminative style is soul-stirring and mind-expanding in a most real way. Great fiction such as this calls early-on for a personal, methodical approach, in which the reader can breathe and allow the profound moments their due percolation. To me, it functions excellent as a companion read. It crescendoes with waves of brilliance and tides of tedium, when I felt occasionally left behind from where Brodkey intended to go. But then there’d come a stupefying paragraph with the most sustained, comprehensive interiority and portrayal of human consciousness imaginable that he’ll eventually cap off with ‘if I can say that..’ or ‘do you know what I’m meaning?..’, which reinforces how Brodkey pleads with us to stay with him, to abandon pre-conceptions absolutely, and be totally open to how a mind/spirit can work. 
 
The concluding sections filled me with awe. My heart and mind jolted by brilliance, I remember hoping to myself that I’d find the time some future day to experience this novel again. It’s not perfect and not for everyone, but it is a remarkable achievement.