Rating: 5/5

Oleander, Jacaranda: A Childhood Perceived captures memories of Penelope Lively's childhood in Egypt in the 1930s and 1940s in snapshots so vivid that they alone would make this a fascinating book. But what shoots it into a league of its own is her simultaneous exploration of the nature and development of childhood perception. 
Lively refers to the ‘anarchic vision of childhood’- anarchic because without preconceptions, unpredicatable, where adult societal and cultural codes are unknown. The experience of childhood itself is irretrievable, all that remains ‘is a headful of brilliant frozen moments’. She sets out to turn these frozen images into words, aiming ‘both to look at the way in which a child sees and at how it matches up with what was seen’. 
She succeeds brilliantly, constantly thought provoking and challenging. Because she grew up in the English community in Egypt, her images are set in Egypt, Palestine and the Sudan, placed she lived or visited with parents and her nanny/governess, Lucy.
She captures moments when she realizes now that she first became aware of the passing of time – then and now, the dislocation of becoming aware of different viewpoints from your own customary egocentric viewpoint and that there is more than one way of looking at the world. 
 Lucy was the prime conditioner of Penelope's world view: ‘I was the product of one society but was learning how to perceive the world in the ambience of a quite different culture. I grew up English, in Egypt’. 
 The question the adult author wants most to pursue is how do ‘children arrive at an alternative interpretation of things and what happens to them on the way?’
She follows the different textures of memory at different stages, such as the simple observations of a very young child - a praying mantis in the garden, in bed with a stomach ache with the clack of Lucy's knitting needles in the background', and the slightly older surreal view of the black hole in Lucy’s chest (she now imagines inspired by the shadow between Lucy's breasts) and the seaweed she glimpsed growing at the base of her father’s torso when his bath towel slipped once. At some point, she says, rationality kicks in and the black hole and the seaweed ‘gave way to an awareness of and curiosity about sexuality', and speculates that some of the surreal nature of such images may continue into adulthood through dreams.
As she gets older, she becomes aware of things outside the house and garden and the texture of her daily life. The second World War is being fought in Libya, battles very close. The house is full of officers, her mother leads an active social life, entertains freely. They holiday at beaches. Which ones? Why? The snapshots she has chosen to write about take us through her growing awareness of social codes in Egypt, cultural differences, and the changing relationships between her parents as they divorce. 
Then there is the devastating shock of being sent to England to boarding school, to a world in which she was severed from Lucy, where she knew none of the codes of acceptability, 'on the outside...the one who cannot quite interpret what is going on, who is forever tripping over their own ignorance or misinterpretation....I was a displaced person, of a kind, in the jargon of the day. And displaced persons are displaced not just in space but in time; they have been cut off from their own past...If you cannot revisit your own origins - reach out and touch them from time to time - you are forever in some crucial sense untethered'.
I read Oleander, Jacaranda in between two readings of W.G. Sebald's The Emigrants. I hadn't expected to find such a reflection of Sebald's haunting theme here. But here it is.