Rating: 5/5

Shakespeare’s tragedies–these four, in particular–are some of the best pieces of literature and storytelling ever conceived. Although the bard was employed to write entertainment for the masses, his plays have stayed resonant, relevant and impactful for centuries and counting. The plays featured in this collection are all masterpieces in their own right; they all feature thematic conventions of tragedy from the time, from the supernatural, good vs evil, love, murder, betrayal, the tragic hero whose “tragic flaw” (hamartia) inevitably leads to their own demise–and each of those respective flaws from each respective play are deeply human and present in all of us to an extent. Additionally, these plays feature some of if not the best tragic heroes (and characters in general) ever written in literature and theatre. The poetic language is just the cherry on top. Here is my ranking and review of each play in this collection, from best to worst–although every single one of these plays are exceptional:

Othello - Jealousy
 
5/5 ★

Othello is one of the bard’s best tragedies—and my personal favorite. Like his other works, it contains beautiful poetry, imagery and speeches but it also features two of the best female characters, one of if not the best primary antagonists in literature and arguably the most tragic ending of Shakespeare’s tragedies. I can’t recommend it enough.

Master manipulator Iago is one of those villains I couldn’t help but love; as an orchestrator of events, he uses everyone's flaws to his own advantage and against them to bring his plan to fruition with devastating results. He’s one of Shakespeare's best characters and must be a joy to watch in a live performance. Additionally, the character of Othello is one of the most relatable, tragic and fascinating of Shakespeare’s tragic heroes; his gradual descent into insanity and self-deprecation is genuinely heartbreaking. 

Macbeth - Ambition

5/5 ★

"All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!"

The universally-lauded Macbeth is regarded as one of if not the bard's greatest plays–and for very good reason; it’s a dark, grim, and sinister epic that is a breeze to read through. Every scene—aside from a very few that are often cut from stage and film productions—is engaging, straightforward and beautifully written. 

Macbeth and Lady Macbeth are two of Shakespeare’s—and fiction’s—greatest characters; unfortunately, the play focuses and relies so much on them that most of the supporting cast of characters, such as Macduff, Malcolm and Banquo feel somewhat underdeveloped, uninteresting and in their shadows; it would require exceptional performances from actors to make them memorable. 

Macbeth is one of if not the best tragic heroes ever written; his downward spiral, nuances, complexities and haunting soliloquies make him a fascinating character to read, study and watch being performed. Macbeth is arguably Shakespeare’s best tragedy and a perfectly rated masterpiece of literature.

Hamlet - Inaction

4.5/5 ★

To be or not to be the best Shakespeare play?

The universally praised revenge tragedy, Hamlet, is widely considered as not only Shakespeare’s magnum opus but one of the best plays ever written in the English language and after reading it, I can definitely see why. 

It explores many themes such as love, obsession, madness, and melancholy. Two of the play’s most compelling aspects, for me, are Hamlet’s soliloquies as well as his gradual descent into insanity—fuelled by the heavy burden to avenge his father. Additionally, the character of Claudius left an impact on m. Funny enough, I found him to be quite bland up until his confession in the third act—one of my favourite speeches in the entire play; it humanizes him much more and, from then on, makes him a much more likeable and interesting antagonist. 

Despite being one of Shakespeare’s longest plays, Hamlet is a complex, in-depth piece of literature that should definitely be thoroughly studied by any actor, scholar, aspiring psychologist (lol) and avid reader. Albeit long and a challenging read, I very much enjoyed the play; however, my opinion still stands that Othello is Shakespeare’s greatest tragedy.

King Lear - Hubris

4/5 ★

A devastating tragedy about a king slowly losing everything precious left in his world and a duke’s illegitimate son plotting against his brother. Lear’s senility, when performed by an exceptional actor, has to potential to be uncomfortably funny yet devastating. 

What disappointed me the most about this play, however, was its somewhat unjustified length; it features overly long scenes and/or plain boring ones that bring the play to a halt. It doesn’t include many memorable monologues either, to my surprise, aside from a few of Lear’s and Edmund's. Lastly, King Lear has one of the most heartbreaking endings of Shakespeare’s tragedies that I’ve read. 

I’d recommend this play but I’ve personally preferred others.