Rating: 4/5

My friend gave me this book a few years ago, and I was in no hurry to read it, as the movie that is based on the book was notorious for downplaying the role of people of color. The movie, from what I could see in the trailer (and from what friends and reviews said as well), insists that the main character, a fictional white cis guy, be the catalyst for change, which isn't supported by any story of Stonewall that I've heard. That being said, I'm very glad I read it.

Stonewall doesn't actually occupy itself so much with the event as with the growing pains of the gay rights movement. Duberman does a great job of emphasizing how it's hard to nail down a linear, easy-to-understand narrative of Stonewall, as people's testimonies vary so widely; what matters, the reader is led to understood, is that ~something~ changed, or clicked, for so many people after June 28, 1969.

The book follows six people from childhood to Stonewall, an approach that I appreciated, even if the men were emphasized over the women. Duberman, a white gay guy, is thoughtful in how the gay rights movement often excluded people of color and lesbians and didn't really have a great appreciation for intersectionality. I liked this attention to often-overlooked narratives, especially since this book was published in 1994. A quote that shows Duberman's critical eye: "Many men in GLF [Gay Liberation Front] supported the women's movement, and some of them gave it a good deal more than lip service. Still, they had been socialized as men and despite good intentions and vigorous efforts at self-examination in consciousness-raising groups, many proved unable to rid themselves of the assumption that their male insights were superior, that their male leadership essential, their male issues paramount." 

Something that really bothered me at the beginning of the book was Duberman's flippant treatment of childhood sexual abuse. As a survivor of childhood sexual abuse myself, I was disturbed to read sentences like, "The neighbors had begun to tease her [Sylvia Rivera's mother] about Ray's effeminacy, predicting he would soon be a full-fledged maricón. What they didn't know was that he had already, at age seven, had sex with his fourteen-year-old cousin--and by age ten was having sex regularly with a married man down the block." I would never casually characterize such situations as consensual.

This book came at the right time for me and I actually felt inspired to ~do~ something after I read it. And in its examination of the inner discord of the homophile and gay rights movements, I found comfort that a group of loud, shouty, obnoxiously self-righteous (I say that with respect) people who disagreed with each other 50% of the time could get their shit together and effect change. I also felt a renewed respect for the thousands of nameless people that were behind the movement and worked tirelessly to make themselves and their community feel heard. It reminded me of how I felt when I read And the Band Played On. So many people dedicated so much of their time, money, and effort, often at great personal cost, simply because they knew what they were doing was right.

Near the end, I felt that Duberman lost a lot of his steam. The book ends a bit quickly, lacking the thoughtful analysis that characterizes previous chapters.

All in all, a great book and definitely well worth the read, especially if you're feeling down about the bickering going on in the left.