Rating: 3/5

Essays on Yeats, Valery, Eliot, Proust, Joyce, Stein, Rimbaud and Auguste de Villiers de l'Isle-Adam (author of the 1890 drama ‘Axël’).

Before its publication in “Axel’s Castle” a fair amount of this material was evidently published in the New Republic where Wilson wrote until 1931, the year “Axel’s Castle” was released. In that year Wilson was 36, only 7 years younger than Eliot, for whose ‘The Waste Land’ Wilson was the first American reviewer. Wilson is also said to be one of the first to review Joyce’s ‘Ulysses.’ Joyce was 13 years his elder.

The essays here are often pleasurably lucid, though at times perhaps a bit too deferential, and best when hewing closest to biography and text, as opposed to the grander literary-historical theorizing prominent in the concluding chapter. However, as indicated by the hint of a cohort registry above, it’s difficult, now some 80 years on, not to view “Axel’s Castle” itself as literary-historical artifact, and grist for a similar sort of rumination.

Oddly, for me perhaps most enjoyable was watching Wilson attempt to come to terms with Gertrude Stein, generously including (as he also does elsewhere) large chunks of illustrative text, as in:

“One was quite certain for a long part of his being one being living he had been trying to be certain that he was wrong in doing what he was doing and then when he could not come to be certain that he had been wrong in doing what he had been doing, when he had completely convinced himself that he would not come to be certain that he had been wrong in doing what he had been doing he was really certain then that he was a great one and he certainly was a great one. Certainly every one could be certain of this thing that this one is a great one.”

(And this is Stein at her relatively more coherent. Consider this, from “Tender Buttons” of 1914: 

“A PIANO.

If the speed is open, if the color is careless, if the selection of a strong scent is not awkward, if the button holder is held by all the waving color and there is no color, not any color. If there is no dirt in a pin and there can be none scarcely, if there is not then the place is the same as up standing.”)

I found it somehow extraordinarily sweet to see a sensible man (as Wilson presents himself) struggle to rationalize Stein’s remarkably inappropriate abstract prose, excerpting lengthy passages from Shaw and the United States Courts-Martial Manual as counter samples of language use, and being led off into the dark alleyways of the meaning of meaning. This, I confess, was a most amusing deferentiality. 

In the closing paragraph of the final chapter (that of the grander literary-historical theory) Wilson almost off-handedly refers to the possible death of “the whole belle-lettristic tradition of the Renaissance.” One thinks, depending on how one takes it, that he’s likely speaking of the venue of his own ambition. But in another sense the opposite may be true, and that in “Axel’s Castle” Wilson was not only witnessing, but also, for better or for worse, fostering and amplifying a new 20th century belle-lettristic renaissance.