Rating: 4/5

The tragic and violent history of Vietnam's struggle for complete independence from colonialism and then the type of rule it wanted for itself as opposed to what western democracies hoped for. It is an epic struggle that starts after Japanese occupation during World War II. Japan is defeated but this does nothing for the former French Indo-China colony. They are reoccupied by France. So begins a desperate and brutal struggle against France. It goes on for almost nine years and culminates in the removal of French colonising government. However, the independence is not what Vietnams expects. The country is divided between North and South Vietnam. Two different nations. One friendly to the western democracies (South) the other pro-Soviet communist (North) 

The Northern half of Vietnam will not settle for this and tries to absorb the south under its own type of politics and rule as a whole and united Vietnam. The propped up Southern Vietnamese government relies on U.S. military aid. At first on an advisory capacity. However, as the struggle continues through the late fifties and towards the mid-sixties it becomes clear that American aid must come in a more robust and direct form of intervention. 

The North of Vietnam must fight a war against the most powerful military force the world has ever known. She (North Vietnam) has one advantage. U.S. land forces will not enter the North for fear of escalating the conflict into China and the Soviet Union.

This one ace card allows the north of Vietnam to keep fighting indefinitely. No matter how many battles the north lose, they can always send more fighters in from the north. It goes on for many years. A war of attrition. But the Vietnamese seem to be incredibly durable. From 1945 to 1975 the Vietnamese keep on fighting. In the end, even the world's biggest superpower lacks the political will to keep going. The Americans pull out and the South is left to its fate. 

This historical account of the Vietnam War is a very compelling read and I would highly recommend this historical read.