Rating: 4/5

For some reason, I had this unexplainable Ulysses S. Grant craving. I think that part of it came from teaching American history, and when I reached the Reconstruction (in my mind, thinking it would be the most boooooring section ... I mean, come on, who can top the drama of a CIVIL WAR?!) I found that the scant sections on his participation as President fascinating. Then I heard from someone else, possibly NPR, mention that his memoirs were probably the only Presidential memoirs worth reading. Well, when I got my Kindle and found that they were free ... what else could I do?

The big surprise? His memoirs don't even address his presidential years AT ALL. It is simply Grant from kid to Grant as the eventual victor of the Civil War. ... and then, that's it. Truth be told, even as a teacher of history I have neglected to be a passionate aficionado of Civil War history. I've avoided it. I think it was so broad in scope and so trammeled by other historians that I simply didn't have the ambition to step into a serious study of it. And so, now I'm reading a two volume book that pretty much details every event from this war I had so carefully avoided for so long ... not what I had planned.

And yet ... this is by far the best way for any aspiring Civil War historian to get started on the Civil War. Instead of trying to swallow the monster events, people, and places that all encapsulate a nationwide war, you get the war from the point of view of one, single soldier. And, conveniently enough, this soldier participates in many of the most significant portions of the war, particularly towards the end. Ulysses, also, turns out to be a relatively humble guy ... well, no general can be truly considered "humble" and of course most autobiographies are tainted by the reputation someone would hope to have, but still. Ulysses is no eloquent author, yet he is still one that you trust. His assessments are simple, meticulously justified, and--whether you agree with them or not--they at least make sense. Besides that, Grant really knew how to put you in the moment. When he finally corners Lee and is able to extract a surrender, and then weeks later someone else hunts down Jefferson Davis, I felt as if I had been experiencing these things in the moment: I took a huge sigh of relief. I had to stop reading temporarily and swallow in the news. The fact that these events coincided with the news of the death of Osama Bin Laden only did more to increase my sense of understanding for the emotional impact of the events of that time. (Not that Lee or Davis were equals to Bin Laden, but the idea of a long, fought era of history being drawn to a close would be difficult to not compare.)

Now that I'm done, my only regret is that I didn't get to read more about what followed. I wanted to hear about Grant's presidency from Grant himself, but if I must, I suppose that I can look to others to fill in that remaining craving.