Rating: 4/5

My 2025 "Spring" read! I love this cover! The color palette is so pretty and unusual. 

Set in 1194 and following the events of Winter's Heat, heroine Nicola Ashby is being held prisoner by Lord Rannulf of Graistan after her participation in her father's revolt against Graistan. Rannulf commands that she marry his younger half brother, Gilliam Fitzhenry, so that Gilliam can get possession of her lands. Gilliam is the man that killed Nicola's father during the siege of Ashby, therefore Nicola will do everything in her power to avoid marrying Gilliam, and is desperate to find a way to rule Ashby in her own right.

...

This was a really good book, and I think it's probably the best in the series. I was intrigued by Gilliam and Nicola as a couple when they were introduced in the first book, and I was really impressed by how their relationship played out.

The first half of this book was a little bit hard for me to get in to because I felt like the subject matter was so heavy. I found Nicola to be a deeply sympathetic character. I typically roll my eyes at HR heroines who balk against the gender norms of their time period because it usually feels anachronistic, but Nicola was such a well written character that the author managed to pull this trope off in a way that felt painfully realistic. Nicola was raised by a father and a community who more or less indulged her in the fantasy that if she could just prove herself capable enough, she could one day rule Ashby in her own right - and she got tantalizing close to achieving that dream, only to have everything fall apart. It was really heartbreaking to read about a girl who was so independent and confident having her autonomy and rights stripped away from her one by one for the entire first half of the book. Nicola is a little bit annoying and stubborn (and says "Nay!" approx. 50,000 times in this book), and she makes increasingly stupid decisions in her desperation to escape her impending marriage, but I could hardly blame her given the circumstances.

This was a super slow burn and emotional romance. Gilliam did kill Nicola's father after all, and it takes Nicola a long time to reconcile her feelings towards him. I appreciated that the author really took the time to explore Nicola's feelings and let them develop, rather than rush into having her love Gilliam simply because he is the hero. I loved Gilliam as a hero, but even I had a hard time rooting for him and Nicola to be together at first purely because of her circumstances. However, once it gets going, their relationship is very endearing.

As always, I was impressed by Denise Domning's writing and her portrayal of the High Middle Ages. She commits to the details of her characters' day-to-day lives which makes the time period really come to life in her stories. I mentioned in my review for book 2, Summer's Storm, that I found the secondary characters in that story boring, but in this story I thought the supporting were very interesting and fleshed out - particularly Gilliam's reluctant young squire Jos, and Nicola's friend Tilda. They were a highlight in the story.

The reason I give this 4 stars instead of 5 is because I found the first half of the book to be a little depressing. That's not to say that it wasn't well written or realistic, it just wasn't the vibe that I enjoy for Historical Romance. I will definitely read the 4th book to finish this series, but I don't see how it could top this one. I truly think that this is peak for the series.