Rating: 2/5

Two-and-a-half stars. Nancy McKenzie puts an interesting spin on a well-known legend. This is Guinevere's autobiography and there is no doubt she is the true hero of this tale. McKenzie does a smart job of entwining the mythical and believable to create the story that is the basis for the legend that will evolve. The feminist heart will delight to find that "Gwen" is a woman ahead of her time who has power in her own right to match Arthur's. And then it will fall to find Guinevere subject to attempted rapes and victim to kidnappings in which she ultimately is always saved by a man. She is, however, an integral part of Arthur's own legend and he reveres her as a beloved equal. So how could a woman described as a perfect match for Arthur's virtues betray her beloved husband and king? Well, in this version, she does not. She loves Lancelot with all her heart from the moment she meets him; before meeting her husband-to-be, Arthur. For his part, Arthur knows how Guinevere feels about Lancelot before he weds her. She grows to love Arthur just as much. In fact, the love all three bear one another is so strong, that honesty wins and trust is never violated. It's a very modern take on love that is not well understood by anyone outside these three, thus rumors circulate and one can presume this is the stuff that made it into legend. Arthur's betrayal by Mordred is handled in similar fashion. In this version, Guenevere raises Mordred, as she is unable to have children herself. Arthur intends him to be his heir to the throne. Mordred is a noble character who possesses many of Arthur's virtues, but his ambition is not tempered and he does not inspire love among the people in the same way as Arthur. Mordred is good but misunderstood. Thus we can presume this also is the stuff that made it into legend. Such departures from popular legend as they are somewhat satisfying, but overall, I hate to say it, make the story more bland. After a bit, Guinevere's perfection becomes irritating, Arthur's character becomes perfectly flat, Lancelot's appeal becomes a mystery, etc. It also irritates me that it's Guinevere (and Gwen, for that matter) and not Guenevere. Hmmm....maybe I'm a purist, after all.