Rating: 3/5

While the story was well written, as in the dialogue flowed and you could easily picture small details, Carly's character was a bit ridiculous. In fact, the character's actions in this novel were the reason I had trouble enjoying it. ****This is a super spoiler alert**** I don't usually do this but I feel the only way I can describe why I disliked it is to point out key points.

First, we have Carly's character. She's 'self-sacrificing' as we all like to put it but it's not realistic at all to me to be quite so 'about everyone else'. It worked with the plot because I don't think the plot would have had the same effect if she wasn't this way but it made it really hard to relate to her and at times it even made her unlikable. 

Second, we have David. While I know he was never meant to be a night in shining armor, really the whole reason this mess started was because he was so caught up in himself when he was younger, I can't understand why he could be so downright mean to Carly but love Andrea immediately and unconditionally. In one specific part of the book, he brings Andrea back to the States to visit and makes a comment about fighting to keep her and basically saying to hell with her mother. It reminded me of a conversation two individuals going through a nasty divorce would be throwing at each other and it was one of the few times I felt sorry for Carly. There was no love between them in that moment or else he would never have threatened to take away the child of someone he loved in that way. It was cruel. 

Third, there was Ethan and Andrea. Ethan, though Carly tried to paint him as a good guy, was in my opinion mentally abusive. That's all I'll say there. Andrea, though sad what happened at the end, blew my mind with her situation. What parent allows for their daughter to up and leave with a virtual stranger?! She was still a minor and David was so selfish in these instances that it made me sick. 

There were some good parts to this book, it wasn't all just frustrating, but when it is hard to relate to the characters, it makes the plot sticky. Bockoven's plot line was well done regarding everything but the character's relationships to each other. I love that she wasn't afraid to ask the dirty questions. For example, Carly asking David if he was having feelings for Andrea. At times, the skipping ahead so many years would get frustrating but the time jumps weren't always a bad thing and seemed to make the book flow. I kind of feel like it would have fallen flat had she actually included all the 'self-sacrificing' these characters were known for.