Rating: 1/5

The Babe Ruth Story, by Babe Ruth, takes the reader through the life and times of Babe Ruth. The book begins with a story about many of the childhood hardships that Ruth had to endure, and transitions to Ruth's teenage years when he first began playing baseball. Ruth tells all about his Major League experiences, including the three teams he's been on; the Baltimore Orioles, the Boston Red Sox, and the New York Yankees. Ruth focuses on his time with the Yankees, because most of his real achievements began here. Ruth tells the reader all of his career struggles, whether it was getting in trouble for being out too late drinking, fighting with teammates, or continuously demanding a pay raise. In fact, the Boston Red Sox sold him to the Yankees because they could no longer afford Babe Ruth as a player on their team. Ruth was a seriously materialistic person, and it did not seem like he was too appreciative of what he had in his life. He set 30, 40, 50, and 60 season home run records, and thought very highly of himself. "I don’t think i’m bragging when I say I made the country home run conscious”(Ruth 88) he stated in this (what seems like a) never-ending book.

This book was terrible. I don't think I'll ever read an autobiography again unless I have to. The entire book was told through Ruth's eyes about how awesome he was at baseball. He was, no doubt, a fantastic player, but the traces of conceitedness in his words was almost sickening. Boring doesn't even begin to describe how painful this book was to finish. My only motivation was that I'd do better on my essay and keynote presentation if I continued reading. Ruth's feats were incredible, but I think this would have been much more interesting had it been . . . say . . . one of his teammates or coaches telling the story. I don't care to hear about how much Ruth loved himself, which was entirely evident on every single page. The way he acted towards his peers and elders was horrible, and made me want to remove him from his grave and burn him. Ruth was truly a womanizer and a drunk, and this book clearly proves that. I would not recommend this to anyone unless you're looking for a book that makes you want to rip your hair out and slam your fists into someone's face (preferably Ruth's).

I'd give The Babe Ruth Story a one out of five. Honestly, this book frustrated me to an extent that I cannot even fathom. Planning out how many pages I'd have to suffer through each day helped out a little, otherwise I would have ended up saving it all until the night before everything was due. Instead of reading the book, here's a quote that pretty much sums up every single thing Ruth talks about, "But I showed them that history repeats itself, because I again knocked three out of that park"(Ruth 163). The entire book is filled with Ruth's comments about how he "saved the game" and "the team couldn't have gotten anywhere without him". What a disgusting display of arrogance. Ruth is anything but humble, which isn't always a bad thing, but after reading this book, it's obvious how he took his proudness to an extreme. Nobody in their right mind would enjoy this book.