Rating: 4/5

Many good points about the Mass and the Apocalypse! Obviously, I mean it's Dr. Scott Hahn! 

 I would be very interested in hearing his views now on some things, now that he attends the Latin Mass! Be cool to read the updated version. ❤

Be warned, my review does end up being me just gushing about the Latin Mass because I am biased and can't write a proper review to save my life. 😂

 Some quotes that really stuck out to me
"We do not know whether we were in heaven or on earth. Never have we seen such beauty... We cannot describe it, but this much we can say: there God dwells among mankind," page 115. 
Quoting early Ukrainian Christians after experiencing the Byzantine rite. It made me immediately think of my first time (and every time since) experiencing the High Mass (the sung Latin Mass.)

"This is my resting place forever; here I will dwell." page 124 quoting Psalm 132:13-14. 

On the Beast of the Apocalypse, "He is 666, the creature stalled in the sixth day, perpetually in travail, yet never reaching the seventh day of sabbath rest and worship." page 138 
Made me think of the Communist workdays! No Sunday rest, just working because it somehow "means" that you're being "useful" to society. I can see a connection to the Protestant Work Ethic there as well.

"Does that make you feel uncomfortable? Maybe you suddenly remembered the parishioners who most get on your nerves. (I know I did.) Could heaven really be heaven if all of our neighbors are there? Could heaven be paradise if Father so-and-so makes it, too?" page 153 
This is SOO important! Such a good thing to think about to help with forgiveness and being genuinely charitable to our neighbor. 

"Think about electricity which can light your home or stop your heart. Think about fire, which can warm your family or consume a city block. These are but dim shadows of the supernatural power of God, Who created fire and formed the earth out of nothing. If we teach our children to treat electricity and fire with respect, how much respectfully should we ourselves treat the very mysteries of heaven, which fill us in Holy Communion?" page 159
 LOVE this!!! Such a good meditation.

There were a few things that I found were strange, coming from someone who has since learned a lot about the Traditional Latin Mass versus the Novus Ordo Mass, but honestly I feel like I can't go on my high horse about it because this book was written almost 30 years ago, and Dr. Hahn has indeed since encountered the Latin Mass. Plus we are all on "a journey" and I was also in the same frame of mind so to speak, thinking that there was only one Mass (the Novus Ordo) and it was a lot more in tune with ancient Catholic history and tradition than much of it really is. 
Here are the few things I wanted to mention that stuck out to me, again this mostly made me recognize how we have all been in that place, since the TLM's existence was certainly not mentioned at all back in the 80s-90s among us "regular" Catholics. 

1. He mentions the Eastern liturgy a lot, which is very beautiful. It did make me think of the beautiful, poetic and "epic"ness of the Roman Rite in its "Traditional Form." I am very happy that author has since found and enjoys that form of the Roman Rite as well. It's so nice to be able to enjoy the beauty and poetry of the Byzantine Rite and the fullness of the Roman Rite. 

2. He mentions a list of "things" (for lack of a better word) from the Mass that is mentioned in the book of the Apocalypse. Like incense, the Lamb of God, Holy Holy Holy, ect. He also mentions St. Michael as being part of that list, which I found interesting because the Consilium, (the group that, after Vatican II took apart and then re-created the Mass as we know it today - as well as the sacraments.) took St. Michael out of the liturgy! He used to be mentioned in the Confiteor, the offertory prayer at the High Mass, and the Leonine prayers was also added to the end of the Low Mass as well. Of course JP II has since requested that the St Michael Prayer be added back to the end of Mass which is awesome. 

3. He mentioned the 3-year Lectionary which made me think of the Traditional 1 year cycle and the differences between the two. The 3 year Lectionary never mentions St. Paul's reading on eating and drinking in an unworthy manner. As Dr. Kwasniewski puts it, "St. Paul’s warning against receiving the Body and Blood of the Lord unworthily, that is, unto one’s damnation, has not been read at any Ordinary Form Mass for almost half a century." (Mythbusting the Lectionaries: Why the Latin Mass's Lectionary Is Superior to the New Lectionary) Which is crazy to think about. 

4. On page 3 Dr. Hahn writes how, "Few will glimpse the powerful and supernatural drama they enter into every Sunday." I find one of the good things about this book is that it WILL help Catholic's who attend the Novus Ordo to be able to meditate more on the miracle and mind-blowing reality of the Mass itself, even if things may seem stale or bland (my words not his obviously.) I was thinking though that the High Mass (even the Low Mass!) do seem to carry more "powerful and supernatural drama" which coincides more of the reality of what the Mass itself is. Dr. Hahn mentions also that "The Mass is near and dear. The Book of Revelation, on the other hand, seems remote and puzzling." One could certainly call the Latin Mass, with all its smells, bells, Latin and order in even the most minute detail "remote and puzzling." But one can also call it near and dear. Which is so crazy but, it really is ever ancient (remote, puzzling, powerful, dramatic) and ever new, while feeling truly, completely like home wherever in the world we are. 

5. I thought it was interesting how Dr. Hahn mentions that "Even John's opening assumes that the book will be read aloud by a lector within the liturgical assembly." He meant the Apocalypse but it made me think of the how the prologue of the Gospel of John is indeed read at the end of every single Latin Mass. "The Last Gospel" its called. 

Overall, I enjoyed Dr. Hahn's book as it gave me a lot of food for thought. Dr. Hahn has done and is doing so much amazing work to help Catholic's begin to truly understand the epic majesty that is the Mass. I believe "The Lamb's Supper" will indeed help Catholics who attend both the Latin Mass and the Novus Ordo to meditate more on the heavenly reality that is given to us. 

The only thing that I could have done without is "Moriah Carry" and "Oath Meal" 😂