Rating: 2/5

welcome to...LADY (MAR)CHATTERLEY'S LOVER!

kind of phoning it in here, pun-wise, but i'm getting married at the end of this month and i really don't want to be spending my first days of matrimonial bliss on an old ass book, so...this attempt at making an intimidating read approachable over several weeks will have 19 chapters.

plus i'm reading this for science (finding out what old-timey smut is like).

CHAPTER ONE
i don't consider myself timid or quick to blush but i don't think i've ever read a hundred-year-old book with so much outright mention of f*cking. baby this is chapter one!

CHAPTER TWO
okay, so, lady chatterley is this girl named connie who kind of married up re: this guy clifford. clifford had to go to world war i, which meant a) his brother died and so b) he is now the lord of their ugly, smelly familial manor. also he is in a wheelchair now, and it is neither subtly nor infrequently implied that this means connie, who, one intuits, is also a fan of a roll in the hay, may be sexually unsatisfied. 

this is the fair verona where we lay our scene.

CHAPTER THREE
within these dozen pages, connie has met, been seduced by, slept with, fallen in love, and entered pen pal status with a disgraced irish playwright. in that order.

CHAPTER FOUR
a random woman just said at a party, "I don't over-eat myself, and I don't over-fuck myself. One has a choice about eating too much. But you would absolutely starve me." so my jaw is on the floor.

CHAPTER FIVE
clifford just asked connie very nicely if she would pretty please screw some guy. more in a childbirth sense than outright cuck reasoning but one has to imagine it's a little of both. 

unfortunately for him, connie's playwright just completely destroyed her ability to feel sexual desire for anyone in any way by making a crass comment, so. that sort of sensibility is closer to the innocence i expected from this book.

CHAPTER SIX
to be honest, i didn't expect our lady's lover to be the gamekeeper, if only because he killed a cat in front of a little girl earlier in this chapter. but connie just got all hot and bothered watching him take a DIY outdoor shower so...probably him.

CHAPTER SEVEN
connie's sister came in and got a doctor's note saying she should do less around the house. will be trying this.

CHAPTER EIGHT
our girl is coming out of a depression because it's march and she remembered about spring. she's just like me for real.

CHAPTER NINE
clifford has some sort of bodily assistant now, who i thought was going to be his new lover. but the two of themm keep thinking of him as her child...so maybe not.

CHAPTER TEN
actually insane that the question "was it good for you?" was being asked by men immediately post-mediocre sex even at the turn of the last century. probably for all of time.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
sorry to mrs. bolton, the lover-mom-assistant, who trauma-dumped about her dead husband, but...kind of a filler chapter.

CHAPTER TWELVE
i spent my time this month trying to have fun with this compendium of smut and adjectives, but it's no use. dh lawrence wouldn't recognize consent if the definition were smack dab in the middle of bowels pulsating with desire or whatever.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
this book keeps having these long passages about mining like levin's agriculture asides in anna karenina. but more boring. and less charming.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
lot of dialogue between connie and a penis here.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
this book is inspiring me to the point of research. for example, did you know "balls" (as in testicles) dates back to the 14th century? the more you know.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
loving that connie's sister just showed up and is as grossed out by this situation as i am. hers is a little more because of classism than i might like, but narrative obstacle beggars can't be choosers.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
we're on vacation, thank god, but we can't escape even here. through about 900 letters we have learned that the gamekeeper's estranged wife reappeared, accused him of f*cking lady chatterley, and left again. badass.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
just realized this is the penultimate chapter. i could not feel less invested in these characters or their outcomes. 

connie's dad meeting the gamekeeper and letting him know he's fully aware his daughter must be a great lay isn't helping.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
yup.

OVERALL
i am honestly surprised this withstood the test of time. unless it's out of some sort of guinness world record holder for most use of the word fucking outside of a middle schooler who just unlocked the ability to swear without flinching, or something. 
rating: 2