Rating: 4/5

This collection of Elmore Leonard's short fiction was originally entitled When the Women Come Out to Dance, but the title was changed to capitalize on its connection to FX's Justified. “Fire in the Hole” is the novella which inspired the series, and was used as the basis for the plot of its first episode. (The series did it justice, but the novella is better.) 

At least half the book is taken up with two novellas, the aforementioned “Fire in the Hole” and “Ten Killer”, the tale of a confrontation between stuntman and former rodeo star Ben Webster and the criminal family who has taken over his deceased father's farm. 

The rest of the book consists of seven stories: “Karen Makes Out” and “Chickasaw Charlie Hoke (treats for fans of Out of Sight and Tishimingo Blues, featuring the familiar characters Federal Marshal Karen Cisco and former baseball player and raconteur Charlie Hoke respectively), “Sparks” (a mellow version of Double Indemnity with a nod toward The Last Seduction), the two western stories “Hurrah for Captain Early” (a negro veteran of the Spanish American war confronts racism in a small town) and “The Tonto Woman” (the relationship between a Mexican rustler and a white woman once captured by Apaches), plus two other stories I would like to single out for special mention.

“Hanging Out at the Buena Vista” is slight, little more than a sketch really, but its portrait of a man and woman in their eighties who meet at a retirement village is—like most of Leonard's dialogue--a model for spare, laconic speech, matter-of-fact and unsentimental. Yet—quite a surprise for Leonard—it is very sweet and very moving too.

On the other hand, we have the original title story, “When the Women Come Out to Dance,” a deceptively casual tale of the growing relationship between discontented wife Mrs. Mahmood and her new domestic employee, the Latina Lourdes. Not to spoil your pleasure, I'll just say that this story not only contains a crime but has an ending that suggests—in the most subtle, offhand way imaginable—how fitting and how ghastly its unconventional punishment may be. This is a marvelous story that should be read by everyone who admires short fiction.

I wasn't sure if I'd like Leonard's short fiction as much as his novels, but I think perhaps I like them even more. The short form showcases his fine dialogue, and encourages his subtlety and efficiency--qualities Elmore Leonard has always possessed in abundance.