Rating: 5/5

Dinosaur in a Haystack is the seventh in a series of essay collections by evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould. These essays were published monthly in the magazine Natural History. The book contains 34 essays of various lengths on a variety of topics. Include but are not limited to discussions of natural history or the history of scientific thought. Due to the book’s nature as a collection of monthly essays, the topics often include scientific discoveries that were recent at the time of writing. The book was published in 1995, and due to its subject matter it provides a view into the scientific ideas of the times. 
	The book is split into 8 different sections each of which have several essays that relate back to the central topic of the section. Some sections such as section three titled “Origin, Stability, and Extinction” are split into several subsections. Each of the eight sections has its own purpose and most essays have their own claims; however, the book does have some central ideas that exist across the entirety of the book. One of the overlaying purposes is the idea of evolution not being a structured progression but a completely random set of events. The central claim throughout the book based on this is the concept of punctuated equilibrium. Punctuated equilibrium is the concept that most species are evolutionarily stable for most of their existence. 
		Gould is well known as one of the premier authors of scientific theory and based on this book, I would say this reputation is earned. From the in depth manner Gould discusses complex scientific concepts, it is clear that he is highly educated and intelligent. However, what sets Gould’s writing apart from the writing of other scientists is his commitment to full explanation of complex ideas. His down to earth tone contributes to effective communication of his complex ideas. By using simple terms, Gould is able to bring readers who may not understand these complex biological concepts into his line of thinking. This leads me to my favorite aspect of this book, the honest discussion of scientific concepts without the use of obfuscating terms or ancient quotations. This book is one of the best pieces of scientific writing simply because of Gould's willingness to walk with the reader.