Rating: 4/5

It's hard to take a tale as grand as Cook's voyage to the South Seas on the Endeavour and make it anything less than enthralling, but Hough gets off to a good start in this biography. The first five long chapters are a tedious recounting of Cook's life before the Endeavour where no detail is too trivial to include, and the telling is insipid. During one tiresome passage Hough lists seemingly every crew member, even the cook, complete with backgrounds where we are told how interesting the characters are, rather than having it shown to us. One lowly master's mate, Charles Clerke, was described as "colourful and intriguing" due to his limitless anecdotes. By this point I was begging Hough to include one of these anecdotes to liven up the prose.

But the book picks up significantly when we get to the heart of Cook's three famous voyages to the South Seas. Each journey is a Boy's Own adventure, with cannibals, first encounters, culture clashes, and unprecedented geographical discoveries. Trekking from jagged polar tundra to soft tropical beaches, they encounter natives who are at once friendly, hostile, promiscuous, thievish, generous and often unpredictable and inscrutable. The newly discovered people are the star of the show, with some of the earliest, most detailed, firsthand accounts of meetings between cultures often vastly separated by manners and technology. 

The strangest tale of all, one still not fully understood to this day, surrounds his death. On Hawaii, Cook's last discovery, he was mistaken for a god when his arrival matched exactly the prophecy of Lono's return to the islands. He was treated as a deity, and his ship supplied generously, but when he failed to fulfil the prophecy by sailing away, and instead returned for repairs to his damaged ship, the locals turned from worshipful to aggressive. Provoked by trigger happy shipmen, the locals attacked and Cook was killed on the beach, his body taken away. It is a surreal end to a surreal story where even Cook seems to start losing his mind, forcing his men to eat walrus and turning from a gentle man capable of empathising even with cannibals, to one quick to flog the most petty thief and dissenter.

This part of Cook's life is where the real fascination lies, and the book-ending can be mostly ignored unless you have a real interest in Cook's family and crew.