Rating: 5/5

This book is honestly probably one of the best books I’ve ever read. It hit me in so many ways. I didn’t think a book could speak in this many ways. I love baseball which is what this book is about, but this book put baseball into a completely different view for me. From beginning all the way to the end, I never got tired of reading it. I don’t think I’ve ever said that about a book either. I would recommend this book to pretty much every single athlete. I would probably recommend to everyone actually, it’s that good. Even if you’re not a fan of baseball or you never played it once in your life or don’t understand it, this book is a really easy read. I’m also sure almost everybody can relate to this book as well. Losing a family member (a father in this case), learning a brand new sport for the first time, meeting your “soon-to-be” best friend learning that new sport that will eventually become your passion, trying to make a high school team, getting cut from a team or being dropped down a level (in this story both) the next year after making the team the previous year, feeling left out because your friend is on a higher team or made the team, making the team the next year and starting, feeling left out because your friend is on a higher team or made the team, having your best player do something dumb and get suspended from the team, pressuring situations that fall in your hands to make the decision, having to win crucial games, or even losing another person that is so close to you (his best friend). I'm sure everyone can relate to most of those things in life. 

This book is just about a kid Seth Barham, who lost his father at very young age. He then meets a boy in the park who is playing baseball who teaches Seth how to play baseball. Seth eventually becomes best friends with that kid he meet, Jimmy Winter. Jimmy moves about 8 miles away and he visits Seth from time to time as both of them never lose the love of baseball. One day Seth gets good news that Jimmy will be going to his high school towards the end of his freshman school year. It's during the baseball season, but the coach allows him on the team after a personal tryout. The next year Jimmy gets moved up to varsity, but Seth stays down at JV. Seth feels left out because Jimmy is hanging out with the varsity players and another stud sophomore that was moved to varsity, Todd Franks. Jimmy and Franks start to go out drinking with the other teammates and doing things that they used to do with Seth. Jimmy and Franks who are the two best players on the team get suspended on the biggest game of the year because they got caught drinking. Jimmy, Franks, and Seth all played varsity the following year and the team was predicted to be number one. They got off to a great start, but the drinking continued for Jimmy. Franks stopped and wanted Seth to tell him to stop as well. Jimmy got suspended again, but this time for ditching classes. Seth and Jimmy finally talk and Jimmy turns into a completely different person. The team has to play St. Francis, one of the hardest teams they play, and if they win, they go to the state playoffs. They destroyed them in a 9-1 win. After the game Seth gets a call at 1:30AM that would change his life forever. I can’t give away the ending, but let’s just say Jimmy Winters chances of going to the majors didn’t happen.