Rating: 4/5

Book has been removed from my library (real one, not GR). I'll never read it again, but I would still like to see one or both of the movies!

These are the two movies I never saw … uh, I guess that should be the two out of this book I ain’t seen, is that better?

 

The one from 1962, when I was a frosh in college – and sittin’ right there in the middle of that Cuban missile thing, in Washington D. of C. Maybe that’s why I didn’t see it? I dunno.
 

That’s the Laurence Harvey actor on the left who was Shaw from the book &amp; “Ol’ Blue Eyes” who was Marco. And as they do here on G-reads I’ll S-P-O-I-L things for you when I tell you that  Shaw was the “MC” of the book’s title!

 

And the one from about 10 years ago. This picture is I guess a picture of an ad. But as you see, it’s the same as the cover of the book I read. So that tells you somethin’ about promotion stuff, am I right?

In this film that name on the right "Liev Schreiber" was Shaw and the guy shown (who’s Denzel Washington) was Marco.

So the two main characters – Shaw and Marco – are portrayed by some guys named Laurence Harvey and Liev Schreiber for Shaw, and some quite a bit more famous guys named Frank Sinatra and Denzel Washington for Marco.

See if you can guess – who’s the good guy, Shaw or Marco? You don’t get no prize for bein’ right. And no fair if you looked inside that spoiler up above!!

All right, so this is on my “crime-fiction” bookshelf, but it ain't really that kinda book, to my way of thinkin’. Most people here on G-reads call it a thriller, but I don't have that bookshelf, and I ain't gonna make one for one damn book.

Everyone and his cousin has seen at least onea these movies (I'm pretty sure.) Except me. Never seen either of 'em - and that was a good thing as we'll see when I get to the ending. But of course I've heard of the book ever since I can remember, and wanted to read it forever, so I finally picked it up a couple years ago and read it.

Let me tell you, I was surprised! Don't know what I expected, but I didn't expect writin' like this ...Mr. Mavole began to make a lot of slobbering sounds so Raymond said roughly that he would write when he knew what flight he would be on and he hung up the phone and felt like an idiot. Like an angry man with a cane who pokes a hole through the floor of heaven and is scalded by the joy that pours down upon him, Raymond had a capacity for using satisfactions against himself. When he got off the plane ... (you know what those dots mean, don'tcha?) He decided Mavole's father must be that midget with the eyeglasses like milk-bottle bottoms who was enjoying sweating so much. The man would be all over him like a charging elk in a minute. etc etcSo that kinda writin', "prose" as they say, wasn't like anything I was used to. I dunno, maybe that's the kinda writin' they did in the 50s. Maybe thats what Keroac sounded like when he wrote On the Road which I read way back then, but I don't remember now what it sounded like? Anyways, after I got over my surprise, I decided I kinda liked the way the book sounded, and the story was pretty tense as soon as it got goin', so I read it and finished it and liked it. And let me say, I was surprised and shocked at the ending, thanks to not ever seeing the movies.

So I'm glad I read it, and you should be to. And I'm glad also that I didn't see the movie (or movies)!

By the way, the guy who wrote it I looked up on "wiki" and he was kind of a cool guy. (But I have to say his name means nothin' to me except for this book). But anyways see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_... if you want.

Ya know, I don't mind sayin' that I feel kinda strange about what I wrote here. Lookin' it over it seems sort of different from my normal writin' stuff. And here I'm sitting just starin' at a queen of diamonds - the card - and wonderin' why I feel funny. Ya know?

And one more thing.  Is it too late to tell you that the damn Q of d-monds has a pretty important role in the book, if you can call it a "role" if it's just played by a damn card?

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Previous review: Anthem Ayn Rand
Random review: The Lives of the Artists Vasari
Next review: On Foot in the Grand Canyon photos

Previous library review: Sailing Alone Around the Room Billy Collins
Next library review: Break It Down Lydia Davis