Rating: 3/5

This is a trilogy in one book. It is completely unclear to me whether they were published separately and then collected together in one volume or if they always came like this. It never really matters, but I'm curious.

Book 1 is The Snow-Walker's Son where Jessa and her cousin (Thorkil) are exiled by the evil Snow-Walker Queen (think every Ice Queen in fantasy ever) because their fathers were rebels. They are sent to the castle in the far north where the Queen's rumored-to-be-monstrous son lives. 

Book 2 is The Empty Hand. The evil Snow-Walker Queen is gone and a good king reigns. But a mysterious monster is carving a path of destruction towards the king's castle and it looks like the Snow-Walker's son (Kari) is the only one who can stop it. For a bonus, there's an evil chancellor. 

Book 3 is The Soul Thieves. The Snow-Walker Queen steals the soul of the king's beautiful new wife and Jessa, Kari and the rest of the gang have to travel beyond the end of the world to defeat the Snow-Walker Queen once and for all.

Disclaimer: I read young adult novels for the romance. When a ya book doesn't have romance I am always (not-so-secretly) disappointed. There is no romance in this book. I always kind of hoped Jessa and the Snow-Walker's son would fall in love, but no dice. So this book lost brownie points from me for something that wasn't its fault. It never purported to be a romance, it's just something I always expect.

This is really an adventure book for the pre-teen set. It has all the proper fantasy elements: evil Queen, good rebel-turned-King, mysterious monsters, magic, scheming chancellor, father-figure mentor/warrior, clever bard, spunky heroine, etc. If you get too old it all becomes repetitive, but when you're young it's still new and, hey, those things became tropes for a reason. They're effective.

As I said, it's not a romance. It's an adventure. Plenty of quests and fell monsters and creepy woods and all that. The best part of the book for sure was the atmospheric creepiness it had in parts. Fisher is very good at creating a sense of creeping dread. 

I think I would've liked this book a lot when I was 10 or 11 and reading Lloyd Alexander and Sherwood Smith's Wren series and Cooper's The Dark is Rising. It's that type of book. 

And this is completely random but I wanted to throw it in: what the heck happened to cousin Thorkil? He was a main character in Book 1 and then is noticeably absent in the other books. I admit I wasn't reading too closely so maybe it mentioned where he wandered off to, but I didn't catch it. I had to go back and check that he hadn't died at the end of Book 1 and I'd somehow missed it (he didn't).