Rating: 5/5

I could do nothing but love this book and give it no less than 5 stars. This book was published before I was born. The first movie made from it; directed by the great John Frankenheimer, was released before my first birthday. I had to wait until I was in my 20s to ever see it. And I instantly loved it. Yet I never thought to track down a copy of the book. 

I found the book just wonderful and fascinating. It made me appreciate the two films that were adapted from it even more. While the story; American soldiers in the Korean conflict who are taken and brainwashed by a collective of Russian, Chinese and Korean 'brain washers' was shocking for its time, there are other subplots that would never make it past the Hayes Code of 1962 and even in 2016 are shocking. 

The book's style is rather unique. It is a bit like the writing of the hard boiled detective novels if the author kept a thesaurus on their desk to drop in obscure and obsolete words and phrases. I was often using the dictionary function of my Kindle. There were even words that stumped the Kindle's dictionary.  At one point late in the book Raymond accuses his mother of making up words such as Carpetbag steak The book is manly. Most of the main characters are men or women who act like men of the time. Yet the author repeats the theme of the love of a 'good woman' as a redemptive cure for what ails you. 

The other thing that I found amazing in this almost 60 year old book was that parts of it almost seemed to be ripped from the headlines of today. There is a Senator who is accusing everyone of working with the Russian Communists and who runs to the media to accuse all of his political enemies of this baseless charge. 

Side note, when I read I often imagine the characters since I have previously seen two adaptations of this book I had a wealth of characters to choose from. In my mind all of the characters were from the 1962 version; except Raymond Shaw who in my mind was firmly assigned to Liev Schreiber. Which made me realize why Frankenheimer was such a genius. In the book Raymond Shaw is a blank. He lacks most basic human emotions and passions and the casting of Lawrence Harvey was so perfect that despite his leading role he fails to imprint on you as Raymond Shaw in the book failed to connect with his colleagues and fellow soldiers.