Rating: 3/5

I remember my friend reading this in fourth grade and I was utterly scandalized. This book is about sixth grade. We weren't old enough.

I went at least a decade in used children's books without hearing a customer mention or request this book, but it seems to have gone through plenty of printings and has some kind of staying power, enough that I still see it in garage sales and Little Free Libraries pretty often, and I'd decided last summer, after not bothering to buy a 25¢ copy at a garage sale, that next time I saw it, I would read it. And then I found it in a Little Free Library last week and here we are.

At its heart, this book is in a complicated conversation with itself over three generations. Barthe De Clements was born in 1920. This book came out in 1985. She spent three decades teaching before she became a writer. She grew up in the Greatest Generation talking animal era of publishing, her adult life took place in the boring realism era, and she seems to have gained success in the Judy Blume watershed of issues and unmentionable topics, so Helen the protagonist gratuitously compares her bust to her friend Louise's bust; but the kids are all named Helen, Louise, Carol, and Jimmy; but Helen has access to fireworks in a way that kids maybe had in the '20s but didn't so much by the '50s or the '80s. 

How school works is so strange here, too. I've never heard of an elementary school where the class lists are posted on the door the first day of school. That's insane. So are the lunch trays. The cafeteria workers wheel thirty trays of food to each classroom x at least two classrooms per grade x K-6 school= 420 meals being transported by adults on carts around the school every day instead of making the kids walk to the cafeteria. And there's a specialist teacher for music but not gym or art. Helen's stakes are so confusing too: When it's first discussed, it sounds like the alternative to muddling through mainstream school with severe dyslexia is going full time to a special school for mentally disable children, but by the end of the book, she's going to the resource room for two hours a day and that's so much more realistic. Maybe normal school and special school were the only options for the early part of De Clements' career, but this book was written for the '80s after minor interventions were invented.

Speaking of the '80s: "Eddie Van Halen. I wish I could run my fingers through his chest hair." Huh? What? These are either the awkward words of an eleven-year-old girl who's trying to figure out how to say that a boy is cute without sounding insane and failing wildly, or a 65-year-old woman who has no idea how tweens talk when they are actually gushing over cute boys, and that line can be both. Weird words in this book. A couple times, Helen describes the corn in the backyard, so you wonder if her father is a farmer, but turns out he's a CPA, so she just lives in a small town or a walkable suburb where corn abuts her backyard, but it's never described, there's just corn out back.

This book is rather true to life in the sense that it's just a bunch of stuff that happens over Helen's year. She starts school best friends with Louise, who's diverse because she's Italian-American, but they drift apart. Helen's uncle visits and takes her to get her ears pierced. She plays some pranks against the awful teacher who isn't trying to figure out what's wrong with her and why she can't read. Mid-year, her mother demands that the school put her in a different classroom, so Helen ends up with the fun male teacher, who advocates for her to get the reading help she needs. Helen's mother was a piece of work, or a lesson about the importance of women working in second wave feminism? Every night, she drills Helen in reading and helps her memorize her homework, but she discourages Helen from doing things like following the words with her index finger because that helps Helen keep track of where she is on the page, but Helen's mother believes that it's not something Helen should be doing. And Helen's mother is adamant that Helen not get special help. Has anyone explained the resource room to her? But her arc is resolved when Helen's dad takes her on as a secretary, so she has something to do besides fail to help Helen read better.

I was worried that "sixth grade can really kill you" meant that this was a Bridge to Terabithia situation, but everyone survives and grows onwards. Overall, this was a romp through a confusing mess of a presentation about the earnest reality of a post-Are You There, God interpretation of what school is like. It was a fine summer read that took less than two days, but if I was a kid, I think it still would have triggered my red flags for weirdness. Good on Barthe De Clements for becoming a novelist late in life, though. I bet this spoke to some dyslexic kids in the '80s.