Rating: 4/5

When you find something familiar you tend to cling onto it in the hopes that it will lead you to a world that will reflect your experiences and mirror back insights that seem unique to you. I find myself constantly seeking reassurances in my reading that I am not alone in my thoughts and feelings- no matter how dark and twisted they may be. When I started reading Peel My Love like an Onion, I thought I had found a kindred spirit. A Mexican-American woman who struggled with her identity, that had a strenuous relationship with her mother and that sought scraps and pieces from other worlds to form a face she would recognize in the mirror. The prose used in this book is lyrical and it resonated with reflections and insights that I’ve had. There were many times when it was a pleasure to walk alongside Carmen, even when I had to slow my pace. There were other times when Carmen’s spirit would race ahead of us (myself and her body) and I would have to run to keep up with her. Carmen was afflicted with polio at a young age. It has left her a cripple, a label she acknowledges and recognizes since it is simply a fact for her. Despite this affliction she becomes a flamenco dancer. It is through this passion that she is able to tread a path she thought was beyond her and experience a love affair with two men. One she holds on to despite a love that has grown rotten and the other renews her with a passion she thought she wouldn’t experience again. This is where my kinship with Carmen turned a bit sour. You see, she had become such a dear friend but at this point she became the friend that fills her life with unnecessary drama, doesn’t heed your advice and keeps coming back to complain about something she has complete control over. It sometimes read like a soap opera and I wasn’t a fan of that. I wasn’t rooting for those men, if anything I wanted to tell them to leave Carmen alone and let her live her life. This is a wonderful book though and I became a fan of Ana Castillo. I want to read all of her works now. She was such a wonderful introduction to Xicana/Xicanisma literature. I felt I had found a voice that I could relate to and that is always a wonderful experience. The lyricism in this book makes it a joy to read, it’s interspersed with Spanish sayings and words that fit the tapestry and I definitely recommend it. I hope this review made sense. It was a book that demanded introspection on what my identity means to me, it held up a mirror that was at times twisted and at others a bit too reflective.