Rating: 4/5

Is there always an edge of jealousy when reading a travel memoir? By default the author is somewhere we want to be. Helen Stevenson’s Instructions for Visitors is the story of her time spent living in a small French town in the Pyrenees close to the Spanish border. The book’s title and the section titles – ‘Instructions, First Impressions, Useful Background, Local Life, Visitors, Leaving’ - groom us to expect a useful manual for travellers, but very early on the travelogue is hijacked by another type of book altogether: a memoir of a love affair. Stevenson tells the story of her on-off relationship with Luc. He is, all at once, the local dentist, the village Lothario, a philosopher-farmer and a successful painter.
I began reading Stevenson’s book feeling rather hostile towards her and her lover. Perhaps it was because she was on ‘my patch’ or very close to a village I have lived in. By the middle of the book, however, I found myself warming to Luc, despite his penchant for admiring himself in mirrors, and to the author-heroine, despite her lamentable tendency to conform to the whims of men and to see herself in terms of their desire. As well as catching Luc’s eye and raising the jealousy of his discarded lovers, the town’s anarchist also fancies her.
The houses, local politics, love affairs and marriages of the town jostle vividly for our attention. She makes us feel that we are visitors ourselves with this array of idiosyncratic people: ‘her eyes are warm, the colour of oxtail soup ... Her speech is one long, hyphenated sentence of greeting, consolation, price-naming and scolding, from eight till eight. She seems to run on sherbet.’ This is a beautifully written story, as we might expect since Stevenson has published three novels. Her writing is laden with metaphors and similes: a boat sail is like ‘the skirt of a ball gown caught in a moment of grace’ and her rival, the dress shop owner, ‘crawls around the window space like a reptile in an illuminated tank’. When Luc smiles at her: ‘I felt like a plant set back in softly forked earth, packed gently into place’.
There is a melancholy sense throughout the book that Stevenson is already absent from this place. The lovers both seem curiously non-committal and fatalistic about their relationship. Stevenson probes the experience of the visitor who will not stay or ever be fully accepted, and of the inhabitant who will never go anywhere else or change. Her ‘instructions’ operate for two levels of visitors: for her tourist lodgers and for herself. At one point Luc suggests that she has been temporarily left behind by a UFO and will soon disappear again. There is a cryptic moment at the end of the story when he tells her she is famous and there has been a lot of interest in the village. The reader has to presume that this is because she has published a section of the book we are reading. Stevenson suggests that as a writer she is a disconnected and perhaps parasitic observer. Luc tells her to ‘get back to your own world... I’m not a tourist attraction.’ Leaving, she describes her last view of the town sitting ‘like a newborn child, wrapped in the folds of these protecting slopes, a pleat in the landscape ... it is never not here... the landscape shifts a season, passing from mimosa into summer yellows and then orange and red’.
This book in the Life Writing genre is a compelling blend of fiction and autobiography. I found myself wondering whether her lover was an actual person, or whether he and her love affair with him, are really a fantasised personification of the place. Stevenson takes us to a charming town in the south of France and she takes us into her inner landscape.