Rating: 1/5

If Wells set out to create a truly dislikable character, then she succeeded in Viviane Walker. In universe, Vivi is supposed to be charming and funny, despite her many faults. But it’s hard to see how or why. Unable to bear not being the centre of attention, she has no qualms about being as obnoxious as possible to make sure she and her troop of equally spoilt, privileged friends are always in the spotlight. Now in her twilight years, Vivi is a sad, self-pitying nobody, racked with jealousy over her daughter's success. A decidedly average woman who dreamed big and thought she was the bee's knees, but in truth never had the aptitude or self-discipline to make anything of herself. This in itself might be relatable, or even endearing, were it not for the awful abuse that Vivi inflicts on almost anyone who isn't a Ya-Ya. Vivi takes her problems out on everybody around her, most notably her children and herself. The cruelty starts early with the stupid name she gives her eldest daughter, Siddalee.

Whilst Siddalee shows signs of an actual personality in ‘Little Altars,’ she grows out of this by ‘Divine Secrets’, in which she somehow manages to be both terminally dull and completely neurotic. I completely failed to see why perfect, thoughtful, sexy Connor (whom everybody just adores. Yawn.) is even remotely interested in her. Connor, if you’re even half as wonderful as the author makes out, move on. You can find someone much better than wet blanket Sidda, and you won’t be saddled with a crazy, ‘diva’ mother-in-law either.

After reading ‘Little Altars,’ I have no idea why adult Sidda would want any sort of relationship with her abusive, alcoholic mother in ‘Divine Secrets’. Or why the other Ya-Ya’s continually gloss over Vivi’s abuse. Perhaps they didn’t know the worst of it, but they certainly knew something wasn’t right. Teensy pays for Sidda’s therapy, and Caro even goes so far as to tell Sidda that at least her mother ‘f*cked her up with style’. Yes, I’m sure the belt Vivi used to whip her children bloody was just the height of fashion, and sexual abuse is always de rigueur. 

This book paints the bond shared by the Ya-Ya’s as the pinnacle of female friendship, but let's be honest here. Real friends are the people who love you enough to call you on your crap, and tell you to get help. In contrast, the Ya-Ya's are a sisterhood of enablers who have stifled each other from girlhood to dotage. There is nothing divine about these ladies.