Rating: 4/5

Another 3.5. How I wish GoodReads allowed partial ratings !

A very simple story of a dewy eyed 21 year old small town girl. Who has this forever-crush on the town's rich kid and big guy. She's been idolizing him since she was a 15 year old, when he majestically rides his magnificent horse across the fields. 

He is 11 years older than her. Doesn't know of her existence until the night of a grand ball at the Cotillion, the hero's manor ! They dance, he flirts, she kind of resists his blatant advances.

He is intrigued by her resistance, pursues her. Offers marriage very quickly, knowing that's the only way to get these shy, sweet virgin types.

She marries him quickly, especially because her family has some financial issues, and the rich guy offers to take care of that as well !!

Dreamy , highly rose tinted, she enters into matrimony. Only to realise, he doesn't care one whit about the concepts of love, togetherness, etc. He is a hard nosed cynic, strongly believes that marriages are meant to crack and crumble.

Till the last page, he maintains this callous approach to marriage. She tries hard, cajoles him, pleads, openly declares her love. But he only seems to want sex, nothing else.

A kiddo is conceived, his callousness remains !! She thinks of walking out, standing up to him, etc.

Nope, but no such thing happens. She remains the docile, submissive, openly loving and caring wife till the end. Even after the child is born and he acts aloof then too !!

Now, one might argue. How can she be so doormatty? But you see, if being doormatty and loving without reservation gets her, her man, then can you blame her ;))

After all the cardinal purpose of romantic fiction is for a female protagonist to GET HER MAN !!! Each story is just about the different ways and means our women apply to get the fellow. Preferably a rich fellow, a gorgeous fellow. And a picket fence, a kiddo or two, are the nice added touches ! Sometimes even a dog is thrown in - the HEA picture is complete !!!!!!!!!!!!

Here the wifely duties she performs till the last page without flinching, manages to melt the fellow down. He forgets his bitter past and succumbs to the charm of having a wife and kid. Happy Families !!!

This story is part of Janet Dailey's "One story per US State" series. This one covers Georgia, but not in particular detail. Just the odd reference to the confederate states, the southeners and the yankees.