Rating: 3/5

3 and 1/2 stars. I had to take off a half star because the ending was so abrupt. This was a very intense story that never let up. 18 year-old heroine is at an Acapulco resort with her slimy stepfather when she meets the hero's brother, who is close in age to her. It's a relief to talk to someone young, because her stepfather keeps dressing her in sophisticated clothes and throwing her at men twice her age. The heroine has just left boarding school and doesn't really know her widowed stepfather - or the real world for the matter.

The hero's brother wants to marry the h, but she refuses, since she doesn't return his strong feelings. The hero steps in because he determines that the h is an adventuress who is cahoots with the slimy stepfather. Heroine doesn't know what he's talking about until the stepfather tells her she must marry a creepy 62 year-old man because he's broke. 

Heroine runs away, marries the hero's brother, and they escape that same day on a train - only to have it crash leaving the still-virginal heroine injured and the brother dead. Enter the hero yet again. . . 

 He still has a dim view of the heroine and thinks she's going to meet up with her stepfather again to take away half of his family business. He keeps her prisoner in various hotel rooms, buys her tarty clothes, and tries to seduce her. She fights him off and they are at an impasse until they return to England and the heroine has a panic attack when she has to ride another train.

The heroine spends a month with a lovely aunt of the hero's. She recovers from her excursion to Mexico and catches the eye of a wealthy neighbor who is having a boat built by the hero's boatyard. The heroine has to fight him off when they are touring the yacht, and hero catches them. This time he's willing to listen to the heroine's side of the story. 

It's all good, but when they return to the aunt's house, the evil stepfather is there. Hero thinks the heroine has lied about not wanting to see her stepfather - and therefore lied about everything else. Heroine runs away the next day - back to her boarding school here she works in the office for a term. 

She is summoned to a lawyer's office to find out about her late husband's will and the hero is there. He takes her on a boat he built for himself. After thinking it over, he realizes he was wrong about her. HEA. 

This is some good old skool fun with a very young heroine and a sexually frustrated hero who nevertheless, backs off when the heroine says no.