Rating: 4/5

“Last Act” is a novel by Christopher Pike. I am currently rereading some of Pike’s novels to aid me on my nano wri mo project, available here as a completely selfless plug:
 https://dashingdon.com/play/starchild...

Of the four Pike novels I’ve reread recently, I think this is one of the best. This seems a master work of plotting, placement of details, symbolism and parallelism with incredibly interesting, moving characters. 

Our protagonist, Melanie, being 18, is actually one of the older prots we’ve had, but there’s something about the innocence and sympathetic notes of her character that makes her seem younger - I feel like her diologues reflect that as well. Her role as the new girl in school makes her a great gateway character, linking her to the reader and reinforcing sympathy. The characters we meet through her are intriguing and are written with enough mystery and question marks to keep us guessing as to what’s going on underneath.

I felt like this is an incredibly detailed work with some details being there to bring vibrancy to the scene and others to help plant clues and heighten the mystery. I’d raise to many spoilers if I delved, but I felt like this was well done.

The play within the play and links between scenes is also key and striking, and I think this parallelism is a key note for Pike, as I noticed similar plot aspects in “Weekend” and “Witch” as well. Not just symbolism is what I’m talking about, but rather representational parallelism, if that hopefully makes sense.

As with some of Pike’s others works your left with some true feels and echoes of the story continuing on. *spoiler* I did wonder with the photos in the end; what if Rindy had been in one of the group photos? Just a thought with how Jeremy tore them up after taking them. Then again, wouldn’t he have kept it if she had been? But he was kind of a weird guy, so I don’t know.*end spoiler*

Overall, as stated, this was one of the better novels I’ve reread so far. I think it flirts with a 5 but I doubt it’ll be impactful on me years later, which is kind of one of my criteria for a 5, where it resonates that much. Still, I gladly give it 4 out of 5 ducks.