Rating: 3/5

This story is a retelling of the life of mythological hero Theseus after his return from the Minoan palace of Knossos. His adventures leading up this this book are covered in the prequel, The King Must Diet. This novel follows his later quests, his friendship with Pirithous, and his liaison with Hippolyta and marriage to Phaedra. 

The story begins shortly after Theseus' triumphant return from Knossos and his inheritance of the kingdom of Athens which now has become the dominate military power of the region. Now the Minoan kingdom is paying tribute to Athens instead of the other way around. If this story has any historicity it would have occurred circa 12th century BC when Minoan dominance ended.

In many ways Theseus starts out being a wise ruler deserving of the title "founding hero of Athens." However, he partakes in some not-so-prudent behavior which perhaps makes the story more interesting by leading to the tragic failure required of Classical Greek drama. He finds a new friend Pirithous and with him learns the joy of going off to distant lands to be a pirate.  Apparently it's OK to steal things as long as it's from people who live in distant lands. I guess that's the rationale behind colonialism in more recent times. Ever heard of the Doctrine of Discovery?

On one of the pirating trips he conquers in one-on-one combat an Amazon named Hippolyta. Subsequently she becomes a loyal lover as only can happen in the sexual dreams of the male ego. But political reality requires that Theseus marry a Minoan princess named Phaedra. Now he has a wife and a lover; they both give birth to boys; what can go wrong?

Things seem to keep going down hill as Theseus grows older. In the end he's betrayed by his wife, an usurper has grabbed power, and Theseus ends his own life. 

An underling theme in the story is the changing of allegiances from the older feminine goddess Artemis to the newer masculine god Zeus. In order to facilitate this transition Artemis has morphed into becoming the daughter of Zeus. Residual loyalty to the feminine goddess plays a role in decline of Theseus' power and is a factor in Phaedra's betrayal.