Rating: 3/5

Either we live by accident and die by accident, or we live by plan and die by plan.
When unexpected tragedies (like accidental deaths) fall on people, we wonder why it happened to them. How did they become the chosen recipient of the calamity as opposed to others? Was it fate or divine intervention? It's a question with no satisfactory answer. Brother Juniper witnesses the fall of the bridge of San Luis Rey while five people cross it. He wonders why those five? Immediately, he makes a theological project of it since he has found his "laboratory" to test God's workings. He inquires into the lives of those five dead people and produces a book. But even with all his efforts, he doesn't find a satisfactory answer to the question. And ironically, his study leads him to his ultimate death. 

It's interesting to ponder what Thornton Wilder wanted to convey to his readers through this novel. For a short one, the novel consists of much thought-provoking content. He talks a lot about love, the different kinds of it. So it's natural for me to conclude that the novel was his way of demonstrating the power of love, how it shapes human lives, and also, how death survives love. 

But the love will have been enough; all those impulses of love return to the love that made them. Even memory is not necessary for love. There is a land of the living and a land of the dead, and the bridge is love, the only survival, the only meaning.
However, I also felt that Thornton Wilder was raising the issue of the limitations of the human mind. Brother Juniper's failed project shows that there are forces in this world that are beyond human understanding. Call it fate, God, or nature, the universe is full of mysteries that elude human comprehension. It's egotistical of humans to think that they can find all the answers to the mysteries in life. Brother Juniper's book was declared heretical. It was burned along with its author. Was that ending a warning? Should we leave things beyond our grasp alone? It almost seems that Wilder was predicting destruction for those who venture beyond their limit. It is clear, however, that he firmly believed mankind should focus on love rather than philosophical ponderings. 

The premise of the story interested me. I wish I could say the same about the story. Unfortunately, I didn't connect with the story as I hoped. The lives of the victims or those connected with them (except for one or two) didn't interest me much. I simply couldn't get into their stories. I was also a little disappointed in not learning enough about 18th-century Peru and Spain. Imparting historical knowledge hadn't been part of Wilder's project, and I have only myself to blame for false expectations. So instead of 4 stars, I had to settle for 3.5.

More of my reviews can be found at http://piyangiejay.com/