The Friendship Pact

Tracey has a crush on Ross Pearlman and Rabbit (the character he plays on the show Joyride). Caroline (a girl that she likes and doesn’t like) gives her the news that coming to town to give a concert and it will be in the school auditorium. It’s a benefit for hemophilia (which his cousin has). Ross is very committed to eradicating diseases, The concert is in three weeks. Tracey has an idea but she decides to wait until she tells her friend Andrea. She and Andrea have a shared scrapbook dedicated to Rabbit (Ross). At lunch, Tracey, Andrea, Caroline, and Mary Kate excitedly talk about what they’ll wear to the concert. For the rest of the day, it’s hard for to concentrate. In-Home Ec, they get an assignment from their teacher Mrs. Collins they’re to make an apron. This is unfortunate because neither Tracey or anyone in her family have any sewing skills. School finally lets out and Tracey tells Andrea they have to find a way to meet Ross. Andrea makes her agree to a unbreakable pact that if one gets to meet him so does the other. They agree not to tell the others. 

They think about it and Andrea suggests that maybe Tracey’d dad can help since he’s an editor at the paper. But Tracey says her dad hates Ross so he won’t help. But she says her Uncle Charlie (who's the editor) might be able to help. Tracey suggests that Andrea can ask her dad to talk to Mr. Thomas (whose organizing the concert) but Andrea doesn’t think this will work because Mr. Thomas is her father’s client. But Andrea agrees to call him and ask. Then Tracey suggests that she also ask her mother (who works at the radio station). But Andrea says she doubts he’ll be at the radio station. Scott (Tracey’s brother) says they’re having a contest for anyone sixteen or younger to meet Rabbit. You have to write an entry for twenty-five words or less and the best will be picked from five. The others will win Rabbit albums. He says they can only enter once. Tracey is confident they’ll have great entries. She asks is Andrea wants to start on it, but she has to get home.

That night, Tracey doesn’t mention it to her dad because her brother says something about the concert and her dad makes a remark about a Darman man gone bad (which is where he and Ross went to college). Andrea calls later and tells Tracey she can’t enter because isn’t open to people who were relatives of people at the radio station.. Tracey asks her brother to send in an entry in Andrea’s place, but he tells her this won’t work because one of them would have to pretend to be him and well u see the point. Tracey’s mom says she’ll just have to win it on her own. She suggests asking her dad because he’s good with words and they all sit around and think of what to write. Her parents say they had crushes on (Marlon Brando and Debbie Reynolds) and Tracey says she’ll say she wants to break the family tradition of not meeting their crushes and they all agree it’s humorous. Then she tells them about the agreement she and Andrea made. She reads the entry to Andrea and she says it sounds fine. Tracey mails off her entry and kisses the postcard three times. 

She and Andrea figure Tracy has a good chance because all the other kid's entires just say that they want to meet him because they love him. Still, they decide to go with their initial plan as a backup. Andra says Mr. Thomas can’t help because he said Ross doesn’t really want to be bothered with all those people. At lunch, all Tracey’s friends discuss what kind of aprons they’re going to make. When it's time to go see Uncle Charlie, Andrea doesn’t want to go. She says it’ll be more mature if Tracey goes alone. Tracey is a little scared but she convinces herself all he can do is say no. Tracey has an idea and tells her Uncle he needs someone to report on the concert that loves Ross Pearlman (her). But he says they already had the idea and they thought about it but decided it was a bad idea. He said for the one kid they picked they would have gotten a thousand angry phone calls and because it would look like favoritism she’d be the last one they’d pick. He also shoots down her idea to let Andrea do it. He tells her she’ll just have to see him at the concert and if she doesn’t get to meet him it’s not the end of the world. He says if there was something he could do he would. He says she’s probably better off not meeting him. Then she makes him promise not to tell her dad she came. 

Tracey leaves his office wanting to cry, but when she gets home there’s a message for her that she got a call and she might be one of the contest finalists. She calls Andrea that night and tells them the good news instead of the bad. Then she tells the rest of her friends the next day. Caroline hints that she doesn’t have to do dumb things to meet celebrities but she won’t say any more. She says the time isn’t right. Then they start talking about the aprons again. 

Friday is the day Tracey has to go to the station. She asks Andrea to go with her. Tracey meets with three other kids and the DJ (Rick Rogers). The kids are Don, Lisa, and Jan and they’re waiting for Evan (who shows up). Rick says after the news the winner will be announced. Then he’ll go into details with the winner later. Then he introduces them on the air. He then picks the name Jan. Andrea later calls Tracey and Tracey gives her the album photo book to cut the pictures out of and put in the scrapbook. Caroline also calls and compliments her on her interview. Caroline asks what she wants most in the whole world and she says to meet Rabbit. She says that can be arranged. Caroline says Mr. Thomas won’t give Ross a party but her parents will. Sooo.. She’s asked her parents can Tracey come to the party. At first, they say no. Then they hear her on the radio and thinks she sounded so mature that they said as long as she doesn’t embarrass them she can come. (The party will be after the concert). She remembers Andrea and then asks can she come, but Caroline says NO. She’s stuck her neck out for Tracey and that that wasn’t easy. Caroline asks so what’s it gonna be. Caroline says she doesn’t know why she’s her best friend and this seals it. Tracey tells her she can’t do it. Caroline tells her to go to hell and hangs the phone up in her face. Her parents say she did the right thing. Scot says she got close twice. Maybe the third time the charm. Mom thinks maybe she or Andrea will come up with an idea. Mary-Kate also calls but when she reminds Tracey of the apron she hangs the phone up on her.

Andrea suggests they can write him letters and he’ll read them and invite them to Hollywood. Even Tracey doesn’t believe this. They work on the scrapbook which is really coming along. It’s just a notebook but has about one hundred pictures and articles about the Rabbit. Andrea has to leave, so Tracey spends the rest of the day sulking. Tracey doesn’t feel like starting the apron. She hasn’t even bought the material for it. So she finds a book and go downstairs to read with her mother. After this, she starts to feel a little better. Andrea calls later and tells her Caroline called her and asked her to the same party. But Andrea accepted. Tracey reminds her of the pact and Andrea says she didn’t think she’d mind. Then she tells Andrea Caroline asked her first. Andrea says she wouldn’t have minded. Tracey says she should call Caroline back and tell her she’s not going, but Andrea says she’s not going to do that. To top this off Tracey finds out Andrea didn’t even call Mr. Thomas. Tracey tells Andrea she hates her and that she’s a rotten creep and she hopes Andrea dies. Andrea says she hopes she dies too and hangs up the phone.

Tracey then destroys the scrapbook. When she goes to class, her teacher tells her the aprons are due the next day. Tracey’s been putting it off so much she hasn’t even bought the material. Tracey takes the ripped-up pieces and of the scrapbook, puts them in a bag, and then gives then to Andrea (whose in disbelief. The scrapbook took her years). Tracey buys some material finally but has no idea how to even start, Scott tells her she needs a pattern. They don’t have that but their mom has an apron for them to imitate. Scott says they’ll trace the apron onto the material. Since this is the best Tracey can do, Scott says she should turn it in. Umm, Clever but I don’t think… The teacher isn’t fooled and she calls her out in front of the class. Then she talks to her privately after class. Tracey says her family can’t sew but her teacher isn’t sympathetic. She makes her stay after class and redo it and if she does she’ll give her a D. She leaves and tells her she can do whatever she wants if she really wants to.. 

Later, Andrea comes by and apologizes and tells her she won’t be going to the party. Caroline has been putting her arm around Andrea all week and calling her (her) best friend. Then she offers to help Tracey with the apron. But Tracey says she doesn’t need the distraction. They agree to see each other at the concert.

When Tracey looks up again Ross Pearlman is standing there. He was told to come to the Home Ec room to rest up before the concert. Tracey is in shock! Then she starts to tell him about the apron. He says his mother taught him before he went to college. Then they kind of have a conversation about the apron. He tells her about the kid he meet at the station that almost wet their pants when they saw him. In comparison just sitting there with Tracey is nice. Tracey finds out that he does know Marlon Brando. They talk about idols and Joyride. He tells her she should be a critic and she tells him she hopes to write for the paper. He tells her he always wanted to act. Then it gets late and Tracey realizes she hasn’t called her parents to tell them she had to stay after school. Tracey asks if he has a dime (knowing she has one) and plans to keep the dime he gave her forever. (Maybe she’ll make a necklace out of it). Then they part. Tracey goes outside to replay the conversation in her head. She knows she should have gotten an autograph for Amdrea but if she has to she’ll give her the dime and she’ll have the memories of him bandaging her thumb when it started bleeding.

When she goes back inside she sees Andrea and tells him about meeting Ross. Andrea asks if she got his autograph for her but she apologizes and says she forgot. In the auditorium, Mary Kate says the party got canceled. Ross has to take a late flight out. Mrs. Collins comes into the room holding the apron and there’s writing all over it. Ross has autographed it. Mrs. Collins still believes Tracey did it. But Andrea believes her and that’s enough. At the concert, Ross dedicates a song called “Just By Chance” and then says she hopes she doesn’t mind what he did to her apron and then he mentions Andrea. 

My Thoughts
This is another book I remember owning and distinctly the cover but not what it was about. When I think about this story. I can relate to it because not that long ago (and no you don’t have to be a teenager to develop a SERIOUS crush) I had a crush on a “Ross Pearlman”. He was also an actor on a tv show and you could not tell me I did not LOVE this guy. He was all out PHOINE and ripped to death. But for me it was way more than that. I watched the videos of him on YouTube and I saw intelligence. I saw a sense of humor. I saw charisma and just slight bit of geek. Every single thing I saw made him more and more desirable in my eyes. And I like Andrea and Tracey had a “Scrapbook”. My “scrapbook” was a blog. It was kinda like my love letter. It had every single one of the television shows and movies he was in with outstanding reviews by me. I mean when I tell you I put my heart into that blog. Eventually, I had to take it down because the blog site got infected with bots (Tumblr). I just wanted to get his attention. But unfortunately, he can’t sing so there was no chance of him coming here to give a concert and the show he was on got cancelled. There was absolutely no chance that the previous show or the current one he’s on while ever get shot here so there goes that. And I don’t think there will ever be a contest that you can write why you love him and get to meet him. I can’t sew either but I don’t think there’s a chance I’ll be taking sewing up at a school he’ll be at and he’ll just randomly walk into the classroom and be like “Hey. I’, JC.” But I think anyone whose ever had a celebrity crush will be able to relate to this book. I’m just glad that Ross *didn’t* turn out to be full of himself. That really would have been such a letdown! Sometimes meeting a celebrity might not be what you dreamed it up to be. I really thought that was what it was leading to with her Uncle and Dad making it seem like he wasn’t so great.

Rating: 6