Rating: 1/5

I picked up a book called Procrastination: Why You Do It and What to Do About It at the library, hoping to be either mildly amused or even helped. Neither of these things happened. After dropping to a non-honors English class I was a bit disheartened, having always considered English one of my strongest subjects. I was trying to improve myself academically, but it was no easy task. Then I found this book, and it became an even more difficult task. It was really really boring. I know there should be a better way to phrase that than just “boring” such as dull or monotonous, but I can’t emphasize enough how it was really really boring. Page after repetitive page went by tediously, explaining scenarios and mindsets that didn’t apply to me whatsoever. It explained scenarios that did apply to me too, but these were isolated incidents. I’m self-aware enough to realize why I’m procrastinating, I don’t need some researcher to over explain it to me. I’d been hearing so many parents, teachers, and college counselors complaining about my issues with procrastination at that point that the book seemed like an extra source for nagging. I’ll admit that’s not the book’s fault, but one of the requirements is to talk about my reading experience so I’m taking about my reading experience. Also I can’t totally forgive the book because the writing is condescending and they had to take into consideration the fact that many people reading it probably have heard a lot of this in the same pious tone before. 
	“Some people would rather suffer the consequences of procrastination than the humiliation of trying and not doing as well as they had hoped.” (Burka 18). That’s just one of the many clichéd and obvious statements this book has to offer. “The journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step,” (Burka 36). That’s one of my favorite overused words of wisdom. But who could forget one of the most obvious and condescending statements I’ve ever seen publicized? “Technological advances now allow us to work 24/7, but they also tempt us to procrastinate 24/7!” (Burka 24). I’ll go ahead and connect this to the essential question “What are the positive and negative aspects of chaos and order?” Because, although the author emphasizes the need to rid procrastination and develop order, it makes them seemed entitled and makes their book boring as hell. A lack of procrastination leads to order, but that order isn’t fun at all and then you have to try to read books like this to better yourself and then it’s a negative experience for you and everyone you love. 
	I’d recommend this book to people who like being talked down to, maybe young children or domesticated dogs. I’d also like to recommend it to people playing the wheel of fortune while reading it because it contains a lot of very common phrases and that could help with the puzzles. For actual procrastinators, I’d recommend the webcomic WaitButWhy’s take on procrastination which is linked here: http://waitbutwhy.com/2013/10/why-pro.... It’s an entertaining and insightful comic with actual substance instead of vague motivational buzz words. I’ll give this book a 2/10 based solely on the fact I could use it sometimes for visual humor. Like I’m procrastinating on reading a book called procrastination which is very mildly humorous. My mom thought it was funny. Anyway, that was the only upside.