Rating: 5/5

”Andorra’s dramatic topography makes it unapproachable by air, so I arrived via train from Paris, having flown that far. As a general rule---and I am afraid I am the kind of person who believes in general rules---I like to arrive in new places by train. There is something about literally crossing borders, traversing frontiers, watching the countryside hurtle by the window and become exurban, and then the gradual diminution of speed as the train approaches a city, that allows one to arrive with an experience of place that flying disallows.”

  

Alexander Fox, which may or may not be his name, arrives in Andorra to begin a new life. He knows nothing about the region except that he once read a book on Andorra that impressed him with the descriptions of the beauty, peace, and solitude to be found in this almost mystical place. He wants to: “live his life more deliberately, more consciously.”

Of course, the sticky wicket part of escaping a past life is that one can never leave oneself in the past as well. The attractive part about being somewhere new is the editing that can be done to your previous life. You can enhance your victories and leave your colossal defeats on the editing floor. If you are really good, you might even convince yourself that all the modifications to your life story are more real than the original events. 

The Andorrians ask Alexander these seemingly innocent questions about his past. It is annoying because he finds himself being evasive. The evasion creates intrigue, and soon he is perceived to be a much more mysterious person than he deserves to be. 

He meets the Dents. He is attracted to the wife, and he can tell she is attracted to him, but he isn’t interested in complications. 

Mr. Dent: “The problem is, in case you haven’t noticed, I’m also attracted to men.”

Okay, the complications have grown two-fold. 

Despite Alexander’s rather astute assessment of not needing complications, it is hard to resist a beautiful, intelligent person who wants to make love to you. 

”Do you know, it’s not here I was happiest. No, not in the summerhouse. It was in your bed. Naked in that fantastic bed of yours, in the hot afternoon, fucking with the doors and windows open. That’s when I was most happy. It’s funny, isn’t it, that you can get the greatest physical pleasure from someone whom you don’t really love. It’s an odd joy, that. Odd and meaningless.”

That is Mrs. Dent, not Mr. Dent. Fox, though he feels sorry for Mr. Dent, is much more interested in the wife. When I worked in the book business, I remember a conversation I had one evening with a head of the music department for the store, who was about my age now then. He only dated married women because he didn’t believe that he had to worry about them wanting more than sex. Of course, there was the very real worry that the husband would show up on your doorstep with a shotgun (it was gun happy Arizona, after all), and you would end up oozing from numerous buckshot wounds. My friend was absolutely deluded, of course. Just because a woman is married doesn’t mean that her emotions are put in a jar and left on the nightstand by her marriage bed. It wasn’t long before he was jammed up in a fine mess, with one of his conquests expressing her undying love for him and a husband extremely unhappy with him. 

*Sigh,* relationships are never uncomplicated. Needless to say, things get complicated with the Dents. 

On the other hand, there is Miss Quay. ”I thought about the grace of her hand; how she had delicately palmed her niece’s forehead, touched my shoulder; how her hand would continue its gentle and benevolent course through life. I wanted to kiss it or put it in the Museum of Astounding Body Parts or exhibit it in a reliquary with the ashen bones of saints.”

He likes Mrs. Dent. He certainly likes all the wonderful, uninhibited sex he has with her, but does he love her? Miss Quay makes his legs go to jelly when he is around her, but is that partly because he hasn’t “had her” yet? The purpose of moving to Andorra was to live his life more deliberately and cleanly, but suddenly his life here has become very messy. 

Not to mention that the police have called him in to question him about the murdered bodies that keep showing up in the waters offshore. 

Peter Cameron writes this character of Fox that I can’t help, but identify with. I even like him. His astute observations about people and books are familiar, as if I’ve thought them or seen them for myself. ”I discovered a copy of Crewe Train by Rose Macaulay, the very book that had prompted me to move to Andorra. I had read it very long ago. If I read it again now, what would I think? Should I let my memory of it alone? Sometimes it is dangerous to revisit a loved book, especially after a great change in one’s life: the book no longer seems perfect; one swears it has been altered or edited, when in fact it is, of course, oneself who has been revised.”

  

Peter Cameron

Oddly enough, that is exactly the way I feel about rereading this book. I really enjoyed it in the late 1990s and the book has travelled with me back and forth across the country as I ended up in new places to live. I even had the pleasure of meeting Mr. Cameron and had him sign the book, but that was before I’d even read it. That might have been fortunate, to save me from being a stammering idiot as I tried to explain to him how much I enjoyed his book. 

My first thought is the book reminds me of Graham Greene, with the intrigue elements of the plot, but as I finish it, I realize that it reminds me much more of a Paul Bowles novel. I could certainly see Greene or Bowles, either one, in similar circumstances trying to escape themselves and failing miserable. The five glorious gold stars speak for themselves. My experiment in rereading this book was a success. 

”Many years ago I read a book that was set in Andorra.”

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten