Rating: 2/5

I feel like I've been reading this for years. It's like Frank Norris decided one day he was going to write an epic and didn't particularly care what it was about (much like the character Presley and his 'Song of the West').

Overall I found this similar in story and tone to The Grapes of Wrath, only it's the Railroad (the titular Octopus) squeezing out mid-sized farms rather than the Bank and Big Farm squeezing out the poor farmer. It's obvious who you are supposed to side with, and yet Norris depicts the ranchers and farmers in such a way as to make me dislike pretty much all of them. If you manage to get passed the prideful boasting and willful ignorance of the cowardly ranchers, and don't object to the frankly ridiculous caricature of a villain (S. Behrman), then their complete disregard to their own tenants and the prosperity of anyone except themselves ought to still put you off. Several farmers are actively ruining their own land in plans to make fortunes quickly and then leave. How do you root for that? 

Now, if the above makes this sound like a nuanced, layered take on what could be a black and white conflict, don't get too excited. Norris employs a lot of structural tactics to convey his message (essentially how helpless the individual is against forces like trusts and monopolies, pretty much summed up towards the end of the novel by the rich railroad magnate Presley visits), and they are employed haphazardly. One particularly heinous use was the death (by starvation) of one character while another group literally feasts. The juxtaposition is a good idea, but the scene switches back and forth something like 20 times. It's excessive and unnecessary, and ruins the intended effect. A lot of the novel is like that.

I gave 2 stars because the writing itself isn't bad, just poorly structured, and there is a wealth of information here for someone interested in either this time period or even potentially business tactics. The international shipping of the wheat to India ostensibly in the name of aid is something that goes on to this day for profit (I believe famine areas in Africa had a lot of this type of 'aid' more recently, much to the benefit of American farm interests).