Rating: 5/5

Joan Lowery Nixon

BIO

Joan Lowery Nixon is the only four-time winner of the Mystery Writers of America Edgar Allan Poe Award and a two-time winner of the California Young Reader Medal.

Whether it's engrossing historical dramas, chilling mysteries, suspense-filled page-turners, or adventure stories, kids, teachers, and librarians love the books of Joan Lowery Nixon.

Nixon is half Californian, half Texan. She has a degree in journalism and credentials in elementary education. Nixon has written over 130 books for children from preschool age through young adult—including science books, co-authored with her husband, geologist Hershell Nixon. Her books have garnered numerous awards and accolades, including the Western Writers of America Golden Spur Award for Best Western Juvenile and the Texas Institute of Letters Award. Many of Nixon's books have won state children's choice awards. She is the only four-time winner of the Mystery Writers of America Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Juvenile Mystery. Nixon has four children and several grandchildren.

Nixon describes the pleasure she gets from writing mystery and suspense: "When I was young I discovered an evening radio program called I LOVE A MYSTERY. It was intriguing, suspenseful, and at times absolutely terrifying, and the title was correct. I did love a mystery—on radio, in films, and especially in books. Maybe I'm really a detective at heart because much later in my life, when I began to write books for young people, I discovered writing mysteries was even more fun than reading them.

"A mystery begins to develop in my mind when something sparks an idea and a question grows from it. What would it be like to move into a house in which a murder had taken place? How would I feel if my best friend were arrested for murder on circumstantial evidence? As a question develops into an answer, I give a great deal of thought to my main character. She is the most important part of the story, and I see it take shape through her eyes. Before I write a word of the story I know how I'll begin it and how I'll end it, making sure to put in honest clues and distracting red herrings—just to make the mystery all the more fun to solve. I love mysteries, and I want my readers to love them, too."

In creating the acclaimed Orphan Train Adventures, Nixon explored a time and place in America's recent past that is not widely covered in history lessons. She explains, "It was a part of history I hadn't known: that beginning in 1854, over 100,000 homeless children were rescued from the streets of New York City and sent by train to new homes in the West. As I researched early journals, I found many letters—some hopeful, some sad—and reports which told of tears as brothers and sisters were separated or a child was not chosen. I wanted to bring history and fiction together in an exciting, adventurous time and place, to tell the stories of those who could have traveled west on the Orphan Train."

Many of Nixon's readers have written to her asking how to get published. Her novel THE MAKING OF A WRITER, a part memoir, part how-to book, is her answer to them. From her first publication at age 10—a poem titled "Springtime"—to her graduation from Hollywood High during World War II, Nixon shares the incidents from her childhood that helped her to develop as a writer.

PRESS RELEASE

New York (July 8, 2003) — Joan Lowery Nixon, a critically acclaimed author of books for young people, died Saturday, June 28, 2003 in Houston, Texas at the age of 76. Mrs. Nixon held a Journalism degree from the University of Southern California and also had credentials in elementary education. She specialized in writing mysteries for young adults, and was awarded The Mystery Writers of America Edgar Allen Poe Award for 4 of her mysteries. Mrs. Nixon is the only person to ever win 4 Edgar Awards.

A past president of The Mystery Writers of America, Mrs. Nixon developed "Kids Love a Mystery Week". She also initiated a writing badge for the Girls Scouts of America and was an active member of Western Writers of America. Her Orphan Train book series (Delacorte Press Books for Young Readers) earned two Golden Spur awards from that organization. The author of over 140 books, Mrs. Nixon was published in more than 20 languages, and 15 of her books have won state children’s choice awards.

Mrs. Nixon described herself as half Californian, half Texan. She was born in Los Angeles, grew up in Hollywood, and spent the remainder of her life in Houston. Mrs. Nixon once described the pleasure she got from writing mystery and suspense: "When I was young I discovered an evening radio program called I Love a Mystery. It was intriguing, suspenseful, and at times absolutely terrifying, and the title was correct. I did love a mystery—on radio, in films, and especially in books. Maybe I’m really a detective at heart because much later in my life, when I began to write books for young people, I discovered writing mysteries was even more fun than reading them."

Many of Mrs. Nixon’s readers wrote to her asking how to get published. Her book THE MAKING OF A WRITER (Delacorte Press Books for Young Readers, May 2002), a part memoir, part how-to book, was her answer to them. From her first publication at age 16—a poem entitled "Springtime"—to her graduation from Hollywood High during World War II, Nixon shared the events and experiences from her childhood that helped her to develop as a writer. Whether referring to her engrossing historical dramas, chilling mysteries, suspense-filled page-turners, or adventure stories, one fact will remain consistently true: kids, teachers, and librarians love Joan Lowery Nixon’s books.

© Copyright 2003, Teenreads.com. All rights reserved.