Conversation continued from the updates…so maybe read those first? 

Well hello again! So you work in reviews too? 

Yes, sometimes I get assigned to reviews - but with 20000 characters to count down in the review boxes as opposed to 420 in the status update boxes, I avoid this posting whenever possible.

You'll not have much counting down to do today - I rarely use even half the characters available for reviews. I wish I could use the rest in the status updates though...

We've been through all that already. 420 characters is the maximum available for status update boxes. There is nothing more to be done. But there is one thing you can do: set your star rating for this book before you begin your review. It's an important part of the reviewing process.

But I never use the star rating system..

Don't tell me you're one of those people who don't stick to review rules. 

Are there review rules?

Well, not quite rules as such, more like tried and trusty conventions: a straight-forward description of a book's story line, some analysis, and a star rating that indicates clearly where the book stands in relation to other books the reviewer has read. Such an approach simplifies life for everyone concerned, and especially for the review reader. He clicks on a book title, familiar or unfamiliar. He reads about the book, which he knows something of already or he doesn't. He notes the star rating while mentally agreeing or not depending on his level of familiarity with the book or on what he's picked up from the content of the review. Everybody knows where everybody stands and confusion is unlikely. They all pass on to write/read more of the same, certain as to the firmness of the ground they're treading. 

Tried and trusty? Sounds more like tired and rusty to me...

Then show me the justification for interfering with something that works. Show me the rationale for introducing vaguenesses where there should only be certainties and convolutions where none are needed? Where is the value in withholding star ratings, and obliging readers to second guess, as if the reviewer's opinion were some great and significant puzzle? We're only talking about books here after all, not the meaning of life or the riddle of mankind. 

But some books can be microcosms of a larger world and their contents can comprehend the riddles of existence in unique and creative ways. That larger significance, and the unique creativity used to frame it, is partly why it seems impossible for me to rate books in relation to other books. Literary works are just too different one from another to be equated in any way. It would almost be like rating my friends….

I presume Henry James is about to be called on to back up your claims? Incomparable artist, stand-alone figure, etc, etc...

Well, this 'review' is under the banner of a Henry James novel after all - and you've read 'The Wings of the Dove' yourself, you've seen what he can do in terms of constructing microcosms of the world.

Ah! But I wouldn't dream of writing a review of it. 

That's precisely why I can't write a conventional review of it either! But I can write about why I can't.

Ok, I'm waiting...16830...

Well, I think plot isn't the most important aspect of his stories so even if I was inclined to outline the plot in my reviews (which I rarely do), I'd never do so in the case of a Henry James novel.

So you're not going to tell the readers what the book is about?

That's right. 

So maybe a little analysis? A few stabs at the meanings behind the themes and symbols?

In the case of a Henry James novel, that's not at all obvious.

You can't do it, in other words.

I can do it, and quite easily, but they would indeed be another's words.

Cryptic! You’ve clearly been reading too much Henry James..

The thing is, Henry James has two voices.

Explain, please.

There's an omniscient narrator in each of the three James novels I've read recently, and the narrator sometimes switches to being a third person limited narrator, presenting things just from one particular character's point of view and allowing other characters to keep their thoughts secret.

Is that what you mean about the two voices? What's new or original about that?

Hold on. It's what he does when he's being omniscient that's interesting. He comments on the narrative as he's telling it, and sometimes analyses the characters and their motivations as well. And then from time to time, he slips into first person narration, he drops in an 'I' voice that adds another later of analysis to the story being told. It's as if James is being the critic of his own story - and in fact he becomes an actual critic at the end of this book. There’s an appendix at the end of my edition explaining how he constructed the book, what he wanted to demonstrate, how well he succeeded, what he could have done better, in short, he becomes his own best/worst critic.

Hmm, I didn't know about the appendix. So you're saying there's no need to review him in the usual way because he himself has anticipated everything that can be said about his story.

Yes, more or less. 

But what about style? You’re not going to tell us he comments on his own style, I suppose?

Funny you should mention his style because something you said earlier reminded me very much of his unique way of writing. You spoke of 'vaguenesses where there should only be certainties and convolutions where none are needed'. If ever there was a writer who indulged in vaguenesses and convolutions, Henry James is the one! He seems to revel in creating long sentences, and as many of them as possible, and he will always choose an elaborate way to explain something rather than a simple one. If a metaphor will bear expanding, he will push it to the limit, when a circle can be drawn wide, he will draw it very wide indeed. In short, he uses 50 words where 5 might do. 
 
Did he know he was doing that?

Oh yes, I think his elaborate style was very intentional. And once again, he addresses this issue in the appendix. He speaks of the ‘dodges’ or strategies he uses in telling his stories and for which he always has reasons, why for example he approaches the character of Millie Theale only and ever circuitously, 'All of which proceeds, obviously, from her painter’s tenderness of imagination about her, which reduces him to watching her, as it were, through the successive windows of other people’s interest in her.' (And how glad I was to read his confirmation of this intention as I’d already picked up this approach in his treatment of the main character in Washington Square, an approach I’d found myself noting also here as I read ‘around’ and ‘about’ Milly). But to get back to his elaborate style, in the appendix he also stresses the notion of ‘attention of perusal’, that is, the attention he requires from the reader. He has a theory about enjoyment of works of art being greatest when they demand more of our attention, and there is no doubt that when reading a Henry James novel, we have to read with full attention. He designs his sentences so that we can’t skim read. We have to read every word, but when we do, what treats we get as rewards!

That may be your experience but I see a lot of negative feedback on his style generally.

You could argue that I’m a particularly patient reader and that’s why his style works for me. But I think there’s a lot more than that involved. I talked about the rewards when we read every word. Sometimes they arrive in a particularly efficient piece of phrasing that sums up all the foregoing narrative, as in the following excerpt, for example. Milly Theale has been wandering around the various rooms or ‘schools’ of the National Gallery looking at painting after painting, and has just sat down on a chair to rest: 'Milly indeed at present fixed her eyes more than elsewhere on the appearance, first that she couldn’t quite, after all, have accounted to an examiner for the order of her various ‘schools’, and then on that of her being more tired than she had meant, in spite of her having been so much less intelligent.'

Hmm. I can anticipate people not understanding what you’re saying here.

How to explain better! I couldn't have noticed the perfection of that final paradox unless I'd paid attention to everything leading up to it. That’s what I mean. Take this excerpt: 'They had accepted their acquaintance as too short for an engagement, but they had treated it as long enough for almost anything else, and marriage was somehow before them like a temple without an avenue. They belonged to the temple, and they met in the grounds; they were in the stage at which grounds in general offered much scattered refreshment.' That’s so efficient in spite of James having exploited the temple image to its fullest. And there’s a tongue in cheek element too. The grounds were shady - and secluded! Those two sentences just work perfectly on so many levels. 

I think you’ll have to come up with more examples than that to convince the doubters.

One more then, and again it's an example of elaborate efficiency: 'She balanced an instant during which Densher might have just wondered if pure historic truth were to suffer a slight strain. But she dropped on the right side.'

Good one indeed, but I’m afraid it won’t convince. In fact I’m tempted to drop in a quote myself about the same Densher: 'Densher had for this, as he listened, a smile of the largest response. ‘Ah my dear child, if you can explain I of course needn’t not “understand”. I’m condemned to that,' he on his side presently explained, ‘only when understanding fails'..' It’s that sort of construction that puts people off.

Such a well chosen quote for what we’re talking about! You must have been underlining your edition too!

Have you come across the sentence full of negatives in The Golden Bowl yet? 

Ah - you're reading it too! Do you mean this one: 'Mr Verver, it may further be mentioned, had taken at no moment sufficient alarm to have kept in detail the record of his reassurance; but he would none the less not have been unable, not really have been indisposed, to impart in confidence to the right person his notion of the history of the matter.'

That’s the one!

I admit I had to read that one twice. But it works in the context, and tells us so much about Mr Verver! And since we’ve dragged 'The Golden Bowl' into our conversation, I’ve been noticing the ‘I’ narrator even more in that book, little asides that comment on the story and the telling of it. For example "The unspoken had come up, and there was a crisis - neither could have said how long it lasted - during which they were reduced, for all interchange, to looking at each other on quite an inordinate scale. They might at this moment, in their positively portenous stillness, have been keeping it up for a wager, sitting for their photograph or even enacting a ‘tableau vivant’" About this scene, the narrator later says: "The little crisis was of shorter duration than our account of it; duration would naturally have forced him to take up his hat."(and leave, therefore changing the outcome, is implied). I love the layers of construction that are revealed.

You speak of novels as if they were buildings. That’s not the way many readers approach literature.

It’s true that I love architecture, the architecture of everything. Even of a review. But in every construction there has to be a moment when we say ‘enough is enough’. I think we’ve reached that point here, don’t you?

I agree completely. And I think there are many who will be grateful that you’re not following Gaudi's approach to architecture - I'm thinking of his never completed cathedral - because then this review would have accumulated so many additions and citations that it would have been an even bigger mess than it is already. And there wouldn't have been 7807 characters left in this review box either! 
Well, at least my shift is over so I'm off home. Bon Dimanche everyone!

Bon Dimanche to you too. Ah, I've just realised, this is a Sunday review. No wonder I've had trouble with it...I'll edit it tomorrow...