Rating: 5/5

“Lord, what fools these mortals be!” 
  
I became a fan of plays when I read a few of them in my English book. They were very good. I liked them. Ever since I wanted to read more of them and of course when I searched for them, Shakespeare’s name was on top. 
 
A while ago I was afraid of reading them because of the classical English. But few days ago, I thought to try them and will use Google as a guide. And now I can’t explain how much happy I’m right now... Even though I faced difficulty to understand at first but with some help of Google, I enjoyed the play a lot. Now I’m getting a little bit used to of the writing. 😊
 
And for this play, it was sooo amazing! Really enjoyed it a lot. It was full of fun. I didn’t expect to like this this much! 

  CHARACTERS

Lysander, Hermia, Demetrius and Helena. They are the mains.

  PLOT

Lysander and Hermia are in love and want to get married. But Hermia’s father wants her to marry Demetrius who is also in love with her. At the same time, Helena is in love with Demetrius who doesn’t love her back. 
Lysander and Hermia plans to runaway and marry each other. They also tell Helena about their plan. Helena tells Demetrius about it while thinking to get his attention. But that never happens. And he goes on pursuit to stop them. And Helena also goes behind him. And they all are in the forest where the fairies happen to stay. 
When the king of fairies sees Helena chasing Demetrius who doesn’t love her back, he tells his servant puck to make him love back using a love juice. And this where everything goes terribly wrong and hilarious...😂 

  RANDOM THOGHTS

&gt;&gt; It was the most hilarious love quadrangle I’ve ever seen. First, they both were in love with Hermia and after the mistake of puck, they both fall in love with Helena. And they all curse each other… that was so funny! Enjoyed their quarrel a lot...😂😂

&gt;&gt; King of fairies makes the queen to fall for a man with the head of donkey! 😂😂😂 I couldn’t believe my eyes...😂😂 That was the peak of madness! 😂
But I couldn’t get why the queen wasn’t angry after being cured? As he had stolen the child he wanted and she loved.

&gt;&gt; When everyone was cured, they all thought it was a bad dream. Hmmm… right. But Demetrius still loves Helena? I know he wasn’t cured but still? Wasn’t it a forced love? I thought there would be a character arc. It itched me a bit…😅 But never mind. 

&gt;&gt; The play they played for the king in the last act was ridiculously entertaining! Nothing made sense but entertaining…😅

I’m now more pumped up to read all of his plays. And I surely will. For now, this is my favorite play. 

Next one is Hamlet. Let’s see 😉. 

1 February, 2020