Rating: 5/5

Reading Road Trip 2020

Current location: Arkansas

There are readers who have a particular penchant for stories set in Paris after the French Revolution, and there are readers who don't ever want to leave London, just following WWII, but for me, my sweet spot has always been set in America, right at the end of the Civil War.

It was a tender and tentative time, here in the U.S. We had just ripped our country asunder, finally abolished slavery, and assassinated the noblest leader this nation has ever known. 

We then experienced a quiet poverty, a great disorientation, and an abundant wound licking, as all people, everywhere, do, following a war. 

So much less was known then about trauma and healing, and so, given what we know about the great American spirit and concepts like manifest destiny, so much of our suffering and our healing continued to play out by pressing on into the Big Sky country of the American West. 

It was a big setting for a diminished people. 

Onto this small stage have stepped several memorable characters, but I met a new one this week: Mattie Ross, the oldest child of Frank Ross:

Frank Ross was the gentlest, most honorable man who ever lived. He had a common-school education. He was a Cumberland Presbyterian and a Mason. . . He was hurt in the terrible fight at Chickamauga up in the state of Tennessee and came near to dying on the way home from want of proper care.

Frank Ross didn't die in the war, and his wife and children were able to celebrate the return of their beloved father and husband. . . only to have him killed promptly by a man named Tom Chaney, a drifter whom the kindhearted Frank Ross had taken in as a ranch hand.

Tom Chaney rode his gray horse that was better suited to a middlebuster than carrying a rider. He had no hand gun but he carried his rifle slung across his back on a piece of cotton plow line. There is trash for you.

When Tom Chaney kills beloved Frank Ross in front of several eyewitnesses and then flees from the law, Mattie Ross is discouraged by the underwhelmed and understaffed local authorities. She decides to take matters into her own hands.

What follows is the most fascinating story of a stoic young woman and her determination to see her father's killer apprehended. And, in doing so, she becomes sandwiched in between an erratic U.S. Marshal known as “Rooster” and a dandy of a Texas rancher known as “LaBoeuf,” two men she has negotiated with to satisfy her desire for justice.

Mattie Ross is a slip of a girl, a young woman, who, at 14-years-old, would be more likely, given the time period, to be focused on romance than revenge.

Hardly.

Mattie does the opposite of most young women at every turn, and Charles Portis was a GENIUS for creating her. 

I am not kidding when I tell you that this read had garnered five stars from me, from its very first paragraph.

I'm not exaggerating when I tell you that I will go on, now, to read everything Charles Portis has ever written.

The title of this story, True Grit, comes from this line that Mattie speaks to Rooster: “They tell me you are a man with true grit.”

Turns out, Mattie possesses just as much grit as either of the men.

Damn. 

A new favorite.