Rating: 4/5

Did you know that this was the basis for the Disney movie The Black Cauldron?

I didn't.
I didn't even realize that this beloved fantasy story even existed until recently. And now I can see why fans of Lloyd Alexander's books were upset over the Disney treatment. 
Yes, the basic bones of the story were there, but that's it. I'm assuming that's because they tried to smoosh 5 books' worth of stuff into one animated children's movie.
A children's movie that is apparently amazing to watch if you're tripping balls. &lt;--or so I've been told by sources that will remain unnamed.

Taran is an assistant pig keeper at Caer Dallben, and when Hen Wen (a white oracular pig) runs off, he sets out on an adventure to save her from the Horned King. He meets up with the sassy Eilonwy, who bosses him around, and the annoying &amp; smelly creature Gurgi, who always wants his munchies and crunchies. Is he good? Is he bad? Read it and find out because I'm not telling you.
Along with the good prince Gwydion, the wandering minstrel Fflewddur Fflam (also a king, btw), &amp; a grumpy dwarf named Doli, Taran tries to stop an undead hoard from wreaking havoc in their kingdom.
There's more to it than that, but you get the basic gist.

Man, was that movie missing a lot of the characters and PLOT. Not to mention the character growth of Taran! He turns into quite the leader and hero in this one. I don't want to spoil anything, but this was a very good story.
And short. 
I loved that it didn't drag on and on and on. For a classic (1964) fantasy novel aimed at young adults, this was surprisingly readable to me.
That does NOT mean I think it's going to be a winner for everyone.
Classic. Fantasy. For kids. 
If you go into it knowing what it is, I think it's more than likely something you will be able to appreciate. If you go into it thinking you're getting some Harry Potteresque story, you will be sorely disappointed.
Recommended for people who know what they're getting. 

On a side note, I was gifted a really lovely copy of The Prydain Chronicles, but I haven't had the time to sit down and read it yet, so I decided to jump into the series with the individual audiobooks till I can peruse my copy.
James Langton was the narrator of the one I listened to, and he did a wonderful job.