Rating: 4/5

Shackleton, by Roland Huntford
reviewed by NC Weil

My husband and I read this book aloud last winter. A powerful adventure story, this biography provides insight into what makes a person a leader, and how essential that quality is when a venture falls into difficulties. Ernest Shackleton made three unsuccessful trips to Antarctica in the early 20th century. On the first, he traveled with Robert Falcon Scott on an expedition to the South Pole that came up short due to poor planning and insufficient provisions.

His second journey was another attempt to reach the Pole, this time as commander. But again they were stymied by inexperience with conditions: they did not know how to ski nor how to use sled dogs, bringing instead Mongolian ponies whose small hooves for their weight often broke through the snow, sometimes into crevasses. They turned back from their goal of reaching the South Pole a mere 90 miles from it - because they didn’t have enough food to get there and return to their provisions. Shackleton chose survival over glory.

His third expedition, the one best known, involved an attempt to cross Antarctica with dogsleds. However, the ship Endurance, caught in the pack ice of the Weddell Sea, was their home for 9 fruitless months while the ice moved it north and west, away from their goal. Eventually the ice began to crush the ship, so Shackleton ordered all hands, both expedition and ship’s crew, to the ice. They lived on a large floe another couple of months, waiting for austral summer’s warmth to open a lane for them to reach the open ocean. That floe began to break up, so they manhauled their three lifeboats to another floe, which after some weeks dissolved beneath their feet. 

Into the boats they went, and through some of the roughest waters on earth - Drake Passage - were able to make landfall on Elephant Island, a forbidding wasteland of rock. Shackleton appointed his second-in-command to remain with most of the crew, and a hand-picked group of six, Shackleton included, refitted one of the lifeboats and sailed by dead reckoning 700 miles across the open southern Atlantic, reaching South Georgia Island and its whaling station. Three stayed with the boat while the other three crossed the uncharted interior of the island - home to 163 glaciers - reaching the whaling station dehydrated, starved, and filthy. When the whaler's crew sailed around the island to collect their fellows, and saw the boat they had sailed so far in such perilous waters, they exclaimed, “These are MEN!”

It took several attempts for Shackleton to procure a ship and return to Elephant Island, where the rest of his crew lived under two overturned lifeboats, subsisting on penguin and seal, having no idea when or whether they would ever be rescued. As Apsley Cherry-Garrard, a polar explorer, declared in 1922, “For scientific discovery, give me Scott; for speed and efficiency of travel, give me Amundsen; but when disaster strikes and all hope is gone, get down on your knees and pray for Shackleton.” For indeed, though none of his expeditions fulfilled their mission, he brought everyone back alive, against monstrous odds. 

This could well be the most thrilling adventure story of all time - men pitted against unforgiving elements, making choices we can only shake our heads over now (Mongolian ponies, shunning skis, bringing dogs without anyone who knew how to utilize them), but surviving, against the most appalling odds. 

Shackleton, a true leader, looked out for his men’s comfort before his own. During their crossing of Drake Passage one man lost his mittens, and Shackleton gave him his own. When the man tried to refuse them, Sir E threatened to pitch them into the water instead of wearing them himself. Even in the vilest conditions he made sure the men were fed and sheltered, and kept them as busy as possible to keep up morale. And they loved him. What kept them alive on Elephant Island many hopeless months was the knowledge that Sir E would move heaven and earth to come back, to bring them home. As indeed he did.