Rating: 1/5

I had never heard of this book until about two weeks ago, when someone told me it traumatized him as a teenager because of its homophobic content. I started researching it and it turns out a number of people were horrified by the content of this book and scared out of politics or coming out of the closet, including Barney Frank, even though he did overcome that and go on to be the first openly-gay senator. When I learned it had also won a Pulitzer in fiction, was a bestseller in 1962, and had been turned into a play and a film (which is the first major motion picture to feature a gay bar) I decided I had to read it.

Drury is actually a very good writer on a sentence level, and he makes it not so impossible to keep track of the large cast of characters, which is impressive. The story is about the Senate confirmation of a new Secretary of State, which goes sideways for various reasons. Drury was a reporter in Washington at the time and when the book came out people swore up and down that this was the best portrayal of how Washington actually works. But there's more to it. Drury was fanatically anti-Communist, and the Russian ambassadors are just outright there to destroy the United States and anyone who so much as had a conversation about communism in college is morally suspect and should be at the very least forbidden from ever serving in government and preferably exiled to a small island, and I'm only exaggerating slightly. (Historically, as it turns out, the Russians were as scared of us as we were of them) He's also pretty racist, I'm guessing, from the one portrayal of a character of color (the Indian ambassador) and can't tell the difference between a Muslim and a Hindu. 

But the real problematic content is the character of Brig, the senator from Utah, who kills himself after he's outed by the President as having had a gay encounter while serving in the army. This is apparently based on a real suicide (though the President was not involved) and it's a major turning point in the plot so it's hard to miss. Ironically, that's when the book gets very good in terms of being a page turner. 

I can't recommend this book except as a historical oddity. It was a book of its time, and its time has past.