Rating: 2/5

Lord Amis is retiring from the Diplomatic Corps to return home to learn to run the estate and be a comfort to his widowed father. Justin also plans to formally propose to Lady Amabel Fellowes, the perfect mate for a future Earl. Before leaving London, Justin learns his father has remarried and been saddled with a parcel of shabby children! How dare some harlot take advantage of his father! She'll not get any of Justin's inheritance and he'll make sure she knows it. Upon arriving at the estate, he promptly makes a fool of himself and earns the enmity of his new step-siblings (ages 4-20). He can't help but realize just how beautiful his new step-sister Ginnie is. Ginnie is incensed than her new brother hates her family so much. It's one thing to be angry with her but to insult her lovely, kind mother who has done her best to support a large family is outside of enough. Ginnie and her younger siblings vow revenge on the high-in-the-instep Lord. If only his kisses were not so delicious. 

BLEH! This is Carola Dunn's worst novel. The romance is squicky (DUDE! She's your SISTER!) and the hero is a pompous jerk. The children are beyond mischievous and fall into the naughty category. I did not enjoy most of the plot. The parts I did enjoy were when Justin got off his high horse and was kind to the children. Mostly though, this story is a dud. Technically this is a kisses-only Regency but there's more heat and some throbbing body parts than your average 90s Regency. I didn't like that especially considering Ginnie and Justin are now sister and brother even if they're not related by blood. 

I liked sensible Ginnie except for when Justin was kissing her and she lost her head. Since Mr. Webster died 4 years ago Ginnie has been both mother and father to her 8 younger siblings and her mother. Ginnie's mother is a lovely wigeon and it falls on Ginnie to run the household, raise her siblings and manage finances. I liked the way Ginnie makes the best of her difficult situation but she does have a temper and it leads her to make a stupid decision that could have had dangerous consequences. I hated Justin for most of the book. He has his moments and I can see why Ginnie might fall in love with him in those moments, but I couldn't love him. He's rude, mean, nasty, has a hasty temper and plots revenge on the Websters just because he thinks they're beneath him. He acts first, asks questions later. He just can't how how lonely and depressed Lord Wooburn was after his wife died and how having a family again makes him happy. 

Lord Wooburn is a dear, if a bit absent-minded. His bride seems to be simple-minded and I am shocked her husbands take advantage of her body. She has given birth to 9 children and I highly doubt she would have understood where they all came from and how to keep more of them from coming. Ginnie obviously is aware of what married couples do behind closed doors but as an unmarried woman, she isn't supposed to know or comment. Obviously Justin takes after his father in the lover department since Lord and Lady Wooburn seem to be enjoying themselves. 

The children tick the boxes of Georgette Heyer's canon: managing female (Ginnie), lovely simple sister (Lydia), studious brother (Gilbert), outdoorsy brother (Colin), tomboy sister, prissy sister, mischievous boys and precious moppet. Here though they are not charming or cute. The only one I like is Judith because she minds her own business in the stables caring for injured animals. I liked Colin too but he only has one big scene. The twins needed a spanking and to be sent to school- a harsh school where boys are beaten if they misbehave because nothing gets through to these two. Ginnie is guilty of indulging their behavior but they're old enough to know better. Their pranks are mean and while Ginnie made them promise no one would get hurt, the pranks do hurt a bit and hurt people emotionally too. Gilbert will probably turn out all right but he's still a bit immature and encourages the pranks on Lord Amis. 

Naturally, the tonnish characters are not so enjoyable with the exception of Justin's closest friend and his sister. Lady Amabel is NOT a demure, pleasing young lady. Justin should have seen warning bells when she rode out in her own high-perch phaeton. She stops short of actually being a villain and in a way, I feel sorry for her because Justin led her on for years and didn't "come up to scratch." She gossips because she doesn't have any other topic of conversation and it makes her seem important.

 I'm reading more into the story than is in the text. The writing is standard but not up to Dunn's usual Regency romantic comedy fare. I would avoid this one if you like her more witty stories.