Rating: 4/5

(MIGHT UPDATE THIS REVIEW. we shall see.)

The Coral Island was truly a masterpiece. I now understand why it was one of the most well-loved Ballantyne books of its time and even today. The characters were impeccable. I fell in love with them immediately. The storyline was fascinating and well-written. All around, it was fantastic.

Another add to this wonderful book is the Gospel message that R.M. Ballantyne skillfully wove throughout the novel and the character’s lives (Ralph’s in particular).

It was a riveting and intriguing story of three boys trapped on a lonely coral island out in the Pacific Ocean, and the many adventures and perilous happenings that befell them. Suffice to say, I loved it! I am sure it will remain my favorite, or at least one of my favorites, of Ballantyne’s many novels. 

Characters:

Oh, the characters! They were fantastic. Jack, Peterkin, and Ralph were the perfect trio. They worked well together. Scratch that. They worked perfectly together. 

I have to say that thirteen-year-old, Peterkin Gay was my favorite. He was lively, humorous, incredibly energetic, and mischievous. What he said and the way he acted was incredibly hilarious, making for many ‘Laugh out loud’ moments. But he also has a real depth to him that shows on those rare occasions. :)

This book was written in first-person point-of-view, and Ralph Rover is our very own ‘Story-teller’, or narrator. Ralph was philosophical, studious, and absolutely charming. He often trails off into deep patterns of thought, which is quite interesting, and, honestly, kind of fun. Suffice to say, I loved him. (But you really can’t help but love all the boys.)

Jack, the brains and brawn, was the leader. Who knows what would have happened to Ralph and Peterkin had Jack not been on that coral island with them! He showed courage and bravery many times throughout the entire book, and was truly sacrificial. Always the one to whom both younger boys looked to when in doubt (actually, when in trouble), he showed wisdom and always had a plan. :)

Conclusion (sorry, this was a long review):

The Coral Island was a wild and adventurous mix of desert coral islands, dangerous pirates, unmerciful savages, and one crazy journey from England to the Pacific Ocean, intertwined with Godly principles and an ocean-full of humor. It espoused principles such as: fighting for the right and protecting the innocent, which can be rare in books today.

The Coral Island was a fantastic book that I absolutely loved. I recommend it to those who enjoy adventure and historical fiction.

READ THIS BOOK!!! :)