Rating: 5/5

Few people are neutral about Moorcock's "Jerry Cornelius" series. There's a large group who think the author was high on something when he wrote the stories, comparing them to a kind of prose version of T S Elliott's "Waste Land" full of pseudo-clever allusions, softcore porn, meaningless drivel in which nothing actually happens, or simply a series of vignettes which should properly be called writing exercises rather than a coherent novel. Others regard the stories as the definitive new-wave SF, epitomizing the sixties as no other series can, groundbreaking, original, poetic and a genuine new myth for the atomic age. 

Well, like everyone else, I can't sit on the fence with this one. Count the stars. I will give a slight caveat, however - for anyone who likes a good, simple read, with everything spelled out in clear view, or even readers new to Moorcock, not familiar with his concept of "The Eternal Champion", it might be simpler to start with one of this author's more accessible works (The "Dorian Hawkmoon" series maybe) and work up. The Cornelius tetrology, you see, is, erm... "difficult reading"... sometimes, on first reading, it's hard to know exactly what's going on.

So let me try to simplify. Jerry Cornelius is a manifestation of the "Eternal champion" responsible for maintaining the balance between Chaos and Order. This particular incarnation operates in the modern era (at the time the works were written), but since Cornelius and his friends and enemies are able to skip between alternate universes and realities, the phrase "modern era" can be taken with a pinch of salt. Think of Cornelius as a kind of cross between "Dr Who" and James Bond - a secret agent (and former Jesuit Priest) who can travel in time at the cost of frequent amnesia, sometimes acting for Law, and other times for Chaos, aided by a series of weird friends and enemies (who frequently swap sides) and some amazing technology (such as a Rolls Royce converted into a submarine), and who, from time to time, goes into a kind of fugue, and must undergo a period of marine rejuvenation! Oh, and he's also a part-time vampire, an arms dealer, and related to the Wild Hunt, into the bargain! If you think that Moorcock has managed to cram just about every archetype from world mythology into his character, you aren't far wrong. In fact, the character has virtually become "open source" in that other writers have taken him as a template for all kinds of myth figures.

The plot? How long do you have? Essentially, Jerry begins by acting out an earlier Moorcock tale, the first in the "Elric" series, but with a vibra-gun instead of a sword. He accidentally kills his sister during a duel with his drug-addict brother, and spends the rest of the series trying to resurrect her. Meanwhile, he continues his task of trying to maintain the cosmic balance, continually metamorphosing himself and jumping from one reality to another. There's a lot more, though - and by the time you reach the "final" novel in the main tetrology - (All the four "main" novels are anthologized in this volume) you find out that there's even more (or maybe less) to Jerry than meets the eye! That's not the end though - there's a lot more short stories to come after this one, by Moorcock himself and others.

Really, I can't do justice to this - you just have to read Cornelius! Really. 

Oh, and this volume is illustrated by the brilliant Malcolm Dean, if you need any more encouragement!