Rating: 5/5

Sixteen year old Cynthia sneaks out during the night and cuts down Red Wolf, a Sioux man who has been tortured by the residents of a mining town and who they plan to hang the next morning. She leaves him a knife for protection and he uses it to kill one of the miners who was supposed to be guarding him. When she finally comes clean, she and her family become outcasts.

She wanders too far from her house several weeks later and is kidnapped by Sioux. A man named Many Bears initially "claims" her, but upon learning that she is a virgin and that she is the white girl who saved Red Wolf, he doesn't hurt her besides some mild tormenting to save face and "protect" her from the other men until they get back to their village. He considers her making her one of his wives, but his second wife, Flowing Waters, is too jealous and gives him too much grief about it, so he takes Cynthia to the "captive women's hut" and ties her down. Red Wolf eventually comes in and cuts her clothes off while she screams, then informs her that he has bought her from Many Bears and needed to make it sound like he had raped her to convince everyone standing outside that he "claimed" her; he then tells her to fight him while he takes her to his tipi to keep up the charade but promises not to hurt her.

Cynthia briefly helps care for Old Grandmother until she dies. She earns the respect of the tribe when she stays behind with Red Wolf while he grieves. She learns all of the proper life skills for a woman in Sioux society. When Red Wolf drunkenly tries to force himself on her and scares her, he promises to take her back home - but they are attacked by white men who try to rape Cynthia. Red Wolf and Cynthia both have to fight them off, after which they make love and return to the village to marry.

Cynthia remains with the Sioux for a while. She becomes pregnant. The village is attacked by white soldiers. Flowing Waters is raped and mutilated alive in front of Cynthia, and the baby Cynthia tries to save is shot in her arms. The soldiers see her blond hair and "rescue" her. Her family decides to move back East. She gives birth to a son named Freedom.

Seven years later, she marries an attorney named Richard who's running for congress. Over the next 10+ years she learns that he is gay. The Sioux are eventually forced onto reservations, and Red Wolf is informed that Cynthia is alive but is not given any information as to where she might be. He goes to a white school to get an education to help advocate for his people.

Through a twist of fate, Red Wolf shows up to one of Richard's speeches and runs into Freedom, who proceeds to tell him that his mother was a Sioux captive and his father is a man named Red Wolf. He and Cynthia have a secret conversation and agree to meet at his hotel room. She briefly has second thoughts until Richard tells her his lover is back in town. Red Wolf goes back West while Cynthia asks Richard for a divorce; to protect Richard's political reputation, she agrees to take the blame and agrees to be accused of adultery. Freedom goes West with her to try to find Red Wolf.

A sweet ending with a nearly-40yo Red Wolf dressing up in buckskins to pick Cynthia up from the stagecoach because he thought she'd like it, and an 18yo Freedom walking up to his dad and softly saying "father" for the first time.

I absolutely LOVED this.