Rating: 3/5

The war in Europe drawing to a close. After his defeat in the endless Russian plain, Napoleon's empire is crumbling. All of Europe is united against him and the end cannot be that far away. It is against this backdrop that Hornblower, cooling his heels in England, is called back to sea. 

A ship outside the port city of Le Havre has mutinied against its cruel captain. Hornblower is sent to sort out the mess. Complicating matters, the French in Le Havre have offered the mutineers safe harbor. If Hornblower missteps, the mutineers will turncoat and go over to the French, giving Napoleon a great morale boosting victory against the hated English navy. 

Fortunately, in a few sharp moves, Hornblower resolves the crisis and retakes the ship. Further, with the French uncertain as to the status of the former mutineers, he sails into the harbor and more or less occupies the city. The French, more worried about the main Russian, Prussian and English armies can do little more than send a minor force to retake the city. Of course, Hornblower defeats them.

It is here that, despite being onshore, Hornblower and the story starts to feel adrift. Hornblower serves as military governor of Le Havre. The Bourbons are restored. His wife joins him. They go to Paris where he bumps into his old friend and savior (from a few books back) the Count, and, of course, his daughter-in-law, Marie. Barbara goes to Vienna to serve as hostess for her brother (the Duke of Wellington) to negotiate a peace. Rather than be irrelevant, Hornblower decides to visit the Count. The relationship with Marie is rekindled.

And then Napoleon returns to France from Elba. The army abandons the Bourbons and rallies to the once-and-future Emperor. Hornblower is asked by the royal family to organize a resistance, and for the last third of the book he, the Count, Marie, Brown and a band of rag-tag royalists wage a guerrilla war against the French army, tying down troops that could otherwise support Napoleon for the climactic campaign. 

In the end, Marie is killed, the Count and Hornblower are captured. They are tried, found guilty and sentenced to death. Predictably, the morning of the execution, word arrives of Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo. The Bourbon's are once again rulers of France and the captives are freed.

Three stars out of five. I found the story to be much less focused than the others. The book to me felt as if the author was trying to force Hornblower into historical events rather than having those events fall around Hornblower. It felt like two short stories rather than one larger one. And, on a personal level, I simply prefer the swirl and stench of powder and gun-smoke, the rolling of the waves and the action of ship to ship broadsides and boardings.