Rating: 3/5

I keep waffling is it 3+ at three or 3+ at four? So, since I'm waffling, 3+ at 3 seems right.

One where Steele makes the hero almost brutish, but with the same soft center she tends to prefer they have. And brutish because he knows what he wants and goes after it, no compromise, so he's all the angrier when a woman enters his life who upends everything, including his heart. With these they're just harder to reach, to sympathize with, and to read.

Heroine gets pushed around a bit in this one. She's not a pushover, however; more the whirlwind of events gets the better of her, including falling for Yate without wanting to or even knowing it was happening as she fell.

They clang. They spark. They can't stay away from each other, although since Steele gave Tully ye olde "loyalty to a terrible family member to a fault," there's no trust or basis for any at the start. Equaling this, and back to the brutishness, there's zero reason for Tully to trust Yate back at the start, given his plans for her (and his recompense for her perceived misdeeds) is akin to a literal pound of flesh.

Steal from me? Well then, sleep with me to make us even.

JS didn't invent it, but she sure returns to that well more than a few times; her success varies. I found this one on the more successful end, in part because I liked Tully from the start, despite her loyalty fault, and I came to like Yate fairly quickly, despite his outward brutishness.

Of course as things go along, his hard shell cracks and her naivete fades as they get to know one another along with ever-present, potent attraction/tension. You just understand once Tully proves herself and earns Yate's trust, he'll only be gentle and considerate and loving. Oh, but what it takes to get there.

I'm glad the awful brother was banished off-page to France and not dealt with thereafter. And I'm glad the awful other woman from the past was barely mentioned aside the havoc she wreaked. And I liked how the secondary couple were around enough to make an impact, were likable and did their jobs, but weren't there to be spanners in the works. Also that their story wasn't tragic or some "second best" situation, but a matter of fact good relationship as Tully and Yate find their way.

When Yate at last shows his vulnerability it's great, including getting over his cussedness to just love her. As is Tully being both honest, tossing her brother for Yate's trust, and not immediately ready to forgive every last thing simply because he loves her in return. 

There's some abrupt ups and downs in this one but the emotion, and connection for Tully and Yate, remains steady. And that makes all the difference to how well it -- and their earned and rooted for and well, good for them -- worked, overall and in the end.