Rating: 4/5

Jan 7, 11am ~~ Fun read, but lots of things to plot before I do my review, so as usual, it will be asap.

730pm ~~ I watched Mr. Ed when I was a kid, of course of course. But honestly I never paid much attention to Alan Young, who played Wilbur. He was just the guy. I was interested in the horse. 

But it turns out that there was much more to Young than I ever knew. He was a star on radio in his early days; was in a few movies during the last year or two of what was called the Golden Era in Hollywood; was in at the very beginnings of live television long before Mr. Ed came along, even before Lucy!

I had read this book pre-GR, about ten years ago, I imagine, considering where it was buried in my bookcase. Pre-GR also means pre-computer, and there is a difference in the experience of reading a show biz memoir when you can sneak away to YouTube and find the movies people are talking about. The reading project becomes more of a mixed media thing, and this time is no different. I have a list of Alan Young features to enjoy now (or at least to have a look at). 

Back to this book. Young starts out by talking about Mr. Ed and how the show was created and the cast brought together. I also didn't remember from my earlier reading that Walter R. Brooks, who wrote the Freddy The Pig children's books, was the man responsible for creating the original Mr. Ed character. That happened in a series of stories published in various magazines starting in 1937. I did check if there was a collected edition of those stories (of course of course!) but if such a book is out there I didn't find it. Yet.

This book is entertaining and very easy to read. You get to know Alan and the other people involved in the show, such as Ed's trainer Lester. There are also plenty of pictures, with the captions written as if Mr. Ed himself is doing the commentating, which I thought was clever. 

I did snort at a few of Young's statements about horses in general (that "most are lazy and reluctant to respond to orders"), but he redeemed himself when he said that Ed knew 'Wilbur' was a novice. Horses are tremendous judges of character. They can tell before a person ever sets butt in the saddle just how much or how little that person knows, and they will respond accordingly. I don't think this is laziness, it is self-preservation. 

There was a horse on the dude ranch that was a rip snorter of a beastie when we wranglers were on him, but put a child or a beginner aboard and he became the most careful, dog gentle animal on the ranch. The best fun was if a wannabe cowboy came along intending to impress his girlfriend, claiming to be an expert rider. We never believed such people the first time they came. They had to prove themselves to us. We would give them this particular horse and the poor 'cowboy' would come back from his hour's ride with a very red face, usually from embarrassment at not being able to get the horse to do anything, but sometimes from anger for the same reason. That anger dissolved when Joe the boss wrangler would say "It's not the horse, it's the rider."

Then he would point to me and say "SHE can make him run." Luckily whenever that happened I was able to make the horse run or Joe would have been very upset with me. And the final bit of trivia here? The reason I'm babbling about the old days? That horse's name was Eddie.