Rating: 5/5

After 9 years away, Ben Shields comes home to Cemetery Ridge, a once prosperous mining community, now nearly a ghost town. On his way in, Ben sees a funeral procession, escorted by an old friend, Travis Sinclair, now the chief of police. Ben stops to stretch his legs and catch up with Travis, who tells Ben it's Horace they're burying - another close friend of theirs from back in the day. 
Travis tells Ben the official cause of death was a bear attack, but there's something off about the whole thing. The best tracking dogs around refused to set foot in the woods after this "bear." Unknown to anyone but Travis, Horace is the third victim in a string of bizarre attacks. And last but not least, the local doctor ran a full panel of labs on Horace, finding not one trace of protein in his blood - something essential to life. 
Local poacher and the best hunter/tracker in town, Fred Larkin, sets his sights on this "bear," hoping to bag it and make a nice profit. When he gets to the woods where Horace was killed, he finds tracks he's never seen before in his life. They certainly aren't bear tracks; there are three toes with claw marks like those of a dinosaur. By the size and spacing, Fred estimates the creature to be 9 ft tall and weighing approximately 1,000 lbs, walking on two legs. Fred is freaked out, but incredibly excited - for it's not often he gets challenged on a hunt. However, what Fred comes face to face with in the woods that day is not what he was expecting. It's not even of this world. He can hear its voice inside his head, speaking of a "feast," and a blinding white light it emits that paralyzes him. It's only by miracle alone that Fred makes it out of the woods alive that day. 
As more and more horrible deaths plague the citizens of Cemetery Ridge, it becomes obvious to everyone this is no bear. Ben becomes determined to find out the truth about this mystery creature before he goes back home, and starts to rely on his old girlfriend, Nadine. At the library, they discover a newspaper from October 30 + 31st, 73 years prior, stating people in town were being slain by something citizens started calling the "Brain Eater," found dead in the same manner as those that died recently - with holes bored into the center of their foreheads. Ben is confused, but sees a pattern between past and present day, that the killings are taking place on or around Halloween - which is coming up very soon, and they all seem to center around the cemetery.
Will Ben, Nadine, Travis and Fred be able to solve the decades old mystery of the Brain Eater before it kills even more people this Halloween? 

----------------SPOILERS PAST THIS POINT-----------------

So, I love everything I read from David Robbins. His books are always quick, easy and fun reads. But this book drove me nuts at the end cause I got no answers. Where did the Brain Eater come from? Why did it live in the cemetery? What was its connection to the Richard's? Why did water hurt it? Why did it only come out around Halloween? Why was there a 73 year gap between it's appearances? SO MANY QUESTIONS. Other than that, a great book.