Rating: 3/5

The late Colin Wilson is one of those writers I can never decide about: when he's good, he's very, very good, and when he's bad, he's horrid. This book is certainly value for money; it's huge, and if you're at all interested in mysteries, the occult, and general "ghosty stuff" there should be something in it for you. At the outset, I claim myself as an open-minded sceptic. I truly want there to be ghosts, etc in the world, and if you give me enough evidence, I will believe it.

But against all this is Colin Wilson being... Colin Wilson. 

He comes across as almost rabidly anti-science and anti-intellectual in some places (unless said science or intellectuals are supporting his case.) His scathing comments about those who doubt the existence of vampires decry "the usual rationalizations" without successfully refuting them. He has staked his support in known frauds such as the Fox Sisters and Uri Geller (I'm not sure whether this was written before or after Uri was outed publicly as a fraud.) In places, he seems determined to not think through the obvious implications of what he's written. For example, in a chapter that establishes someone's "spirit guide" has told them information that is nonsense, he defaults to "the spirit guide was lying", not "the person who claimed to have a spirit guide was lying."

This all would have still rated this book three stars, but I find Wilson almost painfully bigoted in places, particularly regarding sex and sexuality. His argument in chapter 51, that the plays of William Shakespeare could not have been written by Christopher Marlowe (a viewpoint I support in general) is that "Marlowe's work shows the prudery that is often characteristic of homosexuals - the distaste for crude smut." In chapter 42, he touches on a case where a woman was raped (word usage his own) by orderlies in a mental hospital. He writes that this woman's doctor "began to suspect that the orderlies may not have been entirely to blame" due to her having an apparent second personality or a case of possession by a spirit who 'wanted it.' Wilson seems in full agreement of this notion. 

I don't expect the man's writing to be a bastion of twenty-first century progressive attitudes toward minorities, but these unpleasant (and usually unnecessary/irrelevant) little opinions crept in often enough that it began to be a truly uncomfortable read, rather like Christmas dinner with that one elderly relative who is in the habit of piping up with something racist, sexist, etc. right in the middle of innocuous conversation, putting everyone on edge as to when their next rude remark will show up and how offensive it will be.

Toward the end, I have to admit my mind actually began to wander through some chapters, and this was partly because of Wilson's refusal to use any kind of balance or reasoning in discussing the various topics this book covers. During his discussion of the possible murderer of Mary Rogers, he dismisses the idea that Poe himself was the murderer (a valid and most likely stance), simply on the reasoning that "there have been plenty of alcoholic men of genius... not a single example of one who has ever committed a murderer." Between such staunch but rather baseless logic and the little tidbits of bigotry throughout, this was a much more tedious read than it needed to be.