Rating: 5/5

In the time of Batista and the revolution in Cuba, there was another dictator, as bad or worse, ruling in the Dominican Republic. His name was Trujillo, and his preferred way of keeping his power was murdering anyone who challenged him, spoke a word against him, or displeased him in any way. In the midst of this repression, we find the four Mirabal sisters, Minerva, Dede, Patria and Maria-Teresa (Mate). This fictional account of their lives is riveting and oh so bittersweet. 

The sisters have become known in history as Los Mariposas (the butterflies), but each of these women was a distinct and different person. Each was motivated by a different urge and desire. Each was trying to find her own voice. But above all, they were for one another, with one another, loved one another. Their bravery ranged from raw courage to a simple inability to desert someone well-loved. That they put aside their own safety for the preservation of the collective serves as an echo of what true revolution is. What true defiance means. I wonder at their strength and feel cowed by it. 

When I finished this book, I was literally shaking with sadness and anger. Knowing it is based upon real events makes it all the more poignant, and Alvarez has done a magnificent job of breathing life back into these women who were martyred for the cause of freedom in the Dominican Republic. She alternates between the points of view of the sisters, and in doing so brings each of them to life equally. While Minerva is the star of the revolution, each of the other sisters brings her own personality, fears and desires to the table and we, the readers, are handed a feast. At the outset, we know the fate of these women, but the old axiom that the journey is more important than the destination could not be more true than when applied here.

In her postscript to my edition, Julia Alvarez acknowledges having merged actual events and imposed her own interpretation onto others. She states, “I sometimes took liberties--by changing dates, by reconstructing events, and by collapsing characters or incidents. For I wanted to immerse my readers in an epoch in the life of the Dominican Republic that I believe can only finally be understood by fiction, only finally be redeemed by the imagination. A novel is not, after all, a historical document, but a way to travel through the human heart.

She has achieved her goal admirably. I felt the beating of these hearts and at some point in the story their heartbeats seemed to merge with my own.