Great book. Basic instructions on NLP, transcript of a seminar. 

Rapport, pacing and reframing. 
By creating rapport, I can establish a congruent communication channel with the unconscious, being the biggest chunk of the iceberg of mental processing. The unconscious regulates all the bodily functions for survival, choice, pain, pleasure, etc; making direct contact with the most powerful part of a person, I can create change / influence in the most effective manner. 
There are many ways to create rapport: matching (pacing) the breath of the person, matching the predicates they use (visual, auditory, kinesthetic), blinking etc.. basically, matching the unconscious. The eyes show how a person process information, and in which ways they are most dominant: UP (left or right) = Visual / SIDES (left or right) = Auditory / DOWN (left or right) = Kinesthetic. These are basic patterns, and can be different from person to person. I will know for sure by asking the right questions and observing attentively how they 'go inside' and access the information to receive an answer. 

Refraiming can be done by being observant of the process it takes for a person to access the information, and anchoring a certain state to a cue, that can be visual, auditory or kinesthetic. For example, I can ask a person if they have ever made a right decision in their life, right when they access that information I observe how they do it (Visual, Auditory, Kinesthetic), and I will know how they make a 'right decision' in their experience; I can 'anchor' that feeling by saying something, inputting an image (mental or external) or by touch, and every time I bring that anchor, this person will access the same 'feeling' of 'right decision'. 

 
" You will always get answers to your questions insofar as you have the sensory apparatus to notice the responses. And rarely will the verbal or conscious part of the response be relevant."

"You need only three things to be an absolutely exquisite communicator. We have found that there are three major patterns in the behavior of every therapeutic wizard we'Ve talked to—and executives, and salespeople. The first one is to know what outcome you want. The second is that you need flexibility in your behavior. You need to be able to generate lots and lots of different behaviors to find out what responses you get. The third is you need to have enough sensory experience to notice when you get the responses that you want.If you have those three abilities, then you can just alter your behavior
until you get the responses that you want."

"The meaning of your communication is the response that you get. If you can notice that you are not getting what you want, change what you're doing. But in order to notice that, you have to clearly distinguish between what you are getting from the outside, and how you are interpreting that material in a complex manner at the unconscious level, contributing to it by your own internal state"

"In other words, you need a good unconscious systematic repertoire of patterns for each choice point that you have that's going to come up repetitively in your work: How do I establish rapport with this other human being? How do I respond in a situation in which they don't have information consciously and verbally to respond to my question? How do I respond to incongruity? "

"If what you are doing is not working, change it. Do anything else."

"Pacing or mirroring. To the extent that you can match another person's behavior, both verbally and non-verbally, you will be pacing their experience. Mirroring is the essence of what most people
call rapport, and there are as many dimensions to it as your sensory experience can discriminate. You can mirror the other person's predicates and syntax, body posture, breathing, voice tone and tempo, facial expression, eye blinks, etc.
There are two kinds of non-verbal pacing. One is direct mirroring. An example is when I breathe at the same rate and depth that you breathe. Even though you're not conscious of that, it will have a profound impact upon you. Another way to do non-verbal pacing is to substitute one non-verbal channel for another. We call that "cross-over mirroring." There are two kinds of cross-over mirroring. One is to cross over in the same channel. I can use my hand movement to pace your breathing movement—the rise and fall of your chest. Even though the movement of my hand is very subtle, it still has the same effect. It's not as dramatic as direct mirroring, but it's very powerful. That is using a different aspect of the same channel: kinesthetic movement"

"Reframing Outline
••»
(1) Identify the pattern (X) to be changed.
(2) Establish communication with the part responsible for the
pattern.
(a) "Will the part of me that runs pattern X communicate with
me in consciousness?"
(b) Establish the "yes-no" meaning of the signal.
(3) Distinguish between the behavior, pattern X, and the intention
of the part that is responsible for the behavior.
(a) "Would you be willing to let me know in consciousness what
you are trying to do for me by pattern X?"
(b) If you get a "yes" response, ask the part to go ahead and
communicate its intention.
(c) Is that intention acceptable to conscidusness?
(4) Create new alternative behaviors to satisfy the intention. At the
unconscious level the part that runs pattern X communicates
its intention to the creative part, and selects from the alternatives
that the creative part generates. Each time it selects an alternative
it gives the "yes" signal.
(5) Ask the part "Are you willingto take responsibility for generating
the three new alternatives in the appropriate context?"
(6) Ecological check. "Is there any other part of me that objects to
the three new alternatives?" If there is a "yes" response, recycle
to step (2) above."

"One of the things that I think distinguishes a really exquisite communicator from one who is not, is to be precise about your use of language: use language in a way that gets you what you want. People who are sloppy with language get sloppy responses."