Rating: 2/5

I don't think I'm going to be good friends with Marion Chesney's (and her alteregos') books.

This one was, for me, a dollar/euro store Jane Austen. It did not have any depth. It was written in an entertaining and easy to read way, I am going to give it that, but it was written quite poorly. It was REALLY "tell, not show". It was literally spoonfed to us what each character was like.

What I had most of my issues with were the characters, their motivations and their personalities. I like unlikeable main characters - when they are unlikeable for a REASON and it is shown that their flaws are flaws. In this case, I found that Minerva's flaws were almost shown as positives, or maybe sometimes just used for comedic effect... but they were mostly shown as "but look at how virtuous she is" (which in the end, she wasn't even...). I LOOOOVE me some virtuous characters usually, but hers was in an "I'm better than everyone else and it gives me a free pass to be rude"... as if rudeness becomes non-rudeness magically if it is done by a virtuous person. Also, her 'suitors"... of course, the only person who liked her "fantastic" personality was the one who was good-looking... all the others were so conceited and of course, butt ugly (but thought they were the hottest things(...
I found the other characters really flat, to an extent I did not believe the story (moustache-twirling cartoon villains, the trope of the non-virtuous comic priest etc.). Some of the events were just so dumb, too (someone accidentally entering someone else's room and they start kissing all of a sudden without looking at who they hell they are smooching with). There were some inconsistencies, too... Minerva does not know shit about London, but she knows who the best shooter in London is. Yeah right.

I also found Lady Godolphin's character too farce-ish, and also, some of her behaviour did not make sense. Sometimes she was clearly working against Minerva's case. Annabelle was really cliché, too. Also, she was written as a good sister, even if she is unlike Minerva and is too flirty for her own good... and the ending... I don't want to even think about it.