Rating: 1/5

Blue-collar snooker champion from the "rough" North of England falls in lust with posh, sophisticated, London-girl-about-town journalist, and she with him. They jump into bed then marry in haste only to both repent with even more haste. The girl actually got cold feet after their tacky Vegas wedding (which they rushed into after they had a fight about him wining and dining a big-bosomed blonde at the casino!) 

After a few days in his hick Northern town, she realizes they have nothing in common except for their combustible bedroom antics and they might not even like each other very much out of bed, let alone love each other. He has expectations that she is going to leave her exciting London life to be a stay at home wife and mom. She is bored, angry, resentful and all of a sudden hates snookers whereas she seemed fascinated by it when they first met. At the first opportunity that he leaves town for one of his snooker tournaments, she sneaks out and leaves him with only a cold little Dear John note propped up against the mirror. Then, she gets miffed that he didn't bother coming after her. 

Two years later, she shows back up to ask him for a divorce because she plans to marry an older, suave diplomat OM. She suggests they get a quickie divorce in Nevada which will be faster than her having to wait the requisite 3 years and some change under English law. He agrees to cooperate if she does him the favor of helping to break up his situationship with a clingy OW. The “wife” is only too happy to oblige and gets rid of the OW with chilling precision. My skin crawled for real reading that scene! 

After they dispose of the OW, H and h end up in be. The brazen hussy then has the gall to have a cozy dinner for 3 with her husband and her fiance minutes after they did the deed in her bedroom. Truly Tacky Trainwreck! She breaks up with her fiance but does not tell her husband because she still wants to join him on their quickie-divorce-trip to Nevada in the hopes of seducing him into a reconciliation. The cow actually tells her husband she never loved the OM and used his proposal as an excuse to see her husband again to see if there was a chance they would reconcile (or to put it crudely, to get laid again, cause that's about the only thing that they missed about each other in 2 years!). The husband wants none of it and suggest an affair until they get each other out of their system which, as tacky and disgusting and cold of an offer as it is, it is actually the most rational course to take with these two knuckleheads.

 It takes a near drowning of the idiotic wife, who I am convinced did this on purpose, for her husband to rescue her then avow his "love" back to her and agree to reconcile. Meanwhile I did not see an ounce of romanticism, love, even simple affection or tenderness between the two. More like two wild tigers in heat, as likely to claw each other to death as to mate. It really made me laugh that the wife's final parting shot is that she stopped taking the pill and is looking forward to making a traditional home with lotsa lotsa children for her man. The woman did not have an ounce of maternal love in her bones and the man was a philanderer who has a floozie in every snooker-competition across the globe. Their traumatized children are likely to end up in future Harlequins as emotionally stunted, rage-filled characters with mommy and daddy issues galore :(