Rating: 4/5

Excellent. I read this book immediately after Mabel Esther Allan's  The Horns of Danger, which is also inspired by the Horn Dance of Abbot's Bromley. This story, however, was much deeper and richer, centering on the dance and mythology. 

In sharp contrast to Allan's story, here the Vicar of Hagworthy decides that a reinstallation of a centuries(millenia-?)-old tradition could bring in tourists and therefore much needed funds to help reroof the old church. Keen on the idea, he and another woman in the village work tirelessly with the local teenagers to come up with something worthy for the village's summer Fete.

I found all of the characters to be engaging and either relatable or readily identifiable as a personality type. Here, the insular farmers and local blacksmith are dead set against the reinstatement of the ritualistic dance, and apart from gruff reproofs, never give much information as to the source of their objections, heightening the mystery.

I liked Lucy and Kester very much - their characters were well-developed, and I found the interplay between them very natural. The teenage angst and sensitivities were palpable, and I'm glad there wasn't an awkward romantic element foisted upon what I felt was a very realistic interplay between these two. I also loved that strain between clever Kester and the rather dim Norton-Smith sisters, Caroline and Louise, and the differences that had grown up between the sisters and Lucy since the last summer she spent at her Aunt Mabel's in Hagworthy. I was also very fond of Aunt Mabel, the distracted and asocial botanist.

The descriptions of the fictional village of Hagworthy, below the coombs of the Exmoor, were beautiful and haunting. You could feel the heat in the air, and smell the overpowering Meadowsweet, the petrol exhaust from the cars, the slimy film on the surface of the drying river. I desperately want to go to Somerset and search for ammonite fossils from the Liassic period now, too.

A nice, quick read, complete with sweet sketches depicting the characters in their 1970s clothing, and one that made me nostalgic for a time where you had to shore up a supply of library books for summer reading on rainy days (and on sunny days, too, to annoy people like Mrs. Norton-Smith!). Not that I had ever experienced such a time, but it made me wish my childhood had been just like Lucy's, family drama aside. Or at least, that I could also have spent lazy summer days in Hagworthy, exploring the seaside, the woods, the moorland; racing my bike heedlessly down steep and blind country lanes, and taking naps on pillowy heather and bracken in the sunshine, and never knowing the time of day or being constantly connected to anything other than the natural world around you.

If you choose to GIVE THIS BOOK AS A GIFT, I would strongly recommend pairing it with a small, real horseshoe (spoiler if I elaborate). Or an ammonite fossil. Or a full set of stag's antlers to mount on the wall, though that might prove a bit scary in the small hours of hot summer evenings.

This book was almost a 5 star for me, and I liked it so well that I have added the rest of Lively's YA books to my to-read shelf.

Reread, 7Sept2025 - Still love it. :) Love Lucy and Kester's friendship and its complications, love her Aunt (Lively writes some great aunts - see also The House in Norham Gardens), and I love how Lively writes. She absolutely nails the half-seen but definitely real object of terror stuff. Never quite "plausible deniability", but that haziness that happens after the fact, that makes it all more terrifyingly real.
"It weren't never a dance!"
:S