Rating: 5/5

This is a massive (599 pages!) work that spans Lippmann’s long life, from his birth in 1889 to his death in the last month of 1974, and it not only serves as a superb history of his amazing life but also as a thoughtful inquiry into many of the United States’ most challenging moments.

	For most alive today, the name of Walter Lippmann probably draws a blank. But for older persons like me, I have vivid memories of reading his columns during the 1960s when he was still writing prolifically. For decades, he was the premier newspaper columnist whose writings appears in major newspapers throughout the United States. He wrote vigorously and insightfully about the important matters of his time. 

 His focus was primarily on politics and on the major issues and conflicts of his lifetime, but his scope was both wide and deep. He was something of an intellectual patrician – his suspicions of, and doubts about, the ability of the average citizen to understand and make intelligent decisions concerning important matters reflected this – but he was also something of a philosopher who struggled to discern, and then communicate through his many major books, how and why people thought and behaved as they did.

	He was a confident of every major American president from Theodore Roosevelt until Lyndon Johnson, the only exceptions being the Republicans Harding, Coolidge, Hoover and Nixon, and the Democrat Truman. Because of this, and since he and his second wife kept such voluminous notes, we have some fascinating details about, and insights into, these fascinating men and the lives that they also led.

	Moreover, although he never held public office, he knew, was befriended, and his opinions closely attended to by major political and social figures throughout Europe, including Moscow. 

	Although often characterized as a “liberal” by his contemporaries, Lippmann was a tad more complicated than that. While he did share the Progressive sentiments and admired the achievements of such men as Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, he also entertained classic conservative opinions, too, especially as to the size and role of the government, the proper place of business and business leaders, and the abilities of the people. Moreover, his positions were not static; his involvement with major questions throughout his life saw him experiencing a wide gamut of emotions and positions, some of which were quite contradictory to those he had espoused earlier.

	But this is to also say that Lippmann was too honest to be rigid, to open to new information and to honest examination (and re-examination) of policy outcomes to be inflexible, and too sensitive to condemn or abandon honest players in what was, after all, a fluid, dynamic, and information-confusing environment.

	In this book you will reexperience the hope of the Progressives, the domestic achievements of such men as Teddy and Frankly Roosevelt, Wilson, Kennedy and Johnson, as well as the huge mistakes made at Versailles after World War I and following World War II when, after FDR’s death, Truman turned to advisors who were ardent anti-communists and suspicious of Stalin and the Soviet Union.

	Much as is the case with each human life, early surges of hope and accomplishment are often followed with extensive “dry” periods in which earlier optimism and progress now seem to have been more delusion than real. And then there are the times when, in Yeats’ words, the center cannot hold and it all seems to come apart at the seams: World War I, rise of the fascists and the incredible failure of the Great Powers to stop them when they could have, and the stupid hubris of the United States in misunderstanding the “lessons” of the 20th century and assuming that this nation had the opportunity and responsibility to be the World’s Policeman, leading us into the very dangerous Cold War period, the disaster of Vietnam, the stupidities of Iraq and Afghanistan, and the repeated mis readings of our leaders in which nationalism and spheres of interest were mistakenly seen to be evidence of communist subversion and plots to “take over the world.” 

	All this, and more, you will find in these gripping pages. Because the narrative is almost always in the “now” of first-person documentation, the book has an amazing you are there feeling to it, an immediacy which makes events of the now distant past hauntingly part of the present, too. And there were so many times when I felt that maybe, just this one time, things will turn out differently, we will avoid that mistake and seize the moment….. even if, of course, such might-have-beens are already part of the receding past.

	The author of this book, an eminent American historian who only recently died, writes about Lippmann sympathetically, but not uncritically. His extensive research into, and citations from, primary documents allows us to share Lippmann’s perspectives, his emotions, his doubts, and his very human susceptibility to error.

This is amazing work of history, and an instructive one about how consistently we humans, we Americans at least, make the same damn mistakes over and over again!