Rating: 5/5

Book Eight of the Poldark Series, The Stranger from the Sea takes place ten years after Book Seven, The Angry Tide. I was concerned that this would mean an abrupt transition from the story of Ross and Demelza to that of the next generation. I have had this happen with other sagas and found it disconcerting. Not to fear, Winston Graham knows precisely how to tell a story with continuity and progress mixed in perfect proportions.

Life has continued apace since we left Ross at a moment of sadness, but revelation, and Ross now finds himself in a very respectable, but not affluent, position:

”He had made little money. But over the years they had continued sufficiently affluent to live a comfortable life. As he said to Demelza, the most important thing was to strike a balance: poverty and riches each in their own way caused unhappiness. With money, the way to be happy was to continue to have almost enough.”

I was struck by how much truth there is to that. And, within this novel, we get a glimpse of both the horrors of extreme poverty and the decadence of unearned wealth. I am happy to say that Ross and Demelza have raised lovely children, smart and unassuming and in so many ways reflective of both their parents. I became immediately as interested in the futures of Jeremy and Clowance as I had been in that of Ross, Demelza, Elizabeth, George, Dwight and Caroline.

This installment reminds me particularly of Jane Austen. If you enjoy her witty look into the depths of societal classes, this book will resonate with you. It is the time in which class distinctions are collapsing due to the influx of new money, and the time when the aristocracy is perhaps most fervent to hold on to its position and power. 

As always there are difficulties in love. People can never fall in love with only the right people and, even today, there are often obstacles not of our own making.

	She helped tighten one of the girths. ‘I know you have been--greatly upset; and I cannot help you. It grieves me that I cannot help you. I can’t even give you advice!’
	‘Nobody can’
	‘For you would not take it. Quite right. It is hopeless for older people to tell younger ones--particularly their own children--that they have been through the same thing. Such information is no use at all! It bounces off one’s own grief--or jealousy or distress. If we are all born the same we are also all born unique--we all go through torments nobody else has ever had.”

Another bit of the human condition I could well relate to. Don’t we all want to save our children from pitfalls, but isn’t it human nature for each man to make his own mistakes and pay his own penalties...and isn’t that, in truth, the only way anyone finds their way and their own happiness.

Ross fails to see Jeremy for the man he is, capable and interested and daring. Again, I think Winston Graham has seen into the soul of mankind. We so often miss that which is most essential and best in those we are close to; we often view our children as children long after we should have seen them as adults. And, in the way he has often failed to appreciate Demelza, Ross is prone to failing to recognize the value of those who love him most. There is much, I would contend, about Jeremy that is Ross. That fearlessness and drive is there waiting for a place to commit itself, and the similarities sometimes make for less instead of more understanding.

And, lastly, we see that Ross and Demelza are no longer young themselves. They are well along their journey and, while not doddering on old age, we clearly see that they are closer to the end than they now are to the beginning.

”And who would have thought Lady Landsdowne was three months forward? I wish I were. I wish Jeremy was three again like her son. I wish I was twenty-six like her and it was all to come again. Life...it slips away like sand out of a torn envelope. Well, I’m still not exactly old. But it hurst me to see Ross limp and the lines about his jaw, and many of my friends sick or old or dead.”

Ah, another passage that seems written for my life and my age. I hear you, Demelza, but oh it has been a wonderful life, full of events that have warmed and torn you, and sworn to your zest for living it.