Rating: 4/5

There is a strong debate regarding the introduction of sex education in schools in Romania. I would make all the people opposing this measure read this book. Even if it was written a few centuries ago, not much has change in certain places and families. Widespread ignorance regarding basic knowledge of the reproductive apparatus and of the way babies are made should be our main concern. Not the idiotic fear that all children will turn gay (lesbians are ok) or men will have children or whatever. Romania is the country with most adolescent mothers in Europe. Why? Because nobody told them where the vagina / uterus is and how the whole thing works. I don’t even mention that they have no idea how to use protective measures or are bullied against them by men. It is still a shame to discuss these normal topics in many families, especially in the country. Why do I believe this book should be read by people who are against sex education? All the drama that is Tess life begins from one small mistake that could have been avoided if only someone told her how to protect her innocence. Tess was weak and had no skills to protect herself from men because she was uneducated in the matter and she stood no chance when the predator came. 

Tess Durbeyfield is a young, poor woman living in a village in Southern England. However, she is very beautiful and young men start to notice her. One day, her lazy and drunk father is informed by the village minister, Parson Tringham that he is related with an old wealthy family, D'urbervilles. Smelling easy money, Tess’ parents encourage Tess to visit D'urbervilles estate. The house was inhabited only by a blind widow and her son, Alec D'urbervilles. After Tess tells Alec about her relation with him, he mockingly addresses her as cousin and later invites her to work for them. Tess is reluctant to accept, but her mother insists. Tess soon realises they are not actually related and she is trying hard to escape Alec’s insistent advances. One fatidic night she fails in her resolve, without really knowing what happened and from there her life becomes a nightmare. There will be glimpses of happiness but that moment will mark all her ultimately unhappy life. 

This book is a drama, there is no doubt about it. However, the writer somehow manages not to overwhelm the reader with despair. There is a bit of humour, some hopeful and happy moments which make the sad parts of the story bearable. There were a bit too many religious in this novel and some repetitive episodes but all in all it was a classic I enjoyed. What made this book extraordinary was that Thomas Hardy, who is a man, managed to write so well the plight of women of his time.