Rating: 4/5

"I am David." Along with being the story's title, it is also the most repeated phrase in this book. How can we actually find who we are? David proved that even through suffering the hardest trials we can still have enjoyable experiences and learn that life can really be good, we just have to find the good ourselves. Anne Holm outdid herself in this brilliant and touching novel.

 12-year old David escapes a concentration camp after being held prisoner his whole life. After seeing the same scenes, objects, and people every day for 12 years, what would you think of the world seeing it for the first time? Armed with very little to help him survive his long journey to Copenhagen, Denmark, he learns so many things spiritually, physically, and mentally. Along with learning new objects' and places' names, he learns to trust, love, and seek help for the first time. He is persistent and shows courage by learning as much as possible to him and even meeting new people such as Maria, another very important character. With her help, he learns how to smile again and to learn to trust. After many hardships and near-death experiences, he finally makes it to Denmark and finds his mom to be reunited after 12 long, brutal years.

 So, when I first saw this book, I didn't think it was the type of book I'd actually like. First of all, it was based off the war (which really aren't my favorite kinds of books), and it was a low reading level. However, it had many deep lessons and things hidden inside such as the fact that David was so quiet and mysterious. Although he seemed to know so little about the world, he actually knew much more than an average adult because of his time spent in the concentration camp. "Trust no one" (page 142) was one of his main thoughts in the concentration camp which is very understandable considering what happened in those camps. He eventually learned how to trust again, which is a very advanced lesson to learn, many of us still need to learn how. So although this book seems to fit the ages of childhood to youth, I think it would be good for all ages. It is interesting and simple, yet it brings out a different aspect of the war that I never would have considered before reading this book.

 Overall, I really liked this book. My favorite thing about it was probably how he narrated it. It seemed like we, as the readers, were always stuck inside his head. He was always thinking and always pondering on what he wanted to know and what he did know. I love 1st person narration so it made it even better - he found out by his wise quiet that persistence brings success and that love can, in time, be learned. This was a very good book, and it left me feeling satisfied and happy with the ending.