Rating: 5/5

Some context: I have always considered myself a feminist, from the first time I heard the word around age 10. In junior high I became a loyal subscriber of "New Moon" and vehement despiser of "Teen," and after my parents went to bed I'd sneak into online chat rooms to assume the identity of a 27 year old veteran named Roger who was staunchly anti-war and pro-choice. (Turned out people were much more willing to engage with him than a 14 year old girl, in a pretty rad reverse to-catch-a-predator move). In high school and college I diligently volunteered, marched, and debated, I wore loud buttons and t-shirts and when I first heard a boy refer to his girlfriend as his "partner" it was like the skies opened and angels sang and I had to stop myself from just leaning in for a nonconsensual soul make-out because this guuuuuuuuy!

What I'm trying to say is, I picked up this book at the age of 31 as a member of the choir. I picked up this book as historical artifact, from the 60s and maybe even a little quaint, something that might help me better understand the subplots of Mad Men. 

Then: this book changed my life. 

So that happened.

I actually can't think of any other book I have ever read that has affected me this deeply. In my life's timeline there is now pre-this-book and post-this-book, which I can say about 0 other books so far. Granted, it also fell into my hands at a perfect time: about 10 years out of college. 

10 years spent slowly approaching fashion magazines (look, what am I supposed to do with this dumb hair), 10 years scrolling through Pinterest, blogs, watching online commercials; seeing film and TV plotline after plotline with the same boilerplate gender dynamics and definitions of romance and success and happiness and to start feeling the miasma of culture inevitably seeping into my belief systems and sense of self in a way that was both soothing and vaguely discomfiting at the same time. And to start approaching a time in my life when marriage doesn't seem so crazy, and starting to envision what I'd like that relationship to look like. 

The Feminine Mystique is most well known as a feminist manifesto, but to pigeon-hole and possibly dismiss it for this reason would be a regrettable mistake. It's an impeccably researched and reported tome on society, roles, and the capacity for fulfillment within the individual. It is 100% pro-family, pro-romantic-relationships, and pro-men, a tone which is strongly carried throughout the book only to be directly stated in the author's epilogue; if anything, individuals could in all fairness be taken MORE to task in this book, which its afterword by Anna Quindlen mentions. But Friedan adeptly plays equal parts historian, sociologist, psychoanalyst, statistician, reporter, and strong advocate, quoting countless interviews she conducted across American high schools, colleges, and suburbia. She spoke to the heads of magazines, hospitals, and schools. She got access to the slick underbelly of advertising agencies and the research used to direct their campaigns. 

Fom an advertising 1945 survey she quotes (dividing women into 3 categories and their usefulness to the manufacturer: "The True Housewife Type," "The Career Woman," and "The Balanced Homemaker"):

The moral of the study was explicit: "Since the Balanced Homemaker represents the market with the greatest future potential, it would be to the advantage of the appliance manufacturer to make more and more women aware of the desirability of belonging to this group. Educate them through advertising that it is possible to have outside interests and become alert to wider intellectual influences (without becoming a Career Woman). The art of good homemaking should be the goal of every normal woman."

The frank declarations of profit motivation and manipulation can be shocking, even taken in their historical context (another quote from an advertising report: "It might be possible to suggest through advertising that not to take advantage of all 12 uses of X Mix is to limit your efforts to give pleasure to your family. A transfer of guilt might be achieved.") It may seem outrageous and impossible by today's standards, but just as our marketing today wears a more nuanced and subtle garb of the Mystique, so perhaps has our language in setting its boundaries -- to the point where it seems like it shouldn't be a problem at all. Women's rights? Of course we're all for women's rights! Look at this sassy main female character, solving crimes (in her sexy boots and tinyshorts)! Look at that presidential candidate (and this unflattering photo of all her chins, she's aging it's so shameful)! It's a recognizable but more complicated insidiousness, veiled in Girl Power and allegedly shattered glass ceilings and photoshopped limbs and self-righteous rape jokes and slut-shaming and still, still the question, "what shame is there in 'occupation: housewife'?" 

The main takeaways from this book are for everyone, regardless of gender/race/class/sexuality: it's our passions, autonomy, and endless drive to further our knowledge and self-actualize that make us fully developed human beings -- our best selves in society, in love, in our families, and alone. And to stunt that growth to full potential is a foot-binding of the mind. At worst this is a kind of death, at best a "comfortable concentration camp."

If women do not put forth, finally, that effort to become all that they have it in them to become, they will forfeit their own humanity. A woman today who has no goal, no purpose, no ambition patterning her days into the future, making her stretch and grow beyond that smalls core of years in which her body can fill its biological function, is committing a kind of suicide. ...The terror she feels is real, if she has no place in that world. ... Only by such a personal commitment to the future can American women break out of the housewife trap and truly find fulfillment as wives and mothers -- by fulfilling their own unique possibilities as separate human beings.

Incredible writing, incredible reporting, and about so much more than housewives. Everything that has been uneasily, wordlessly hovering in the periphery: now a nonstop lightbulb over the head.