Rating: 4/5

Although it lacked all the excitement, drama, glamour and awesomeness of These Old Shades and Devil's Cub, Regency Buck was still highly enjoyable and well worth reading. I instantly fell for the hero, Lord Worth, who was as handsome as he was irritating, and as dashing as he was manipulative. Yes, I wanted to shake him up a great many times and command him to stop driving poor Judith up the wall, but he was such an interesting and fun character to read about, that I could not but like him a lot. His way of calling Judith Clorinda was a-do-ra-ble!

Judith was also pretty awesome; I loved her kickass side and her rebelliousness against certain rules and fashions of her time, as well as her stormy relationship with her guardian. I also liked the fact that she wasn't portrayed as being perfect (pretty, rich girls that are faultless become annoying within no more than 50 pages or so). She had a very naïve side and was extremely easily provoked (especially by Lord Worth). Her loving tenderness towards her younger brother Peregrine was very touching; you could tell how much she loved him and how he meant to her. Being her only immediate relative, it was understandable that she was thus devoted to him, even though he wasn't a particularly engaging character.

What I enjoyed the most about this novel - beside the love story - was all the description of clothing, events, and fashions/manners of time. I loved how Heyer had references to Lord Byron and his poems, and to Jane Austen and Sense and Sensibility. And the fact that Beau Brummel was a character, and a close friend of Judith's was pretty cool too. Heyer even had the Prince Regent and some of the royal Dukes appear as characters in the novel. I personally love the Regency period, so I was happy with all the descriptions and historical figures. Wasn't too crazy about the numerous descriptions of the Pavilion and some such places however, as my vocabulary isn't enlarged enough to permit me to understand all the architectural terms, but I had been able to picture it better, I think I would have enjoyed these parts more, rather than finding them boring. 

The book is a little long for what it is, certain parts were dragging on and became a bit boring. I'm not an athletic person, nor am I in the least interested in sports, so there was a little too much boxing/racing for me.

Regency Buck is a bit unusual compared to the other Heyers I've read, mainly because she decided to focus more on the manners and rules of the upper class nobility, instead of having her main characters get involved in abduction, gambling, drinking, sword fighting, cross-dressing, etc... Yes, much of that stuff does happen, but not all within 2 chapters, like in some of her other novels (for example, The Corinthian), were about a million things happen within 20 pages. All the events in Regency Buck was a lot more spaced out, which gave the novel a more sober feel.

I also loved all the snuff box issues. I had always been intrigued with the whole taking snuff affair (I seriously had no clue what it meant to "take snuff" the first time I read about that...I eventually thought they were doing drugs!) and found it really cool that the Earl had a room where he made his own, and even offered to get some for Judith (I didn't know that women could take snuff too, I thought it was just a guy thing).

Honestly I love Georgette Heyer so much, she saved me many times from painful hours of agonizing thoughts and worries... Her books are my favourite comfort read.

Now, where is An Infamous Army?!?!?!!!!?!? My library doesn't have it!!! I'll have to order it on Amazon as soon as possible! 

I still can't figure out why I didn't order it at the same time as I did the three books that preceded it??? When I knew that it was a serie?? Why am I doing this to myself!!

I can't wait to meet up again with my dear Alastair people &lt;3!!!