Rating: 3/5

I've got some GR friends who are big Madeleine Brent fans, and I really enjoyed Golden Urchin, so I was excited to see that my local library had a couple more of her (his*) books, which are historical romance/adventure books written in the 70's and 80's.

Stormswift starts out with a bang: Jemimah Lawley is a young woman whose parents were killed, 2 1/2 years before the book begins, in the Kabul, Afghanistan massacre of the British of 1879 (shout-out to The Far Pavilions lovers here), when Jemimah was 17. Jemimah escapes Kabul with a servant, but is quickly captured and sold to a brutal tribal king, who hasn't been having any luck having children and was told by one of his shamans that he needed to try marrying a European woman.

The book doesn't pull its punches here: the king "marries" Jemimah, beats her into submission, tries his best to get her pregnant, and casts her aside in disgust when that doesn't work (luckily the guy is shooting blanks). Jemimah's been working as a servant since, keeping her head down, but now another local king--an even worse guy than the first king--wants to give her a try. Her current master, a local doctor, decides to help her escape, and hands her over to a peddler who promises to deliver her to the British.

This first part was exciting and compelling reading. Things slow down a bit when Jemimah gets to England to reclaim her heritage, but there are some interesting and unexpected twists and turns in the plot. I don't know that any of them are total shockers, and some of them are a little (okay, a lot) far-fetched, but I was going along for the ride and having a good time . . . until I got about 75 pages from the end and the love story veered off in a direction that I wasn't expecting or hoping for.

*somewhat spoilerish discussion follows* 

Basically there are two good men in love with Jemimah, and the one she fell in love with isn't the one I loved. I just never felt a whole lot of emotion for the guy Jemimah loves: the book tells you that she's fallen in love with him but I just wasn't feeling it, maybe because I'd already gotten emotionally invested in Guy #1. The book totally warns you this is happening--no surprises here--but I still kept hoping she'd change her mind. And then the ending just drove the final stake into my heart. So I was feeling rather grumpy when I finished. 

Here's the deal: If I'm viewing Stormswift simply as a rather better-than-average romance novel, it ultimately disappointed me, because I wasn't into the guy Jemimah chooses. And from a literary point of view, it just didn't have the level of depth and complexity that a novel needs to make me suck up whatever romantic disappointments I might have, and love the book for its literary qualities, like, say, Rebecca.

Some of my GR friends (hi, Dorcas and Tweety) feel quite differently about this book so, as always, your mileage may vary.

*Madeleine Brent was a pseudonym for Peter O'Donnell, best known for the Modesty Blaise series.