Rating: 3/5

Long ago and far away when something Lesbian meant it was from the isle of Lesbos there lived a famed poet and songstress Sappho. So scant are the actual facts about her life, it's an author's ideal playpen. Though one may muse on just how much of the author herself gets imprinted on these biointerpretations. Jong, herself a poet of some renown (so much so that she included a sizeble addition of her own Sappho style poems into the book), and now stranger to writing on sexuality, women's paths, etc. creates a Sappho who is compelling, brave, outspoken, adaptable and distinctly (considering her fame) hetero inclined and not altogether all that much of a feminist. Which isn't to say she doesn't play around, she does, prolifically so. So much so that one must make a conscientious effort to discard our semipuritan mentality in favor on the ancient world's barely pubescent age of consent and rampant bisexuality for all. Sappho is, above all, a servant of Aphrodite, and as such she preaches love, love, LOVE (alongside a sizable helping of pleasure) in life and song. It's an interestingly constructed book, starting off as a regular historical fiction and then, as Sappho goes on her very own odyssey, throwing in adventures of mythological proportion. Subsequently upon her return to Lesbos, once again historical fiction and then pure imagination land ending. It works in its own way, precisely because of the aforementioned scarcity of facts. Sort of a magical biography. I didn't love the book, but I did enjoy mostly. The writing was as frou frou as a book about poetry would have. It is as mentioned quite hetero inclined, which might be just the author's take. I'm not even sure I loved the Jongian interpretation of the main character. It read oddly longer than the page count suggested. But it was original and imaginative and a pretty entertaining romp throughout the antiquity. Interestingly enough the terms lesbian and saphhic weren't used in the way we've come to know them until 1890s, hundreds of repressed years later. What a world.