Rating: 5/5

Apostle of the Haphazard
 
The only thing one can say after reading a book like this is: I wish I knew Christ like Oswald Chambers seems to have done. What a faith and what a life. He was kind of like an intellectual Keith Green who said, "I refuse to worry" because his life was truly hid in Christ. And like Keith Green, he was a part of what is loosely referred to as the Holiness Movement except Chambers was in at the beginning. Oswald Chambers said “I feel I shall be buried for a time, hidden away in obscurity; then suddenly I shall flame out, do my work and be gone.” His statement was prophetic, except that the divine flame is burning brighter than ever thanks to the printed page. A friend once introduced him as “the apostle of the haphazard” and like the wind Jesus mentions in John 3:8, Chamber’s life appears erratic, but there seemed to be an angel in the whirlwind guiding him to where he was needed and he was used mightily by the Lord.

He is the posthumous author of over fifty books of which My Utmost for His Highest is the best known. His wife earned her living as a stenographer before their marriage. She could take verbatim notes in shorthand at 250 words a minute, faster than anyone can talk I am sure. She took verbatim notes of all of his talks and sermons and turned them out as books after his death in Zeitoun, Egypt of appendicitis in 1917. He reached thousands for Christ during his life and he has reached millions more after his death and continues to do so. My Utmost for His Highest has been in constant publication since it was first published in 1935 and its popularity shows no sign of waning anytime soon. That is because each of the daily devotionals seems to have been written fresh each morning just for the reader. It is like Oswald Chambers is in the room with you. If you want a summary of all that Chambers taught and his wife faithfully transcribed, it is this: “Jesus only, Jesus ever.”

He was the son of a Baptist Pastor and was converted under the preaching of Charles Spurgeon and heard D.L. Moody preach. He was born to Victorian era parents who worried about him as parents will because he refused to care about money. He never seemed to actually have a set salary on any of his preaching and teaching. He never owned a home but considered himself and his wife "spoiled bairns of the Kingdom" because the Lord always supplied above and beyond what they needed. He was a practically impractical man who always gave hilariously to anyone who asked anytime and any place. When chided for being foolish and warned that he would become an easy mark, he said, "I believe beggars are sent to test our faith. My duty is plain-to obey the command of God and give to everyone who asks," but, he added with a twinkle "Besides the Lord always gives double for all I give away." And He did.

He went through his own dark night of the soul and came out the other side radiantly in love with Christ. Shortly after being ordained in Dunoon, Scotland(?) and being a sought after speaker in Christian circles his popularity and seeming success only accentuated his growing sense of despair, emptiness and longing. A young local woman accused him of sexual misconduct with her. It was almost more than he could bear although there was no truth to her story and a thorough investigation exonerated him, but the damage had been done. He was misunderstood, shunned, avoided and became the object of whispered gossip in and around Dunoon. Not only was his reputation tarnished, but the charge only served to heighten his awareness of what he was capable of. He knew he had not sinned sexually with her, but he also knew that he could have. "Within him lurked a frightening pride that was beyond his power to conquer."

It was beyond his power, but not God's. Thing's came to a head in November 1901 and "then and there I claimed the gift of the Holy Spirit in dogged committal on Luke 11:13." He called it a baptism of the Holy Spirit, but I am not sure if he subscribed to the Pentecostal doctrine of a second blessing or not. He was not a Pentecostal in the modern sense and did not believe in speaking in tongues as a sign gift. I prefer to use the term “Baptism of the Holy Spirit” in reference to a believer’s experience at conversion as set forth in 1st Corinthians 12:13. But this special filling of the Spirit resulted in new insights into the Christian life and effectively banished his doubts. "Glory be to God, the last aching abyss of the human heart is filled to overflowing with the love of God. Love is the beginning, love is the middle and love is the end. After He comes in, all you see is 'Jesus only, Jesus ever'. When you know what God has done for you, the power and tyranny of sin is gone, and the radiant, unspeakable emancipation of the indwelling Christ has come." He was filled with the Holy Spirit and unlike most of us, he didn't seem to leak much.

He left school in 1905 and began a ministry as an itinerate preacher of the gospel in Britain, the United States and Japan. He was a missionary and taught at the Oriental Missionary Society Bible School in Tokyo. He became a “missioner” for the Pentecostal League of Prayer founded by Reader Harris which had to change its name because of confusion with the nascent Pentecostal tongues movement. He married Gertrude Hobbs on May 25th 1910 who was an expert stenographer as noted above. His affectionate nickname for her was Biddy, which was a play on the words Beloved Disciple or B.D., which transmogrified into Biddy. Chambers felt that there was a need for a Bible college in Britain that emphasized personal Christian living as well as academics. With a little help from his friends he founded the Bible Training College at Clapham. The school operated on faith and prayer and when someone offered to endow the school, Chambers refused explaining that, “No, if you do that it will probably go on longer than God means it to.”

The school lasted until the outbreak of World War One and Chambers sailed with the troops to Zeitoun, Egypt as a Y.M.C.A. Secretary. Where he ministered mightily until his untimely death on November 15th, 1917. He had undiagnosed appendicitis, peritonitis set in and they could not save his life. He reached thousands of soldiers on the very brink of the Valley of the Shadow of Death with the good news of Jesus Christ. Many of them never made it out of that valley and were there to welcome their comrade into the Celestial City. Millions are now grateful for the providential partnership of a faithful wife who was also a genius stenographer and the Apostle of the Haphazard.