Rating: 3/5

This is the fourteenth novel in the Albert Campion series and was published in 1952. The book begins with Meg Elginbrodde and Geoffrey Levett in a taxi. Levett is a wealthy businessman, used to getting what he wants and he is desperately in love with Meg and intends to marry her. The problem is that since their engagement was announced, Meg has been receiving photographs from her husband - who she believed had died in the war. She has turned to Campion and Detective Chief Inspector Charles Luke for advice, when a meeting is proposed between her and her former husband. The man she glimpses across the fog bound platform of a station is certainly not her husband, but the mystery deepens after he is questioned and released.

What follows is an extremely atmospheric mystery; set in a post-war, weary London in a middle of a pea souper fog. As events escalate, Levett goes missing and witnesses are killed. A convict called Jack Havoc has escaped from prison – he is hunting a “treasure”, while Luke and Campion search for him in the “Smoke,” which is the fog bound city of London. There are some wonderful characters, such as the saintly Canon Avril, the brilliantly named Tiddy Doll and the elusive Havoc himself – the Tiger of the story.

I had only read one Campion novel before and I found myself a little lost so far into the series, as obviously you were meant to know some familiar characters. However, Campion himself did not feature strongly in the book, meaning that it worked quite well as a stand-alone story. London itself – battered, weary, down at heel – is almost a character in itself. Everyone stumbles around, unable to see and events are revealed slowly, almost as glimpses through the fog. If you are interested in London shortly after the war, then this novel gives you a great view of the City at that time and is worth reading just for the historical aspect of the book. 

Rated 3.5

Having re-read this, I did find it a little more understandable. I don't think the series will ever be a favourite - I am not overly fond of the gangs and deadly secrets type of novel and prefer the drawing room type mystery, rather than haring about the country looking for treasure. However, I do like Campion as a character and I will continue to complete the series. However, my rating would probably stay the same.