Rating: 3/5

This was generally an enjoyable read, with a lot of local color and fun anecdotes about the people, culture and landscape of still largely-unsettled 1970’s frontier Alaska. With that being said, I don’t know if it works as a book? This is essentially two short stories, one about a river trip into the Brooks Range and one about the committee that intended to select a new Alaskan capitol city and the gossip and geo-politicking around the decision (ultimately to not move the capitol at all), and a third much longer book that is almost a stream of consciousness narrative about the history and inhabitants of the remote village of Eagle, AK. All of this was interesting and fun but much much much too long. This did not need to be 400+ pages. Also, McPhee indulges in a few literary habits I disliked, primarily his repeated use of long strings of quotes, without much context, to illustrate the public opinions on various issues. I didn’t notice it at first, but after the 9th or 10th iteration of this device, it got grating. The speed at which he jumps from vignette to vignette was dizzying at times. 

Despite that, I really did enjoy getting a look at how truly you could still live in isolation from society in Alaska as late as the 70s, and the forces at play that would help shape a state I deeply love. The latent anxiety McPhee describes about division of public land between state, federal and tribal uses is fascinating and prescient giving the current decimation of wilderness in America today, and there’s a breed of people described here with a DIY, self sufficient, don’t-tread-on-us attitude, blended with a healthy respect and love for wild places and things that has no illusions about their danger and rawness, that we could use a lot more of today. 

“Life and death are not a duality. They’re just simply here- life, death- in the all pervading mesh that holds things together. Less than five minutes after a wolf stops chasing a moose, the moose is browsing… The moose does not go on thinking, worrying about the wolf. Death is as much a part of life as breathing. People in cities seem to want life and death to remain at a standstill. Most people who are against killing are horribly afraid to die. They seem to think you can have life without death, and so they have withdrawn from life. They seem to think that the animals up here are smelling flowers.”