Rating: 4/5

4 Seeing 👬🏾in person🤝(as opposed to Viewing 🖥️ separately 🚶) Stars by one of my lifetime favorite, and ever prescient SF writers, who's also an accomplished physicist, mathematician, and biochemist with many nonfic publications in these fields.

It was exhilarating, uplifting, &amp; comforting to be back with Elijah Baley &amp; R. Daneel Olivaw in another SF Murder Mystery by one of my lifetime fave authors◝(ᵔᗜᵔ)◜! I recently left this dynamic duo last month at the conclusion of 'Caves Of Steel', 5-stars ⸜(｡˃ ᵕ ˂ )⸝♡!

After addressing the murder, and the twisted mystery of it, on planet Solaria - one of the 50 human colonized "Outer Worlds", Detective Plainclothesman Baley returns to Earth reporting:
"The Solarians have given up something that mankind has had for a million years; something worth more than atomic power, cities, agriculture, tools, fire, everything; because it's something that made everything else possible."
To which undersecretary Albert Minnim replies:
"I don't want to guess, Baley. What is it?"

You'll want to read this prescient novel, published in 1958, to find out what IT is! 
As I've watched our local and global culture (and the way we "communicate") dysmorphically altered over the decades, I am in awe, and dread, that yet another of Asimov's poignant fiction novels has, once again, foretold of our current state of affairs and what may be in our near future.

This was a June Buddy Read with the voltaic group HORROR OR HEAVEN⚡.

If you're interested, Asimov's ROBOT novels in chronological order are:
Mother Earth (I just found out about this short story - that kicks off The Spacer saga continued in the ROBOT novels- and look forward to reading it very soon)
I, Robot (a congruous collection of Asimov's early short Robot stories that remain socially, technologically, and politically relevant)
The Caves of Steel
The Naked Sun
The Robots of Dawn
Robots and Empire
Highly recommend for fans of SF, especially those fans of The Golden and Radium Ages as well as of Asimov. Valued from other angles, readers interested in social, political, and technical commentary may also enjoy these short stories and novels 💛🧚‍♀️🙋🏼.