Rating: 5/5

Texas Independence and Remember the Alamo

Mr Johnstone is one of my most favorite western authors. He also wrote various other genres, as well - science fiction, horror, and military. His main genre was the western, though. I had discovered him in junior high. Since then I never met one of his westerns that I didn’t like. My heart nearly broke when the world lost this very prolific author. 
Earlier this year, after nearly three weeks of almost steady rain, I was devastated to discover an office storage box in my attic with all 18 paperback copies of this series water damaged from a leak in my roof. Desperate to salvage 15 of the 18 that suffered the most water damage, I spent hours using my hair dryer to blow dry each page of each water logged book praying the glue would continue to hold the pages to the spines. So 31 years after purchasing the first book of the series, I decided to reread it. It is the amazing masterpiece that I recall it to be.
This is an exciting historical fiction saga of a 7 year old Kentucky orphaned boy who is raised by American Indians. At age 12, he manages to leave the Shawnee camp and travels into the Arkansas Territory. After some trouble with his girl friend’s vile father, he and she flee across the Mississippi River, marry and make their home in the unsettled East Texas area. By then he has become a living legend, both locally and across the land.
Between the worrying unrest of slavery in the States and her territories, and the weary struggle of Texas attempting to wrest independence from Mexico, they begin their new life and start a family together. 
Amongst their lives are historic figures - Stephen Austin, Sam Houston, James Fannin, and some of the brave men who fought at the Alamo - William Travis, Jim Bowie, and Davy Crockett. It’s an extraordinary novel of a remarkable young couple who hold to their core values, have an unwavering love of God, country and family with accompanying loyalty, integrity and honor of their relatives, neighbors and friends, and interweaving those lives with love and friendship that only grows deeper, stronger and closer.