Rating: 4/5

WHY’D YOU READ THIS BOOK?
This book is nearly 20-years old. About ten years ago, my friend’s son was tossing it in the trash, so I pulled it from him and told him I’d read it someday when I felt like brushing up on American lit., and that day finally came.
 
DO YOU NOW FEEL SUFFICIENTLY “BRUSHED UP”?
Yes, I do. Where the American lit. courses I’ve taken in the past were deep, this book is wide. For example, in all my years of education—primary, secondary, and tertiary—I have never read anything by Mark Twain, and I feel guilty about it since I have a degree in English literature, so I’m slightly relieved that this book offers a decent write up on Twain and his work. As I understand it, academia has tended to snub Twain, and I never understood why, but having now read sufficient excerpts of his work, I don’t feel as clueless about it.
 
WHAT ELSE DID YOU LEARN FROM THIS BOOK?
Well, I mostly felt my knowledge was being refreshed, and now that I’m older, I feel especially appreciative of authors like Kate Chopin who must have had to cope with incredible anxiety before and after writing her controversial The Awakening.
 
I was grateful for the write up on Ezra Pound. I recall Pound being mentioned by professors, but I knew virtually nothing of him other than a few pithy lines of poetry, but, of course, it’s no wonder since he was—eh-um—sympathetic towards fascism, and we all know universities don’t like that sort so much.
 
By the way, I ended up adding numerous books to my impossible collection of books to be read after learning more about Maxine Hong Kingston and Zora Neale Hurston.
 
WAS THERE ANYTHING WORTHY OF NEGATIVE CRITICISM IN THIS BOOK?
Not really. I was surprised to see a few typos, more than usual for a non-indie publisher. At one point Mark Twain’s name was written “Mark Train.”
 
I think the coverage of Langston Hughes was a bit short-changed. Actually, for a book like this, if an author is mentioned, an excerpt of at least 100 words should be included. It seems excerpts of writing drastically fell off as authors whose copyrights were still in effect were mentioned.
 
IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE YOU’D LIKE TO SAY?
Well, yeah, there is. I figure some scholarly types might frown upon a book like this, thinking maybe reading it doesn’t result in the most erudite effect, especially if you’re an author (albeit an indie author in my case). The title—Idiot’s guide—most definitely doesn’t help of course. Nevertheless, I’d rather err on the side of barbarism than read some utterly pedantic and inaccessible mumbo jumbo. 
 
DO YOU RECOMMEND THIS BOOK TO OTHERS?
Yes, I recommend the book, but probably seeking out an updated version (if there is one) is better since the humor in this book is a little dated. I mean, I doubt Millennials will get Imelda Marcos shoe jokes. Also, there are some great authors that have emerged since the release of this old book, Victor Villaseñor for one, and readers shouldn’t miss out on learning about them.