Rating: 5/5

SEX. Did that get your attention? Ha.

I don't know about you, but I consider sex to be very interesting. Combining sex and history sounded like an intriguing read so when I saw Sex with Kings at my local used book store I just had to have it! I was completely engrossed in this book (which hasn't happened for a long time) so I would definitely recommend this book to others. I've noticed that a lot of people dislike Eleanor Herman's organizaton of the book, but it didn't bother me. Rather than making several short biographies, Herman divdies the chapters by theme - which I think is a great approach. If she only had two pages of material on one mistress, but 45 on another it would be way to unbalanced. 

Sex with Kings is an extremely captivating book, focusing on a very unique part of history that has always been hush hush and not talked about often. Not only is Sex with Kings informative, but it is also quite humorous - which is awesome! It provides a fascinating historical insight of the lives of many of royal mistresses who were both loved and loathed. "Often a royal mistress could not win in the stern court of public opinion no matter what she did. If she bore the king children, she was a harlot bringing expensive bastards into the world. If she did not, she was even worse -- a barren harlot. If she was beautiful, her beauty was a gift from the devil to inflame the hapless monarch. If she was plain, the king deserved better. If she lived opulently, she was selfishly spending the poor people's taxes. If she lived simply, she was detracting from the king's glory." 

Although there were often many gifts, jewels, property, and riches would be bestowed upon the mistress and her family, life was not easy. Whether she was the lover of the king out of love or greed the royal mistress's duty was to always be at the king's beck and call. No matter what time of day, or if she was tired, or ill. "Unlike the Queen, whose position was cast in stone, the mistress’s was made of far flimsier stuff. There would be no peace for her, no rest. Having obtained the great prize, the new mistress could not sit back and enjoy her rewards. She could not look around her magnificent rooms with satisfaction, or smile contentedly as she toyed with her glittering jewelry -- not if it meant letting her guard down for a moment."

Death from childbirth, veneral disease, bastard children, the threat of being replaced, constant gossip, and the threat of the king dying before the mistress were only some of the hardships. Not to say that all of the women experienced hardships though. Many were admired, blessed, and comfortable. 

I never realized the difficulties that mistresses had to go through in the past, but then again I never realized the strong connection that some mistresses had with their royal lovers either. I highly recommend Sex with Kings - not only for the historical gossip, but also for the moments sprinkled throughout that will touch your heart.