Rating: 2/5

I will start out at the end, then go to the beginning. Actually, although the book ended, the story did not. I have noted that there is a sequel, which is a good thing, as this story definitely leaves the reader wondering what happened. There was quite a bit of action and suspense, building up to an abrupt stop, and I was unpleasantly surprised by that.

I thought the characters, with the exception of the “doctor” and one other (Galen), were quite well done. I imagined that there would be official interference from various governmental busybodies, and was pleased that there was not, but surprised, as in the real world there would have been a plethora of different agencies striving to butt in and take over, all for the good of the people, naturally!

This story started slow. Very slow. It took me several days and several starts to get into it, but when I did, I found that it was enjoyable, especially as I could related story events to different world mythologies. I enjoyed the interweaving of science and magic, and the building of the relationships between the characters. These were interwoven into an eons-long tale of a family of guardians, waiting for the signals that initiate the end of the world as we know it – or at least the guardianship status of the family. 

A few of the major issues I had dealt with the family itself. They were not really involved with each other until the crisis hit, and seemed to have no idea how to deal with each other. I especially didn’t like the grandfather, who seemed to be one of those people who refuse to share knowledge, either because they perceive it as dangerous, or through some convoluted sense of power. 

I also had an issue with “main” character. Galen is our hero, yet he is lacking in knowledge, and seems unable to gain it. He is shunted to the background for the majority of the story, and does not seem to try to learn what he needs to do, turning the reins over to his father and grandfather instead.

That leads me to the next quibble. Here we have a family designated as the eternal guardians, yet there is only one child per generation. I can see choosing the heir from each generation, but only have one child could quickly spell the end of the dynasty.

Overall, although I thought the story was interesting, the reasoning seemed simplistic and maybe even a bit ridiculous. With the abrupt ending, it was unsatisfying, and although it would be nice to know that the situation resolves itself, I think I will let it continue without me.