Rating: 5/5

Two decades old and still excellent. 

Unfortunately, one book (or a dozen...) is not enough to change a whole school system and while this knowledge isn't more well-known, not much is going to change.

But I'd highly recommend this book and others by Alfie Kohn to anyone having anything to do with education or educating someone. Teachers, professors, parents, members of governments and parliaments who make and apply laws about education, everyone should read at least this book, to see what is wrong with our education systems and how to make them more useful for people.

I'm one of those people who grew up in a very standardized school system (not as much as the one in the USA, but close enough) and excelled at it and hated almost all of it. I was able to get good grades because my brain is a sponge (well, used to be, now it's a sieve) and I could remember the irrelevant stuff needed to pass tests, even on subjects that I didn't understand, nor understand the utility of.

It took me getting to university to finally learn how to learn (and that was one big "aha" moment for me) and even there passing exams was too easy for me because the system is not meant to get you exploring and learning as much as it could (until my PhD, that is, when I crashed and burned spectacularly, into a ball of depression and burnout I never thought possible). 

I never found out what I was good at enough to pursue a real career in (writing and editing, that's what I'm good at) and I was always skipping from one thing to the next, hoping that the new thing would be it. 

I have no idea what happened with my former classmates, but I'm pretty sure most of them are not happy and fulfilled because of the same reasons. School didn't teach them any life skills. 

People who want to become teachers should read this book and understand that their role is not to pass on information, but to create an environment in which students become curious and start exploring on their own. Teachers should be mentors, more than anything, enablers of knowledge and of curiosity. 

I'm rambling now, just read the damned book.