Rating: 5/5

1981 dawned upon me, bleary-eyed and blitzed out on modecate, as I tried to lounge artfully in the fifth-floor smoking lounge of the Department of Delegating and Disappearing, reading The Day of the Jackal.

Trying to relax to no avail.

You don’t relax on modecate. You either slumber (your brain fried) or perch on tenterhooks.

But my friend Jim couldn’t know that. Big Jim was one of the more affable Ex-military clerks in Delegate and Disappear. His boss, Nancy, was a sight for sore eyes but often disappeared on urgent voluntary errands.

But any manager could have safely disappeared thanks to Jim, once their work had been smilingly delegated. 

Jim was a trained logistician, and could do his job with his hands tied behind his back!

So why not tell Jim of my depression, the reason for my meds? Jim would just nod and say with Uncle Mahmou in the wonderful novel Darius the Great is Not OK, “just gotta try harder, Fergus!” 

The old KISS Principle - Keep it Simple, Stupid. The Air Force has a cure for every problem.

Per ardua ad astra!

But to the burned out trying harder is not even on the table.
***
But I did manage to finish off the Jackal, before my meds could manage to finish me off. Truth be told, it left me cold. But then, on modecate, life itself leaves you cold. 

And Jackal was an expertly told tale - it ran like clockwork, I fondly mused, even though it scared me shirtless.

Why? 

Well, back then we English Canadians were outraged at the Premier of France, because he had memorably said Québec should be freed from Canada. 

 "Long live Free Quebec!" he had shouted.

Meddler...

So frankly, I sweated through the ending of Jackal, for our injurious treatment of him back then would have seemed imminent to us at that moment, had he returned to Canada.

(Once our motive was clear, Canada would need an alibi…

Would France have extradited our federalist head of state in proxy?)
***
Hey - c’mon now, Fergus… don't go there.

But in just such a way, a still-green kid of 31 like me might have dreamed lugubrious nightmares, during a massive smoking-lounge modecate slumber, while big Jim affably grinned on.

But in real life, after Jackal, my life began to unroll much more brightly. 

Happiness returned after my doc curtailed my modecate regime upon receiving a glowing assessment from my boss of my progress in somehow understanding the intricacies of logistics!

And, having soon afterward received top marks for a mini course in supply management, I returned more awake to the smoking lounge, now knowing the ropes completely, like Jim.

And smiling affably too, like big Jim, and glad once more to be alive.

For trying harder was once again on the bargaining table.

I would from henceforth "try harder" - just like my dear, depressed Darius - now that each of us had finally found Hope!