Rating: 5/5

In this second book in the series, we are just getting familiar with the foibles of SMU (or as Nick tells him new office mate "I think I should warn you [...] my previous office mate was murdered"), and more into the realization it takes a special person to be a teacher ... and that "special" isn't always a complimentary descriptor. 

During a committee meeting, it is decided that a conference about a woman writer will give SMU a step up in their lackluster efforts to get more women faculty and TAs. Anais Nin? Too passe. Gertrude Stein? Too lesbian. Toni Morrison? No black faculty members in the department. Edith Wharton seems the perfect compromise and since Nick is the foremost Edith Wharton bibliographer, it falls to him to organize the conference. Hilarity ensues .... plus, of course, murder(s). 

The major strength of this series is Stefan and Nick's long-term (10+ years and counting) relationship which is mature and comfortable. I love how each accepts the others' quirks:.Stefan was surprised. "They asked you to run a conference?"
I nodded dumbly.
"I don't understand." He frowned. "Do they want to sabotage it? Don't they know how scattered you are?"
I started to laugh. Why is it that someone you love can openly tell you your faults and it seems funny, affectionate?"The resulting conference is amazing - there are two warring factions of Edith Wharton scholars, and an insufferable bisexual Pulitzer prize-winning author Chloe DeVore who has moved on from her early collections of short stories to a 700-page book called Empire of Sin about Justinian and Theodora. Or as Nick and fellow teacher Priscilla quip: "What the hell would Chloe DeVore know about the Byzantine Empire?" "I guess she spent a weekend in Istanbul once."

All the characters here are beautifully fleshed-out and this is one of those books where you will either bookmark every other page, or drive your friends and family crazy by reading aloud to them line after witty / funny / charming line. 

The murder / mystery is also well done, but there's just so many other wonderfully fun things happening that, for me personally, that element was only a small part of the joying of reading this book. 4.5 stars.