Rating: 4/5

4 Dexterously Dansing Stars as a resulting average of 5 Back-In-The-Day-Stars + 3 Démodé-Today-Stars.
Published in 1981, this is Stephen King's first foray into nonfiction, at which time his first nine novels (Carrie through The Stand), one novella (The Mist), and one short story collection (Nightshift) had been published under his name as well as four novels under the nom de plume Richard Bachman (Rage, The Long Walk, Roadwork, and The Running Man, published in a 1985 omnibus edition titled The Bachman Books). 
King made his first professional story sale (a short story The Glass Floor) to Startling Mystery Stories in 1967. He continued to write and sell short stories to magazines for a few years preceeding the publication of his novels. Many of these were later gathered into the Night Shift collection or appeared in other anthologies.

In Danse Macabre King delves into the anatomy of the horror genre from 1818 with Mary Shelly's Frankenstein: The 1818 Text through 1979 with Ghost Story by Peter Straub. King does a splendid job sketching the anatomy of horror over this timespan covering chosen popular and obscure works by Harlan Ellison, Shirley Jackson, Ray Bradbury, John Windham, Ramsey Campbell, Richard Matheson, and Jack Finney, just to name a few; with special attention to the "Unholy Trinity" (dubbed by Grady Hendrix in his one of a kind book about books, Paperbacks from Hell: The Twisted History of '70s and '80s Horror Fiction
  
): Rosemary's Baby, The Other, and The Exorcist which "spawned a new era in horror fiction."

King takes a cursory look at horror in radio, cursory likely because, "I am the last quarter of the last generation that remembers radio drama as an active force. Radio's real golden age ended around 1950, the year at which this book's casual attempt at media history begins." 

Then comes his assessment of horror in film, aka, "the horror movie as junk food." Here he covers, sometimes with just a fleeting thought other times with an indepth dissection, "roughly 100 horror films released during the period 1950-1980, all of which have contributed something valuable to the genre", starting with 1951 "The Thing" (one of the author's asserted faves) through 1980 "The Shining" (another claimed fave!). "The audience finds some kind of relevance in the
film, whether it can be universal like the fear of death, the unknown, or cultural, social, religious
relevance."

"Horror has not fared particularly well on TV, it is very difficult to write a successful horror story in a world which is so full of real horrors." King adequately analyses many of the TV series that kept me intermittently glued to the boob-tube during my later childhood and early teen years: The Twilight Zone, Night Gallery, Alfred Hitchcock Presents, The Outer Limits, Tales of the Unexpected, and Tales From the Crypt. Yes, the best in TV series Horror (⊙⁠‿◎)🔪💉🩸⚰️😲!

King closes with the final chapter,
"Chapter X: The Last Waltz- Horror and Morality. 
The danse macabre is a waltz with death. With the disguise of semantics carefully removed and laid aside, what those who criticize the tale of horror (or who simply feel uneasy about it and their liking for it) seem to be saying is this: you are selling death and disfigurement and monstrosity; you are trading upon hate and violence, morbidity and loathing; you are just another representative of those forces of chaos which so endanger the world today.
You are, in short, immoral."
What did the author have to say to those critics (and the rest of us who just feel uneasy about it and our liking of it) in 1981? Well, 🤐 this is a spoiler-free review and shall remain such. Do tell, how do you feel about it? 

Written almost in a "stream of consciousness" style, I enjoying the semi-autobiographical aspect as well as King's iconic humor and always captivating composition. As a faithful fan of Classic King, this nonfiction anatomy of Horror is as good a read as any Classic King novel!
I, for one would whole heartedly support, purchase, read, and promote a 21st century sequel or supplement to this outstanding analysis of Horror Fiction in books, movies, TV, and maybe change out radio for the internet or another electronic medium of today.

This was my final read in the 2nd Annual Long Books Challenge (LBC), finished with with 2.25hrs to spare 🤸🏼‍♀️🤸🏼!