Rating: 4/5

”He came toward me and I shrank deeper into the corner. This was strange. I had never felt anything but respect and tenderness for this brilliant, unhappy friend. And I made myself think of Waldo dutifully; I thought of the years we had known each other and of his kindness. I felt sick within myself, ashamed of hysteria and weak shrinking. I made myself stand firm; I did not pull away; I accepted the embrace as women accept the caresses of men they dare not hurt. I did not yield, I submitted. I did not soften, I endured.

‘You are mine,’ he said.”

  

The beautiful, vivacious Laura Hunt is dead. 

Not just dead. Her face has been blasted by buckshot, obliterating her loveliness, leaving only the painting on the wall as a memory of her alluring elegance. It is certainly very personal to shoot someone in the face, but to shoot a lovely woman in the face is somehow a larger crime, a more vicious offense. 

Who shot Laura Hunt? 

The New York Detective, Mark McPherson, has already made a name for himself as being a man on the upward track. He has recently recovered from being shot, and so not only is he gaining a reputation for being smart and creative, but he has also proven his metal as well. He is thoughtful and oddly vulnerable. He didn’t want this case. A murder case is too simple for what he wants to investigate, but as he starts chasing down leads and hears the lies and the half truths of everyone involved, he starts to become interested. There is one other complication:

He falls in love with Laura, well the painting of Laura. This is her at her absolute best, immortalized with gorgeous eyes and alabaster skin. 

Waldo Lydecker is also in love with Laura. ”Waldo had kissed me often; it was his habit to kiss when we parted, and often affectionately over some compliment. I felt nothing, neither shivering repulsion nor answering flame. A kitten nuzzled against my legs, a dog licked my hands, a child’s moist lips touched my cheeks: these were Waldo’s kisses.” Anybody else feel the need to *shudder*. 

  

The lovely Gene Tierney is cast as Laura in the 1944 movie.

He helped her get started, and her career has seen a steady climb because of her association with Waldo. She is grateful, but his possessiveness, treating her as if she is a sculpture he formed with his own hands, is becoming a problem. He is wealthy, successful, an intellectual snob who is completely self-centered. Frankly, he’d be appalled to know this novel was titled Laura and not Waldo. His alibi for the night of the murder did make me laugh out loud. He was supposed to have dinner with Laura, but she never showed. ”I had eaten a lonely dinner, reviling the woman for her desertion, and read Gibbon in a tepid tub.”

I like Gibbon, too, but he isn’t so scintillating I’m going to sit in a tub of lukewarm water and read him. The thing about Waldo is he isn’t very likeable, and yet, somehow I like him. Maybe it is because he can recognize the finer things in life and express his reverence so eloquently for art, books, and plays. 

There is also Shelby Carpenter. He is Laura’s fiance. One thing that Mark McPherson and Waldo Lydecker can agree on is that he is not the man either one of them would choose for Laura. Of course, they each feel they are a much better choice than he. Shelby comes from a different world. Laura describes Shelby, showing that she is well aware of his faults: ”My people were plain folk; the women went West with their men and none of them found gold. But Shelby came from ‘gentle’ people; they had slaves to comb their hair and put on their shoes. A gentleman cannot see a lady work like a n-----r; a gentleman opens the door and pulls out a lady’s chair and brings a whore into her bedroom.” Shelby’s only ambition is to find a woman to take care of him. He is an expensive habit, but he is charming and capable of looking very good in a nice suit. 

Vera Caspary, as you can tell from some of the quotes I shared, has not only written a great noir novel, but also expresses the difficulty that women have in building a career and navigating the uncertain waters of the relationships they must maintain with the men who are helping them. Men rarely do anything without expecting something in return. The interplay with Shelby, Waldo, and Mark, who each want her but want her for different reasons, adds some depth to a plot that was crafty enough not to need such great characterization. Men who help men expect loyalty in return, but men who help women expect compliance. A woman desired is a woman with power, but that power is built with a shaky foundation too reliant on the changing whims of men.

  

There was a terrific noir film made of this book in 1944, starring Gene Tierney and Dana Andrews. This is one of my favorite noir films. I’m really at a loss to say whether you should read the book first or watch the movie. I watched the movie first and felt that the twist was not only handled well, but was so deliciously shocking. The characters are all developed with more depth in the book, so there is certainly merit to reading the book as well. I’m certainly intrigued by the progressiveness of Caspary’s writing and look forward to reading more books by her. 

If you wish to see more of my most recent book and movie reviews, visit http://www.jeffreykeeten.com
I also have a Facebook blogger page at:https://www.facebook.com/JeffreyKeeten