Rating: 5/5

I've just finished the first three of the Poldark novels. 

I'd never have considered reading them if I'd not had the opportunity to read the first one for free on kindle, mainly because I shy away from romance-novels-made-into-a-long-running-TV-series. 

Pity that. 

Winston Graham wrote the first four novels as a series in the 1950's, and then returned to them in the 1970's and wrote another five. 

I've read the first three only, because the fourth is not available on Kindle. I will seek it out at the library, though. 

At the core, these novels are considered historical romance, but meticulously researched so that the period of the late 1700's in Cornwall is brought to life very vividly without any prettying up. 

Graham explores the social divisions of the society with a certain brutality, dwelling on the lack of rights among the poor classes, the child labour, the ignorance, the fear of the upper classes of losing their privilege. 

While Graham does not skim over the deplorable, inhumane living conditions of the poorest, neither does he revel in it for the sake of shock. It is merely there, a fact of life, ordinary. 

The lives of women are exposed with a keen eye, and he does not shy away from exposing their utter dependence on the men in their lives - fathers, brothers, husbands, sons, nephews - yet he does not dramatise. They have no rights, and while they chafe privately, even this is self-curtailed because in their very bones they have accepted their place. 

In the three books I read, there were three particularly important women through whom Graham was able to explore the socio-cultural boundaries in which their lives were contained. He did this marvellously - frustrating me at times, for he does not give a nod to modern sensibilities of feminism. He tells it like it was. 

I think this is why I enjoyed the books so much. They are not 'romantic' at all, other than they depict relationships; but they are very real relationships, exploring power, loyalty, dependency, toxicity. Of course, life for human beings is all about relationships - between friends, family, neighbours, enemies, the relationships between those who must depend on each other for sheer mutual survival. 

His characters are wonderfully complex - and by this I don't mean that he's created complex backstories for them for the sake of sensationalism, but that not a one of them is wholly good, or bad, or right, or moral, or admirable. They are all very alive with their individual flaws, strengths and characteristics, and so one can hate them, admire them, pity them, despise them in turn. 

Cornwall of the late 1700's is brought to life most vividly; beautiful, yes, but also grey, and damp, and cold, the landscape wild but also ailing due to the mines and the smelters and the commencement of industrialisation. It's a harsh land.

The books are an analysis of human rights, in my view, a disclosure of how people lived that is not a dispassionate historian's highlighting of the facts, but a very human, humane, passionate, life-and-death reliving of those times through the lives of his protagonists. 

I think Graham has been done a disservice by not being taken more seriously for his historical exactitude, and the dismissal of his books as romances. 

I've enjoyed the first three very much, and I will seek out the remainder.