Rating: 3/5

Well this was really a book of contrasts. Some of my favorite Elric material is in this slim volume, and yet there's also plenty of crushing boredom stuffed in there as well.

I'm going to go through each work in this collection, but suffice to say the tl;dr version is that the first half is great, and the second half is bad and occassionally dire.

Elric at the End of Time 5/5 - This is the title story. I know that some readers haven't taken much to this - but I thought it was delightful! It's a crossover between the Elric universe and the Second Aether universe, and I thought it was absolutely hilarious. If you've ever thought that Elric was too po-faced and serious (and not to mention too gloomy and morose), then this story will be perfect for you. It was really nice to see an author like Moorcock engage in such a humorous manner with his own work.

“Aye,” said Elric darkly, “return me to my realm, so that I may fulfill my own doomladen destiny …”
Werther looked upon the albino with affectionate delight. “Aha! A fellow spirit! I, too, have a doomladen destiny.”
“I doubt it is as doomladen as mine.”

“You are very welcome here,” said Werther. “I cannot tell you how glad I am to meet one as essentially morbid and self-pitying as myself!”
Elric did not seem flattered.

The Last Enchantment 5/5 - This one has a very different tone to the first story. For one, it's not a comedy. It's another classic adventure (although it is a short one). If you enjoy the Elric saga, you should enjoy this.

The Secret Life of Elric of Melnibone 5/5 - Well there's a whole lot of fives so far. This one isn't a story, it's an essay but it's a great essay. It's essentially Moorcock explaining how he created the Elric character, and about the life of the stories themselves. It's insightful and it doesn't overstay it's welcome. It's both in-depth and concise.

If only the volume ended here, it'd be brief, but superb.

Sojan the Swordsman 1/5 - Why? Whhhhhhy? This story held so little interest for me. To begin with, Elric isn't even in it. It concerns a sort of Conan-like character called Sojan who roams around performing all manner of deeds and slowly making a name for himself as some kind of deed-doer. This is one of the earliest Moorcock stories, and it shows. It's not so much bad (the writing is basically competent), it just isn't interesting. There's so little world-building and there's so little characterization. It's a real shame that this was included, because it's the longest story in the collection, and just isn't on the same level as the other works.

Two Essays about Jerry Cornelius 2/5 - Once again... why? These are two essays about a character who isn't in the Elric saga. I guess if you're interested in Jerry Cornelius they might be interesting. I'll leave that for a Jerry Cornelius fan to decide.

The Stone Thing 3/5 - This one was wacky. It's a very short story that parodies fantasy tropes. It's in an essentially similar tone to the title story, but it's a lot shorter and doesn't concern Elric. What it does concern however is a god called Cwlwwymwn and a wizard called To’me’ko’op’r. With these things, I can forgive the lack of the volume's titular star.

In conclusion, I think that Elric fans should read this. Well, maybe not all of it - perhaps stop half-way, but I don't agree with the assessment I've seen sometimes that this volume is worth skipping. The first half is gold. I just wish the publishers had chosen the material for the second half more carefully.