Rating: 4/5

Soooo... Is adultery good or bad?
I mean, on the surface the answer is bad, you faithless arsehole, though one or two stories give some wriggle room, such as the horrific marriage in the The Cook, the Thief, his Wife and her Lover, in which case the wedded relationship is so monstrously vicious and toxic you'd be weird if you didn't cheer for the adulterers. But in the various 'knights in love' tales of Marie de France, where the stories are varnished in old time religion and 'thou shalt not commit adultery', the swings and hypocrisy on such a question hurt my bloody neck.
We're asked to applaud or villify people for the same situations:
A son kills his mother's husband so his Dad can marry her: happy ending for the lovers.
Two lovers plan to murder the woman's husband so they can be together, but God sees fit to have the husband die conveniently: good ending for the lovers.
But:
A couple plan to murder a husband via a boiling bath, but when the husband enters early, the lover boils his own head out of shame (what?) and the wife is killed: bad ending for the lovers.
A woman finds out her husband is a werewolf and, not terribly surprisingly, gets rid of him so she can marry someone who isn't likely to eat her or drag his arse along the good carpet: wife and her lover suffer a bad ending.

What the hell is the difference, exactly? Clearly I'm missing something, but what still alludes me. It's not that the lovers happen to be morally justified or that their love is 'too powerful', as even the most devoted couple can face terrible endings and even the most rampantly shitty people are saved by the cure all that is the divine power of 'courtly love'. One example of the latter which stood out for me, has the married male lover never tell his mistress he's already wed and murders his squire for letting the cat out of the bag. This bellend gets a happy ending, with his wife joining a convent out of choice so the lovers can be together, and her willingness to do this is based on how clearly distressed and 'devoted' her hubby is to his mistress (you made wedding vows, pal), the fact the girl didn't know he was married and died on the spot when she found out (she got better) and the fact the wife also found her rival ever so terribly sexy. It's a weird mess.

Despite the fact it's not quite clear who's the villain or the star crossed lover till they suffer some terrible punishment, the stories also include tragedies, daring adventures and horrible crimes. Some stories are beautifully poignant, while some are bloody stupid, not least of which is a man who does everything he can to get a potion to help with an impossible task to win his beloved, and then doesn't use said potion out of stubborness. He then dies. Golf clap, golf clap, dumbass.

I might sound like I'm taking the utter piss out of the these stories, and you would be 100% accurate, but I quite liked the Lays. It was amusing interpreting the amount of euphemism ('thigh' for 'dick' and how lovers were always called 'friends') and there's plenty of imagination, fantasy and some quite heartening examples of pushing against the morals of the time. The stories can be a little frustrating, sure, but I can see how these silly tales enthralled many a bored Lord or Lady on a cold winter's night in the manor, and while there is more beautiful (and sensible) stories from the Middle Season, there's plenty for the modern reader to appreciate here.