Rating: 4/5

The Moon rises the drum is beaten harder and harder as the sounds thunder to the thousands of excited spectators on both sides of the Grand Canal the rockets hit the sky and explode briefly illuminating the dark heavens as the nine canoes Dragon Boats move swifter and swifter on chilly waters the tired drummer of the lead vessel gives all his strength in one final effort as the finishing line is near and collapses just before reaching their goal disappointing his men the moonlight race comes to an abrupt end, as the stunned crowds numerous lanterns on shore light up the grim scene. We follow the wily Judge Dee, on a barge of the canal with his three wives for a better view yet more interested in playing dominoes than watching the contest not a fictional character he once lived a nemesis to criminals celebrated today in films, books and television the Sherlock Holmes of China with a difference... he was real, Di Renjie. A person like us in the ancient land of China 1,400 years ago, can he find the culprits which caused the murders two more quickly fall , Amber the extremely attractive second lady of a prosperous merchant Kou Yuan -liang whose body is discovered in a remote sacred temple of the River Goddess the White Lady, now mostly neglected, Amber with a dubious past, first wife Gold Lotus in the last four years struck with a strange debilitating malady, third victim another would be student like his late friend Tong Mai, the man will never beat another drum, he Sia Kwang becomes the same ...late, admittedly not the best inhabitants of our fair little town but still humans. Somehow all connected, the fertile mind of the judge is frequently thinking, conjuring new conspiracy theories to dot the eyes and make sense of these murders, the brutal senseless butchering. why? That is his job to uncover but how? Rumors involving the Emperor's pearl lost for a century newly found, but how is this germane to these cases...
 Judge Dee has only his old sergeant Hoong Liang to help, his other three able men are on vacation in the capital; no not a new invention...rest. A small tranquil... walled town becomes sinister grows bad until , it too vanishes in the air? But don't count our man the magistrate of Poo-yang out he hasn't quit and will never do this a fighter always. The story is rather complicated however, still enchanting the reader which is the ultimate design of any book. I confess these novels perpetually gives us joy strange if you think about it, they are murder mysteries something is not quite right nonetheless I will continue to read them. The public wants, needs their hobbies so lets get a good book.