Rating: 4/5

4 stars for "Abercrombie Station". reviewed in Dust of Far Suns.

2 stars for "Cholwell's Chickens". Jean Parlier of "Abercrombie Station" returns, no longer a mercenary and now a wealthy young woman, but still just as deadly. the novella details Jean's journey back to her home planet to investigate who she is and why her unknown mother abandoned her as an infant at some dirty saloon. the first half was great: the planet Codiron is a fun pastiche of an Old West town; strange mysteries are hinted at; and best of all, Jean nonchalantly dispatches a handsome but violent douchebag who had the nerve to get in her way. unfortunately the second half rushes past a highly disturbing scenario involving beautiful clones bred and held captive by a creepy old perv. perhaps Vance didn't want to explore such ugliness; I don't blame him, but he probably should have never used that plotline in the first place. it all comes to an abrupt halt via a clumsy deus ex machina. or more precisely, two vengeful harridans ex machina. even more precisely: two vengeful harridans springing out from a broom closet. which sounds a lot more fun than it actually was.

3 stars for "The Gift of Gab". reviewed in Dust of Far Suns.

5 stars for "Rumfuddle". reviewed in The Best of Jack Vance.

4 stars for "Chateau d'If". I loved this one. Roland Mario is a good guy, healthy, smart, but rather bored with his life... just like his pals. they are all intrigued by this mysterious place known as the Chateau d'If, which promises a unique adventure. what follows could be surprising, if one had never read the author before... the tale twists and turns, moving from weird mystery to fiendish body swapping to cold revenge sworn to corporate espionage to the partial rehabilitation of a useless life. Vancean standards such as an impassive and mysterious young woman, a worthless but entertaining egomaniac (in this case, the villain of the piece), brief musings on the nature of existence, and a focus on long-game planning all make welcome appearances. also features a 3 mile high building that has stadium-sized floors dedicated to various epochs of the past, because why not. this early Vance novella was exciting, perfectly paced, and completely satisfying. plus some sweet schadenfreude!