Rating: 5/5

For my favorite work by my favorite author, it is hard to put into words just how much I love this book and why exactly that is. Oe's recent passing has definitely had me reflecting on his life, and I think I've managed to sum up exactly what it is that I like about Somersault.

This is far from being Kenzaburo Oe's most popular book. There is no doubt that part of the reason for that is the thickness of the book. It is nearly 600 pages long, and it doesn't flow particularly quickly. When I found a second-hand copy of it at the book store by my house, I excitedly picked it up. It was the first physical work of Oe I had actually seen, and I had been particularly interested in this one. That being said, I was not really aware of what I was getting into. This was basically my foray back into reading, and this was quite the way to do it. My dad actually read from my copy first but gave it back after twenty minutes because he thought it was boring. 

When I began reading it, I was also not aware of how graphic it was. I was in a public space when reading it and quickly turned red after seeing "painfully erect" followed by a description of masturbation. But once I got over that hill of being uncomfortable, I saw how beautifully written this book is. It embellishes the smallest details of life, and it feels more real because of that. We as humans tend to notice more about our environments than we would normally write about. Even if that takes away from the "action," I don't care. There's something so fascinating about hearing this objective standpoint about the world around this ensemble of characters.

Morio was an interesting character as well because of how little he seemed to matter. I had initially guessed him to be a throwaway reference to Hikari, but he made such an impact on the story because of how he took the mantle of Guide from Kizu. Despite this, the largely rational characters react to this with praise instead of disdain. Kizu still paints the triptych that becomes one of the biggest symbols in the story.

I also love the relationship between Patron and Guide, even though we don't really see much of them together. They are both humble despite their large followings. In many of the bigger new religions, the founders will claim that they are the Messiah, but this is purposefully subverted. The mentions of casting away the names of Savior and Prophet show me how they do not want to be like Aum Shinrikyo, a big inspiration for this book. 

To me, it is clear that Patron and Guide, despite their kind natures, were both manipulating each other without the other knowing. This is far more clear with Guide. At first, Patron appears to be a sad, unwell man suffering from schizophrenia. Guide is simply using this to his advantage. Guide knows he can manipulate this man at his lowest point to spread his own world view. However, Patron is more cunning than he lets on. It seems that he would provide information that could intentionally influence Guide in one direction. Incredible to me.

Beyond those two, this book is the only media I have ever consumed with a queer main character that is not about being queer or corny as hell. Kizu and Ikuo are well written characters who, despite being a bit toxic, care for each other. Neither of them are ever particularly frowned upon for their homosexuality. This is even more shocking considering the book is over 20 years old. I believe the reason that their perspectives are so good is because Oe himself was queer. Bird in A Personal Matter also briefly fantasizes about going on a date with a homosexual crossdresser he meets on the street, and considering Bird is based on Oe, I don't think it's too farfetched to say that Oe may have gone both ways. I am honestly very surprised that I haven't seen more talk about that.

I suppose that's all I have to say on that matter. All of my favorite books are mildly blasphemous religious-inspired fiction, and this is one of the most clear examples of that.