Rating: 4/5

Most of Christie's “classic” Poirot novels were written in the decades between the World Wars; that's the milieu readers (or, at least, this reader) typically associates him with. First published in 1952, this is one of the later entries in the canon. From the beginning of the Poirot books, it's been suggested that he's no longer young, and either semi-retired or thinking of retiring. By now, though, he actually is elderly (the author describes him at one point as “very old”) and really retired. (But “the little grey cells” haven't lost their acuity....)

In the first pages, our hero struck me almost as a caricature of himself, compared to the portrayal in earlier novels. He's always liked his creature comforts, and he's always been super-vain; but to my knowledge he hasn't previously been depicted as practically living for his stomach, as he is here, and if I were Capt. Hastings (who's absent in this book) and were privy to his reflections about the relationship, he'd never see me again. (He misses his sidekick solely for the latter's utility as a “stooge” to admire his genius. :-( ) And when he receives a visit from a police acquaintance, Superintendent Spence, his early misapprehension of the man's purpose is so emotionally tone deaf and clueless as to be, in my estimation, totally unlike the usually perceptive and supremely tactful Poirot that I know.

However, once Christie gets into the mystery aspect of the plot, she hits her stride, and Poirot is again himself. The previous November (it's now warm weather again), in the English provincial village of Broadhinny, an apparently inoffensive, widowed cleaning lady in her 60s was murdered in her cottage, her head bashed in with an unidentified weapon and her modest savings stolen from under a floorboard. (They were subsequently found hidden outside the dwelling.) Her unemployed, generally not well liked lodger, James Bentley, was arrested for the crime, on strong evidence developed by Spence, and has now been convicted and sentenced to hang. The problem is that Spence (who's nearing retirement age himself), based on a lifetime of experience with murderers, doesn't believe Bentley is the right psychological type to be guilty of this sort of crime, despite the strength of the case against him. He wants Poirot, as a favor, to look into the case with an eye to seeing whether someone else could be the real culprit. Respecting his psychological judgment, and caring about justice as much as Spence does (and being bored out of his skull with retirement!) Poirot takes on the task, though there's no money in it. This will be a challenging case, because Broadhinny is a mare's nest of secrets; and with an execution in the offing, time is of the essence.

This is a very well-constructed, tightly-plotted mystery, which kept me guessing from the beginning. With some mystery reads, I'm able to guess the culprit well before the reveal. But here I couldn't; and while I had a tentative theory or two towards the end, the true identity and motivation of the killer was a total surprise. As is characteristic of this author, there is a finite pool of suspects; the murderer had to be a local resident who knew where Mrs. McGinty kept her money, and Broadhinney isn't a very populous place. Moreover, without Hastings as narrator, our main viewpoint character is Poirot himself, so we follow the development of the case and its clues largely through his eyes. Still, Dame Agatha provides enough plot complexity and red herrings that I suspect most readers will be as surprised by the denouement (explained in another characteristic Christie device, the gathering of all the main characters in one room for Poirot to conduct the Big Reveal) as I was. She tells her story with plenty of attention to developing realistic characters and insightfully exploring their relationships (as in many other Christie novels, there's a Cast of Characters preceding the text; but I skipped this, preferring to form my own impressions from the beginning), and sprinkles in some touches of humor. Partly compensating for Hasting's absence, another character who appears in several Poirot novels, his mystery-writing friend Ariadne Oliver, shows up about halfway in, though she's only a secondary character here. I'd encountered her previously in Dead Man's Folly, which I read as a kid, though that book was actually written later than this one. (Her character clearly incorporates something of Christie's own personality; and her “series character” Sven Hjerson, a 60-something eccentric Finnish expatriate detective, whose creator detests him but has come to be saddled with him because her fans like him, gives us a wryly humorous meta-fictional glimpse of Christie's own feelings about Poirot after 30+ years of writing about him.) In other reviews, I've noted that Christie usually doesn't convey much of a period feel in most of her books (that I've read). Here, however, it's a bit more marked; at least, I picked up an ambiance of post-war England, not yet fully recovered from World War II (there are still ration books, for instance), and beginning an era of economic decline and social-cultural unraveling, with malaise and a sense of worthwhile things being lost very much in the air.

All in all, this was a very rewarding read of its type, and a solid addition to the Poirot corpus. No fan of traditional mysteries would be apt to be disappointed with it.