Rating: 4/5

Note, April 7, 2023: When I read short story collections intermittently over a long period of time, my reactions are similarly written piecemeal, while they're fresh in my mind. That gives the reviews a choppy, and often repetitive, quality. I'm now trying to go back and edit some of those done in the past, to condense and rearrange them into unified wholes. Accordingly, I've now edited this one.

I suspect that I read this collection, and some of the other Holmes collections in addition to the first as well, as a kid, since here I had the experience (not for the first time, in reading these books!) of recognizing a passage of dialogue I'd read before. I definitely recall that my reading of The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, back in the mists of childhood, set me to hunting up and reading every Sherlock Holmes book I could find. Only the titles of the first collection and the four novels stayed in my memory; but given my tendency to forget title information for books I read in those days, it's quite likely I read all, or at least much more, of the canon at that age than I specifically remembered! 

Collecting 13 Sherlock Holmes tales which originally appeared in The Strand magazine from Oct. 1903 to Jan. 1905, and published in book form in 1905, this is the third of Doyle's five story collections featuring Holmes, the second one being The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes. Indeed, the lead story here, "The Adventure of the Empty House," is essentially a sequel to the last story in the previous collection, "The Adventure of the Final Problem." (In all of these collections, the arrangement of the stories is apparently in the order they were written.) The former story is one of two here that I definitely remembered already reading; the other is "The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton," which is one of my favorite stories in the Holmes canon, though hard to discuss without a spoiler. (It was adapted for the PBS Mystery! TV series, starring Jeremy Brett, as "The Master Blackmailer;" I can recommend that version, but it does flesh out the original with significant added material.)

I would say that stylistically, the stories here are typical of the Holmes corpus --which is to say, very readable, flowing well, with appropriate levels of description and character development, posing challenging intellectual puzzles that call forth satisfying displays of deduction, often with atmospheric and Gothic touches, and with inherent emotional impact and sometimes thought-provoking situations. Holmes' character dominates the book, and he's definitely one of the genre's most individual and memorable sleuths. (One reviewer did mention a "a heavy reliance on 'someone's past comes back to haunt them'" and I'd agree that this is a theme that crops up in several Holmes stories, here and elsewhere.)

I guessed the main outlines of the solution in "The Adventure of the Norwood Builder," "The Adventure of the Solitary Cyclist," and "The Adventure of the Six Napoleons," but it was still fun to see Holmes demonstrate and prove it, and the stories held some definite surprises nonetheless. "The Adventure of the Priory School" and "The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez" (which has two of Doyle's more memorable characters), were more stories where I'd seen the adaptation on PBS' Mystery!, so again I knew the basic solution; but the stories differed from the adaptation in some particulars, and I'd forgotten others, so they weren't spoiled reads on that account. Other mysteries were more difficult to resolve until the denouement, though in a couple of cases I'd formed a basic theory along the way which was correct as far as it went. 

"The Adventure of the Dancing Men" allowed Holmes to demonstrate his code-breaking skills to advantage. In the missing-person story, "The Adventure of the Missing Three Quarter," the title comes from the terminology of the British sport of cricket --a world as new to Holmes as to me. :-) Both "The Adventure of Black Peter," (featuring the demise of a generally despised retired sea captain, his body found pinned to a wall with one of his own harpoons) and "The Adventure of the Abbey Grange" are among Holmes' grislier murder cases. But the latter was one of my favorite stories here --though its grisliness wasn't the reason I liked it! That one is marred in one place by a character's use of "white man" as a complimentary term synonymous with "man of personal integrity," which is obviously racist; but Doyle is simply reproducing there the kind of speech that a character with these characteristics and background might well have used in that era. (The same usage rears its head, for instance, in John Buchan's The 39 Steps, which dates from the same period.) One story in The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes actually makes a very good statement about racial issues and is refreshingly free of the usual British racism of that day; to avoid a "spoiler," I won't identify the story, but it probably reflects the author's own attitudes more reliably than a casual comment put in the mouth of a character who appears once.

"The Adventure of the Second Stain" takes Holmes and Watson, once again, into the world of high stakes international espionage. My main take-away from "The Adventure of the Three Students" is that it reflects a mind-set of English (and probably American as well) college students in an era that still saw academic cheating as something beneath an honorable person --and indeed, still felt that a person could be honorable, and that this would actually be a good thing. (Attitudes have changed today, and not for the better; but having read this soon after being present for the signing, at the start of another school year, of the Bluefield College Honor Code by the incoming freshmen, I'm glad that I'm serving an institution that chooses to go against the grain in that respect!)

Like The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes, I read this collection (this time, at least) as part of the omnibus volume The Original Illustrated Sherlock Holmes, which reproduces all of the illustrations of the stories done by Sidney Paget when they were first published in The Strand. These enhance the read, IMO (kids aren't the only readers who can enjoy illustrations; we adults do, too! :-) )