Rating: 1/5

On the surface it seems to be a good text on cults, but it seems mostly to exist to cast dispersions on “new age-y” kind of stuff (alternative medicines, astrology), the more extreme forms of Christianity (Mormonism, Christian Science, Jehovah’s Witnesses), and how certain teachings of Eastern religions have created cult-like organizations as they have been Westernized. Most of this book is a close look at the theologies of Jehovah’s Witnesses, Christian Scientists, and Mormons, and how their practices differ from Martin’s own fundamentalist views of the Bible. There are shorter chapters describing how other organizations, like the Moonies, the Baha’i Faith, Scientology. 

Also, a big part of the book is how these cults draw people away from fundamentalist christianity. 

And it’s interesting that he comes from the perspective of a very specific reading of scriptures, which seems to almost put his beliefs dangerously close to those that he is arguing against. For example, he notes: 

“It should be noted that hardly ever in their discourses will such cultists discuss the essential problem of evil, the existence of personal sin, or the necessity of the substitutionary atonement of Christ as the sole means of salvation from sin, through the agency of divine grace and the exercise of faith.” 

I guess if you’re a Christian and don’t completely agree with all of those things as important, you can still use this book to classify certain other Christians as members of a cult. 

His arguments about semantics remind me of the church I grew up in. His very specific interpretation of the Bible is the valid one, and others are not. He compares this things like law and mathematics where you have specific, correct, terms. Like one person I talked to discussing how their very specific Biblical interpretation was true meant all others were incorrect: “If I say there is one moon, and you say there are two moons, only one of us can be correct.” It’s this kind of rhetoric that gives these kinds of doctrines a false sense of truth. Martin assumes his interpretations of the Bible are NOT interpretations - they are factually correct. 

He also wants to evaluate science against God’s Word. 

“While Christians should not reflect very psychological discover or position as wrong (!), each psychological assumption should be evaluated carefully against the standard of God’s Word, the Bible.” 

While I understand his point that a field like psychology may not have the exactness of some of the physical sciences like physics or chemistry, ensuring that even this field of science agrees with the Bible gets dangerously close to what Galileo faced several hundred years ago. 

I love how he says he doesn’t want to make fun of anyone involved with these organizations, then compares them to dogs! 

On page 18, “It is not my desire in any sense to make fun of adherents of cult systems, the large majority of whom are sincere, though I am not adverse to humor when it can underscore a point.” 

Then on page 41, he is completely condescending: 

“In the case of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the literature of the Watchtower is replete with examples of psychological conditioning that elicits a definite pattern of religious reflexes in response to stimuli. As Pavlov’s dog salivated at the sound of a bell that represented food, so a true Jehovah’s Witness will spiritually and emotionally salivate whenever the Watchtower rings the conditioning bell of Russellite theology.” 

Really, I think that point could have been made without comparing Jehovah’s Witnesses to dogs. 

It’s probably telling that he spends a lot of a chapter complaining that secular versions of deprogramming (removing cult brainwashing) don’t necessarily differentiate Christian fundamentalism (like Martin’s teachings) and some of the more extreme cults that Martin is writing this book about. 

Of course, some of the ways he discounts the teachings of these more extreme Christian organizations is how their very specific (false) doctrine differs from his very specific interpretations (sorry, factual truths) of the Bible. To his credit, a lot of these doctrines from these Christian “cults” are pretty fantastic and absurd. But we aren’t going to talk about how some of Martin’s teaching are absurd and fantastic to other biblical scholars. He states that “Doctrinal heresy is a sin against God.” But one man’s doctrinal heresy is another man’s Truth. 

I think we’d all agree that these cults probably cause more harm than Martin’s own religion, but that may be like saying murder is worse than assault. That doesn’t mean the latter is ok.