Rating: 2/5

*Rant coming up ahead*

Ever heard of Jason and the Argonauts? No? WHY. Basically, they were what people used to fangirl about centuries ago, instead of Kaz Brekker and the Dregs.

  Summary

So this boy Jason shows up one day in his hometown and walks straight up to his evil uncle aka King Pelias and says 'hey uh, that throne belongs to me. Cuz you know, you kinda stole it from my dad.' LITERALLY.

I don't get how people had the guts to be so straightforward back then.

Anyway, Pelias is like hm okay but before that you gotta bring me the Golden Fleece at the end of the rainbow. Because #yolo, Jason agrees. Then out of nowhere he gathers up a crew with star-studded names/a bunch of badass heroes who you'd probably recognize. (To be honest I knew Orpheus and Theseus were part of it, but Atalanta though?? I had no idea the squad was so lit.) And so they journey and have tons of fun and adventures and near death experiences, e.g. shaking Heracles' hand and defeating dragons.

Also, there's a witch somewhere along the way, straight out of Ravenclaw.

I'm a huge sucker for myths and folklore, so before I got into this book I was expecting to finish with a solid 4~5 stars. But we need to talk about—

  The Writing

*clears throat*

"O my lord," the slave said, "I have come before thee sent by Æson, my master, who told me where to come and what blasts to blow upon the horn. And Æson, once King of Iolcus, bade me say to thee that if thou dost remember his ancient friendship with thee thou wilt, perchance, take this child and guard and foster him, and, as he grows, instruct him with thy wisdom."

"Ah, that I were as young as he is now! Ah, that I had been reared and fostered as he was reared and fostered by the wise centaur and under the eyes of the immortals!"

Suitable for kids in the 1600s? Hell yeah. Suitable for kids in the 21st century? Hell no.

Unless you could stand reading 320 pages of thee's and thou's. That's no problem, but it just wasn't for me. I legit struggled with deciding whether or not I should DNF this book and almost sobbed.

This book wasn't that bad but I felt like it kept jumping back and forth. It was as if instead of only covering the letter A, the author went like hmm A is related to B, because alphabets, right? So maybe I'll just tell my readers about ABCDEFGHIJ.

Oh no wait, how about AXCHGBEDIF? Just ??

????????

As if he had to tell us about every existing myth that had a connection to Jason. Which can possibly lead us to what? The creation of mankind, probably. Because Jason wouldn't exist if we didn't talk about how 'Heaven and Earth had children'. Plus, the order was super confusing.

Okay to be honest, some other stories weren't even related. I understand how the title of this book says 'The Golden Fleece and the Heroes Who Lived Before Achilles', but the main plot was originally about the Argonauts, so why talk about Pandora all of a sudden?

Oh and also, Hades is called Aidoneus over here. Don't ask me why. When the book talked about the gods I almost thought this man was left out at first lmao.

Because of the writing, I felt myself skimming a few pages in the middle. I'd still recommend it to some people, but if you're just starting Greek mythology, this book might be a tad overwhelming and confuse the soul out of you.