Rating: 5/5

This was THE book I've been looking searching for. This book offers a theory on how the ghetto became the ghetto. Most of the books I read was about the culture of the ghetto and how mentally it's hard to work themselves out. 

This book used ALOT of interesting statistics to make his point about the crisis in the inner city: "Despite a high rate of poverty in ghetto neighborhoods throughout the first half of the twentieth century, rates of inner-city joblessness, teenage pregnancies, out-of-wedlock births, female-headed families, welfare dependency, and serious crimes were significantly lower than in later years and did not reach catastrophic proportions until the mid-1970s." All these factors changed after civil rights bills were passed in the 1960s. THIS was why Critical Race Theory (CRT) came about. They were trying to figure out why these factors were still increasing despite these new bills. AND how could it be worse than before when in theory, there should be less active racism? One factor noticeably absent was any discussion of drugs or gangs. What was real eye-opening was comparing the statistics and conditions of the inner cities from 1960 and earlier to the 60's, 70's and 80's. Something changed. But what? 

Conservatives would blame the Great Society programs (welfare) for the increase of the factors listed above. The author cited several studies that show that: 'Welfare simply does not appear to be the underlying cause in the dramatic changes in family structure of the past few decades." Here's an example: "However, despite frequent references to literature to rising welfare expenditures, benefit levels have fallen in real terms over the past 10 years, while illigitimacy ratio have continued to rise." And one study of welfare mothers showed they were significantly less likely to refrain from using contraceptives, less likely to desire an additional pregnancy and less likely to become pregnant. 

The author says that the main reason for the deterioration of the inner cities is the lack of manufacturing jobs, a la, season 2 of the Wire. Blacks were migrating to the North and manufacturing jobs were going away, thus less jobs for Blacks moving to the north. And I wonder if that was a point David Simon was making. The only opportunity for these people is to turn to drugs/gangs since jobs are few and far between for the uneducated. 

Another significant point he made was about affirmative action. He demonstrates that affirmative action only benefits those who have an advantage to begin with. It's not benefitting those who live in the inner city. 

He does offer some solutions such financial assistance, but it has to be in conjunction with creating jobs and teaching them skills that will allow them to get a decent paying job. 

Granted this book was written in 1987. And the crack epidemic starting to make its impact. And none of that was mentioned.