Rating: 4/5

Money...who doesn't have questions and concerns about money? I read this book because my background is one that teaches that money and those whom have a lot of it are evil, or at least of questionable character. As I matured, I realized however that money is a tool and our actions surrounding it are what can be labeled good or evil. I thought this book might further my understanding of my relationship to money and perhaps thereby bring more of it into my life! The author did an excellent job of helping me in the former pursuit. Give me a while and perhaps the latter will follow.

Mr. Jenkinson's treatise is an examination of "where the trouble with money comes from" and how to transform our relationship with money, how to learn from the lessons that money teaches us. He states as his goal in this book to show us what having a "soulful and conscious consideration of money might be like and how money might make the soul's ways come a little more into view...how to live a good authentic and soulful life that includes or even embraces money and the role it plays in it." My favorite part of this book is the thorough examination of the history of currency and usury, which provide a clear understanding of many of the long standing prejudices that exist among Christian-based cultures for money and those who control and lend it. He examines the connection between money and sex - how the way we handle and communicate about one tends to reflect our approach to the other, how the way we "share" our control of money in a relationship informs greatly on the balance of power (perceived or otherwise) within it. There is wisdom and beauty in these pages and I will probably listen to these chapters again.

The author states clearly that his goal is to help men, specifically, to have a better relationship with money and to understand the pressures that being the traditional primary wage earner/provider imposes on them. I forgive the author his conservative male-centric view and listened to the parts specifically about men and heterosexual relationships, understanding that in today's society much of what he writes applies to whoever is the "head of household" or "primary wage earner."

What this book is not, is a prescription for how to make more money, nor how to move forward and fix our relationship to money, however, a close reading of this book will, I believe, go a long way towards helping one to understand the latter, which presumably will influence our ability to achieve the former.

Note: I listened to this as the audio version, read by the author, and found his voice to be pleasant and soothing.