Rating: 2/5

Valerie Wentworth was a rebellious teenager who drank, smoked and had an illicit love affair with wealthy and classy neighbor Judd Prescott. She fell in love, but all he wanted was sex. When she found out she was pregnant, her grandfather kicked her out and told the whole town she'd eloped. At his death, she returns with her (and Judd's) son Tadd. At first, Judd keeps his distance because he thinks she's married. When he finds out she isn't, he does just about whatever he can to get Valerie to stay. But Valerie doesn't trust Judd's motives. To her, he seems to be manipulating everything so that Valerie will be his mistress and they can resume their passionate affair. And finding out that Tadd is his son, gives Judd the ammunition he needs to accomplish his goals.

This was not my favorite story by this author. I liked that it was angsty and came close to being the "train-wreck" that is so common of this time period. It was certainly not boring, that's for sure. Naturally this feels quite dated, since it was written in the 70's or 80's. I don't necessarily mind that, outside of the attitudes of the time that are weaved into the story (like gender roles and such). I guess what I didn't like is that, all of the drama and angst that was central to the story felt somewhat contrived and unnecessary. If Judd had merely been a bit more open and honest about what he wanted or if Valerie had been less evasive and suspicious. Don't get me wrong, Judd was pretty much an asshole. His jealousy in his youth drove Valerie away (and boy, did that feel like a farfetched reason for his cruel attitude at the time). But when she returns and he learns that she's available, instead of merely saying how much he cares and always has and that he'd like a chance again, he mocks her and laughs at her and heavily insinuates that he'd like her to be his mistress again. Then he manipulates her by playing off of Tadd - making promises to him and making her the bad guy when she has to say no. Which is a pretty shitty thing to do. And all this is done in an attempt to get her to stay? I'm not sure how that works. One would think pissing off the woman you love is a sure way to get her to go. Valerie was quite emotional, but her anger is pretty well justified. Even more so when he mocks her anger. I think when stories go this direction and there's this kind of assholery and crazy angsty drama, I'd rather it go all out and be a train-wreck. But, this is a clean romance. It's also one with a surprising lack of paternal possessiveness from the Hero. He doesn't seem to care that Tadd is his son nor that he's lost 6 years of Tadd's life. It seems that Tadd is a means to an end for Judd. And for the reader, Tadd is pretty much a brat.