Rating: 3/5

H.G.Wells is more interested here in preaching about Socialism and its supposed benefits than providing the reader with a plot that tells a story. The year is 2102 a man Graham wakes after sleeping since 1899 caused by sickness but he lacks rest all through the rather inconherent scifi narrative a famous well respected novel it's not.If you're looking for another War of the Worlds or The Time Machine you'll be very disappointed. The author is trying to make this political fictional Utopia seem delicious however he can't.The future seems quite bleak like one big city with convayer belts used by all which dominate the surrounding scene of 30 million folks inhabiting London few in the rural areas . As the happy rich live in tall buildings with the depressed poor more slave than free suffer. Revolution breaks out and the sleeper becomes the clueless puppet leader.Troubles everywhere but Graham is in the dark , who are the good guys ? To be honest Mr. Wells guesses of the future were quite wrong by miles, primitive small toy like airplanes flying above as they ...
dominate the skies , freedom is nowhere foumd, people oppressed not a good place to be in . Mild Graham's a fish out of water to be sure wants to help them but lacks courage he was in his time a man lacking inertia, a mind full of turmoil. Until he meets a strong girl Helen, strangely the niece of Ostog the new dictator and all he cares about is raw power , he also likes the gifts a few trinkets would be nice too, the typical tyrant with a soft face. The book could have been fun and enjoyable if the writer wanted, instead of spreading his thoughts to the public that just did not like the message and hoped for an exciting look into what would be , not some paradise which never could exist.For fans only, others be warned. Maybe some different kinds of characters and stories for the adventurous would have suffice their needs.But I doubt it...the reason this is obscure and deserves to be. A sermon dressed to seem a novel.