Rating: 3/5

2nd reading

I wouldn’t have chosen this Dickens to reread but for recently joining a local group (The Dickens Fellowship of New Orleans). The reread was certainly worth it and not only for the convivial fellowship of the monthly meetings. (How can you go wrong with cheese and cakes being offered, and tea and sometimes wine being poured?) Sure, there were the somewhat annoying coincidences, melodrama, blushing love interests and meaningless side-plots (and I don’t mean at the meetings), all true to the picaresque indicated by the novel’s name, a style characteristic of Dickens’ first few novels, as he took for inspiration one of his favorite authors; he even named one of his sons Henry Fielding. (My own almost meaningless side-note: I came across a reference to Morleena Kenwigs’ braids in Louisa May Alcott's Moods which I read during this time of rereading.) 

But if not for the reread, I wouldn’t have again enjoyed the characters of Newman Noggs (my favorite of the multitude), the ‘gentleman in small-clothes’ (his two scenes so funny that I remembered them from my first read) and Mrs. Nickleby. Yes, even Mrs. Nickleby, who certainly has more personality than her two children. She's obtuse, self-centered and muddleheaded; but she can be sarcastic in the way of a mother whose children are always telling her how wrong she is:To this, Mrs Nickleby only replied that she durst say she was very stupid, indeed she had no doubt she was, for her own children almost as much as told her so, every day of her life; to be sure she was a little older than they, and perhaps some foolish people might think she ought reasonably to know best. However, no doubt she was wrong; of course she was; she always was, she couldn't be right, she couldn't be expected to be; so she had better not expose herself any more; and to all Kate's conciliations and concessions for an hour ensuing, the good lady gave no other replies than Oh, certainly, why did they ask her?, Her opinion was of no consequence, it didn't matter what she said…
If for nothing else, the novel is memorable for its being instrumental in the demise of the actual Yorkshire boarding schools (the last scene set in the fictional Dotheboys Hall, seemingly comic, depicts how inhumane treatment leads to more of the same). What power for a novel and its author who, at the time of its writing, was only twenty-five years old.