Rating: 4/5

At one point during "Lust," Michael, the protagonist, wonders "How is this any different from masturbation?" He's able to conjure up anyone he wants and have sex with them. Hot gym trainer. Tarzan. Alexander the Great. Anyone. Then he can send them away, and it's like they were never there. There are no consequences. He can't get HIV, he can't get his feelings hurt because they do whatever he wants, he can experiment without fear. 

So how it any different from masturbation? The same could be said of the book itself, which at times, feels like Ryman engaged in writerly masturbation, putting his characters into certain scenarios and writing about them forever. When he spends about 50 pages fucking Picasso -- yes, that Picasso -- it killed the entire book for me. 

Up until that point, it's an interesting thought experiment. Gay power dynamics, pornography, a somewhat juvenile view of sexuality vs. innocence, trying to understand how other people see you, etc. Michael conjures up versions of himself, his father, and cartoon characters to fuck around with. But as the novel hits the 250 page mark, Michael tries to make "sense" of this gift, which is a pointless exercise. He wonders if the people he conjures up are truly alive. Who cares? I was hoping the book would address the fact that these people do whatever Michael wants them to do. Perhaps they tell him he's alive, because that's what he wants to here. Perhaps they act this way to get him to question life. If the book does address that, I skimmed over it as I lost interest in the end. 

Michael starts to feel guilty dismissing them, a guilt clumsily paralleled in his job as a medical researcher doing gruesome tests on animals. The more complicated things become, the more plot holes arise, and the more it feels like you're losing your own mind as a reader. 

The concept may fall apart, but I don't see how it could ever conclude tidily. As a result, I forgive it. The beginning is fascinating and an interesting thought experiment. The sex scenes are hot more often than not, although there are a lot of descriptions of assholes that are sometimes confusing, like one that "folds in upon itself" or something similar. How does this person poop? It does portray a wide range of body types, but almost regretfully so, tending to give more positive adjectives to muscular bodies and big dicks, and being "surprised" when a non-model turns out to actually be attractive. 

Any book that examines sexuality in such a full-frontal way is going to be problematic in different ways to every reader, so again, I forgive these issues. I just wish the book hadn't worn out its welcome, as lust as a tendency to do.