Rating: 5/5

”Through the prism of the mist, the heat of the low jungle sky seem to focus on this wretched spot, where tarantulas and scorpions and stinging ants accompanied the mosquitoes and the biting fly into the huts, where the vampire bats, defecating even as they fed, would fasten on exposed toes at night, where one could never be certain that a bushmaster or fer-de-lance had not formed its cold coil in a dark corner. In the river, piranhas swam among the stingrays and candirus and the large crocodilians called lagartos; in adjacent swamps and forests lived the anaconda and the jaguar. But at Remate de Males such creatures were but irritants; the true enemies were the heat and the biting insects, the mud and the nagging fear, more like an ague, of the silent hostile people of the rainforest.”

I’ve been struggling even starting this review, because I don’t know how I can properly do this book justice in a couple hundred words. I enjoy all kinds of books—from fun with little actual substance, to genre novels, to classics and challenging works of what can only be described as high art. There’s a time and mood for them all—much like there’s a mood for Burger King, street food, masala, and caviar. This is one of those rare reading experiences that comes along every now and then that defies any kind of classification; with prose so rich you find yourself rereading whole pages, in awe of its beauty; complex characters; themes that apply just as much in the age of a digitally connected planet as they did in the deepest corners of Amazonia 75 years ago; lush imagery that lives and breathes just as much as the very rivers, jungles, swamps and people it depicts. 

This book is
  it.

One of those times I’m blown away by both the story I’ve just read and the kind of mind that can pull this kind of thing out of the ether and put it to paper in such a way. Our basic plot revolves around a small group of missionaries who travel to the Western Amazon—where thousands of miles of flat jungle explode into mountains that stretch to the sky—to spread the Good News. We have the Quarriers, a family of three, who arrive in the jungle to meet the Hubens, a couple who has been at work already, pushing east into indigenous territory in hopes of making some fresh converts out of the Niaruna—a seemingly vicious tribe that isn’t afraid to put a few arrows through these people that come from the west and take their land, make them sick, degrade their women, and steal their cultural identity. Sharing this last outpost of anything resembling western civilization are the partners of Wolfie and Lewis Moon—the first being drifter from the US, the second being a half-Cheyenne Native North American who have somehow found themselves in this deep corner of South America with their “services” available to the highest bidder. We also have the mustache-twirling local Comandante, who is nobody’s friend. These characters mix as they all move east, and contact is made with the fearsome Niaruna. This is where our story begins.

This book addresses every aspect of missionary life, indigenous life, and what happens when the two meet that you could possibly think of. It’s a clash of culture, a clash of religion, and a clash of the spirit world with the ‘real’ world; a psychedelic, ayahuasca-infused journey into the depths of faith, love, assorted takes on idealism, and most notably into the heart of the jungle and the people who live there. 

Peter Matthiessen has crafted something here like I have never read or experienced before. Everything shines and pulses with energy; the prose, the characters, and the setting. This is a novel, a social and religious commentary, and a work of high art. It has without a doubt become one of my favorite books of all time and I just cannot recommend it enough. At times beautiful, horrifying, and sad, it’s always probing both its own characters and setting, as well as the mind of the reader. 5/5