Rating: 3/5

Dance While You Can is a very angsty read, but it does have CH hallmark of an emotionally immature h who gradually and usually quite painfully, grows up to find a romantic relationship.

Carrie is a dancer and all her life has wanted to be a Prima Ballerina- if you know anything about dance, this means years of intense and very focused lessons and a very narrow life, as all Carrie has done for 23 odd years or so is dance. She has the talent and ambition and is well on her way, when she runs into Alex the H on vacation. She gets a bit intoxicated, throws caution to the winds and has a fling (taking the precaution of lying about her name - she gives her roommate's- so that she doesn't run the risk of sleeping with a celebrity hunter). 

She leaves the affair behind and all is going well until she winds up preggers. In the meantime the H has managed to track her down but he is irked she lied to him and rather mean about the whole thing, so she doesn't tell him she is preggers. I actually understood that, cause in typical HPlandia style, the H comes across as being more interested in bagging a trophy and if he knew about the pregnancy, having an heir with a forced marriage, than really liking the h. So he starts dating her man-eating roommate and this of course depresses the h. She takes some time off and goes into seclusion.

Eventually the H finds out she is preggers but she tells him her dance partner is the father, and after another big fight with the H being a jerk, he goes off and she has a still birth. She falls into a huge depression but her dance teacher gets her out of it and the h goes back to rebuilding her dancing star status. 

 The H is still around with the roommate but the h focuses back on her career until her parents and her dance teacher convince her to tell the H she loves him. He has loved h all along (although why he never said ANYTHING nice to her or about his feelings is a mystery) and was only friends with the roommate to make the h jealous but gave it up when they did not think it worked. The roommate is actually in love with the h's dance partner. (His story is One Last Dance.

So they both finally get around to confessing their feelings and huge HEA with a good epilogue. The h is able to maintain her career and have a family, so good finish all around.

I liked it, but there are some heavy angst moment's and CH does have a skill for making the horrible choices made by both H and h seem almost reasonable in the circumstances. The writing is good, the emo drama is good and the only thing lacking is more one on one time with the h and H. The story works as it is, but a little more relationship that wasn't antagonistic would have been better.