Rating: 4/5

To my understanding this is Rogers’ capstone work which he wrote towards the end of his career/life. Although not necessary, I do recommend reading “On Becoming a Person” before reading this work to get a better description of his theories on human relations. He is a leader in what is known to be humanistic psychology and in this work describes the implications of placing the individual, with all his/her feelings and faculties, at the core of society, particularly in the context of education and human relationships. 

In summary, Rogers and colleagues have highlighted three elements of being/relation that seem to cultivate powerful positive behavior change and learning in both individual and group settings: empathy, positive regard, and congruence. 

Empathy is described as the ability to put yourself in another person’s shoes and share their perspective without (and this he stresses) identifying with that frame. Positive regard is viewing others in an ultimately positive light by holding their inherit goodness in focus and using their not yet manifested potential as a guide. Congruence more or less refers to authenticity; when the gap between experience, thought, and action is minimal. Rogers proposes, with research to support, that these 3 elements are paramount to growth at the individual level whether it be in a one-to-one relationship or in a small/large group setting. 

Rogers presents a vision for the future of the West where he stresses turning to within oneself to find meaning and wisdom while simultaneously being wary of large institutions such as Big Education, Religion, even Marriage (which I found quite progressive). “Be Yourself-Build Community” is his phrase. I can understand the sentiment he was writing with (this being published in 1980) and I do think you have to read it with some nuance to apply it to today’s culture, yet I wonder what he would say of the direction our culture has gone in the last half century, with what seems to be a fragmentation and/or division of shared ideals in the context of continued emphasis on individuality. He rightly stresses the ability to stay young in mind to keep up with the ever changing world, but my initial reaction to the last few chapters where he outlines this is that it seems a bit sensational and revolutionary (he himself uses this word). I think many of the visions he had on education and self awareness have yet to materialize on any culturally significant scale but I would still regard them as positive ideals to strive for. 

Definitely a worthwhile read for anyone interested in psychology/education/human relationship.