Rating: 5/5

The Book That Led To My Best Friend

Groundbreaking and thought provoking. Need to grab a highlighter just to get through the first chapter. It has so many ideas that were ahead of its time and still deserve a pause. 

This is one of my favorite books of all time. I have read it at least half a dozen times. Although I do recommend reading it over several months because there is so much to take in if you like to noodle on your thoughts. 

The author, Henry David Thoreau, believed in high thinking and simple living, subscribing to the philosophy of transcendentalism and was friends with Louisa May Alcott and her family (the author of Little Women).

"The cost of a thing is the amount of life which is required to be exchanged for it." - Henry David Thoreau in Walden

Throughout my life, Walden has been my guiding light, a beacon of hope in the daunting sea of consumerism and overscheduling. When I worked at Sears for $6.70 an hour, I would desperately want a new pair of jeans, and I would think about how long it would take me to pay for them, how many hours I would have to spend on my feet to pay for something that I didn't really need. Saying no to things became easier. 

As if Walden didn't already profoundly change my life, it also led to my best friend. Who knew that one book review would forever change my life? Transcendentalists make great friends.

If you want to check out my video review: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DxGbc...

On July 4, 1845, Henry David Thoreau goes into the woods to live alone in a very small cabin along the shores of Walden Pond. This book was written during his two years and two months in this cabin. He questions ideas and he questions the constant need for more, more, more. What is true wealth? What does it mean to be rich? Do we take time to enjoy the things around us?

He does provide some VERY detailed descriptions of nature which can be boring from time to time. However, he is providing us the sounds, smells, and sights of 1845. What will the world be like 175 years from now? Additionally, I like to focus on the words of Thoreau and try to imagine the birds chirping and hearing the wind wrestle the leaves through the strands of grass as light shimmers through the branches of trees. It is essentially yoga for your mind. Pick this book up and sip it like a fine wine. Relax and enjoy the small things in life.

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango