Rating: 3/5

This book was well-written and an easy read. In fact, I found it hard to put down. The author goes through topical chapters, covering most of the big topics in anthropology. 

The problem (as with much anthropology) is knowing how much is fact and how much fancy. This difficulty slaps you in the face in this book because of the author's predilection for flights of exegesis. You are basically welcomed to the book with a deep dive into his reconciliation of the Guayaki birth rituals with their origin myth. He concludes by saying that of course this is all his own conjecture but that doesn't make it wrong. 

This kind of humanities essays persists throughout the book, sometimes with linchpin arguments that have little clear backing. For example, his essay on the male and female roles and the place of the homosexual in the tribe gets clinched by his declaration that homosexuals have sex with their brothers, but he provides zero narrative on how he got this piece of information which is unlikely to be freely provided.

My only other complaint is his persistent and often unnecessary use of native language vocabulary without providing any kind of glossary. Unless you can remember the precise place where he first used and defined a word, you're stuck wondering what he's referring to -- and half the time it's just an anteater and he could have just said so. 

Probably his best move is saving the juiciest topics for last. After the first few chapters you'd be excused for coming away with a "noble savage" impression of these nice, peaceable types put upon by the cruel and heartless white people. The second part is true enough. 
But then he starts moving through marriage, death, revenge, jousting, cannibalism... and you realize that it's never really that simple. The Guayaki are closer to the Yanomamo than you really were hoping. In fact, I come away with the impression that South America was really a pretty savage place to live, no matter which civilization you belonged to.