Rating: 4/5

Having finally decided to read Robert E. Howard's Conan stories, I am glad I had the good fortune to purchase the three volume, fully illustrated, Del Rey collection. Unlike the numerous Lancer/Ace paperbacks available to me in the '60's and '70's—the ones with the really cool Frank Frazetta illustrations--this edition does things right.

One of the reasons I never explored Conan's world is that every Lancer/Ace volume I examined in the bookstore sported the name of at least two authors, sometimes three. Howard--who I knew created Conan—was of course always there, but inevitably his name was accompanied by L. Sprague de Camp or Lin Carter, or both. I've always distrusted collaborations and posthumous continuations, and I could never tell from the Lancer/Ace presentations which was which. In addition, I was further baffled by the fact that each volume was placed in the context of an extensive and complicated chronology of Conan's life and adventures, which—given the multiplicity of authors—I also instinctively distrusted. Even the first volume in the chronology contained works of all three. All I wanted was the original Howard stories, and, not knowing a simple way to get them all together in one place, I gave up.

The Del Ray edition—which has really cool illustrations by Mark Schultz of “Xenozoic Tales"—is also governed by chronology, but it is the chronology of Robert Howard's literary efforts, not Conan's heroic deeds. The tales in this first volume are presented in the order of their composition, and it is interesting to note that, as these adventures arose in the imagination of Howard, they bear no relationship to any chronology: Conan is a middle-aged king in the first story, a mercenary in his early manhood in the the second story, and a very young thief in the third. 

As I continued to read, I began to sense that this lack of chronology was appropriate. Conan's great barbarian virtue is that he is totally alive in the moment, whether stealing a magic gem, commanding a pirate ship, or threading his way through a dungeon filled with terrors. His fierce, bright intelligence is not reflective, and so he is free to make his decisions unaffected by any theory of the past. By contrast, it is the sorcerers—usually Conan's adversaries—who are bound by tradition and history, asleep and ensared in ancient mazes which--like editor's chronologies--are often prisons of their own devising. 

Howard is a powerful writer. His diction is more than occasionally trite, but his style is muscular and forthright, his prose musical and clear. All thirteen stories here are worth reading, but “The God in the Bowl,” “The Tower of the Elephant,” “The Queen of the Black Coast,” “Xuthal of the Dusk,” "Rogues in the House," "The Vale of Lost Women,” and "The Devil in Iron” gave me particular delight.