When the King of Horror writes about the Horror culture then it's a book bound to be perfect.

Um,almost
well, it was, but now it's a bit outdated.

King writes mainly about horror films and books from the 1950's up to the 1970's
Since then it's been more than thirty years and thousands of films and books were released and published since then so; he talks about things in the past.

With the books it's fine, because you can find all these books he recommends still available today. The same can be said for films, but watching films from the 50's-60's is not like reading a book from that time, they don't age as well as the books.

But films with this or the other way can be watched, if you want it.
Horror radio on the other hand is something unknown today.
It stopped being current since the advent of TV, and a whole chapter about horror shows on radio was a bit of a bore.
The same can be said about the archaic TV Shows from the USA, a long chapter about shows I ain't gonna watch.
The same can be said about most of the films, but of course not all of them. 

But 72% of the book [334 pages (i-xxviii, 1-128, 282-460) out of 460] is about the archetypes (and their creation) of Horror (Vampire, Frankenstein Monster, Werewolf), Horror fiction in English, King's experience with the horror genre both as a writer and as a reader/viewer, and more.
So this leaves 126 pages for Radio, TV, and Films, which equals 27% of the book.

So, even mathematically this book has more positive elements than negative for me.
But even the negative ones are not exactly that. They were just not that interesting to me, as interesting as the autobiographical sections and the horror book sections.

But I knew about some of them and even watched them and liked them, like:

Radio: Orson Welles - War Of The Worlds - Broadcast (1938)
TV: The Twilight Zone (1959-1964)
Film: The Shining (1980), Nosferatu (1922)

So to sum up this uneven (just like the book) review, I liked it, I recommend it to every King and horror junkie and for me it's 4.5 stars

King even in non-fiction is a storyteller.